M2506 16994198 105656
Blasij Monluci Franciae Mareschall▪ Vera Effigies▪
THE COMMENTARIES OF Messire Blaize de Montluc, MARESCHAL OF FRANCE. WHEREIN ARE DESCRIB'D All the Combats, Rencounters, Skirmishes, Battels, Sieges, Assaults, Scalado's, the Taking and Surprizes of Towns and Fortresses; as also the Defences of the Assaulted and Besieg'd: With several other signal and remarkable Feats of War, wherein this great and renowned Warriour was personally engag'd, in the space of fifty or threescore years that he bore Arms under several Kings of France. TOGETHER WITH Divers Instructions, that such ought not to be ignorant of, as propose to themselves by the practice of Arms to arrive at any eminent degree of Honor, and prudently to carry on all the Exploits of War. Cicero. M. Marcello. Epist. 8. l. 4. Omnia sunt misera in Bellis civilibus, quae Majores nostri ne semel quidem, nostra aetas saepe jam sensit: sed miserius nihil, quam ipsa victoria: quae etiamsi ad meliores venit, tamen eos ipsos ferociores, impotentiores{que} reddit: ut, etiamsi naturâ tales non sint, necessitate esse cogantur. Multa enim victori, eorum arbitrio, per quos vicit, etiam invito facienda sunt. LONDON, Printed by Andrew Clark, for Henry Brome, at the Gun at the West End of St. Pauls, MDCLXXIV.
Academiae Canbabrigiensis Liber
To the Right Honourable, PHILIP, EARL of CHESTERFIELD, Lord STANHOPE of Shelford, &c. MY LORD, THough all men that know me are sufficiently enform'd of the ma∣ny and great obligtion your Lordship has layd upon me, and that as many of them as I have discours'd withal upon that subject, are able, if they will do me right, to bear witness with what candor and acknowledgment, not perhaps without something of ostentation, I have ever own'd and extol'd them; yet (my Lord) those men are so few, and the beforementioned obligations of so gene∣rous a nature, that I confess I have a desire both to be more universally known your servant, and that the world at the same time should take notice, that though you may in my person have plac'd your fa∣vours upon an unworthy, yet that they have never∣theless been conferr'd upon a grateful man. Such a one (my Lord) I profess my self to be, and having no other way to manifest that I am so, have taken the li∣berty to dedicate this Translation of mine to your Lord∣ships diversion and acceptance, not suspecting that you who have honour'd me so many other ways should discountenance me in this, but rather protect me from
others, as well as excuse me to your self; and in truth (my Lord) I am so much your own, that you may justifiably enough be a little partial in my fa∣vour. My Lord, it may perhaps be expected by those who know your Lordship for the noble person you are, that I should here salute you with a finer Epistle than peradventure I can write, or at least than this is either likely, or in truth intended to be; not that I would not present you with the best I have, but know∣ing your Lordship aversion to such impertinencies as men sometimes stuff their Dedications withall, I should not only willfully offend you, but moreover step out of my own design, which is very clear from the vanity of thinking to advance your Honor or Name by any testimony of mine, and only intended with all submission to declare my self, MY LORD, Your Lordships most humble and most obedient Servant, CHARLES COTTON.
The TRANSLATOR's PREFACE TO THE READER. A Man that has had no better luck in Printing Books than I, and receiv'd from the world so little thanks for his labour, should, one would have thought, have taken some reasonable warning, and in some moderate time have gi∣ven over scribling; but notwithstanding these disencouragements, I have hitherto, and do yet continue incor∣rigible, as, whoever will take the pains to read them, will see by the following Commentaries: and seeing I acknowledg this to be a fault, and that every fault requires some excuse, I think fit to give the Reader some account why I still persist so obsti∣nate to pester the world with my writings. It is not then out of any ill natur'd desire I have to be trouble∣some, or any great ambition I have to be laught at; but beeing, by a perpetual confinement to the solitude of my own House, put eternally upon reading, that reading, when I meet with any thing that pleases my own fancy, inspires me with a desire to communicate such things as I conceive are worth knowing, and are out of the common Road of ordinary Readers, to their ob∣servation▪ and to dedicate those hours which I my self have spent with some delight in such Translations, to their vacancy and diversion. This is the true and only reason why I have, and some∣times do spend so much time about such things as these, and it ought the less to offend the generality of men, because, though I only pretend by it to oblige but a few persons, and those none of the most considerable; yet it can be prejudicial to none, the Author only excepted, and he can suffer by it, with none nei∣ther but such as will not take the pains to read him in his own Language; for such as cannot do it ought to rest satisfied, and
provided the Subject be without reproach, are better with an ill Translation than none at all. Such a one in plain truth is this; not that I am willing to confess I have much missed the sense of the Author; but though elegant enough for those times, 'tis a knotty piece in it self, and though wrapt up in very good sense, yet writ by the rough hand of a Soldier, and a rough one, and stuft up with old musty Proverbs (the mode of wit it seems at that time) and such as we have not sometimes Proverbs of our own to render them by, and to English a Proverb without a Proverb, is to make that unpleasant, and almost unintelligible in one Language, that is queint and elegant in another; to repair which I have in some places been necessitated almost to create Proverbs, or at least to render his after a Proverbial way, to make them a little like the Original. But I could wish this was the worst fault the Reader will find in the Book; I am afraid it is not, and know also very well there are some others, for which no man living could pro∣vide a remedy (unless upon the Author's heads he would have made a History of his own) to wit, intolerable digressions, and those intolerably long, with so many, and so long-winded A∣parenthesies, included within tedious periods, as very much take from the grace of his Style (of it self a rude one) and strangely perplex the Reader; for which whether I should accuse Monsieur de Montluc's want of Art (which he himself confesses) or the luxuriency of his fancy (which often hurries him from his sub∣ject) I am yet to seek. I must also add, That though this Treatice have generally a very good reputation in the world, yet there are some, who are men of very great judgment, and who have no inclination to discountenance either good writings, or good men, that decry this Book for one of the vainest pieces that ever was writ; and indeed they have reason on their side, there being a continued thread of vanity and ostentation throughout the whole work, ou par tout on trouvera les Gasconades a bon marché. But the Author being a Gascon (to which Nation bragging is as natural, as bra∣very) and the things he relates of himself being undeniably true, I conceive he ought to be excus'd, and the rather, because it is for the most part in vindication of himself from the ill offices and slanders of those little Monsieurs of the Court, of whom he so often complains, and gives himself the best description: a sort of vermin, that in truth have evermore insinuated them∣selves into all Courts of Princes, especially that of France, where
the worthiest men in all Ages have ever been subject to the clan∣destine malice▪ and private calumny of such as durst not so much as have lookt on, to have beheld the brave actions perform'd by those they were not afraid to traduce, and bespatter at the distance of an hundred leagues, and under the protection of their Ma∣ster's presence and favour. After all these objections which I have here set down, as well to prevent others, as to excuse my self; I am now to tell you, that had I not for all this thought this Book a very good one, I should have found my self something else to do; and I may venture to declare I think it so, since it has had so great a reputation, with almost all sorts of men, that the truth of it in no one particular (that I ever heard of) was ever disputed by any; and that it has been allowed by all to be the best Soldiers Book, that is, the best Book for the instruction of a Soldier that ever was writ. Never certainly were Enterprizes design'd with more judgment and resolution, nor ever carried on with greater bra∣very and conduct than all his were; besides the labour, hazard, and diligence, with which they were ever executed, were such as perhaps had never been practis'd before, nor, for ought I ever heard or read, ever imitated by any Frenchman since: from whence I am apt to conclude, that either Monsieur de Montluc was the great∣est Soldier of a Subject that ever was in France, or that the Hi∣storians of that Kingdom have not been so just to the rest, as he has been to himself. I cannot deny but that to an invicible spirit▪ and an inde∣fatigable constancy in suffering all the hardships of war, the fierce∣ness of his nature, prompt, and perfectly Gascon, or else his zeal to Religion, and the service of his Prince, or both, made him sometimes do things which seem'd bloody and cruel; but the necessity of the time, and the growing faction of the Hugon ots, would have it so; neither do I think (I know not how discreet I am in declaring so much) that Sacriledge and Rebellion can be too roughly handled; and severity must needs appear a virtue, where clemency would evidently have been a vice. As to the rest, the Reader will find his Harangues well fitted to the several occasions, his Deliberations prudent, and well grounded, his In∣structions sound, his Arguments rational, his Descriptions plain and intelligible, and the whole well enough coucht, from a hand that was better acquainted with a Sword than a Pen, and by a man whose design, as well as profession, was rather to do things worthy to be written, than to write things worthy to be read.
To conclude, I shall beg of the Reader in the behalf of the brave Author, to consider him a poor Gentleman, bred up to Arms, by which alone he pusht on his fortune to the highest degree of honor, without any addition of Letters, or other ad∣vantages of education, the ordinary foundations of greatness, than what he forg'd out of his own courage, and form'd out of his own natural parts, which were notwithstanding such as approv'd him a Captain of extraordinary valour and conduct, and made him moreover allow'd to be a man of wit, Characters which all the Historians do generally allow him, and particu∣larly Davila, though he only here and there glances upon his name. For my self, I have nothing to say, but this, that although this be no elegant, it is nevertheless (if I mistake not) an useful piece: and though we have lost the use of Bows and Targets, yet design and diligence will be in fashion, so long as the Practice of Arms shall endure. I expose my share of it then to every ones mercy, and good nature; such as will buy the Book, will keep me in countenance; 'tis no matter whether they take the pains to read it or no, for by that means my Bookseller's bu∣siness will be done, and as to the rest I shall not be much disap∣pointed, my design being in plain truth (though I should be glad, I confess, and proud it might take) chiefly to pass away my own time, and to please my self.
THE French Printer TO THE NOBLESS OF GASCONY. GENTLEMEN, AS we see certain Countries yield particular fruits in great abundance, which are elsewhere rarely to be found; so it also seems that your Gascony does ordinarily produce an infinite number of great and valiant Captains, as a fruit that is natural and peculiar to that Climate, and that compara∣tively the other Provinces are in a manner bar∣ren. 'Tis to her Womb that the World stands oblig'd for those noble and illustrious Princes of the House of Foix, Albret, Armagnac, Cominge, Candalle, and Captaux de Buch. 'Tis to her that we stand indebted for Pothon, and la Hire, two happy Pillars, and singular Ornaments of the Arms of France. 'Tis she who in our dayes has ac∣quainted the remotest Nations with the names of de Termes, de Bellegarde, de la Vallette, d'Aussun, de Gondrin, Terride, Rome∣gas, Cossains, Gohas, Tilladet, Sarlabous, and divers other brave Gentlemen of the pure and true Soil of Gascony, without mentioning those at this day living, who generously enflam'd with the Trophies and Atchievments of their brave Predecessors, are emulous of their glo∣ry, and put fair for an equal share of renown. 'Tis your Gascony (Gentlemen) that is the Magazine of Soldiers, the Nursery of Arms, the Flower and choice of the most warlike Nobless, of the whole Earth, and the Mother of so many renowned Leaders, as may dispute the pre∣cedency of valour with the most celebrated Captains of the Greeks and Romans that ever were.
But of all those who (descended from your noble Families) have a∣dorn'd the practice of Arms, no one for Prowess, Experience, or Re∣solution did ever excel this invincible Cavalier Blaize de Montluc, Mareschal of France. That Prerogative of Honor cannot be dispu∣ted with him, no more than the gifts Heaven was pleased to conferre upon him of a prompt and marvelous vivacity of understanding; of a present, and nevertheless a very reserved prudence, which he discover'd upon the most sudden and surprizing occasions in the management of af∣fairs, of an admirable memory, and so rich, as the like is rarely to be found, of a great facility of speech, strong, and bold, and full of incite∣ments of honor in the ardours of Battel; and in affairs of State, of a grave and temperate eloquence, heightned and illustrated with Pro∣positions, Reasons, and Arguments, and all accompanied with so clear and lively a judgment, that although be was destitute of Letters, the beauty of his natural parts notwithstanding darkned the splendor of those, who to a long experience in affairs, had joyn'd a perfect and ex∣act knowledg of the profoundest Arts and Mysteries, both of books and men. The greatest part of you who knew him, and have often fought un∣der his Ensign, stand in need of no other testimony than your own know∣ledg: but the younger sort, who never had the good fortune to see this great man, besides what they may have gather'd by report, will per∣fectly know and understand him by his own commentaries, the actions whereof you have seen him perform when living, and which he dictated when sick, and languishing of that great Harquebuze shot which shat∣ter'd his face at the Siege of Rabasteins, where for a farewel to Arms he serv'd his Prince in the quality of Pioneer, Soldier, Captain, and General at once, after which from his Bed to his Grave this generous soul could never find any rest, which he was wont to say was his capital Enemy, and gave him occasion towards his end to command this Distick to be engrav'd upon his Tomb. Cy dessous reposent les Os De MONTLUC, qui n'eust onc repos. Here with repose Montluc lies blest, Who living never could find rest. Seeing then, that assisted by your valours, he has so fortunately per∣form'd so many glorious feats of Arms; I conceiv'd it but reasonable that this Dedication should address it self to you, that you might enjoy the fruits, and have the pleasure of reading those actions repeated in his Writings, and of seeing the names of your noble Ancestors recorded
to posterity in a Chronicle of Honor. And, if I mistake not, there will hardly be found a History more repleat with variety, more grate∣ful to the Reader, and more rich in instructions for the conduct and direction both of Peace and War than this, where (I fancy at least) the difference betwixt a History compil'd by a sedentary man, bred up tenderly and deicately in the dust of old Studies and old Books, and one writ by an old Captain, and a Soldier brought up in the dust and smoak of Armies and Battels will easily be discern'd. I know not what ancient Histories have the vertue in a little spac to render those who read them with the greatest diligence and observa∣tion very wise and circumspect leaders: but if any such there be, this, above all others, will easily obtein the precedence, and enform you (ge∣nerous Nobless) of all the good and evil events that attend the fortune, or misfortune, the valour or the cowardize, the prudence or inconside∣ration of him who is Chief or General of an Army, or who is Prince or Sovereign of a mighty Kingdom. You have here wherewith to de∣light your fancy, to discretion your valour, to martialize your wisdom, and to form the true honor of a School of War. The Commentaries of this second Caesar will make you Doctors in Military Discipline, and will serve you for Model, Mirror, and Exemple; they have no ficti∣tious lustre, no affected artifice, no foreign ornament of borrowed beau∣ty. 'Tis nothing but simple Truth that is nakedly presented before you. These are the conceptions of a strong, sound, and healthful digestion, that rellish of their original and native soil, bold, and vigorous concep∣tions, reteining yet the breath, vigour, and fierceness of the Author. This is he, who having the first arriv'd to the highest step of all the degrees and dignities of war, has highly promoted the honor of your Country both by his Sword and his Pen, and to such a degree, that the name of the Montluc's shall gloriously live in the memory of a long and successful posterity, manifesting without envy to succeeding Ages, that your Captain and Historian, as he knew how prudently to enter∣prize, and bravely to execute what he had design'd, was no less good at his Pen, but equally eminent in that faculty, to record with truth and judgment, what he had acted before with the greatest courage and conduct.
On the brave Mareschal de Montluc, and his Commentaries writ by his own hand. MONTLVC, how far I am unfit To praise thy valour, or thy wit, Or give my suffrage to thy fame, Who have my self so little name, And can so ill thy worth express, I blushing modestly confess; Yet when I read their better lines, Who to commend thy brave designs, Their Panegyricks have set forth. And do consider thy great worth; Though what they write may be more high, They yet fall short as well as I. Whose is that Pen so well can write As thou couldst both command, and fight? Or whilst thou foughtst who durst look on, To make a true description? None but thy self had heart to view Those Acts thou hadst the heart to do, Thy self must thy own deeds commend, By thy own hand they must be pen'd, Which skill'd alike in Pen and Sword, At once must act, and must record. Thus Caesar in his Tent at night, The Actions of the day did write, And viewing what h'ad done before, Emulous of himself, yet more, And greater things perform'd, until His arm had overdone his will, So as to make him almost fit To doubt the truth of what he writ. Yet what he did, and writ, though more, Than ere was done, or writ before; Montluc by thee, and thee alone, Are parallel'd, if not outdone, And France in Ages yet to come, Shall shew as great a man as Rome. Hadst thou been living, and a man, When that great Ceasar overran The antient Gauls, though in a time, When Soldiery was in its prime; When the whole world in plumes were curl'd, And he the Soldier of the world, His conqu'ring Legions doubtless had By thy as conqu'ring arms been stayd: And his proud Eagle that did soar To dare the trembling world before,
Whose Quarry Crowns and Kingdoms were, Had met another Eagle here, As much as she disdain'd the Lure, Could fly as high, and stoop as sure. Then to dispute the worlds Command You two had fought it hand to hand, And there the Aquitanick Gaul Maintain'd one glorious day for all. But for one Age 't had been too much T'have had two Leaders, and two such; Two for one world are sure enow, And those at distant Ages too. If to a Macedonian Boy One world too little seem'd t'enjoy; One world for certain could not brook At once a Caesar, and Montluc, But must give time for either's birth; Nature had suffer'd else, and th' Earth That truckled under each alone, Under them both had sunk and gone. Yet though their noble Names, alike With wonder, and with terror strike; Caesar's, though greater in Command, Must give Montlnc's the better hand; Who though a younger Son of Fame, A greater has, and better Name. With equal courage, but worse cause, That trampled on his Country's Laws, And like a bold, but treacherous friend, Enslaved those he should defend: Whilst this by no ambition sway'd But what the love of glory made, With equal bravery, and more true Maintain'd the right that overthrew. His Vict'ries as th' encreast his power Laid those for whom he fought still lower; Abroad with their victorious Bands, He conquer'd Provinces and Lands, Whilst the world's conqu'ring Princess Rome Was her own Servants slave at home. Thy courage brave Montluc we find To be of a more generous kind, Thy spirit, loyal, as 't was brave, Was evermore employ'd to save, Or to enlarge thy Country's bounds, Thine were the sweat, the blood, the wounds, The toyl, the danger, and the pain; But hers, and only hers the gain. His wars were to oppress and grieve, Thine to defend, or to relieve: Yet each to glory had pretence, Though such as shew'd the difference,
By their advantages, and harms 'Twixt Infidel and Christian Arms. France, Piedonont, Tuscany, and Rome, Have each a Trophy for thy Tomb: Sienna too, that nature strain'd, Only to honor thy command, Proud of thy name will be content, It self to be thy monument: But thine own Guienne will deny Those noble Relicks elsewhere lye: But there enshrin'd now thou art dead, Where (to its glory) thou wert bred. O fruitful Gascony! whose fields Produce what ever Nature yields. Fertile in valour as in fruit, And more than fruitful in repute, How do I honor thy great Name, For all those glorious Sons of Fame, Which from thy fair womb taking birth, Have overspread the spacious Earth. Yet stands the world oblig'd for none, Nor all thy Heoes more than one; One brave Montluc had crown'd thee Queen, Though all the rest had never been. Past times admir'd this General, The present do, and future shall; Nay whilst there shall be men to read The glorious actions of the dead, Thy Book in Ages yet unborn The noblest Archives shall adorn, And with his Annals equal be, Who fought, and writ the best but thee. Charles Cotton. On the Commentaries of Messire Blaize de Montluc. To the Worthy Translator. HE that would aptly write of Warlike Men, Should make his Ink of bloud, a Sword his Pen; At least he must Their Memories abuse Who writes with less than Maro's mighty Muse; All (Sir) that I could say on this great Theme (The brave Montluc) would lessen his esteem; Whose Laurels too much native Verdure have, To need the praises vulgar Chaplets crave:
His own bold hand, what it durst write, durst do, Grappled with Enemies, and Oblivion too; Hew'd its own Monument, and grav'd thereon It's deep and durable Inscription. To you (Sir) to whom the valiant Author owes His second Life and Conquest o're his Foes, Ill natur'd Foes, Time and Detraction, What is a Strangers Contribution! Who has not such a share of Vanity To dream that one, who with such Industry Obliges all the world, can be oblig'd by me. Thomas Flatman▪ On the Commentaries of Montluc translated. I Never yet the French Tongue understood, Which may (what e're their Fashions are) be good; Yet such as I, by your industrious hand, Come now them and their State to understand. This, and your well-translated Espernon, Make those brave Histories of France our own. Sir, these are noble Works, and such as do Name you Translator, and the Author too. You are our Author, and our thanks to you (As yours to their Historians) are due. Nay ev'n the French themselves must thank you too: For we (and we are the major part) who know Nothing of them, but what is noise and shew. Hard names for damn'd course Stuffs, stinking Meat, Adulterate Wine, strange Habits, Legs and Faces, Might justly look on France, (not to speak worse) To be of these the Mother, or the Nurse. But us you undeceive, and do them right, By these exact Translations which you write, And we who understand no French, now find You are both just to them, and to us kind. R. Newcourt.
ERRATA. PAge 1. line 20. r. to justifie. p. 2. l. 24. r. and yet. p. 4. l. 50. r. the charge and honor. p. 5 1. 7. r. not for. p. 8. l. 32. r. and the. p. 11. l. 51. r. in, in. p. 12. l. penult. r. a fugitive. p. 15. l. 47. r. they. p. 19. l. 4. r. dine aboard. p. 22. l. 6. r. not dign. p. 24. l. 17. r. by burning. p. 28. l. 43. r. de Montpezat. p. 29. l. 22. r. at that time. l. 38. r. de Tande. p. 31. l. 25. r. de Montpezat. p. 32. l. 29. r. de Fonterailles. p. 39. l. 23. r. and me to Savillan. p. 41. l. 24. r. Monsieur d' Aussun. l. 50. r. knew the. p. 42. l. 14. r. could avoid. p. 45. l. 16. r. Reconis▪ p. 51. 1. 41. r. enough to do to. p. 54. l. 23. r. if they were. p. 56. l. 48. r. weary. p. 57. l. 11. r. fought. Ib 1. 14. r. fault. p. 59. l. 38. r. they advance, p. 6. l. 31. for d' Aussun, r. d' Anguien. p. 63. l. 10. for for now r. new. p. 65. l. 49. r. the Mareschal. p. 66. l. 13. r. the feast. p. 67. l. 46. r. when you arose. p. 68. l. 11. r. took notice. p. 8. l. 57. r. we are. p. 92. l. 39. r. if they. p. 126. l. 39. r. to scoure. p. 130. l. 29. r. and that Captain St. Auban. p. 133. l. 37. r. which was a. p. 143. l. 35. r. went a∣bout to. p. 150. l. 17. r. in their. p. 159. l. 12. r. inconiderable. p. 161. l. 20. r. hateful word. p. 173. 1. 59. and 60. r. a Trooper. p. 174. l. 32. r. the plain. p. 175. l. 40. and 41. r. had moor'd them in the Ditch. p. 176. l. 15. r. and that would make. p. 177. l▪ 19. r. stop short. p. 184. l. 16. r. no body else. p, 193. l. 6. r. Cremona. p. 197. l. 36. r. du Tillet. p. 209. l. 48. r. Quails. p. 213. I, 56. dele all. p. 232. l. 5. r. Commands. p. 233. l. 2. r. to p 242. l. 25. r. deliver'd to him. p. 246, l. 9 r. Coral. p. 281. l. 49. r. la Masquere. p. 289. l. 54. r. Cabinet. l. 58. r. the Children. p. 290. l. 45 r. repulst. p. 312. l. 40. r. best Curtall. p. 313. l. 28 dele that. p. 314. l. ult. r. Chalosse. p. 320. l. 2. r. suffering him. l. 34. r. to the friendship. p. 321. l. 23. r. I here. p. 322. l. 2. Comma after Field. l. 29 r. had told. p. 323. l. 19. r. l' Isle p. 325. l. 40. r. he, and p. 340. l. 48. r. we should. p. 344. l. 9. r. see the wife. p. 345. l. 26. r. and would never. p. 348. l. 13. r. Clergy would l. 32. r. of which. p. 355. 1. 47. r. and had they. l. 49 r. they had had. p. 357. l. 45. r. one near unto Tholouze. p. 358. l. 12. r. the best friends I had. p. 359. l. 25. He has indeed. p▪ 363. l. 8. r. the Coins were broken. p. 364. l. 53. r. to the Hole of the wall. p. 365. l. 38. r. and that in case I should. p. 376. l. 15. r. I am sure mine never did. p. 382. l. 32. r. subjects. l. 53. r. your blood. p. 389. l. 13. r. all other employments. p. 391. l. 49. r. My Lord. p. 395. l. 44. r. tan to Bourdeaux. p. 403. l. 44. r. It was.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for Henry Brome, since the dreadful Fire of London. THE History of the Life of the Duke Espernon, the great Fa∣vourite of France; wherein the History of France is conti∣nued from 1598, where D'Avila leaves off, down toour times, 1642 in fol. price 16 s. Horace, a French Tragedy Englished, with a Song at the end of every Act: price 1 s. Scarronides or Virgil Travesty, a Mock-Poem on the first and fourth Book of Virgil, in English Burlesque: price 1 s. 6d. all three by Charles Cotton Esq Elvira, a Comedy, or The worst not alwaies true: by the Earl of Bristol: price 1 s. Mr. Simpson's Division Viol, in fol. price 8 s. His Conmpendium of Practical Musick, Oetavo: price bound 2 s. A Treatise wherein is demonstrated, that the Church and State of England are in equal danger with the Trade, in quarto: price 1 s. 6 d. By Roger Cook Esq Erasmus Colloquies in English. The Vindication of the Clergy. The Fair one of Tuis, or the Generous Mistress, a new piece of Gallantry. Eltons Art Military, in folio. Brome's Songs and Poems, in octavo: price 3 s. His Translation of Horace, with other worthy persons: price 4 s. Sir Kenelm Digby's two excellent Books of Receipts; one of Phy∣sick and Chirurgery: the other of Cookery and Drinks, with other Cu∣riosities: price 3 s. 6 d. The Exact Constable: price 8 d. useful for all Gentlemen. Leybourn's Arithmetical Recreations: price 1 s. Toleration discussed: price 2 s. 6 d. by Mr. I'Estrange Centum Fabulae: price 1 s. useful for Schools. The Lord Coke's Institutes, in four parts. Sir James Dyar's Reports, in fol. price 18 s. Dr. Heylin on the Creed, in fol. price 15 s. Dr. Glisson de Vita Naturae. Dr. Skinner's Lexicon, in fol.
THE COMMENTARIES OF Messire Blaize de Montluc, MARESCHAL of FRANCE. The First Book. BEing at the Age of threescore and fifteen retir'd home to my own House, there to seek some little Repose after the infinite Pains and Labours I had undergone, during the space of above fifty years, that I bore Arms for the several Kings my Masters, in which Service I past all the Degrees and through all the Orders of Soldier, Ensign, Lieutenant, Captain, Camp-Master, Go∣vernour of Places, his Majesties Lieutenant in the Provinces of Tuscany and Guienne, and Mareschal of France: finding my self maimed in almost all my Limbs, with Harquebuz-Shots, Cuts and Thrusts with Pikes and Swords, and by that means rendred almost useless and good for nothing, without strength or hope ever to be cured of that great Har∣qubuz -Shot in my Face, and after having resign'd my Government of Guienne into his Majesties hands: I thought fit to employ the Remainder of my Life in a Description of the several Combats, wherein I have been personally engag'd in the space of two and fifty years, that I had the Honour to command: assuring my self, that the Ca∣ptains who shall take the pains to read my Life, will therein meet with Passages, that may be useful to them in the like Occasions, and of which some Advantage may be made to the acquiring of Honour and Renown. And although I have in the several En∣gagements I have undertaken (and some of them perhaps without great Reason on my side justifie my Proceedings) been exceedingly fortunate, and successful beyond all humane Aim; I would not yet any one should conceive that I attribute the Success or the Glory thereof to any other, than to God alone; and indeed whoever shall consider the Dangers and Difficulties I have gone through and overcome, cannot but therein ac∣knowledge his Almighty and immediate Arm. Neither have I ever fail'd to implore his Assistance in all my Undertakings, and that with great Confidence in his Grace and Mercy, and Assurance of it; wherein his Divine Majesty has been pleased so far to be gratiously assisting to me, that I have never been defeated nor surpriz'd in any Exploit of War, where I have been in command; but on the contrary have ever carried away Victory and Honour. And it is very necessary and fit, that all we who bear Arms, should ever consider and always confess, that we, of our selves, can do nothing without his Divine Bounty, which inspires us with Courage▪ and supplies us with Strength to attempt and execute those great and hazardous Enterprises which present themselves to our Undertaking. And because some of those who shall read these Commentaries (for it will be very hard to please all, though some will set a just value upon my Book) may perhaps think it strange, and accuse me of Vain-Glory for writing my own Actions; and say, that I ought in Modesty to have transferred that Work to another Hand: I shall tell such once for all, that in writing the Truth, and attributing to God the Glory thereof, there
will be no harm done: Neither (besides that the Testimonies of several Men of Honour yet living will justifie the Truth of what I shall deliver) can any one give a better Account of the Designs, Enterprizes, and Exentions, and the Actions happen∣ing thereupon, than my self, who was an Eye-witness, and an Actor in them all; and who also design not herein to deprive any one of his due and particular Honour. The greatest Captain that ever liv'd was CaesarCaesar▪ and he has led me the way, having himself writ his own Commentaries, and being careful to record by Night the Actions he performd by Day. I would therefore by his Exemple contrive mine, how rude and impolisht soever (as coming from the hand of a Soldier, and moreover a Gascon, who has ever been more solicitous to do, than to write or to speak well) Wherein shall be comprehended all the Exploits of War, in which I have either been personally enga∣ged, or that have ben performed by my Direction; and those beginning from my greener years, when I first came into the World; to signifie to such as I shall leave be∣hind me, how restless I (who am at this day the oldest Captain in France) have ever been in the Search and Acquisition of Honour, in performing Services for the Kings my Masters, which was my sole and only end, ever flying all the Pleasures and Delights, which usually divert young men whom God has endowed with any commendable Qua∣lities, and who are upon the point of their Advancement, from the Paths of true Virtue and undisputed Greatness. A Book not intended however for the Learned Men of the World, they have Historians enough of their own, but for a Soldier, and wherein a Captain, and perhaps a Lieutenant of a Province may find something that may be worth his Observation. At the least I can affirm that I have written the Truth; having my Memory as good and entire at this instant as ever, and being as perfect in the Names both of Men and Places, as if all things had past but yesterday, as yet I never committed any thing to Paper, for I never thought at such an Age as this, to undertake any thing of this kind: which whether I have well or ill performed, I refer my self to such, as shall do me the Honour to read my Book, which is properly an Account of my own Life. To you therefore (Captains my Companions) it is, that this Treatise does princi∣pally address itself, to whom peradventure it may in some measure be useful. And you ought to believe that having so many years been in the same Command wherein you now are, and having so long discharg'd the Office of a Captain of Foot, and thrice that of Camp Master and Colonel, I must needs have retein'd something of that Condition, and that in a long Experience I have seen great Honours confer'd upon some, and great Disgraces befal others of that Degree. There have been some who in my time have been cashier'd and degraded their Nobility, others who have lost their Lives upon a Scaffold, others dishonoured and dismist to their own Houses, without ever having been more regarded either by the King or any other: And on the contrary, I have seen others who have trail'd a Pike at six Francs pay, arrive at great Preferments, performing things so brave, and manifesting themselves men of so great Capacity, that several who in their Original have been no better than the Sons of poor labouring Men, have rais'd themselves above many of the Nobility by their Prowess and Virtue. Of all which having my self been an Eye-Witness, I am able to give a precise and a true Account. And although I my self am a Gentleman by Birth, yet have I not∣withstanding been rais'd to that degree of Honour wherein I now stand, as leisurely, and as much step by step, as any the poorest Soldier who has serv'd in this Kingdom these many years. For being born into the World the Son of a Gentleman, whose Father had made sale of all his Estate, to only eight hundred or a thousand Livres yearly Revenue, and being the eldest of six Brothers that we were, I thought it prin∣cipally concern'd me to illustrate the Name of Montluc (which is that of our Family) as I have also done with as much Peril, and as many Hazards of my Life, as Soldier or Captain ever did; and that without ever having the least Reproach from those by whom I was commanded; but on the contrary with as much Favour and Esteem as ever any Captain had who bore Arms in the Armies, wherein I had the Honour to serve. Insomuch that whenever there happened any Enterprise of Importance, or Danger, the Kings Lieutenants, and Collonels, would as seon, or sooner, put me upon it, as any other Captain of the Army; of which the ensuing pages will give you sufficient Testi∣mony. From the time therefore that I was first advanc'd to the Degree of an Ensign,Play, Drink, ad Avarice pernicious to Men in Com∣mand. I made it my business to understand the Duty of an Officer, and to learn to be wise by the Ex∣emple of such as committed Oversights, or were otherwise negligent in their Command. To which purpose I first totally wean'd my self from Play, Drink, and Avarice; as
knowing well, that all Captains of that Complexion, are so unfit ever to arrive at any thing of Great, as to be much more likely to fall into the bfore-nam'd Misfortunes. That Knowledge it was that made  positively resolve against all these three things, which Youth is very prone unto, and which are very prejudicial to the Reputation of a Chief. Of these Play is of such a Nature, that it subjects a man, neither to do nor intend any other thing, and that whether he win or lose; for if you win, you are ever∣more solicitous to find out new Gamesters, being prepossest with an Opinion, that you shall still win more, and continue in that Error until all be lost. Being reduc'd to this point you run almost into Despair, and mditate nothing day nor night, but where and how to get more money to play again, and to try to recover your Losses by a better Hand. In which Condition how can you think to acquit your self of the Charge the King has put into your hands, when you shall wholly bend your Study, and employ your whole time in another thing, and instead of cotriving how to over reach your Enemy by laudable Stratagems of War, you plot nothing else, but how to ruin your Camrade and Friend by an infamous Cheat at Cards or Dice? This must of necessity wholly divert you from your Duty; whereas you ought to be continually amongst your Soldiers, and so frequent, as if possible to know every man by his distinct Name; and▪ that for these two Ends, first to prevent any Acts of Insolence in their Quarters, for which you may expect and fear a just Reproach from the Lieutenant of the Province or your own immediate Colonel: And in the next place to take care that there happen no Mutiny amongst them; nothing being more pernicious to a Company, nor of more dange∣rous Consequence to an Army, than mutinous Spirits. And how can you possibly have an Eye to sch Disorders, or give any tolerable Account of the Trust reposed in you, when your Heart shall be wholly bent upon Play; that will alarm you a hundred and a hun∣dred times a day, and put you besides your self. Fly then (my dear Companions) fly I beseech you this hateful Vice, which I have often known to be the Ruine of many, not only in their Fortunes; but which is more, and that ought to be dearer, in their Honour and Reputation. Now for what concerns Wine; if you be subject to debauch, you cannot avoid falling into as many and as great Inconveniencs as he that Plays; for nothing in the World so much stupefies the understanding of a Man, and that inclines him so much to sleep, as Wine. If you drink but little you will consequently not eat too much; for Wine calls upon the Appetite to eat, that you may the longer enjoy the Pleasure of Drinking: So that in the end being full of Meat and Drink before you rise from Table, it will be necessary to go sleep, and perhaps at such a time when you ought to be amongst your Soldiers and Companions, near your Colonel and Camp-Master, to enquire what News or Orders they have received from the Kings Lieutenant, that you may know when any Occasion is presented, wherein you may employ your Valour and Wisdom. To this; Excess in Wine brings along with it another and extreme Dan∣ger, which is, that a Captain being drunk knows not how himself to command, and less how to permit others to do it; but will fall to striking and beating his Soldiers without all Sense or Reason; whereas, if there were a just Occasion, he ought first to chastise his Soldier with Remonstrances, mixt with some tart Menaces and Reproofs, giving him to understand, that if he relapse into the same Offence, he is to expect nothing but an exemplary Punishment. And is it not better to chastise your Soldier with Words and Threats, than with Bastinadoes, Cuts and Thrusts, killing him or maim∣ing of his Limbs which Wine will prompt you to do? Neither must you expect to be the more fear'd for such Usage of your men, but on the contrary mortally hated by all your Soldiers. And what rare Exploits can you think to perform with men that hate you? I beseech you believe me, for I have seen the Experience of it, as much as another of my Age, I have seen no less than four Captains die by the hands of their own Soldiers, who have assassinated them behind, for the ill Usage they have receiv'd at their hands. They are Men as we are, not Beasts; if we be Gentlemen, they are Soldiers; they have Arms in their Hands, which inspire Mettle into any man's Brest, that bears them. Wine is apt to make you unreasonable and bloody for the least Of∣fence, and that without all manner of Discretion, for you are not your selves. More∣over, neither the Kings Lieutenant, nor your own Colonel, nor Camp-Master will ever put you upon any Enterprize of Honour, that might perhaps procure your Advancement; but will say, Shall we entrust an Execution of this importance to such an one as will be drunk, when he ought to have his Wits about him to know and dis∣cern what he has to do? He will do nothing but throw away so many men, and by his ill Conduct bring upon us Loss and Confusion. O the vile Repute that this
Wine will brand you withal, when nothing of good shall be expected from you! Fly then (my Companions) fly then this Vice, equally hateful, and more beastly, and scan∣dalous, than the former. A Captain likewise should in no manner be covetous; for though Wine and Play may most aptly be term'd Companions, yet Avarice is also one of the Gang that occa∣sions a million of Mischiefs, and brings as great or greater Inconveniences upon a Leader, as any other Vice whatever. For in the first place, if you suffer your self to be carried away by this insatiate Thirst of getting, it is most certain, that you shall never have a Soldier worth any thing under your Command; all the good Men will avoid you, and report of you, that you value a French Crown more than a valiant Man; so that you shall never have men of any Resolution about you, but such as upon the first Occasion wherein you ought to give a Testimony of your Valour and Conduct, will leave you in the lurch, where you must either fly to your eternal Infamy, or stay to lose your Life, and that without any hopes notwithstanding, whether you live or die, ever to recover your Reputation. For if you be kild, though you have done bravely in your own person, every one will be apt to say, that your great Avarice brought you to your Ruine, for want of good men to stand faithfully by you; and if you save your self by running away, be you sure you will imprint such a mark in your Fore-heads, as it will be hard ever to wash away; at least you will be oblig'd to hazard your Life upon all Occasions more than another man, to clear the Prejudice that all men will have against you, and to wipe away the Blemish wherewith you have spotted your Reputation; wherein 'tis great odds you will lose either Life or Limb. And after all (as it is the ordinary Recompence of men who are more than commonly adventurous upon such occasions) for the Reward of your Merit it shall be said, that the Despair of your former Miscarriage, has push'd you upon the Execution you shall have perform'd, and not your own Bravery and Resolution. O how many more Misfortunes could I here reckon, that have befaln, and do daily befal Commanders, who have been and are tainted with this avaritious humor? I know you will ask me now, what shall we do, if we do not lay up money, and clip the Soldiers Pay? When the War is at an end, we must go to the Hospital, for neither the King nor any one else will regard us, and we are poor of our selves. But can you imagine that a wise and valiant Captain, a man of great Attempt and Ex∣ecution shall be sent to starve in an Hospital, as if such men flutter'd in a Camp by hundreds; It were well for the King and the whole Kingdom, if there were but a dozen such in an Army. Put forward then to get but a Leg amongst this dozen, and try to get in by your Valour, Wisdom, and Virtue. For these twelve cannot live for ever, and one being dead, though you cannot skrew in your whole Body at that time, yet you may edge in the one half, and the next that dies, you are in. And can you then believe, that either the King or any of the Princes, who have taken cognizance of your Valour, will suffer you to go to the Hospital? This is an Appre∣hension so unbcoming a wise and valiant Captain, that it is only sutable to Drun∣kards, Gamestrs, and mean hide-bound fellows of no Value nor Account. And whoever applies himself to great and generous Actions, and has a care with Diligence and virtuous Resolution to exclude and banish from his Thoughts all the fore-mention'd Vices, nothing can be wanting to him. I have said that it were a great deal, if there were a dozen only such men in an Army; but if there were an hundred, yet the King is rich enough to provide that men of that Merit need not be sent to the Hospital. Or suppose that the King could not suddenly provide for the support of such deserving men;A brave Man is never to des∣pair of his Fortune. there is notwithstanding no Prince, nor any other great Person, who has been engag'd in the War, where you shall have signaliz'd your selves for men of Honour, who will not be proud to receive and take some one into his Care and Protection, and that will not take hold of all occasions of doing you a good Office to the King, and of advancing you into some degree, and then on the other side, can you think the King will always continue you in the same Condition, or leave you in the same Command? Do not believe it, but assure your selves, that such men will be lookt after, on whom to confer the Care and Honour of greater Employments, who have honourably dis∣charged those of less moment and account. I pray what was I, but a poor Soldier like one of you? What were, or what yet are so many valiant Captains yet living, for whom the King and all Mankind have a singular Esteem? Have we who are yet in being enrich'd our selves by nimming from our Soldiers Pay? Have we purchas'd any great Estates out of the Thefts of our Com∣mands? I could name some of our own Country of Guienne (who could get nothing
but I must know it, no more than I could unknown to them) who have never got five hundred Crowns by their Service; and yet are those men despis'd? Are they sent to the Hospital? The King, the Queen, the Monsieur, all the Princes of the Blod, and all the Lords of the Court have so great a Respect for these men, out of the esteem very one has of their Valour, that they have got the start of many great men in the Kingdom. Nay when they are in their own Country (where no man is a Prophet) they are there honour'd by men of all sorts and conditions, not from the Families from whence they are descended, nor for the Possessions they enjoy; but upon the single account of their own Merit. Now there are some who perhaps will say, If I do not purloin from the King, and poll from the Soldier, now whilst I am in Command, how shall I make Provision for my Children? To whch I shall return, Would you enrich your Children with an ill Reputation and an infamous Name? A pretious In∣heritance you will leave them, when for shame of your Miscarriages and Misdemea∣nours, they shall be forced to hang down their heads amongst the Great ones, from whom they should derive their Fortunes and recive honourable Commands. What Differnce will thre then be betwixt the Reception and Esteem the King and all the Princes will then make of the Sons of such Fathers as I have mentioned, and of yours, who will not dare to appear before Men of Honour, having their Faces covered with their Fathers Shame? But perhaps some one may say, that I for my part, by the Pla∣ces and Commands I have been invested withal by the King, have rais'd great Profits and got a great Estate, and therefore may talk at my ease: But I protest before Al∣mighty God, and call him to witness, that in my whole Life I never had thirty Crowns more than my Pay; and what Condition soever I have been in, or what honourable Commissions soever I have had, whether in Italy, or in France, I have ever been necessitated to borrow money to carry me home. At my Return from Sienna, where I had the Honour to command in the quality of the Kings Lieutenant, Monsieur the Marschal de Strossy gave me five hundred Crowns. When I returned a second time from Montalsin, Monsieur Beauclair, who was our Trea∣surer, was fain to examine all the Purses in Town to provide me three hundred and fifty Crowns to carry me to Ferrara, and yet I had no less than ten Gentlemen in my Company. The Duke of Ferrara furnish'd me with a supply when I put my self into Verseil, and afterwards to carry me to Lions, where I found in Catherin Ican the Post-Masters hand, two or three thousand Francs that Martinean had there deposited for me, of my Pay, with which I defrayed my Charges to Court. To a worthy and a brave man, nothing can ever be wanting. Now would I fain know, if for all this I ever went to the Hospital, and whether I have not advantaged my self a hundred times more in serving my Kings and Masters, in all Integrity and Loyalty, than by all the Tricks and Shifts I could have? Oh (my Companions) take exemple by those who for having been loyal in their Charges, can walk with their Faces erect before all the World, and are therefore honoured and esteemed by all sorts of men; and not by such who by the Conscience of their Crimes are constrained to hide their heads in their houses, or that make their Posterity blush for them. Wealth will fall upon you when you least dream on 't, or expect it; and one Reward or Bounty from the King, is worth more than all the sharking Tricks, Thefts, and Larcnies of your whole Lie. O how happy are those Soldiers, who ollow Leaders, that for their Prowess and Virtue are esteem'd by all the World! How secure are their Lives and Honours under such Captains, and into what Disasters and Disgraces do those frequently fall, who follow the more unworthy sort of men. For with the former you shall learn and acquire Honour and Renown, that will raise you to an equal degree with your Chiefs, and on the contrary following the latter, you shall learn nothing but Vices, or at least things of very little Value, and they will rather lead you on to the ruine of your Lives, than to the Advancement of your Honour and the Improvement of your Name, there being nothing else to be learn'd of such as have no Valour nor Virtue in themselves. A man may serve a long Apprenticeship under a bad Master, and perhaps, not be much the wiser when he has done: but provided you be free from the three fore-men∣tioned Vices, and that you have Honour in your Prospect, it is impossible but that all things must succd with you; at least you will have the Satisfaction of a noble End, if you propose to your selves to die like men of Honour, which is the ordinary Recompnce of War, and what every brave Man should heartily wish. There yet remains a fourth, which if you cannot wholly avoid, yet go to it as sel∣dom,
and as soberly as you can, and without losing your selves in the Labyrinth, and that is, the Love of Women. Imbark not by any means in that Affair, for it is utterly an Enemy to an heroick Spirit. Leave Love at home whilest Mars is in the field; you will afterwards have but too much leisure for those Delights. I can safely say, that never any fond Affection, or affectionate Folly of that kind could ever divert me from undertaking and executing what was given me in command. Such little Amoroso's as these are fitter to handle a Distaff than a Sword. Love is a great Enemy to a Soldier, and besides the debauch and the time lost in those little Intrigues, it is an Occupation that begets a numberless number of Quarrels, and sometimes even with your dearest Friends. I have known more People fight even upon this account, than upon the score of Honour. And what a horrid thing it is, that a man should forfeit his Reputation, and very often lose his Life for the Love of a Woman! As for you Soldiers, above all things I recommend to you the Obedience that you owe to your Commanders, to the end that you may one day learn how to command: for it is impossible that Soldier should ever know how to command, who has not first learn'd to obey: And take notice, that the Virtues and Discretion of a Soldier are chiefly manifested in his Obe∣dience, and in his Disobedience lies the Ruin of his Life and Honour. A resty Horse never yet made good Proof. The Proverb will serve, and you ought not to flight the Advice I give you, if but in respect to my Experience, who have seen a great deal; and I must needs be a very ignorant and senseless fellow, if in all this time of my Life, I have made no Observations of the Successes and Misfortunes both of the one and the other. But I have committed some to memory, and that is it which has given me occasion to write this Book in the latter end of my days. Having in my greener years been bred up in the Family of Anthony Duke of Lorain,Monsieur Montluc's Education. and now grown up towards a Man, I was presently preferred to an Archer's Place in the Dukes own Company, Monsieur Bayard being at that time Lieutenant to the same. Not long after being enflam'd with the Report of the noble Feats of Arms every day perform'd in Italy, which in those days was the Scene of Action, I was possess'd with a longing desire to visit that Country. To this end making a Journey into Gascony, I made shift to procure of my Father a little Money and a Spanish Horse, and without further delay began my Journey in order to my Design, leaving to Fortune the hopes of my future Advancement and Honour.His first Sally. About a days Journey from my Fathers house, and near unto Leitoure, I turn'd a little out of my way to visit the Sieur de Castetna, an antient Gentleman who had long frequented Italy, of him to inform my self at large of the State, Condition, Manners and Customs of that Country in order to my future Conduct. This Gentleman told me so many things, and related to me so many brave Exploits which were there every day perform'd, that without longer abode, or staying any where longer than to refresh my self and my Horse, I past over the Alpes, and took my way directly to Milan. Being come to Milan, I there found two Uncles of mine by my Mothers side, call'd the Stillatts, both of them men of great Reputation and Esteem, of which the one serv'd under Monsieur de Lescut, Brother to Monsieur de Lautrec (the same who was afterwards Mareschal of France, and then known by the Name of the Mareschal de Foix) by whom I was presently put into an Archers place in his own Company, a Place of great Repute in those days, there being in those times several Lords and great Persons who rode in Troops, and two or three who were Archers in this; but since that Discipline is lost and grown degenerate, and all things are turn'd upside down, without hopes that any man now alive shall ever see them restor'd to their former Estate. At this time the War betwixt Francis the First and the Emperour Charles the Fifth broke out again with greater Fury than before, the later to drive us out of Italy, and we to maintain our Footing there, though it was only to make it a place of Sepulture to a world of brave and valiant French. God Almighty rais'd up these two great Princes sworn Enemies to one another, and emulous of one anothers Greatness; an Emulation that has cost the Lives of two hundred thousand Persons, and brought a million of Families to utter Ruin; when after all neither the one nor the other ob∣tein'd any other advantage by the Dispute, than the bare Repentance of having been the causers of so many Miseries, and of the Effusion of so much Christian Bloud. If God had pleas'd that these two Monarchs might have understood one another, the whole Earth had trembled under their Arms; and Solyman who was contemporary with them, and who during their Contests enlarg'd his Empire on every side, would have had enough to do to defend his own. The Emperour was, 'tis true, a great and a magnanimous Prince, yet in nothing superiour to our Master, during his Life, saving
in a little better Success, and in that God gave him the Grace to bewail his Sins in a Convent, into which he retir'd himself two or three years before his Death. During the space of two and twenty months that this War continued, I had the good fortune to be an Eye-witness of several very brave Actions, which were very fit to season a raw Soldier; neither did I fail continually to present my self in all places and upon all occasions, where I thought Honour was to be purchas d at what price soever; and it is to be imagin'd I had my share of fighting, when I had no less than five horses kill d under me in the short continuance of that Service, and of those two in two days, which Monsieur de Roquelaure,Five horses kill'd under Monsieur Montluc. who was Cosen Germain to my Mother, was plea∣sed to give me. For in this beginning of my armes I had the good fortune to gain so far upon the affections of the whole Company, that my horses being lost, eve∣ry one was willing to help to remount me, and being moreover taken prisoner in Battel, I was soon after delivered by the procurement of my friends. Let such therefore as intend to acquire honour by feats of Arms, resolve to shut their eyes to all hazards, and dangers whatever, in the first encounter where they shall happen to be present; for that's the time when every one has his eyes fix'd upon them, to observe their behaviour, and thence to form a judgment of their future hopes. If in the beginning they shall, by any handsom action, signalize their courage, and boldness, it sets a good mark upon them for ever, and not only makes them noted, and regarded by all: but moreover inspires them themselves with mettle, and vigour to perform more,The loss of the Dutchy of Millan. and greater things. Now you must know that in this War we lost the Dutchy of Millan. Of which (though I do not pretend to be any great Clerk) I could write the true History, and should his Majesty command me, I would deliver the truth, and I am able to give as good an account (though I was my self ve∣ry young at that time) as any man whatever in France, I mean of those passages where I had the fortune to be present, and no other; for I will write nothing by hearsay. But I intend not to busie my self with a Relation of other mens actions, and less of the faults, and oversights by them committed, though they are yet as fresh in my me∣mory, as at that moment; and seeing that what I my self perform'd in that Coun∣try, at that time, was in the quality of a private Souldier only, I being not as yet step'd into Command: I shall no longer insist upon this melancholy Subject, which has also been writ before by others: only this I shall make bold to affirm, that Monsieur de Lautrec was by no means to be blam'd, he having there performed all the parts of a good, and prudent General; and, who indeed was in himself one of the greatest men I ever knew. Neither shall I trouble my self to give a narration of the Battel of the Bicoque, in which I fought on foot, as also did Monsieur de Mont∣morancy, since Constable of France; A Battel that Monsieur de Lautrec was compel∣led to consent unto, through the obstinacy of the Swisse, quite contrary to his own judgment. A Nation whose wilfulness I have seen occasion the loss of several pla∣ces, & cause great inconveniences in his Majesties affairs.A Character of the Swisse. They are, to speak the trute, a very warlike people, and serve as it were for Bullwarks to an Army: but then they must never want, either money, or victuals; for they are not to be paid with words. After the unfortunate loss of this fair Dutchy of Millan, all the forces returned back into France, and with them the Company of the said Mareschal de Foix, wherein I then had not only the place of a Man at armes; but moreover an Assignation of an Archers pay. Sometime after the Emperour set another Army on foot to recover Fontarabie; whereupon our Company, and several others were ordered to repair to Bayonne to Monsieur de Lautrec, who was his Majesties Lieutenant in Guienne. The said Sieur de Lautrec, that he might the better make head against the enemy, (who made a shew of attempting something upon the Frontier) made a suddain leavy of fourteen or fifteen Ensigns of Foot; which was the occasion that I (who ever had an inclination for foot service) entreated leave of Captain Sayas (who carryed the Cornette in the absence of Captain Carbon his brother) for three months only; that I might ac∣cept of an Ensign offer'd to me by Captain Clotte; who at last very unwillingly gran∣ted my suite, although he himself had first sent to Captain Carbon to sollicite it in my behalf Suddainly after this (the Enemy being dayly reinforced with fresh sup∣lies) la Clotte was commanded away to Bayonne,Montluc made Ensign of foot. & a few days after that, Captain Car∣bon took the Companies of Monsieur de Lautrec, and the Mareschal his brother, with two Companies of Foot, to wit, that of Megrin Comenge, and la Clotte to conduct us thorough the Woods straight to St. Iean de Luz, where the enemies Camp at that time lay. So soon as we were arrived at the top of a little Hill about half a quarter
of a League distant from Luz (having already pass'd a little River by a wooden bridge, another half quarter of a League behind this little hill, at the oot whereof, and before us, there ran a rivolet of fifteen, or twenty paces broad, and deep to a mans girdle, joyning to which there is also a plain which extends it self in an easie descent, down to the said Rivolet; from whence one may easily discover St. Iean de Luz, one of the finest Bourgs in all France, and seated upon the Margent of the Ocean Sea) Captain Carbon who commanded the Party, leaving two Cornets upon this lit∣tle hill, the one whereof was carried by Captain Sayas, which was ours, and the other by Captain d' Andouins, which was that of Monsicur de Lautrec (but both of them onely in the absence, the one of Captain Carbon, the other of Captain Ar∣tiquiloube,) and only twenty horse with each, together with our two Companies of foot, took the rest of the Gens-d' armes, and with them Monsieur Gramont, the same who afterwards dyed in the Kingdom of Naples, and who was at this time Lieutenant to the Company belonging to Monsieur de Lautrec. With this Party Captain Carbon pass'd over the little River, and having divided his men into three squadrons (as one might easily discern from the Hill where we stood) trotted along the plain directly towards St. Iean de Luz. Being come to the middle of the plain, he there made a halt for an hour, or more, whilst a Trumpet went twice, and sounded the Fanfare to the Enemy, after which being about to re∣treat, as not believing any one would stir out of the Enemies Camp, the forlorn which he had sent out towards the utmost skirts of the plain, return'd back upon the spur, to acquaint him that all the Enemies Camp began to move; and suddenly after we be∣gan to discover three of their Squadrons of Horse, appearing upon their march, one upon the heels of another,The Action at St. Iean de Luz. and making directly towards Monsieur de Carbon. Of these the first that came up, presently, and smartly charg'd the foremost of ours, where there were many Launces broken on both sides; but more of ours, than theirs, for as much as in those times the Spaniards carried but few Launces, and those very slender, long, and pointed at both ends. During this charge Captain Carbon was leisurely drawing off the other two Squadrons towards the place where we were, when the second of the Enemies squadrons coming up, and uniting with the first, beat up our first to our second squadron, commanded by Monsieur Gramont, where the skirmish was very hot, and a great many men thrown to ground both on the one side, and other, amongst whom were the Seigneurs de Gramont, who had his horse kill'd under him, de Luppe Standard-bearer to Monsieur de Lautrec, de Poigreffi, who is since turn'd Hugonot, de la Fay de Xaintonge, who is yet living, and divers others. At the same instant we discover'd another great Party of Horse advancing towards us a little on our left hand, at the sight of which the Captains who carried our Colours came both of them running to me, and saying we are all lost, whereupon I told them, that it were better, than so to conclude, to hazard fourscore, or an hundred Foot, to bring off our Horse who were engag'd. To which la Clotte, and Megrin made answer, that that venture would only occasion a greater loss, and that moreover they very much doubted the Souldiers would hardly be perswaded to go down, seeing death so manifest before their eyes. Now you must understand there was no one present at this discourse, sav∣ing the two forementioned Captains, and my self, our Foot standing drawn up four∣teen, or fifteen paces behind; and it was not amiss; for I make a great question had they heard what we said, and seeing the Gens d' armes in manifest danger to be lost, whe∣ther I should have been so chearfully followed, as I was. And it is a good rule, as much as a man can to conceal from the Souldier the danger of any enterprize, if you intend to have them go briskly to their work. To this last objection of the two Captains, I made answer that I would run the hazard to lead them on, and that lost, or lost not, it was better to hazard, and to lose fourscore, or an hundred Foot, than all our Geus-d'∣armes. And thereupon without further deliberation (for long consultations are often the ruine of brave attempts) I return'd back to the Souldiers, and the Captains with me (for the business requir'd hast) saying to them only these few words, Come on, come on Comrades, let us go, and relieve our Gens-d' armes, and was thereupon follow'd by an hundred Foot of our own Company, who with very great resolution descended with me to the foot of the Hill, where at the head of my men I passed over the brook, and there deliver'd twenty of my men to be led by the Bastard of Auzan, a Gentleman who has nothing blemish'd the legitimate Sons of his race; though all of them men of singular bravery, and remarkeable valour. Now you must know that  the Company I commanded,-bows. was no other than Cross-bows, for at this time the use of the Harqubuze, had not as yet been introducd a∣mongst
us; only three, or four days before six Gascon Harquebusiers came over to us from the Enemy, which I had received into my Company, having by good ortune been that day upon the Guard, at the great Gate of the City; and of those six, one was a native of the Territory of Monluc. Would to heaven that this accursed engine had never been invented, I had not then receiv'd those wounds which I now languish under, neither had so many valiant men been slain for the most part by the most pitiful fellows, and the greatest Cowards; Poltrons that had not dar'd to look those men in the face at hand, which at distance they laid dead with their confounded bullets: but it was the Devil's invention to make us murther one another. Being thus past the River, I order'd the Bastard d' Auzn not to suffer his men to shoot, but only to present as if they intended to do it, to the end that he might favour mine, and give them time to discharge and retire again into their order, Now when I was under the foot of the Hill, I could not possibly see what our men did; but being advanc'd a little further into the plain, I saw all the Enemies three Squadrons drawn up into one body, and the great party on the left hand, marching upon a good round trot di∣rectly towards ours, who were rallyed, and stood firm, without being able either to advance forwards, or to retire back, by reason of some great stones that lay scatter'd in their Rear. Here it was that Captain Carbon (who had no Arms on, having before been wounded in his left arm by an Arquebuze shot) seeing me so na him, came up to me, and said, Oh Montluc, my dear friend, charge up boldly, I will never forsake thee: Captain, said I, take you only care to save your self, and your Gens-d' Armes, at the same instant crying out, shoot, Comrades, at the head of these Horse. I was not above a dozen paces distant from the Enemy when I gave them this Volley, by which (as it appear'd by the testimony of the Prisoners, who were taken a few days after) above fifty Horses were kill'd, and wounded, and two Troopers slain, an execution that a little cool'd their courage, and caus'd their Troops to make a halt. In the mean time Captain Carbon had leisure with his party to retire full gallop towards the brook I had pass'd over to relieve him▪ where such as had their horses lost, taking hold of the others horse tayls sav'd themselves also, and all toge∣ther pass'd over the River. Which hast they were necssitated to make, or otherwise the great party of horse on the left hand, had charg'd them in the Flank, had they drawn more leisurely off. In the mean time under favour of the twenty Cross-bows of d' Auzan, who sustain'd us, we rallied again, and gave another volley. So soon as Captain Carbon had passed the River with his Horse, remounted Monsieur de Gra∣mont, on another horse, and mounted the rest n Crouppe, he commanded the said Siur de Gramont to ride to the top of the hill, and in all hast to draw off the Ensigns both of horse and foot, at a round trot, directly to the other River, where the bridg was, that leads towards Bayonne. Which order being given he suddenly turned back again towards me, having in his company an Italian call'd Signior Diomed, and the Siur de Mainaat, where he found me retreating towards a ditch, upon the edg of a Marish, and of which I might be within some twelve, or fourteen paces, which not only hindred him from getting up to me, but moreover gave him enough to do to save himself. I notwithstanding in spite of the Enemy recovered the ditch of the Marish, being still sheltred by d' Auzn, whom I commanded to climb over in great di∣ligence, and there to make head, which he accordingly performed. The Spaniards in the mean time made a shew, as if they meant to charge, but they durst not attempt to break into me; neither were my six Harquebusirs idle all this while, but did wonders with their shot, when having at last retreated my men with∣in five or six pas of the ditch, I caused them all in an instant to throw themselves in∣to it, and under favour of d' Auzan, almost as suddainly to mount the ditch bank on the other side, over which we all got safe and sound, saving three Soldiers, who were slain with Harquebuze shot, for not having been so nimble as the rest; and here it was that, as in a little sort, I made head against the Enemy. Now you must know, that that party of the Enemy which came up on the left hand, made a halt at the bank of the River, when they saw our Horse were already got half way up the hill▪ and those who had fought, and to whom I had given a stop at the ditch bank, were now upon their retreat home, when seeing three Squadrons of Harquebusiers coming along the plain, and making towards them with all the speed they could, it reviv'd their spirits, and inspir'd them with new courage to face about again. I, in the mean time (having also discover'd these fresh succours) began to shift along by the ditch, till being by the return of a corner of it, slipt out of their sight, I drew my men into a very narrow meadow, from whence at full speed I gain'd the
oot of the hill I had descended before, and having repass'd the River, soon recove∣red the top of the mountain. The danger wherein I saw my self to be, as well of the Horse I had pressing upon my Rear, as of the Battaillon of Inantry which I saw fast advancing towards me, did not however make me loose my Judgment in a time of so great need; nor hinder me from discerning and taking this opportunity for my retreat, during which I made the little handful of men I had march very close together; and by turnes encouraging, and speaking to them, made them often face about and salute the Cavalry, who pursued me both with Cross-bow, and Harque∣buze shot; when having gain'd the top of the hill, I drew into an Orchard, ma∣king fast the Gate on the inside, that the Horse might not so suddainly enter, and by the favour of that, and several others planted with Apples, still made on towards the Bridge, till I came to a little Church call'd Hitée, from whence I perceived the great road to be all covered over with the Enemies Horse, there being nevertheless a great ditch betwixt them and me, from whence I bestow'd upon them some Ar∣quebuze, and Cross-bow shot, which also very seldom fail'd of their effect, and compell'd them (seeing they could not come up to me) some to advance forwards, and others to retire. I then put some of my men into the Church yard, thinking there again to make head; the greatest folly I committed throughout the whole acti∣on; for in the mean time a good number of their Horse gliding along by the meadow straight towards the Bridge, were already advanc'd so far, that I saw my self totally enclos'd, without all manner of hope to escape, and to save my self. Now so soon as Captain Carbon had recover'd the Bridg, and that the Horse, and Foot were all pass'd over, he commanded Monsieu Gramont to hast away, not only a trot, but a full gallop; for he already discover'd the Enemies Infantry in the Orchards, which I could not do; neither did I ever perceive them, till they began to shoot at me; and then I made a sign to my Soldiers in the Churh yard to come, and draw up to me in the great high way. Captain Carbon in the interim, being he saw nothing of me, half concluded us all for killd, or taken, and yet seeing all the Enemies Troops of horse both on the right hand, and on the left, making directly towards the Bridg, would leave Captain Campai (an admirable good Soldier) at the end of the Bridg with five and twenty horse, and thirty Cross-bows of Captain Megrin's Company, to try if there were any possible means to relieve me, were I yet alive, causing the Bridg in the mean time to be broken down. Now because that Troop of the Enemies horse which march'd on the right hand, made a great deal more hast towards the Bridge, than that of the left, I quitted the great high way, and under favour of a hedg made straight towards the River, where I was again to encounter the Horse, which notwithstanding I made my way thorow, chopt into the River, and in despite of them all, passed o∣ver to the other side: wherein, the banks of the River being high, favour'd me very much, they being too steep for the horse to get down, neither was our shot of both sorts idle in the mean time. At last I recover'd the end of the Bridg, where I found Captain Campai very busie at work to break it, and who so soon as he saw me, was very importunate with me to save my self, at the same time presenting me the Crup∣per of his horse to that end:A brave reso∣lution in a Captain. but he had no other answer from me, but this, that God had hitherto preserved me, and my Soldiers also, whom I was likewise resol∣ved never to abandon, till I had first brought them into a place of safety. Whilst we were in this dispute we were aware of the Spanish Infantry coming directly to∣wards the Bridg, when finding our selves too weak to stand the shock, Campai with the Cross-bows of Captain Megrin took the Van in order to a retreat, and I remain'd in the Rear, having gain'd a ditch that enclos'd a little meadow, which was sufficient to defend me from the horse, it being so high, that they could not come to charge. I had now nothing left me but my six Harquebusiers, my Cross-bows having al∣ready spent all their Arrows; nevertheless to shew that their hearts were not down, I caus'd them to hold their Swords ready drawn in the one hand, and their Bows in the other to serve instead of a Buckler. Now Captain Campai's men had broken down the greatest part of the Bridg before they went away, by reason of which impedi∣ment the Cavalry could not so soon ome up to us, having been constrain'd to foord the River two Harquebuze shot on the right hand, whilst the Foot in the mean time with great difficulty fil'd it over one by one by the rails of the Bridg, a po∣sture wherein it had been a very easie matter to defeat them, had I not foreseen that then the Cavalry would have come up to enclose me, and our honor depended
upon our rtreat. Wherefore still getting ground, and from ditch to ditch, ha∣ving gain'd about half a quarter of a league of way, I made a halt, that my men might not be out of breath, when looking back I perceiv'd the Enemy had done so too, and saw by his countenance that he grew weary of the pursuit, a thing at which I was very much astonish'd and not a little glad, for in plain truth we were able to do no more▪ having taken a little Water and Cider, and some Mai bread out of a ew small houses we met upon the way. In the mean time Captain Campai sent out some Horse to see what was become of us, believing me to be either dead, or taken. And now behold us arriv'd in a place of safety, with the loss of only three men in the first ditch; and the brave Bastard d' Auzan, who by loytring something too long in a little house by the Church was lost. In the intrim of this bustle which continued pretty long, the alarm was carried to Monsieur de Lautrec to Byonne, together with the news, that we were all total∣ly defeated, at which he was exdingly troubled, in regard of the ill consequen∣ces that usually attend the fleshing and giving an Enemy blood in the beginning of a War. However he drew out presently into the field, and was advanc'd but a very little way, when he discover'd our Ensigns of Foot conducted by the Sicur de Gramont, marching upon the Road towards him, who so soon as he came up, pre∣sently gave him an accoun of what had happened, and did me the honor to tell him, that I was the cause of their preservation: but that withall I was lost in the service. Captain Carbon was not yet arriv'd, forasmuch as he had made a halt to stay for Captain Campai, from him to learn the issue of the business: but in the end he came up also, to whom Monsieur de Lautrec spake these words. Well, Carbon,  this a time wherein to commit such a piece of folly as this? which I do assure you is not of so little moment, but that you have thereby endangered the making me lose this City of Bay∣onne, which you know to be a place of so great importance. To which Carbon made an∣swer. Sir, I have committed a very great fault, and the greatest folly that ever I was guil∣ty of in my whole life: to this hour the like disgrace has never befallen me; but seeing it has pleased God to preserve us from being defeated, I shall be wiser for the time to come. Monsieur de Lautrec then demanded of him, if there was any news of me, to which he made answer, that he thought I was lost: but as they were returning softly to∣wards the City in expectation of further news, Captain Campai also arriv'd, who assured them that I was come safely off, relating withal the handsom retreat I had made, in despite, and in the very teeth of the Enemy, with the loss of four men only, and that it was not possible, but that the Enemy must have lost a great number of men. I was no sooner come to my Quarters, but that a Gentleman was sent from Monsieu de Lautrec, to bring me to him, who entertained me with as much kindness, and respect, as he could have done any Gentleman in the Kingdom, saying to me these words in Gscon; Montluc mon amic you a oublideray jamai lou service qu'abes fait au Roy, & m'en seviera tant que you vivrai. Which is, Montluc, my friend, I will never forget the service you have this day performed for the King: ut will be mind∣ful of it so long as I live. There is as much honor in an handsom retreat, as there is in good fighting, and this was a Lord who was not wont to caress many people; a fault that I have often observ'd in him; nevertheless he was pleas'd to ex∣press an extraordinary favour to me all the time we sate at supper, which he also continued to me ever after, insomuch that calling me to mind four or five years af∣ter, he dispatch'd an express Courrier to me from Paris into Gascony with a Com∣mission to raise a Company of Foot, entreating me to bear him company in his expe∣dition to Naples, and has ever since put a greater value upon me, than I deserved. This was the first action I was ever in the quality of a Commander, and from whence I be∣gan to derive my reputation. You Captains (my Camrades) who shall do me the honor to read my Life, take notice, that the thing in the world, which you ought most to desire, is to meet with a fair occasion wherein to manifest your courage in the first Sally of your Arms▪ for if in the beginning you shall prove successful, you do (amongst others) two things. First you cause your selves to be praised, and esteemed by the great ones, by whose report you shall be recommended to the knowledg of the King himself, from whom we are to expect the recompence of all our Services, and Labours: And in the next place, when the Soldier shall see a Captain who has behavd himself well, and performed any notable thing at his first trial; all the valiant men will strive to be under his command, believing that so auspicious a beginning, cannot fail
of a prosperous issue; but that all things will succeed well with him, and that under such a man they shall never fail to be employ'd; for nothing can more spite a man of courage, than to be left at home to burn his shins by the fire, whilst other men are employ'd abroad in honorable action. So that by this means you shall be sure always to be follow'd by brave men, with which you shall continue to get more honor, and proceed to greater reputation; and on the contrary, if you chance to be baffled in the beginning, whether through your Cowardise, or want of Conduct, all the good men will avoid you, and you will have none to lead, but the Lees, and Canaille of the Army, with whom (though you were the eroe of the world) there will be no good to be done; nor other, than an ill repute to be ac∣quir'd. My Exemple upon this occasion, may serve for something, wherein though perhaps there were no great matters perform'd, yet so it is, that of little xploits of War, great uses are sometimes to be made. And remember, whenever you find your selves overmatch'd with an Enemy, that you can bridle, and hold at bay with the loss of a few men, not to fear to hazard them. Fortune may be favourable to you▪ as she was to me; for I dare confidently say, that had not I presented my self to lead on these hundred Foot (which all play'd their parts admirably well) we had certainly had all the Enemies Cavaly upon our hands, which had been a power too great, for so few as we were to with∣stand. The Enemies Camp soon after retir'd into Navarre, whereupon Monsieur de Lautrec disbanded the one half of his Companies, reserving only the two Ensigns of Monsiur de Cauna, and that of the Baron Iean de Cauna, consisting each of on∣ly three hundred men (the first time they had ever been reduc'd to that number) they having formerly consisted of five hundred, or a thousand; a device whereby the King's Treasury was very much relieved, as it sav'd the pay of so many Lieu∣tenants, Ensigns, Serjeants, and other Officers: but withall the command of a good number of men , usually invited men of Condition, and Estates into the Service, who at present disdain to accept of Commissions, where they see so many pitiful Captainetts, who are admitted into Command, without ever having strook a stroke. At this time you must know Monsieur de Lautrec bestow'd my Captains Company up∣on me, though I was then but twenty years of age, and leaving four Companies in Bay∣onne, took Post, and went away to Court: which departure of his encouraged the Enemy to renew his Camp, and to lay Siege to Fontarabie, which they also took be∣fore his return. The loss of this place was occasioned, either through the indiscre∣tion, or the treachery of a Nephew to the Constable of Navarre, and Son to the late Mareschal de Navarre, who having been banish'd from Spain, for siding with Hen∣ry King of Navarre, was, together with a Garrison of four hundred men (Exiles like himself) put into this City, where he was at this time so well solicited by his Uncle, that he revolted to his side, by which means this place was lost, which otherwise had been impregnable, though the Enemy had made two great breaches in it: but being I was not there present, and that  will deliver nothing upon report, I shall say no more but this, that Captain Frangett who surrendred it up to the Spaniard, and who for so doing laid the blame to the said Don Pedro, was afterwards for his pains degraded at Lyons. The loss of this place depriv'd us of very good footing we had in Spain. It was here that some years before, Monsieur de Lde won immor∣tal glory, by enduring a whole years Siege in all the extremities that mankind can undergo, and he for so doing carried away honor, and reward, but Frangett infa∣my and ruine; thus goes the world, and fortune. In the mean time, if any of the Princes, or the Kings Lieutenants shall vouchsafe to peruse this Book of mine (and perhaps they may read worse) let them take notice by this exemple, and others that I have seen, and that I may perchance make mention of hereafter, that it is very dangerous to make use of a man, that has once abandon'd his own Prince, and na∣tural Soveraign; not that he is to be rejected, when he flies into a mans arms for refuge, and protection; but he ought not by any means to have a place entrusted to him, with which he may at any time make his own peace, and restore himself to his Princes favour. Or if they shall think fit to trust him, it ought not to be however till af∣ter by a long tryal, he shall have so manifested his fidelity, that there is no more question to be made of his Faith; and then in such a process of time, the Country, into which he shall come at first a stranger, or fgitive, and an Exile, will be grown natural and familiar to him, and he will have received benefits, and acquir'd
such interests, and possessions, as may fix him there: and yet vn then let it be at a sufficient distance from such as he may have had any private correspondencies, or se∣cret practices withal: For by what I have heard from several of the Emperour's Captains, had Charles of Bourbon taken Mrselles, and Provence, the Emperor would never have committed so great an error, as to have entrusted them in his hands, though he had faithfully promis'd so to do. But let us proceed. All these Foot Companies being disbanded, excepting those which were left in Garrison, I who had no mind to be immur'd within the walls of a City, again put my self into the Company of Monsieur Le Marschal de Foix, wherein I continued till such time as King Francis went his expedition against Monsieur de Boubon, who, together with the Marquess of Pscara laid Siege to Marselles (which Sieur de Bour∣bon, for an affront that had been offer'd to him, was revolted to the Emperor (there is nothing a great heart will not do in order to revenge) where seeing the King would permit the Mareschal de Foix to carry no more, than twenty men at arms of his own Company along with him, and finding my self at my arrival to be excluded that election, and none of the number, I took such snuff at it, that I went with five or six Gentlemen, who did me the honor to bear me company, to be present at the Battel, with a resolution to fight volunteer amongst the Foot. But Monsiur de Bourbon after having lain six weeks only before the City, rais'd the Siege. The Signior Raco de Cera, a Gentleman of Rome, a brave, and expe∣rienc'd Captain, together with the Sieur de Brion were within, with a sufficient Gar∣rison, his Majesty had thither sent for the defence of the Town; So that Monsieur de Bourbon found himself to be deceivd in his intelligence, and that he had reckon'd without his Host. The French did not as yet know what it was to rebell against their Prince; for so soon as he had notice of the Kings approach, he retir'd himself over the Mountains, and descended into Piedmont, by the Marquisate of Saluzzo, and Pigerol, and not without very great loss, fled away to Milan, which also both he, and the Vicroy of Naples, were constrain'd to abandon, and to fly out at one gate, whilst we entred in at another. Signior Don Antonio de Leva (who was one of the greatest Captains the Emperor had, and who I do believe had he not been hindred by the Gout (with which he was infinitely tormented) would have surpass'd all others of his time) was chosen in this posture of affairs to be put into Pavi, with a strong Garrison of German Soldi∣ers, supposing that the King would infallibly fall upon that place, as in effect he did. The Siege continued for the space of eight months, in which time Monsieur de Bour∣bon went into Germany, where he so bestirr'd himself with the money he had bor∣rowed from the Duke of Savoy, that he thence brought along with him ten thousand German foot, together with four or five hundred men at armes from the Kingdom of Naples, with which Forces encamping himself at Lode, he came to offer the King Battail upon a St. Matthias day, our army being very much weakened as well by the length of the Siege, as by Sickness, with which it had been miserably infected. To which disadvantages the King had moreover unluckily disbanded three thousand Grisons commanded by a Collonel of their own called le grand Diart, I suppose, to contract the charges of the War. Oh that these little pieces of good Husbandry do very often occasion notable losses! Also a few days before Monsieur d' Albaine was, by the King's command, departed with great Forces towards Rome, from thence to fall into the Kingdom of Naples: but in the end all vanish'd away in smoke; for, to our great misfortune, we lost the Battail, and all these enterprizes came to no∣thing. The Description of this Battail is already publish'd in so many places, that it would be labour lost therein to wast my paper; I shall therefore only say, that the business was not well carried in several places on our side, which occasioned their ruine, who behav'd themselves best upon that occasion. The King was taken priso∣ner, Monsieur the Mareschal de Foix, both taken and wounded with an Arqubuze shot in his thigh, which moreover enter'd into his belly, Monsieur de St. Pol taken, and wounded with thirteen wounds, with which he had been left for dead upon the place, and was stript to his shirt: but a Spaniard coming to cut off his Finger, for a Ring he could not otherwise pull off, he cried out, and being known, was carried with the said Mareschal into Pavie, to the lodging of the Marquess de Scadalfol; several other great Lords lost their Lives, as the Brother to the Duke of Lorrain, the Admi∣ral de Chabans, and many others taken, amongst whom were the King of Navarre, Mssieurs de Nevers, de Montmorency, de Brion, and others; but I shall not taxe the
memory of any one for the loss of this Battel; nor set a mark upon those who beha∣ved themselves ill enough, even in the presence of their King. During all the time of my abode in the Army, I was continually with a Captain call'd Castille de Navarre, without any pay, which Captain having the fortune to command the forlorn hope in the day of Battel, intreated me to bear him Company, which accordingly I did, as also the five Gentlemen who came in company with me. I was taken prisoner by two Gentlemen of the Company of Don Antoni de Leva, who upon the Saturday morning let me go, together with two of my Camrades; for they saw they were likely to get no great treasure of me, the other three were killed in the Battel. Be∣ing now at liberty I retir'd my self into the house of the Marquess, where Monsiur le Mareschal lay wounded. I found him with Monsieur de St. Pol, both together in one bed, and Monsieur de Montejan lodg'd in the same Chamber, who was also wounded in his leg. There I heard the discourse and dispute betwixt Siur Frederick de Bege, who was prisoner, and Captain Sucra who belong'd to the Emperor upon the loss of this Battel, who accusd our French of many great oversights, particularly nominating several per∣sons, whose names I am willing to forbear: but I judg'd their opinions to be very good, being both of them very great Soldiers, and what I then heard has since been service∣able to me upon several occasions; an use that every one ought to make of such contro∣versies, who intends to arrive at any degree of perfection in the practice of Arms. A man must seek not only all occasions of presenting himself at all rencounters, and Bat∣els; but must moreover be curious to hear, and careful to retin the opinions, and arguments of experiencd men, concerning the faults, and oversights committed by Commanders, and the loss, or advantages to the one side and the other ensuing thereupon; for it is good to learn to be wise and to become a good Master at another mans expence. The Kingdom of France has long bewailed this unfortunate day, with the losses we have sustain'd, besides the captivity of this brave Prince, who thought to have found fortune as favourable to him here, as she was at his Battel with the Swisse: but she play'd the baggage, and turn'd her tail; making him to know how inconveni∣ent, and of how dangerous consquence it is, to have the person of a King expos'd to the uncertain event of Battel; considering that his loss brings along with it the ru∣ine of his Kingdom. Almighty God nevertheless was pleas'd to look upon this with an ye of pity, and to preserve it; for the Conquerors dazled with the rayes of victo∣ry lost their understanding, and knew not how to follow their blow; otherwise had Mon∣sieur de Bourbon turn'd his Forces towards France, he would have put us all to our Trumps. The Munday following Monsieur de Bourbon gave order that such as were taken pri∣soners, and had not wherewithal to pay their ransom, should avoid the Camp, and return home to their own houses. Of which number I was one; for I had no great treasure: he gave us indeed a Troop of horses, and a Company of Foot for our safe conduct: but the Devil a penny of money, or a bit of bread: insomuch that not one of us, had any thing but Turnips, and Cabbage-stalks, which we broyl'd upon the coals, to at, 'till we came to Ambrun. Before our departure Monsieur le Mareschal commanded me to commend him to Captain Carbon, and the rest of his friends, whom he entreated not to be dejected at this misfortune; but to rouse up their spirits, and ndavour to do better than ever, and that they should go, and joyn themselves to Monsieur de Lautrec his Brother. After which he made me a very notable remon∣strance, which was not ended without many tears, and yet deliver'd with a strong accent, and an assured cotenance, though he was very sore wounded, and so much that the Friday following he died. I travell'd on foot as far as Redorte in Languedoc, where his Company then lay; whereof Monsieur d Lautrec, after his death, gave one Tertia to Captain Carbon, a command that he did not long enjoy; for soon after a Villain native of Montpellier, who had favour'd the Camp of Monsieur de Bourbon, kill'd him behind, as he was riding post upon the Road near unto Lumel. As great a loss as has been of any Captain, who has died these hundred years; and one that I do believe had he lived to the Wars,The Chara∣cter of Cap∣tain Carbon. that we have since seen, would have perfor∣med wonders, and many would have been made good Captains under his command: For something was every day to be learn'd by following him, he being one of the most vigilant, and diligent Commanders, that I ever knew, a great undertaker, and very rsolute in the execution of what he undertook. Another Tertia was given to Cap∣tain ignac of Auvergne, who also did not keep it keep it long, for he shortly after fll blind and died. The third Tertia he gave to Monsieur de Negrepelisse, the Father to him now living, of which a Cosen German of mine called Captain Serillac carried the Ensign.
In the mean time Madame the Queen Regent, Mother to the King, and with her all the confederate Princes of the Crown, had set several Treaties on foot, and labou∣red on all hands the Kings deliverance, with great integrity, and vigour, and to so good effct, that in the end this mighty Emperor, who in his imagination had swal∣low'd up the whole Kingdom of France, gain'd not so much as one inch of earth by his victory, and the King had the good fortune in his affliction to derive assistance even from those who at other times were his Enemies, yet to whom the Emperors greatness stood highly suspected. His Majesty being at last returned home, and mindful of the injuries, and indignities, had been offer'd to him during his captivity, having in vain tryed all other ways to recover his two Sons out of the Emperors hands, was in the end constrain'd to have recourse to Arms, and to recommence the War. And then it was that the expedition of Naples was set on foot under the command of Monsieur de Lautrec, who (as I have already said) dispatch'd a Courrier to me into Gascony to raise a Company of Foot, which I also in a few days perform'd, and brought him be∣twixt seven and eight hundred men, of which, four or five hundred were Harque∣busiers, though at that time there was but very few of them in France. Of these Monsieur de Ausun entreated of me the one half, for the compleating of his Company, which I granted to him, and we made our division near to Alexandria,Alexandria surrendred. which at this time was surrendred to the said Monsieur de Lautrec, who from thence sent Mes∣sieurs de Gramont, and de Montpezat to besiege the Castle de Vige; before which place, as we were making our approaches, and casting up trenches to plant the Artillery, I was hurt with a Harquebuze shot in my right leg, of which shot I remain'd lame a long time after; insomuch that I could not be at the storming of Pavie,Pavie taken by assault, and half burnt down. which was carried by assault, and half burnt down to the ground. Nevertheless I caused my self to be carried in a Litter after the Camp, and before Monsieur de Lau∣trec departed from Plaisance to march away to Boulongne, I again began to walk. Now near unto Ascoly, there is a little town called Capistrano, seated upon the top of a Mountain, of so difficult access, that the ascent is very sleep on all sides, sav∣ing on those of the two Gates, into which a great number of the Soldiers of the Country had withdrawn, and fortified themselves. The Count Pedro de Navarre, who was our Collonel, commanded our Gascon Companies to attaque this Post, which we accordingly did, and assaulted the place. We caus'd someMoving Pent-houses under the protection of which, Soldi∣ers use to ap∣proach a wall. Manteletts to be made wherewith to approach the Wall, in which we made two holes, of capaci∣ty sufficient for a man easily to enter in, about fifty or threescore paces distant the one from the other: whereof I having made the one, I would my self needs be the first to enter at that place. The Enemy on the other side had in the mean time pull'd up the planks, and removed the boards, and tables from the roof of a Parlour into which this hole was made, and where they had plac'd a great tub full of stones. One of the Companies of Monsieur de Luppé our Lieutenant Colonel, and mine pre∣par'd to enter at this place, and now God had granted me the thing, that I had ever desir'd, which was to be present at an assault, there to enter the first man, or to lose my life: I therefore threw my self headlong into the Parlour, having on a Coat of Mail, such as the Germans used in those days, a Sword in my hand, a Targuette upon my arm, and a Morrion upon my head; but as those who were at my heels were pressing to get in after me the Enemy pour'd the great tub of stones upon their heads, and trapt them in the hole, by reason whereof the could not possibly follow I therefore remaind all alone within fighting at a door that went out into the street: but from the roof of the Parlour, which was unplank'd, and laid open for that purpose, they pepperd me in the mean time with an infinite number of Harquebuze shot,The Sier de Montluc woun∣ded with two Harquebuze shot. one of which pierc'd my Targuette, and shot my arm quite through, within four fingers of my hand, and another so batter'd the bone at the knitting of my arm and shoul∣der, that I lost all manner of feeling, so that letting my Targuette fall, I was constrain'd to retire towards my hole, against which I was born over by those who fought at the door of the Parlour: but so fortunately nevertheless for me, that my Sol∣diers had, by that means,And the same Arm at the same time broken in two places. opportunity to draw me out by the legs, but so leisurely withal, that they very courtously made me tumble heels over head from the very top to the bottom of the Graffe, wherein rowling over the ruines of the Stones, I again broke my already wounded arm in two places. So soon as my men had gathered me up, I told them, that I thought I had left my arm behind me in the Town, when one of my Soldiers lifting it up from whence it hung, as in a Scarf, dangling upon my buttocks, and laying it over the other, put me into a little heart; after which; seeing the Sol∣diers
of my own Company gather'd round about me, Oh my Camrades (said I) have I always us'd you so kindly, and ever loved you so well, to forsake me in such a time as this? which I said, not knowing how they had been hindred from following me in. Upon this my Liutenant, who had almost been stiled to death in the hole, call'd la Bastide (Father to the Savillans now living, and one of the bravest Gentlemen in our Army) propos'd to two Basque Captains call'd Martin and Ramont, who al∣ways quarter'd near unto my Company; that if they would with Ladders storm by a Canton of the wall hard by, he would undertake, at the same time, to enter by the hole it self, and either force his entry that way, or lose his life in the attempt. To which I also encouraged them, as much as my weakness would permit. The Ladders being therefore presently brought, and tyed together, because they proved too short, la Bastide made towards the hole, having sent to the other Captains to do as much to the other;Capisrano ta∣ken by assault. but they did no great feats. In the interim that la Bastide was fighting within, having already gained the hole, Martin and Ramont gave a brave Scalado to the Canton, and with so good success, that they beat the Enemy from the wall▪ and entred the Town. Of this being presently advertis'd, I sent to la Bastide to conjure him to save me as many women and maids as he possibly could, that they might not be violated (having that in devotion for a vow I had made to our Lady of Lortta, hop∣ing that God, for this good act, would please to be assisting to me) which he did; bringing fifteen or twenty, which were also all that were saved; the Soldiers being so animated to revenge the wounds I had receiv'd, and to express their affection to me, that they killed all before them, so much as to the very children, and moreover set the Town on fire.Burn to the ground. And although the Bishop of Ascoly (this being a member of his Diocess) was very importunate with Monsieur de Latrec in behalf of the Town, the Soldiers could notwithstanding never be made to leave it, till they saw it reduced to Ashes. The next day I was carryed to Ascoly, where Monsieur de Lautrec sent Mes∣siurs de Gramont, and de Montpezat to see how I did, with whom he moreover sent two Chirurgons the King had given him at his departure, the one called Master Alesme, and the other Master Gorge; who, after they had seen how miserably my arm was mangled, and shatter'd, positively pronounced, that there was no other way to save my life, but to cut it off, the execution whereof was deferr'd till the next morning. Monsiur de Lautrec thereupon commanded the said Sieurs de Montpezat and de Gramont to be present at the work, which they promised they would, but not without some difficulty, out of the friendship they both had for me, especially the Siur de Gramont. Now you must understand that my Soldiers had, a few days before, taken prisoner a young man, a Chirurgion, who had formerly belong'd to Monsieur de Bourbon▪ This young fellow having understood the determination to cut off my arm (for I had entertain'd him into my service) never ceased to importune me, by no means to endure it; representing to me▪ that I was not, as yet, arrived to the one half of my age, and that I would wish my self dead an hundred times a day, when I should come to be sen∣sible of the want of an arm. The morning being come, the forementioned Lords, and the two Chirurgions, and Physicians, came into my chamber with all their instru∣ments, and plaisters, without more ceremony, or giving me so much as leisure to re∣pent, to cut off my arm, having in command from Monsiur de Lautre to tell me, that I should not consider the loss of an Arm, to save my life; nor despair of my for∣tune; for although his Majesty should not regard my service, nor take it into consi∣deration to settle a subsistence for me, yet that nevertheless his wife, and himself, had forty thousand Livers a year revenue, wherewith to recompence my valour, and to provide that I should never want; only he wished me to have patience, and to mani∣fest my courage upon this occasion. Every thing being now ready, and my arm going to be opened to be cut off; the young Chirurgeon standing behind my bed's head, never desisted preaching to me by no means to suffer it, insomuch that (as God would have it) though I was prepared, and resolved to let them do what they would with me, he made me to alter my determination; whereupon, without doing any thing more, both the Lords, and the Chirurgeons return'd back to Monsieur de Lautre to give him an account of the business, who (as they have all of them several times since assured me) said these words. I am glad to hear he is so resolved, and should also my self have repented the causing of it to be done; for had he dyed, I should ever have suspected myself to have been the occasion of his death; and had he lived without an arm, I should never have look∣ed upon him, but with exceeding great trouble, to see him in such a condition; let God there∣fore work his will.
Immediately after the two forenamed Chirurgions came to examine mine, whether or no he was sufficient to undertake the cure; for otherwise it was order'd, that one of them should remain with me; but they found him capable enough, to which they also added some instructions, what was to be done upon such accidents as might hap∣pen. The next day, which was the fourth after my hurt, Monsieur de Lurtre caused me to be carried after him to Termes de Bresse, where he left me in his own quarters, to the care of the man of the house, who was a Gentleman, and for the further assurance of my person, carryed Hostages with him, two of the most considerable men of the Town, whereof one was brother to the Gentleman of the house, assuring them, that if any the least foul play was offer'd to me, those two men should infallibly be hang'd. In this place I remain d two months and a half, lying continually upon my reins, in∣somuch that my very back bone pierced thorough my skin, which is doubtless the grea∣test torment, that any one in the world can possibly endure; and although I have writ∣ten in this narrative of my life, that I have been one of the most fortunate men, that have born arms these many years, in that I have ever been victorious wherever I comman∣ded; yet have I not been exempt from great wounds, and dangerous sicknesses, of which I have had as many, and as great, as any man ever had, who outliv'd them. God being still pleased to curb my pride, that I might know my self, and acknow∣ledg all good, and evil to depend upon his pleasure: but all this notwithstanding a scurvy, four, morose, and cholerick nature of my own (which favours a little, and too much of my native Soil) has evermore made me play one trick, or another of a Gascon, which also I have no great reason to repent. So soon as my arm was come to a perfect suppuration, they began to raise me out of Bed, having a little cushion under my arm, and both that, and my arm swath'd up close to my body. In this posture I continued a few days longer, until mounting a little Mle that I had, I caused my self to be carried before Naples, where our Camp was already sate down, having first sent away a Gentleman of mine on foot to our Lady of Lorett to accomplish my vow, I my self being in no condition to perform it. The pain I had suffer'd, was neither so insupportable, nor so great, as the affliction I had, not to have been pre∣sent at the taking of Malphe, and other places; nor at the defeating of the Prince of Orange, who after the death of Monsiur de Bourbon (slain at the Sack of Rome) com∣manded the Imperial Army. Had not this valiant Prince (of deplorable memory, for the foulness of his revolt from his Lord, and Master) dyed in the very height of his Victories, I do believe he had sent us back the Popes into Avignon once again. At my arrival at the Camp, Monsieur de Lautrec, and all the other great persons of the Army, received me with great demonstrations of kindness, and esteem, and par∣ticularly Count Pedro de Navarre, who caused a confiscation to be settled upon me of the value of twelve hundred Duckets yearly revenue call'd la Tour de la Nuncide, one of the fairest Castles in all the Tertitory of Labour, and the first Barony of Naples; belonging to a rich Spaniard call d Don Ferdino. I then thought my self the greatest Lord in all the Army: but I found my self the poorest Rouge in the end, as you shall see by the continuation of this discourse. I could here dilate at full how the Kingdom of Naples was lost, after it was almost wholly conquer'd; a story that has been writ by many: but it is great pity they would not, or durst not relate the truth, being that Kings and Princes might have been taught to be so wary by this Exemple, as not to suffer themselves to be imposed upon, and abused, as they very often are: but no body would have the great ones learn to be too wise, for then they could not play their own Games with them so well, as they commonly do. I shall therefore let it alone, both for that I do not pretend to record the faults of other men, as also because I had no hand in these transactions, and shall only write my own Fortunes to serve for instruction to such as shall follow after, that the little Montlucs my sons have left me, may look with some kind of Glory into the life of their Grandfather, and aim at honorable things by his Ex∣emple. There were no great matters peform'd after my coming to the Camp; neither did they busie themselves about any thing but the City of Naple, which also they inten∣ded to overcome by Famine, and it must suddainly have fallen into our hands, had it not been for the revolt of Andrea d' Auria, who sent to Count Philippin his Nephew to bring back his Gallies to Genoa,The revolt of Andra d' A∣ria. with which he kept the City of Naples so close block'd up by Sea, that a Cat could not have got in; which he immediately did, and thereupon an infinite of provision was put into the Town by Sea, whilst our Gallis delay'd to come. God forgive him who was the cause thereof, without which acci∣dent the Town had been our own, and consequently the whole Kingdom. This
Philippin Lieutenant or Vice-Admiral to Andrea d' Auria,A great Na∣val victory obtain'd by Philippin d' Auria. near unto Capo-dorso obtai∣ned a famous Naval Victory over Hugo de Moncada, and the Marquess de Gust, who came to the relief of Naples; but from this Victory proceeded our ruine: for Philippin having sent his prisoners to his Uncle to Genoa, and the King being importunate to have them deliver'd over to him, Andrea d' Auria would by no means part with them, complaining that he had already delivered up the Prince of Orange to the King, with∣out any recompence▪ upon which occasion the Marquess de Guast (a man of as great dexterity, and cunning as any of his time, and a great Warriour) knew so well how to manage Andrea d' Auria's discontent, that in the end he turn'd his coat, and with twelve Gallis went over to the Emperor's side. The King our Master was well e∣nough informed of all his practices, and might easily enough have prevented the mis∣chief; but his heart was so great, and he was so higly offended with Auria, that he would never seek to him, whereof he repented at leisure: for he has since been the cause of many losses that have befall'n the King, and particularly of the King∣dom of Naples, Genoa, and other misfortunes. It seem'd as if the Sea stood in aw of this man; wherefore without a very great, and more than ordinary occasion, he was not fit to have been provoked, or disgusted: but perhaps the King might have some other reason. In the end our Gallies arriv'd, and brought with them the Prince of Navarre, Brother to King Henry, with some few Gentlemen only of his train, who lived but three weeks after; for he came in the beginning of our sickness. At his landing Mon∣siur de Latrec sent Michael Atonio Marquess of Saluzzo for his Convoy (for he landed a little below la Magdaleine within half a mile of Naples) and with him a great part of the Ges d' Armes, with the black Italian Regiments, which were commanded by Count Hugues de Gennes, since the death of Signior Horatio Bailone, and had been the Companies of Signior Giovanni de Medicis, Father to the Duke of Florence that now is, who had been wounded in his leg, with a Harqubuze shot before Pavie, being then in the Kings Service,The death of Signior Gio∣vanni de Me∣dicis. and was thence carried to Plaisance, where he had his leg cut off, and thereof soon after dyed, and after his death the said Signior Horatio took upon him the command of his Companies. It seem'd that God would at that time some evil to the King, when he lay before Pavie. For in the first place some one advis'd him to send away the Grisons, secondly to send Monsieur d' Albain to Rome with another part of the Army, and for the sum of all misfortunes God sent this mis∣chance to Signior Giovanni, who (to speak the truth) understood more of the af∣fairs of War, than all the rest, who were about the King, having three thousand Foot under his command, the best that ever were in Italy, with three Cornets of horse, and I do verily believe (and there are several others of the same opinion) that, had he been well at the Battel, matters had not gone so ill as they did. Signior Horatio afterwards encreas'd the number a thousand men, which made up four thousand foot, who carried black Ensigns for the death of the said Signior Giovanni, and were more∣over all put into mourning, from whence they deriv'd the name of the Black Regi∣ments, and afterwards associated themselves to the Marquess of Saluzzo, who tem∣poriz'd for about two years in Italy, and about Florence, and afterwards join'd with our Army at Troyes, or else at Nocera, I am not certain which, for that I lay at the same time wounded at Termes on Bresse. But to return to the landing of the Prince of Navarre, because there was something of Action there performed wherein I had a share, I shall give an account of that business. Captain Artiguelaube (who was Colonel of five Gascon Ensigns which were wont to be under Monsieur de Luppée, and of five others commanded by the Baron de Bearn) was commanded, as also was Capta de Buch, eldest son of the Family of Candale, to draw down to that place, and I also (poor wretch as I was) was one of the num∣ber. So soon as we were got down to the shore▪ the Marquess left all our Pikes behind a great Rampire, which the Count Pedro de Navarre had caused to be cast up, and that extended on the right hand, and on the left, for about half a mile in length. Close adjoyning to this was a great Portal of Stone, through which ten, or twelvemen might march a breast, and that I do believe had been a Gate in former times, for the Arch, and other marks thereof were still remaining; to the checks of which Portal, our Rampire was brought up, both on the one side, and the other. Our Battaillon was drawn up about an hundred paces distant from this Portal, the Black Regiments some three hundred paces behind ours, and the greatest part of the Horse yet further behind them. Monsieur le Marquis, Monsieur le Captau, the Count Hugues, Captain Artigue∣laube, and almost all the Captains as well Italians as Gascons along with them, went
down as well to facilitate, as to be present at the Princes Landing; which said Seigneur Capt had six Ensigns, three of Piedmontoise, and three of Gascons. They were so long about their landing, that they there staid three long hours; for they made the Prince to stay and dine abroad, before he came out of the Galley: a little delay some∣times occasions a great mischief, and it had been better, that both he, and all the com∣pany with him had made a good sober fast; but the vanity of the world is such, that they think themselves undervalued if they do not move in all the formalities of State, and in so doing commit very often very great errors. It were more convenient to move in the Equipage of a simple Gentleman only, and not to Prince it at that rate, but to do well, than to stand upon such frivolous punctillios, and be the cause of any misadven∣ture, or disorder. Captain Artiguelaub in the mean time had plac'd me with threscore or fourscore Harqucbusiers upon the cross of a high way very near to the Magdaleine, which is a great Church some hundred, or two hundred paces distant from the Gates of Naples; and upon another cross of the high way, on the left hand of me, where there stood a little Oratory, two or three hundred Harqubusiers of the black Regiments, with an Ensign of Pikes; In the same place also, and a little on the one side, was plac'd the Company of Seignur de Candale, consistng of two or three hundred Harque∣busiers, about two hundred paces distant from, and just over against the place where I stood. Being thus upon my Guard I saw both horse and foot issuing out of Naples, and coming full drive to gain the Magdaleine; whereupon mounting a little Mule that I had, I gallop'd straight down to the water side. All the Lords and Gentlemen were as yet on board, caressing, and complementing one another, to whom by certain Skip∣pers that were plying too and again betwixt the Gallies, and the Shoar, I caus'd it to be cryd out, that the Enemy was sallying out of the Town by whole Troops to in∣tercept them, and to recover the blind of the Magdaleine, and that they should think of fighting, if they so pleased; an intelligence at which some were basely down in the mouth, for every one that sets a good face on the matter has no great stomach to fight. I presently return'd back to my men, and went up straight to the Magdaleine, from whence I discover'd the Enemies Horse sallying out dismounted, with the bri∣dles in the one hand, and their Launces in the other, stooping as much as they could, to avoid being seen, as also did the Foot, who crept on all four behind the walls that enclosed the backside of the Church: I then presently gave my Mule to a Soldi∣er, bidding him ride in all hast to acquaint Monsieur de Candale, and Captain Artigue∣laube therewith, whom he found already got on shore, and who upon my first adver∣tisement, had caus'd a Galley to put out to Sea, from whence they discover'd all that I had told them, which being in the Port they could not possibly do. This Galley up∣on the sight presently began to let fly whole broad-sides of Canon at us, one whereof kill'd two men of my Company close by me, and so near that the brains both of the one, and the other flew into my face. There was very great danger in that place, for all the bullets, as well of this Galley, as of the others, which did the same, play'd directly into the place where I was, insomuch that seeing them still to continue their shot (for those of the Gallies took us for the Enemy) I was constrain'd to draw off my men in∣to the ditches to secure them. In the mean time they mounted the Prince in all hast on horseback, and made him to save himself full speed towards the Camp, all his Gentlemen running after on foot. They had no great leisure to stay with us, for I believe being so lately come, they had no mind to dye. Their hast was so great that they had no time to land, either the Princes Baggage, or his Bed, and there were some, who were wise enough to keep themselves aboard the Gallies. But the Seigneur de Candale, and Count Hugues were men of ano∣ther sort of mettle, and staid upon the cross high way where their men had been plac'd before; and Captain Artiguelaube went to the Battaillon, that was drawn up behind the Rampire. The Game began with me, and I do not know whether it be my good or my evil fortune;The Fight. but so it is that in all places where I have been, that I have evermore found my self in the thickest of the blows, and there where the busi∣ness ever first began. Now a Band of Harquebusiers came directly towards me, run∣ning: and that because I had placd one part of my Harquebusiers behind a ditch bank that borders all along upon the high way, and the rest on the right and left hand in the ditches in file (which I did more for fear of the Artillery, that plaid from our own Gallies, than for any apprehension of the Enemy) and came within twenty paces of us, where we entertein'd them with a smart volly of all our shot, by which five or six of their men fell dead upon the ground, and the rest took their heels, and fled, we
following after as far as the Magdaleine. There they rallyd, and withdrew from the high way on their right hand, and on that side where Monsieur de Lavall of Dauphiné stood with his Company of Gens-d' Armes, he was Nephew to Monsieur de Bayard, and Father to Madame de Gordes, who is at this time living, and a very valiant Gentleman. Monsieur de Candalle, who had seen my Charge, and saw that the Enemy now all discover d themselves, and that both Horse and Foot drew into a great Meadow, where Monsieur de Lavall stood; fearing they might charge me again, he sent me a supply of fifty Harquebusiers, just at the time when a Battaillon of German Foot pre∣sented themselves within twenty paces on my right hand. The Spanish Harquebusiers in the mean time fir'd with great fury upon our Gens-d' Armes, who began to draw off at a good round trot towards the high way possessed by Monsieur de Candalle, where there was a great oversight committed, which I will also give an account of, that such as shall read it, may make use of the exemple, when the chance of War (as at one time or another it may) shall perhaps reduce them to the same condi∣tion. Count Hugues, and Monsieur de Candalle had drawn up their Pikes upon the great Road, without leaving room for the Cavalry to retire, and there was a necessity that Monsieur de Lavall must, in spite of his heart, pass that way; for betwixt Monsieur de Candalle and me there was a great ditch, that Horse could not possibly get over. Had they left the Road open, and drawn themselves up in Battalia behind the ditch, they might have given a stop to the Enemies fury; and by that means Mon∣sieur de Lavall, might at great ease have got off along by the high way, and have made an honorable retreat. So soon as the Enemy saw that Monsieur de Lavall was forced to his Trot they presently charg'd him both in flank, and rear, with both Horse and Foot at once, when having thrown himself into the Road to get clear of this storm, he encountred these Pikes upon his way, where he was constrained a∣gainst his will to force his way thorough, and in so doing bore down, and trampled under foot all that stood before him; for our Pikes were drawn up so close that they had no room to open. This put all into confusion, and I was ready to run mad to see so great an absurdity committed; yet is not the blame justly to be laid pon Mon∣sieur de Candalle, he being very young, and having never been upon such a service before: but Count Hugues is highly to be condmned, who was an old Soldier, and understood the discipline of War; yet I will not say but that he behaved himself with very great bravery in his own person: but it is not enough to be bold, and hardy, a man must also be wise, and foresee all that can happen, forasmuch as oversights are irreparable in matters of Arms, and smal faults are oftentimes the occasion of very great losses, as it happened here to him, who had not provided against all adven∣tures: For he was himself taken prisoner, as also Monsieur de Candalle, being woun∣ded in his arm with a Harquebuze shot.Captain de Buch, Count de Candalle slain. Three days after, the Enemy seeing he was not likely to live, sent him back to Monsieur de Lautrec, who was his Kinsman, and the next day he died, and was buried at Bresse. He was a brave, and a worthy young man as ever came out of the house of Foix, and would in time doubtless have been a great Soldier, had he lived to hold on as he had begun. I never knew man so industrious, and desirous to learn the practice of arms of the old Captains, as this Lord was. To which effect he rendred himself as obsequious to the Count Pedro de Navarre, as the meanest of his Servants. He was in∣quisitive into the reasons of things, and informed himself of all, without fooling away his time about trifles, that other young men covet and love: and was more frequent at the Quarters of the Count Pedro de Navarre, than at those of Monsieur de Lautrec; in∣somuch that the Count would always say, he was there training up a great Captain. And in truth when he was brought back into the Camp, the said Count kiss'd him with tears in his eyes. It was a very great loss of him. All who were at the same post were ither kill'd, or taken, some excepted, who saved themsesves by the ditches, leaping from ditch to ditch, but those were very few, for the Enemy pursued their victory on that side very well. I on my side began to march along by the side of a hedg, with my face still towards the German Foot, the lesser evil of the two, and by good fortune both for me, and my Company the Enemy in my rear pursued us coldly enough. At my coming to the Portal I spoke of before, I there found a great Troop of the Enemies Horse, comman∣ded by Don Ferdinando de Gonzaga (for it was he who gave the charge) so that to recover the Portal I must of necessity fight with a resolution either to pass thorough, or die. I made my men therefore to give them a volly of Harquebuze shot, for I for
my part had nothing wherewith to fight, but my voice; upon which volly they made me way, so that having pass'd the portal, I fac'd about, and stood firm. At which time their Harquebusiers also came up, who at once altogether charged upon us, with all their united power both of Horse and Foot; when seeing this torrent coming upon me, I recover'd the back side of the Trench, with my Harqubusiers only, who had saved themselves from the first encounter; which the Marquess seeing, he was in so great a perplexity, that he gave us all over for lost. I there disputed the portal a long half hour from the back side of the Trench, for it remained free, as well on their side, as on ours; they durst not attempt to pass, neither did we dare to approach it. If e∣ver Soldiers plaid the men, these did it at this time; for all that I had with me could not arise to above an hundred and fifty men. The Marquess then came up to Captain Arteguelaube, to make him rise, they being all couched upon one knee, for had they stood upright, the Spanish Foot had had them in their aim, and cryed to him, Cap∣tain Arteguelaube, I beseech you rise, and charge▪ for we must of necessity pass the Portal: But he returned him answer, that he could not do it without losing the best of our men, as it was very true, for all the Spanish Foot were then come up. I was close by the Portal, and heard all; but the Marquess not satisfied with this answer, spurred up to the black Regiments, commanding them to march up towards the Portal, which they accordingly did. I knew by the manner of their motion, what command they had received, which was the reason that I stept out, and cried to Captain Arte∣guelaube, Camrade, you are about to be disgraced for ever, for here are the Black Re∣giments, that, upon my life, are making towards the Portal, to carry away the honor of the service; at which words he started up (for the man wanted no courage) and ran full drive towards the Portal, when seeing him come, I suddenly threw my self before the Portal, and passed with all those who followed me, marching straight towards the Enemy, who were not above a hundred paces distant rom us; we were imme∣diately followed by the Foot, sent by the Marquess: but as we were half passed tho∣rough, the Marquess gave the word from hand to hand, to make a hal, and to advance no further. The Enemy seeing us come on with such resolution, and the Cavalry following in our Rear, thought it the wisest course to retire. I was by this time ad∣vanced where we were plying one another, with good round vollies of shot, at fifty paces distance, and we had a good mind to fall on to the Sword, when the Marquess, and another Gentleman with him, came himself on horseback to stay me. I think he did ill in it; for had we all passed thorough, we had certainly pursued them fighting up to the very Gates of Naples. There was in this place very many on both sides bea∣ten to the ground, that never rose again, and I admire how I escaped, but my hour was not come. That which occasioned the Marquess to retire, was the fear he had of tempting for∣tune a second time; he was contented with what he had already lost, without being willing to hazard any more; so that tired out, and over spent, we return'd to re∣pass the Portal, that had been so long disputed, where a great many good men lay dead upon the place. There it was that the Gentleman who was with the Marquess, when he came to command me to retire, I have forgot his name, said to him (for I heard him very well) Monsieur, I now see that the antient proverb is true, which says, that one man is worth an hundred, and an hundred are not so good as one: I speak it by this Captain who has his arm in a scarf, and leans to the Rampire (for in truth I was quite spent) for it must needs be acknowledged, that he is the only cause of our preservation. I heard likewise well enough, though I took no notice of it, the Marquess make him this answer. That man will always do well wherever he is. A passage, that although it be to my honor, and my own commendation, I would however insert it here, without bragging nevertheless, or vain glory. I have acquir'd honor enough besides: but this may perhaps serve to excite the other Captains, who shall read my Life, to do the same upon the like occasion. And I must needs confess that I was then better pleased with this Character, that this Gentleman, and the said Marquess were plased to give of me, than if he had given me the best Mannor in his possession; though I was at that time very poor. This commendation made my heart to swell with courage, and yet more when I was told, that some one had entertained Monsieur de Lautrec, and the Prince with the same discourse, all the time they sate at Supper. These little points of honor serve very much in matters of War, and are the cause that when a man shall again happen to be in the like service, he fears nothing: it is very true that men are some∣times mistaken, and gain nothing but blows: but there is no remedy for that, we must give and take.
You Captains, and Lords who lead men on to death (for War is nothing else) when you shall see a brave act performed by any of your followers, commnd him in pub∣lick, and moreover relate it to others who were not present at the service: if his heart it in a right place, he will value such a testimony more than all the treasure of the world, and upon the next occasion will strive to do still better. But if (as too ma∣ny do) you shall not design to regard, or to take notice of the bravest exploit can by man be performed, and look upon all things with an eye of disdain, you will find that you must recompence them by effects, since you would not vouchsafe to do it by word of mouth. I have ever treated the Captains so, who have been under my command, and even the meanest of my Soldiers; by which they thought them∣selves so obliged, that I could have made them run their heads against a wall, and have stood firm in the most dangerous post in the world, as (for exmple) I did here. This was the first misfortune, and the first disgrace, that had yet befallen us in all this Expedition. It seemed to all the world that the Prince of Navarre brought us all misadventure and mishap: would to God he had staid in Gascony; neither had it been the worse for him, who came only to end his days a great way from home, without doing any thing but taking a view of Naples. He dyed three weeks,The death of the Prince of Navarre. or there abouts, after his arrival, and was the occasion of the death of this brave young Lord (which I shall ever lament) who also had the honor to be his Kinsman. Yet was not this all, for so soon as it was known that such a Prince was arrived, every one pre∣sently concluded that he had brought some considerable succours, and relief, at least money for the pay of the Army: but there was nothing of all this; for neither he, nor the Gallies brought us one man of recruit; nor any other thing, but his own retinue, and some few Gentlemen Voluntiers; which was a great discouragement to our distressed Army, and the Enemy, who were very well informed of all, took new heart at it, knowing very well by that, that the Waters of France were very low, when a Prince of his condition, came to such a Siege as this, in an equipage, as if he had only come a∣broad to see the world: but the fault ought not to lie at his door, they were too blame that sent him. 'Tis a great fault in Kings and Princes, who put men upon great attempts, to take so little care of those whom they know to be engaged in an enterprize of so great im∣portance, as was this of the Sieur de Lautre: for the taking of Naples had very much as∣sured the State of France, which by that means would have had its arms at liberty for many years, and we should have disputed it long, had it once been ours, for we should have been made wise by our precedent losses. The King committed yet ano∣ther oversight in not sending some handsom Troop of Gentlemen, and some conside∣rable Body of Foot with this young Prince, the neglect of which (as I have already said) made our people believe, either that he did not much regard us; or that his hands were full, and that he had elsewhere enough to do. Wherein Monsieur de Lau∣trec was by no means to be blam'd, who never ceased to send dispatch after dispatch, and post after post, to give his Majestie an account of all; but I return to my self; for (as I have always declar'd) I will by no means play the Historian: if I should, I should have enough to do, and scarce know at which end to begin. This was the last engagement where I had any thing to do, wherein though I did not command in chief, yet had I notwithstanding the command of a very good Com∣pany of Foot, and had my full share of the fight that was very handsom; but not for all; which I have set down to acquit my self of my promise, to wit, that I would give a particular account of all those passages, wherein I had the honor to command: passing the rest lightly over, as I do the remainder of this unfortunate Siege, which we were at last constrained to raise, Monsieur de Lautrec being dead,The death of Monsieur de Lautrec▪ to the great misfor∣tune of all France, which never had a Captain endowed with better qualities than he was: but he was unhappy, and ill assisted by the King, after His Majesty had enga∣ged him, as he did first at Millan, and now lastly before Naples. For my part with that little that was saved, which was almost nothing, I return'd the greatest part of my Journey on foot, with my arm in a scarf (having above thirty Ells of Taffeta a∣bout me,ad forasmuch as they had bound my arm and my body together with a cushion between) wishing a thousand times rather to die, than to live; for I had lost all my Masters and Friends, who knew, and lov'd me, being all dead, excepting Monsieur de Montpezat (the Father of this now living) and poor Don Pedro our Colonel taken, and carried prisoner into the Rock of Naples,O Don Pdro de Navare. where they put him to death, the Emperor having commanded, that for the reward of his revolt, they should cut off his head. He
was a man of great understanding, in whom Monsieur de Lautrec (who conided in few persons) had a very great confidence. I do also believe (and am not single in that opinion) that he counselled him ill in this War▪ but what! we only judg by Events. In this handsom equipage, I came home to my Fathers house, where, poor Gentle∣man, I found him engag'd in too many necessities of his own, to be in any capacity of much assisting me; forasmuch as his Father had sold three parts of four of the Estate of the Family, and had left the remainder charg'd with five children, by a second venture, besides us of my Fathers, who were no less than ten. By which any on may judg, in what necessities we who are come out of the Family of Montluc have been constrained to fol∣low the fortunes of the world. And yet our house was not so contemptible, but that it had near upon five thousand Livers yearly revenue belonging to it, before it was sold. To fit my self in all points I was constrained to stay three years at home, with∣out being able to get any cure for my arm, and after I was cur'd I was to begin the world again, as I did the first day I came out from a Page, and as a person un∣known▪ seek my fortune in all sorts of necessiities, and with extream peril of my life. I praise God for all, who in all the traverses of my life, has ever been as isting to me. Upon the first motions of War King Francis instituted his Legionaires,The Legion∣aires institu∣ted. which was a very fine invention, had it been well pursued (for a start all our Laws, and Ordinances are observed, and kept, but after a while neglected, and let down) for it is the true and only way to have always a good Army on Foot (as the Romans did) and to train up the people to War,1534. though I know not whether that be good or evil. It has been much controverted, though I for my part had rather trust to my own people, than to strangers. Of these the King gave one thousand to the Seneschal of Thoulouse, Seigneur de Faudo∣vas, who made me his Lieutenant Colonel, and although it was the Languedoc Le∣gion, and that he was Colonel, I nevertheless raised him all his Regiment in Guienne, and appointed him all his Captains, Lieutenants, Ensigns, Serjeants, and Corpo∣rals. A great rumor was at that time spread over all France, that the Emperor through the great intelligences he had within, was, for the conquest of such, and so great a Kingdom, coming up with vast, and invincible Forces; thinking at unawares to surprize the King; and in effect he did advance as far as Provence. The King to oppose so mighty, and so powerful an Enemy, summon'd in all his Forces from all parts: in or∣der to which summons, we used so extraordinary diligence (neither was I ever slothful) that our Regiment was the first that arrived at Marselles, where we found Monsieur de Barbezieux (which was de la Rochefoucant) and Monsieur de Montpezat, whom the King had made his joynt Lieutenants there (the one having as much authority as the other) and the Seigneurs de Boitieres and de Villebon (Provost of Paris) the Regiments of Monsieur le Grand Eseuyer Galliot, and of the said Seigneur de Montpezat, who came from Fossan all dismounted, having each of them aOr pad Nag. Curtal only, for by Article at the surrender of the said Fossan (which was lost through the enormous, and perhaps unheard of Treachery of the Marquess of Saluzzo) they were obligd to leave their great horses behind.The treachery of the Mar∣quess of Sa∣luzzo. The Emperor being soon after come to Aix, the Legionary Regiments (consisting of a thousand mn each) of Monsieur de Fontrailles (the Father of these now living) and of Monsieur d' Aubigeons, came presently up to us, as also those of Christophle de Goust, with seven Italian Companies. I am not certain whether the Regiments of Monsieur de Boiiers, and de Villebon were there, or no: but I very well remember that of the said Seigneur de Barbezieux; and so long as the Emperor continued at Aix, we remain'd at Marselles,1537. where nothing however of Action past, but what I am now going to relate. Whilst the Emperor lay very long at Aix, in expectation of his great Canon, where∣with to come, and batter the walls of Marselles, his provisions did every day more, and more wast, and diminish. In which point of time the King arriv'd at Avignon, where His Majesty was advertised, that if means could be made to destroy some Mills the Empe∣ror had seiz'd into his hands towards Arles, and especially one within four Leagues of Aix, called the Mill of Auriolle, the Enemies Camp would soon suffer for want of bread. Upon which advice the King commited the execution of the burning of those Mills a∣bout Arles, to the Baron de la Garde, who had a Company of Foot, to Captain Thorines Standard-bearer to the Count de Tandes,Mills burnt by the Frenh. and some others, who accordingly executed the design. Which notwithstanding the Spies still brought word to the King, that he must also burn those of Auriolle; forasmuch as they alone ordinarily nourishd not the
Emperors whole houshold only; but moreover the six thousand old Spanish Foot, which he always kept about his own person. His Majesty sent therefore several times to Mes∣sieurs de Barbezieux, and de Montpezat to hazard a Regiment of men, to go, and burn the said Mills of Auriolle. The first to whom they recommended the execution thereof, was to the foresaid Christophle le Goast, who positively refused to undertake it, alledging that it was five Leagues to the aforesaid Mills,Captain Goast refuses to un∣dertake the Enterprize, where they were to fight threescore Guards, that were within it,, and an entire Company that were quartered in the Town, so that he should have five Leagues to go, and as many to return, by means whereof he should going or coming be infallibly defeated upon the way, for the Emperor could not fail of intelli∣gence, it being no more than four leagues only from the said Auriolle to Aix; and on the other side the Soldiers would never be able to travel ten long leagues without baiting by the way. This answer was sent back to the King, who notwithstanding would not take it for currant pay; but on the contrary sent another more positive order, than the for∣mer, that it should be proposed to some others, and that though a thousand men should be lost in the Enterprize,and yet let them not concern themselves, for the benefit that would accrue burning the Mills, would countervail the loss (such easie Markets Princes make of the lives of men.) Whereupon it was offer'd to Monsieur de Fonterailles, who was once in mind to un∣dertake it: but some of his friends representing to him his certain ruine in the attempt, he piss'd backwards,Also Monsieur de Fonterailles. and would by no means touch. All which being sent word of to His Majesty (who continually had the manifest advantage the destroying of the other Mills had brought to His Majesties affaires, reminded to him) he still persisted to press the aforesaid Lords, to send some one, or another to demolish these. Now one day, after I had heard how discontented the King was, and the excuses that had been alledg'd by those to whom it had hitherto been recommended (which in truth were very rational, and just) I began to meditate with my self, which way I might execute this design, and to consider, that if God would give me the grace to bring it about, it would be a means to bring me to the knowledg of the King,It is underta∣ken by the Sieur de Mont∣luc. and to restore me to the same reputa∣tion and acquaintance, I had formerly acquir'd; and that now by three years idleness, and the length of my cure, was as good as vanish'd and lost: for it is nothing to get a good repute, if a man do not uphold, and improve it. Having therefore taken with my self a resolution to execute this design; or to die in the attempt: I enform'd my self at full of my Landlord of the scituation, and condition of the place where these Mills were: who told me that Auriolle was a little Town enclos'd with high walls, where there was a Castle well fortified, and a Bourg composed of many houses, with a fair street tho∣rough the middle of it, and at the end of the said Bourg, which led from the Town towards the Mill, was a little on the left hand the Mill it self. That at the Gate of the said Town there was a Tower, which look'd directly down the great street towards the Mill, before which no man could stand, without running great hazard of being either slain, or wounded; and that beyond the Mill was a little Church at the distance of about thirty, or forty paces. He told me moreover, that I was to go to Am∣baigne, two Leagues from Marselles, and that from thence to Auriolle, it was three more, if we went by by the Mountains which the Horse could not possibly do; but must be constrained to go near upon a League about, where they were moreover to pass a River that was deep to the Saddle skirts, by reason that the Bridges had been bro∣ken down. My Landlord having told me all this, I consider'd, that if I should undertake this af∣fair with a great party, I should be defeated; for the place being only four Leagues di∣stant from the Emperor's Camp, he would have present intelligence, and would send out his Horse to intercept me in my return, as it also fell out; for immediately upon our coming to the Mill, the Captain of the Castle dispatch'd away in all hast to the Emperor. So that I conceiv'd it much better for me to undertake it with a small number of mn, and those light and active fellows; to the end that if I did the work I went for, I might either have means to retire by one way or another; or at the worst if I should throw my self away, and those who were with me, yet they being but a few, the City of Marselles would by that miscarriage be in no manner of danger to be lost, which was the thing most disputed in the Council; whereas by losing a thousand or twelve hundred men, which were thought a necessary proportion for such an Enterprize, the said City might be expos'd to some danger, especially in a  time when they expected a Siege. I then desir'd my Landlord to provide me three fllows, who were expert in the
ways, to guide me by night to the said Auriolle, and so that, as near as could be guess'd, they should bring me to the Mills two hours before day; which he accordingly did, when after having some time consulted with them, I found the men were fearful, and loth to go: but at last mine Host so encourag'd them, that they were all resolved; whereupon I gave to each of them a brace of Crowns, and caused them to be kept up in my lodging, which was about Noon; and having computd with my Landlord how many hours the nights were then long, we found, that provided I should set out about the twilight, I should have time enough to do my business. All this being done, that my design might not be known, I went my self first to Monsieur de Montpezat, to acquaint him with what I intended to do; and more∣over that I was resolved to take with me no more, than six score men only, which I would choose out of the Seneschalls Regiment, to which I was Lieutenant Colonel. In all places wherever I have been, I have still made it my study to discern betwixt the good men, and the bad, and to judg what they were able to do, for all men are not proper for all uses. The said Sieur de Montpezat thought my resolution very strange, and out of friend∣ship advis'd me not to do so ridiculous a thing, as to hazard my self with so few men; telling me, that I might as well have five hundred if I would. To which I made an∣swer, that I would never demand five hundred men for the execution of an Enter∣prize, that I could better perform with six score, and tormented him so, that in the end he was constrained to go along with me to Monsieur de Barbezieux, who yet thought it more strange, than the other, and would needs know of me my reasons and by what means I would execute this design with so few people. To whom I made answer, that I would not declare to any one living, which way I intended to proceed: but that nevertheless (if they so pleased) I would undertake it. Whereupon Monsieur de Montpez at said to him, let him go; for though he should be lost, and all those with him, the City will not for that be in the more danger to be lost, and it will give His Majesty content. Monsieur de Villebon who was present at the deliberation, laugh'd, and jeer'd at me, saying to Monsieur de Barbezieux, let him go, he will infallibly take the Emperor, and we shall all be ashamed, when we see him bring him into the City to mor∣row morning. Now this man did not love me, for some words that had passed betwixt us at the Port Royal; neither could I forbear to tell him, that he was like a dog in a manger, that would neither eat himself nor suffer others. All was pass'd over in jest though in plain truth, I was half angry, for a little spurring would serve to make me start. The Seneschall de Tholouse, my Colonel, adhear'd to my opinion, whereupon I had immediate leave granted me to go choose out my six score men, and no more, which I did, taking only oneOr Centu∣rion, a term u∣sed as suiting that of Legi∣on. Centenier, and a Corporal, the rest were all Gentlemen, and so brave a Com∣pany, that they were better than five hundred others. It is not all to have a great num∣ber of men, they somtimes do more hurt than good, which made me entreat Monsieur de Barbezieux to cause the Gate of the City to be shut, being well assur'd that otherwise I should have had more company than I desir'd; which he also did, and it hapned well for another reason, for in less than an hour my design was spread all over the whole City. Just at Sun-set, I, with my six score men, repair'd to the Gate, the wicket whereof was only open: but the street was so full of Soldiers, ready to go out with me, that I had much ado to distinguish my own, and was therefore constrained to make them all take hands, for I very well knew them every one. As I was going out of the Gate, Monsiur de Tavannes (who was since Mareschal of France, and at this time Standard-bearer to the Grand Escuyer Galiot) came to me with fifteen, or twenty Gentlemen of their own Company, telling me, that he, with those friends of his were come to offer themselves, resolved to run all hazards with me in the execution of my design. I used all the arguments I could to divert him from that resoluti∣on: but it was time, and labour lost; for both he, and those with him were all positively resolv'd. Messieurs de Barbezieux, de Montpezat, de Boitieres, de Vil∣lebon, and the Seneschal de Tholouse, were all without the Gae, and before the wicket, drawing us out one by one,Tavannes▪ when Monsieur de Tavannes offering to pass, Monsieur de Barbezieux would not permit him, telling him, that he should be none of the party, and there some words, and a little anger passed, both on side and the other: but Mon∣sieur de Tavannes overcame at last, and pass'd the wicket; for which cause they detain'd from me fifteen or twenty men of those I had chosen: but I lost nothing by the ex∣change, only these disputes deferr'd the time so long, that the night was shut up, before we began to march. Monsieur de Castelpers Lieutenant to Monsieur de Montpezat (who was my very particular friend) having heard how I had been raill'd,Castelprs. and jeer'd amongst
them, determin'd to get to horse, with some fifteen, or twenty men at arms of the said Company, being all very well mounted, and to that end had spoken to Monsieur de Mntpezat at his going out of the Gate, to entreat him, that he would not be displea∣sed i he made one in the Enterprize; telling him that I was a Gascon, and that if I fail'd in the attempt, it would beget matter of sport for the French, and they would laugh us to scorn. Monsieur de Montpezat was at first unwilling to it, but seeing him begin to grow into a little heat, at last consented, whereupon he presently ran to mount to horse, and there might be nineteen or twenty of the party. Now to give a full account of this Enterprize, (which although it was not the con∣quest of Millan, may nevertheless be of some use to such as will make their advan∣tage of it) so soon as we came to the Plan St Michel, I gave to Captain Belsoleil (Centenier to our Company) threescore men; and threescore I kept for my self (Mon∣sieur de Tavannes,The order of the Enter∣prize. and his followers being compriz'd in that number) to whom I also deliver'd a good Guide, telling him withal, that he was not to come near me by a hundred paces, and that we would continually march at a good round rate. Which order being given, and Monsieur de Tavannes, and I beginning to set forward, up coms Monsieur de Castelpers, of whose deliberation we till then knew nothing, forasmuch as it had been resolved upon at the very moment of our going out at the wicket, which hindred us another long half hour: but in the end we agreed, that he should go the Horse way, and gave him another of my Guides, which he mounted behind one of his men; so that we had three parties, and to every party a Guide. At our parting I gave him instructions, that so soon as he should arrive at the end of the Bourg, he should draw up behind the Church, for should they enter into the street, the Compa∣ny quarterd in the Town, would either kill them, or their horses; and that therefore he was not to appear, till first he heard us engag'd. We now began to set forward, and marched all night, where as far as Aubaigne, we found the way to be exceeding good: but from thence to Auriolle we were fain to crawl over the sides of Mountains, where, I believe, never any thing but Goats had gone before: by which abominable way, having got within half a quarter of a league of Auriolle, I made a halt, bidding Monsieur de Tavannes, to stay there for me, for I must go speak with Belsoleil. I therefore went back, and met him within a hundred paces of us, or less; where speaking to him, and his Guide, I told him, that when he should arrive at the Bourg, he was by no means to follow me: but to march directly to the Gate of the Town, betwixt the Bourg and the said Town, and there make a stand at the Gate, it being necessary that he should gain two houses next adjoyning to the said Gate, which he must suddainly break into, to keep the Enemy from fallying out to disturb us; and that there he was to stay, and fight, without taking any care to relieve us at all; after which order given to him, I moreover past the word from hand to hand, to all the Soldiers, that no one was to abandon the fight at the Gate, to come to us to the Mill; but that they were punctually to observe whatever Captain Belsoleil should command them. Returning then back to Monsieur de Tavannes, we again began to march, when being come near to the Castle, under which and close by the walls of the Town, we were of necessity to pass, their Centinels twice call'd out to us, Who goes there? to which we made no answer at all, but still went on our way, till coming close to the Bourg, we left the way that Captain Belsoleil was to take, and slipt behind the houses of the said Bourg, when being come to the further end where the Mill stood, we were to descend two or three stone steps to enter into the street, where we found a Centi∣nl, that never discover'd us, till we were within a Pikes length of him, and then he cry'd Quivive? to which I made answer in Spanish, Espagne, (wherein I was mista∣ken, for the word was not then Espagne, but Impery) whereupon, without more cere∣mony he gave fire; but hit nothing. The alarm being by this means given, Monsieur de Tavannes, and I threw our selves de∣sperately into the street, and were bravely follow'd; where we found three or four of the Enemy without the door of the Mill: but they immediately ran in. The door of this Mill was ma with two folding leaves, both which were to be bolted fast with a great Iron Bar on the inside; one of these had a great Chest behind it, and the other the fore∣said Bar hld more than half shut, and had these fellows behind it. The Mill was full of men, bod above stairs and below (for there was threescore men in it, with the Captain, who had no dependence upon the Governor of the Town, each of them having his command apart) and we were one by one to enter this place. Monsieur de Tavannes would very fain first have entred and press'd forward with
that intent; but I pulling him back by the arm, withheld him, and push'd in a Sol∣dier that was behind me: the Enemy made but two Harquebuze shot, having leisure to do no more, being all fast asleep, excepting these three, or four, who had been pla∣ced as Centinels before the Mill door in the street. So soon as the Soldier was got in, I said to Monsieur de Tavannes, now enter if you will; which he presently did, and I after him, where we began to lay about us to some purpose, there being no more but one light only to fight by within.The Mill of Auriolle token▪ In this bustle the Enemy by a pair of stone stairs of indifferent wideness, recover'd the upper Room, where they stoutly defen∣ded the said stairs from the floor above, whilst I in the mean time sent a Soldier to tell the rest, that were without, that they should get up upon the outside of the Mill, and uncovering the roof, shoot down upon their heads, which was immediately perform'd; so that the Enemy perceiving our men to be got upon the roof, and that they already let ly amongst them, they began to throw themselves into the water out of a window on the backside of the Mill: but we nevertheless mounted the stairs, and kill'd all those that remain'd, the Captain excepted, who with two wounds, and seven others all wounded, were taken prisoners. Hereupon I presently sent one away to Captain Bel∣soleil, to bid him take courage, and stoutly to dispute the Gate of the Town, for the Mill was our own. The Alarm in the mean time, in the Town was very great, and those within three times attempted to Sally: but our men held them so short, that they durst never open their Gates. I sent Captain Belsoleil moreover most of my men to assist him, and in the mean time, with the rest, fell to burning the Mill, taking away all the Iron work, especially the Spindles, and Rinds, that it might not be repair'd again, never leaving it till it was entirely burnt down to the ground, and the Mill-stones rowl'd into the River. Now you must know that Captain Tavannes took it a little to heart, that I had pull'd him back by the arm, and ask'd me afterwards upon our returne, why I would not permit him to enter the first, suspecting I had more mind to give the honor of it to the Soldiers: to whom I made answer, that I knew he was not yet so crafty to save himself, as those old Soldiers were; and that moreover, that was not a place considerable enough for a man of his worth, and con∣dition to dye in; but that he was to reserve himself for a noble breach, and not to loose his life in a paltry Mill. Whilst these things were in doing, Monsieur de Castelpers arriv'd, and leaving his party behind the Church, came up to us on foot, and upon this the day began to appear: wherefore I entreated Monsieur de Tavannes, and de Castelpers to retire behind the Church (for the shot flew very thick in the street, where they could see any one pass) telling them, that I would go draw off Belsoleil; whereupon they both ac∣cordingly retir'd, and as I was drawing off our men one after another running down on both sides the street, Monsieur de Castelpers presented himself with his twenty Horse at the end of the street by the Church, wherein he did us very great service, for the Enemy might otherwise have allyed out upon us. I had only seven, or eight men hurt, who nevertheless were all able to march, one Gentleman only excepted, called Vigaux, whom we set upon an Ass of those we had found in the Mill, and presently began to retire towards the top of a mountain, which was al∣most the same way by which Monsieur de Castelpers had come, when the Enemy discovering us to be so few,The Impeallists maks  Sally. they all fallyed out in our Rear; but we had already gain'd the top of the Hill, when they arriv'd but at the foot of it, and before they recovered the heighth, we were got into the valley on the other side, rea∣dy to climb another (there being many little hills in that place) and yet we ne∣ver marched aster than a foot pace; and so went straight on to Aubaigne. I had given order to the Soldiers that went along with us, that every one should take with him a loaf of Bread, which they eat by the way, and I also had caus'd some few to be brought, which I divided amongst the Gens-d' Armes of Monsieur de Tavannes, and we our selves eat as we went; which I here set down, to the end, that when any Captain shall go upon an Enterprize, where he is to have a long march, he may take exemple to cause something to be brought along to eat, wherewith to refresh the Soldiers, that they may be the better able to hold out; for men are not made of Iron. So soon as we were come to Aubaigne, two leagues from Marselles, where we had thought to have halted, and to have taken some refreshment, we heard the Artillery of the Gallies, and of the Town, which at that distance seem'd to be volleys of Har∣quebuze shot; an Alarm that constraind us without further delay, or taking any
other refreshment, than what we had brought along with us, to march forwards, and to enter into consultation amongst our selves what course we were best to take; we al∣ready took it for granted, that the Emperor was arriv'd before the Town, and that he would certainly sit down before it;The Emperor Charles before Marselles. and thence concluded it impossible for us to get in again, which made us often repent, and curse the enterprize that had shut us out, the misfortune whereof was wholly laid to my charge, as the Author of all. n this uncertainty what course to steer, Monsieur de Castelpers was once resolved to go charge desperately thorough the Enemys Camp, to get into the City; but when he came to acquaint us with his determination, we remonstrated to him, that that would be to throw himself away out of an humor, and that since we had together perfor∣med so brave a service, and with which the King would be so highly pleased, we ought likewise together either to perish, or to save our selves. Captain Trebous Gui∣don to the Company of Monsieur de Montpezat, told him the same, so that we conclu∣ded in the end to leave the great high way, and crossing the Mountains on the left hand, to fall down behind Nostre Dame de la Garde, making account, that in case we could not enter into the City, the Captain of the said Cittadel would receive us in there. So we turn'd out of the way, and it was well for us that we did so, for Vignaux, and les Bleres keeping on the great Road straight to Marselles, had not gone on ive hundred paces, but they met with four or five hundred Horse, which the Emperor (having had intelligence from those of Auriolle of what had been done) had sent out to meet, and fight us upon the way; and had not the Emperor parted from Aix by night to go before Marselles, so that the Messengers of a long time could meet with no body to whom to deliver their errand, I do believe we had certainly been de∣feated: but the Emperor knew nothing of it, till break of day, whereupon he pre∣sently sent out those four or five hundred Horse upon the Road to Aubaigne, who did no other harm to Vignaux, and those who were with him, but only took away their Arms. In this manner we travail'd all day from mountain to mountain in the excessive heat, without finding one drop of water,Retreat. insfomuch that we were all ready to dye for thirst; al∣ways within sight of the Emperors Camp, and ever within hearing of the Skirmishes that were made before the Town, Monsieur de Castelpers, and his Gens-d' Armes march∣ing all the way on foot, as we did, and leading their horses in their hands, till com∣ing near to Nostre Dame de la Garde, the Captain of the Castle taking us for the Enemy, let fly three or four pieces of Canon at us, which forc'd us to shift behind the Rocks. From thence we made signs with our hats; but for all that he ceas'd not to shoot, till in the end, having sent out a Soldier to make a sign, so soon as he understood who we were, he gave over shooting; and as we came before Nostre Dame de la Garde, we saw the Emperor, who was retiring by the way he came, and Christophle Goast, who had all day maintain'd the Skirmish, beginning also to retreat towards the City. We then began to descend the Mountain, when so soon as Monsieur de Barbezieux, and Monsieur de Montpezat (who, with some other Captains, were standing without the Gates of the City) had discover'd us, they would have gone in again, taking us for the Enemy; but some body saying, that then those of the Castle would have shot at us, the said Sieur Montpezat presently knew Monsieur de Castelpers▪ and we there∣upon arriv'd at the Gate of the City, where we were mightily caressed, especially when they heard of the good success of our enterprize, and they talk'd with the Cap∣tain of the Mill, who was wounded in the arm, and in the head, and after every one retir'd to his own Quarters. I made no manner of question, but that Monsieur de Barbezieux, so soon as the king should come to Marselles, would have presented me to His Majesty, and have told him, that I was the man who had perform'd this exploit, that His Majesty might have taken notice of me: but he was so far from doing me that friendship, that on the contrary he attributed all the honor to himself, saying that it was he, who had laid the design of this Enterprize, and had only deliver'd it to us to execute; and Monsieur de Montpezat was by ill fortune at that time very sick, and could say nothing in my behalf, so that I remain'd as much a stranger to the King, as ever. I came to know all this by the means of Henry king of Navarre, who told me that he himself had seen the Letters which the said Sieur de Barbezieux had writ to the King to that effect,Injustice of Monsieur de Barbezieux towards the Sieur de Mont∣lu. wherein he attributed to himself the whole honor of that acti∣on. Monsieur de Lautrec would not have serv'd me so; neither is it handsom to rob another man of his honor; and there is nothing that does more discourage a brave heart: but Monsieur de Tavannes, who is now living, can testifie the truth. So it is, that the destroying of these Mills, both the one, and the other, especially
those of Auriolle, reduced the Emperors Camp to so great necessity, that they were ain to eat the Corn pounded in a Mortar, after the manner of the Turks; and the Grapes they are put their Camp into so great a disorder, and brought so great a Mortality amongst them, especially the Germans, that I verily believe there never re∣turn'd a thousand of them into their own Country, and this was the issue of this mighty preparation. The Captains who shall read this relation, may perhaps observe, that in this En∣terprize there was more of Fortune, than of Reason, and that I went upon it as it were in the dark, though it was happily brought about: but I do not suspect how∣ever, that any one will conclude it to be wholly an effect of my good fortune, but will also take notice, that I forgot nothing of what was necessary to make the de∣sign succeed; and on the other side they may observe, that my principal security was, that the Enemy within the Town by the Rule of War, ought not to sally out of their Garrison, till they should first discover what our Forces were, a thing in the obscuri∣ty of the night, which they could very hardly do▪ all which notwithstanding, I did not yet so much rely upon their discretion, but that I moreover put a bridle in their mouths, which was Belsoleil, and his Company. A man must often hazzard some∣thing, for no one can be certain of the event. I concluded the conquest of the Mill for certain: but I ever thought it would be a matter of great difficulty, and danger to retreat. Thus did the Emperor Charles, both with shame and loss, retire, where that great Leader Anne de Montmorency (all that time Grand Maistre, and since Connestable of France) obtein'd renown.The death of Antonio de Le∣va It was one of the greatest baffles the Emperor ever re∣ceived, and for grief whereof his great Captain Antonio de Leva (as was reported) afterwards dyed. I have sometimes heard the Marquis de Guast say, that this ex∣pedition was the sole contrivance of the sai Antonio de Leva, and yet both he and his Master very well knew, what it was to attaque a king of France in his own Kingdom. The Emperor being with his Forces retir'd, I would no longer continue Lieute∣nant to the Seneschal's Regiment; who, had it lain in his power, would have re∣sign'd it wholly into my hands. Monsieur de Boitieres then did me the honor to make me an offer of his Guidon, which I likewise refus'd to accept, having set my heart more upon the Foot, than upon Horse service. I had moreover an opinion, that I should sooner rise to advancement by the Infantry, which was the reason that I again return'd home, where having made some little stay, I would go into Piedmont there to serve under Monsieur de Boitieres, who was the kings Lieutenant in that Pro∣vince, and in order thereunto went first to Marselles, where I was six or seven months detain'd by Monsieur de Taude. Some time after the Emperor rais'd an Army therewith to go and lay siege to The∣roae, and the King, at the same time, rais'd another to relieve it: whereupon I im∣mediately took post, and went to Court, where Monsieur Le Grand Maistre gave me a Foot Company, and another to Captain Guerre, which we presently rais'd in, and about Paris, and were both of us receiv'd into the Guards of Monsieur le Dauphin, who was afterwards Henry the Second of France. The Army march'd presently away to Hesdin, and to Anchi le Chastea, both which places were taken by the said Grand Maistre, as also Saint Venant; neither could the Imperialists do any good upon The∣roane, which Monsieur de Annebaut reliev'd in the very face of the Enemy, though there was a disaster happened upon that occasion, thorough the heat, and vanity of some young Gentlemen, who because they had a mind to break their Launces, would needs indiscreetly seek the Enemy, by whom they were defeated, and all taken, both Monsieur d' Annebaut, and all the rest. Soon after which the Imperialists retir'd and the King's Army also: As for me, seeing there was no great matters to be done thereabouts, I return'd presently after into Provence, where I had left my great Horses, and my Armes: and where about ten or fifteen days after, I received a Packet from the said Monsieur le Grand Maistre, where∣in there was a Commission to raise two Ensigns of Foot, and to march them away into Piedmont, whither the King himself was also going in person to relieve Turin, Monsieur de oitieres being shut up within it. I thereupon presently took Post to go into Gascony, and made so good hast, that in eight days I had rais'd the two Compa∣nies, of which I made Captain Merens my Lieutenant; when, being about Tholouse, I left the men with him, and went away Post, having heard that Monsieur le Grand Maistre was already arriv'd at Lyons, and that he march'd in great diligence to gain
the Pas de Suze, wherein he shew'd himself to be no novice in War▪ So that seeing I could not bring up my Companies time enough to be with him at that Engagement, I was resolved to be there alone: I could not however make so great hast, but that I found the King got before me to Sorges, and Monsieur le Grand Maistre two days march further advanc'd: where His Majsty commanded me to return to my command, and to come up with Ambres and Dampons, who had each of them two Companies more, telling me moreover, that we were to be commanded by Monsieur de Chavigni, and giving me further instructions that we were to sit down before Barsellonette, and to seize all the Towns thereabout into our hands. So soon as I came to Marselles, I had news brought me, that my two Companies had disbanded themselves; for (as the ambition of the world is great) Monsieur de Lieux my Brother had sent to my Lieutenant to desire him, that he would loyter a while in expectation of him up and down the Country thereabouts, forasmuch as he was raising a Foot Company,Mr. Lieux, brother to Mr. Montluc. which he intended speedily to march away under the shadow of my Commission; to which my Liutenant very indiscreetly consented, not∣withstanding the promise he had made me to march five leagues a day. But as my Lieutenant had quitted the great Road, and turn'd aside towards Albigeois to spin out the time, he came at last to a Town call'd l'Isle, where the Inhabitants shut their Gates against him, which forc'd him to give an assault, as he did, and carried the place, with so suddain an execution, that although my said Brother was then within a days march of him with his Company, yet would he not come up, till the business was done, where his Soldiers having sack'd the Town, and being by that means loaden with booty, they were afterwards in so great fear to march, that they all disbanded, and every one run home with his spoil to his own house. By which you may under∣stand, A Captain ought as sel∣dom as he can to leave his men. that an officer ought very seldom to leave his command, if not upon extraor∣dinary occasion, for the great desire I had to be one of the first, made me to aban∣don mine, which was the cause of this disorder. I was therefore constrain'd to raise two other Companies in Provence, wherein the Count avour'd me very much, so that I had soon dispatch'd, muster'd at Villeueufve d' Avignon, and made so great hast, that (notwithstanding this accident) I yet arriv'd at the Valleys two days sooner than Ambres, and Dampons, and took the Castle, and the Town of Mieulan, where I made a halt in expectation of Monsieur de Chavigni, and the Companies of the said Ambres, and Dampons, who disputed the passage of Lauzet, which they could never have ob∣tained, for all the people of the Country were there gather'd together to defend it: but that the Spaniards who were at Barselonette, and those who were gone to defend the passage, hearing that I had taken Mieulan, retir'd by the Mountains (for I was pos∣sessed of the great Road towards Barselonette) and the common people seeing the said Spaniards to retire, quitted the passe by night, by means whereof they entred in∣to it. We then went to besiege Barselonette,The Sieur de Montluc shot. before which place we lay three weeks, where I receiv'd a Harquebuze shot through my left arm, but it never touch'd the bone, so that I was presently cured, after which the King having relieved Turin, His Majesty return'd, and we for not having been present at the service, were all three commanded back; upon which order Monsieur d' Ambres went away Post to his said Majesty, with whom he prevailed so far, that he was pleased to leave him one of his Companies: which when I understood with what difficulty he had obtain'd, I carried mine back into Provence, where having dismissed them, I retir'd my self to my own house. At which time there was also a cessation (seeing no peace was to be made) concluded for ten years. I thought fit to commit this to writing (though there be no great matter in it) to let the world see, that I never rested long in a place; but was always ready at the first beat of Drum; for the days of Peace were whole years to me, so impatient I was of lying idle. At the end of this War, the King was pleased to honor Monsieur le Grand Maistre with the Office of Connestable of France; an employment that has ever been vacant (as it is at this day) after the death of Monsieur de Montmorency. A thing that I conceive our Kings have purposely so ordered, as well to take away all oc∣casion of Jealousie amongst the Princes,The danger of creating a Connestable  France. as also for the danger of entrusting so great a power in one mans hands. Witness St. Pol, and Bourbon, the last of which indeed was very faithful, and dyed in his Majesties service, ever approving himself a great, and prudent Captain: which testimony I am constrain'd by truth to give of him, and by no other obligation that I have; for neither he, nor any of his were ever any friends of mine.
During the time of this Truce, I tryed (forsooth) to be a Courtier, but in vain, for I was never cut out for that employment, I have ever been too free, and too open hearted to live at Court, and I succeeded there accordingly. Now after the soul, and detested assassinate committed upon the persons of the Seigmeurs Fregouze and Rincon, Embassadours for the King our Master,The Truce broken by reason of the Murther of Mr. Fregoze▪ and Mr. Rin∣con, mbaadors for the Christian King his Majesty incens'd at such an outrage, and for which he could obtain no manner of satisfaction; he resolv'd to break the Truce, and to that end set two Armies on foot, one of which he gave to Monsieur le Due d' Orleans, which was design'd for Luxemburg, and the other to Monsieur le Dauphin, who came into the County of Roussillon to reduce it to his Fathers obedience, having Monsieur d' Annebaut (who since was Admiral) in company with him. I therefore hearing that the said Mareschal was to take with him the Companies of Piedmont, which were commanded by Monsieur de Brissac, and also an Engineer called Hieroni∣mo Marini, reputed the greatest man of Italy, for the besieging of places, I had a great desire to go to the Camp, to learn something of this famous Engineer. Where being accordingly come, I put my self under Monsieur d Assier, who commanded the Artillery in the absence of his Father, and who never stirr'd from the said Hie∣ronimo Marini; by which means I happened to be at the approaches that were made before the City of Perpignan to which we had laid siege: but in two nights I perceiv'd that all he did signified nothing; for he begun the Trenches so far off, that in eight days the Canon could not be mounted, as he himself declared; to which I made an∣swer, that in that time the Enemy would have fortified their City, four times as strong as it was on that side. The King had for this Enterprize rais'd the bravest Army that ever my eyes beheld: it consisted of forty thousand Foot, two thousand men at Armes, and two thousand Light horse, with all necessary equipage for so considerabe a Body. Monsieur Montpezat had been the Author of the design: though not so secretly, but that Spain was before hand wholly possessed with the expectation of it: which notwithstanding, and that the Town was excellently well fortified; yet I dare boldly afirm that if the Mareschal d' Annebaut would have given credit to my words, he had infallibly done his business. I had taken a private view of it: for some years before this, Monsieur le Connestable being gone to Leucate to treat a Peace with the Emperor's Deputy Granvelle, had sent me with General Bayard, and President Poyet (who was since Chancellor) to whom the Emperor's Deputy (at the instance of Monsieur de Veli Embassador for the King) gave permission to go, and recreate themselves three or four days at the said Perpignan. At which time the said Connestable made me put my self into the habit of a Cook belonging to Monsieur de Poyet,The Sieur de Montlu ent Spye into Perpignan. to the end, that under that disguise I might discover the place; and yet I once thought my self to be discovered: however I found oppor∣tunity by the means of a Fleming servant to the said de Veli, which he had left be∣hind him, to take an exact view of the place; for he had led me quite round the Town both without, and within, so that I was able to make a report to the Connestable of all the strength, and defects of the said City; who was pleased to tell me there∣upon, that I had made a perfect discovery, as by several others, who had long been in∣habitants there, he had been credibly informed. Now you must know this was only a pretended divertisement of Poyet, and Bayard, who durst by no means take the Kings Engineer in their company, as the Conestable would have had them, fearing he might be discovered, and themselves, by that means, detained Prisoners: neither did they fail to relate to him afterwards the fright they were in when a Spanish Captain challeng'd me by my name: but I faced him out of the business, counterfeiting both my Country, and Language, and dissembling better to understand how to handle a larding-pin, than a sword, and saying that I was a Cook to Monsieur le President Poyet, who himself had not a word to say, for the ter∣rible fear he was in least I should be discover'd: but General Bayard laugh'd the Spa∣nish Captain out of his conceit, in private telling him, that he was not the first who had been so deceiv'd: but that the man he took me for, was one of the best Captains the King of France had. At all this story the Constable did only laugh; but I very se∣riously told him, that he should never make me play the Spye again so long as he liv'd▪ 'Tis an employment of too great danger, and that I have ever abhorred: but so it was, that at that time I plaid the cook to discover the place; which I did exactly well, and that is the reason why I have said, that had Monsieur d' Annebaut given credit to me, he had easily taken the Town: but he would rather believe a suborned Gascon Ma∣son (which the Enemy had thrust out of Town on purpose, and had order'd to give himself up, only to amuse the Mareschal, and to persuade him to assault that part,
which he did assault) and his Engineer, than any thing I could say Insomuch that we did nothing either worth writing, or rlating, which fell out so much the worse, as it was the Dauphin's first tryal of Armes, who had a mind to do as well, as Monsieur d' Orleans his Brother, who took Luxemburg: but it was no fault of his. Two days before the Camp dislodgd, the said Mareschal went round about the Town, where I shew'd Monsieur d'Estree who is yet living, the place where I would have had them to have made their Attaque,The Siege raised from before per∣pgnan. and that very near at hand, though the Canon, and Harqubuze shot they liberally bestow'd upon us, might reasonably have made us stand aloof: which after he had seen he cryed out, Good God, what an error have we committed! but it was then too late to repent, for the relief was already entred in, and the time of the Rains was at hand, which would have damm'd up our retreat; and yet we had enough to do as it was to draw off our Artillery, so ill a place is that Country, for an Army to move in. During the time of this Siege the Company of Monsieur Boleves became vacant, which Monsieur le Dauphin sent to entreat for Boqual (who since is turn'd Hugonot) and I also writ to Monsieur de Valence my Brother, who was then at the Court at Salers; where the king was so discontented, by reason of the ill success of this enterprize, both with the Dauphin, and Monsieur de Annebaut (who had also sent to sollicite it in the behalf of another) that His Majesty would neither grant it to the one, nor the other: but was pleased to confer it upon me. The Camp being raised, Monsieur de Brissac had Capestaing assign' d him for Garrison, and Monsieur de I' Orge (Colonel of the Legionaries)Tuchant (the place to which they had drawn off all the ammunitions of corn that had been left in the Camp) assigned him for his, Where three days after all the said Legionaries forsook him, nothing but their Captains remaining behind; who thereupon sent to Monsieur Brissac, that if he did not come speedily to his relief, he should be constrain'd to abandon the said provisions, and to shift for himself: which made us march with all possible diligence, without being more then half a night only upon our way, and found him totally left alone, saving for Messieurs de Denez, and Fonterailles, and their servants. Now there was a Castle upon the Mountain towards Perpignan, about a League from Tuchant, and on the left hand of Milan, and the said Seigneurs de Brissac and de I Orge being gone out of the said Tuchaut to hear Mass at a little Chappel about a Cross-bow shot from thence; at our coming out from Mass we heard very many Harquebuze shot at the said Castle, and discover'd a great many men about it, with a great smoak of Powder, whereupon I ask'd Monsieur de Brissac, if he were pleas'd that I should go thither with thirty or forty of my men, to see what the matter was; who presently gave me leave so to do: wherefore without any more delay, I presently sent a Moynne my Lieutenant, to get them together, and to bring me a horse, which be∣ing suddainly brought, I march'd directly towards the Castle Le Peloux wo was Lieu∣tenant to Monsieur de Brissac had a desire to follow after, as had also Monbasin, St. Laurens (a Breton) and Fabrice, being all Launce-passades belonging to the Company of the said Seigneur, together with fifty or threescore Soldiers of the same. I made ve∣ry great hast, when so soon as the Enemy had discovered me, as I was beginning to climb the Mountain, they retreated down the other side into a plain which lies below Tanta∣vel where they clapt themselves down under the Olive trees, to stay for the rest of their fellows, that they had left behind them at Mila. The Captain of the Castle was Barennes, an Archer of the Kings Guard, who had been placed there by Monsieur de Montpezat, and whilst the said Barennes was shewing me the Enemy, appear'd Peloux with his Soldiers, and with them a Gentleman called Chamant, a very brave man, so that although we knew the Enemy to be above four hundred men (as we were also assured by Berennes) we nevertheless concluded to go, and fight them. This place was all Rock tufted over with a little Copse, thorough which we were to pass to get to them; wherefore we agreed, that Peloux should take a little path on the right hand, and I another on the left, and that the first which came up to them, in the plain, should fall upon them, the one in the Front, and the other in the Rear; which we had no sooner concluded, but that the Enemy rose up, and we disco∣vered them all plainly at our ase. Monbasin, Chamant, St, Laurens, and Fabrice who were all on horseback, would needs go along with me, at which Peloux was a little dis∣contented, forasmuch as they all belong'd to Monsieur Brissac, as he himself did, excep∣ting Chamant, who belonged to Monsieur le Dauphin. Artiguedieu, and Barennes likewise went in my Company.
From the very beginning of our descnt, the Enemy lost sight of us, and we of them, by reason of the wood, and of the Valley, which was pretty large▪ Le Peloux with his Guide took his way, and I mine, when so soon as I came into the Plain, I was as good as my word, for I charg'd the Enemy thorough and thorough; breaking in after such a manner amongst them, that above twenty of them at this en∣counter were left dead upon the place, and we pursued them fighting, as far as the bank of the River, which might be some four hundred paces or more: But when they saw us to be so few, they rallied, and as I was about to retire, march'd directly up to me, whereupon I made a halt, as they did also at the distance of four or five Pikes length only from one another, a thing that I never saw done before. As for Peloux, when he was got to the middle of the Mountain, he began to think that I had taken the better way, which made him suddainly to turn off, and to follow my steps: and fortune also turn'd so well for me, that as we were Pike to Pike, and Harquebuze to Harquebuze,A brisk skir∣mish. at the distance I have already said, grinning and snarling at one another, like two Mastis when they are going to fight, Peloux and his Company appear'd in the plain; which so soon as the Enemy saw, they turn'd the point of their Pikes towards us, and their faces towards the River, and so fell to marching off, whilst we pursued pricking them forward with our Pikes, and pelting them with our Har∣quebuze shot in their Rear: but they march'd so very close, that we could no more break into them as before; and when they came to the bank of the River they made a halt, facing about and charging their Pikes against us, so that although Peloux, and his Company made all the hast they could to come in to our relief, we were never∣theless constrain'd to retire fifteen or twenty paces from the nemy, who immedi∣ately all on a thrump leapt into the River, and through water middle deep, pass'd over to the other side. Mobasin in this engagement was hurt with a Harquebuze shot in his hand, of which he remain'd lame ever after, St Laurens and Fabrie had their horses kill'd under them, and mine was wounded with two thrusts of a Pike▪ la Moyenne, my Lieutenant, was wounded with two Harquebuze shots in one arm, Cha∣mant, who was lighted off his horse, had three thrusts of Pikes in his two thighs, and Artiguedieu one Harquebuze shot, and one thrust of a Pike in one thigh; to be short, of betwixt thirty and five and thirty that we were, there remain'd only five or six un∣hurt, and only three dead upon the place. The Enemy lost one Serjeant of great re∣pute amongst them, together with twenty or five and twenty others killd, and a∣bove thirty wounded, as we were told the next day by two Gascon Soldiers who came over to us. In the mean time Messieurs de Brissac and de I' Orge doubting it would fall out as it did, mounted to horse, and came so opportunely to the Castle of Tantavel, that they saw all the fight, and were in so great despair at the Charge I had made, that they gave us twice or thrice for lost: an  very sorely rebuked Peloux, for not ha∣ving observ'd the agreement we had concluded amongst us; which if he had done, we had infallibly cut them all to pieces, and brought away their two Colours; yet I am apt to believe it might not be altogether his fault (for he was a very brave Gen∣tleman) but his Guides that led him the worse way, as Peloux himself since told me. However so it fell out, that the field was mine, with the loss of three men only, and not one of the Gentlemen dyed. Soon after the Baron de la Garde came to Nice with the Turkish Army, conducted by Barbarossa, which consisted of an hundred or six score Gallies, a thing that all the Chri∣stian Princes who took part with the Emperor, made a hainous business of, that the King our Master should call in the Turk to his assistance; though I am of opinion that towards an Enemy all advantages are good; and for my part (God forgive me) if I could call all the Devils in Hell to beat out the brains of an Enemy, that would beat out mine▪ I would do it with all my heart. Upon this occasion Monsieur de Valence, my Brother, was dispatch'd away to Venice, to palliate and excuse this proceeding of ours to the Republick, who of all others seem'd to be most offended at it, and the King would by no means lose their Alliance; who made them an Oration in Italian, which I have thought fit to insert here, until he shall think fit to oblige us with his own History; for I cannot believe that a man of so great learning, as he is reputed to be, will dye without writing something; since I who know nothing at all, take upon me to scribble▪ The Oration was this.
THe Emperor having been the cause of all the ruines,Oration of the Bishop of Valence to the Senate of Ve∣nice. miseries, and calamities, which have befallen Christendom for these many years; it is a thing (most illustrious Princes) which to every one ought to appear exceeding strange, that his Ministers should be so impu∣dent, and frontless, as to lay the blame thereof to the thrice Christian King my Lord and Ma∣ster, and unjustly condemn him for keeping an Ambassador resident in the Court of Constanti∣nople: ut I would fain ask those people, whether they can imagine that the practices which have been set on foot by the Command of the Emperor, and the King of the Romans with the Grand Signior for ten years past, have been kept so secret, that the greatest part of Chri∣stendom are not fully enformed thereof. Does not every one know what Truces, and what treaties of Peace ( general, but particular) have been concluded, and what offers have been several times made to pay yearly a vast Tribute to the Great Turk, for the kingdom of Hun∣gary? and yet he makes it a case of Conscience to endure, that a little King should hold that Kingdom under the favour and protection of the Turk, as a thing inconsistent with Christia∣nity, and unbeseeming a Christian Prince? To which I could truly add, that at the time when the Peace was concluded betwixt your most Serene Republick and the Turk, the king of the Romans, by the secrt practices of his Agents, did all that in him lay, to hinder that Treaty, as by the several Letters and Dispatches that have been intercepted, does most manifestly appear. The same Ministers of the Emperor do think also, that they discharges themselves from all blame, in keeping a lutter, and farcing their Posts and Gazetts, (as their manner is) with observations of the long abode that the Naval Army of the Grand Signior has, for some months, made in the Ports of France, and under that pretence would, by their passionate calumnies, impose upon the world a new Article of Faith, to wit, that no Prince, for his own defence, either can or ought to derive succours from such, as are of a Religion contrary to his own; not taking notice, that in condemning the King, my Lord and Master, they at the same time accuse David, a valiant King, and a holy Prophet, who seeing himself persecuted by Saul, fled away to Achish, who was an Idolater, and a profess'd Enemy to the Law of God; and not only so, but some time after, moreover rank'd himself in the Squadrons of the Infidels, even then, when they went to fight with the people of his own Religion. They also condemn Asa King of Juda, who called into his aid the King of Syria, to deliver him from the oppression of the King of Israel. They moreover reproach Constantine, a most Christian Prince, and he, who of all the Emperors, has best deserved of the Christian Commonweal, who in most of his expeditions, carried along with him a great number of Idolatrous Goths in his Army. They likewise taxe Boniface, so highly commended by St. Augustine in his Epistles, who, for his own defence, and perhaps to revenge some injury receiv'd, called into Affrick the Vandals, profess'd enemies to our Religion. They calumniate Narses (the slave of Justinian, a very valiant, but, above all, a very re∣ligious Captain, as may be concluded from the testimony of Saint Gregory, and also by the Churches he has built, both in this illustrious City, and that of Ravenna,) who called in the Lumbards to his aid, a people, at that time, abborring the name of Christian. Arcadius Emperor of Constantinople (allowed by all Historians for a Prince equally religious, and wise) having in the latter end of his days a desire to substitute some Governor, and Protector, that might be sufficient to preserve the Dignity and Authority of the Empire, turn'd his thoughts towards the King of Persia, an Idolater, and entreated him in his last Will to accept the Tu∣ition, and Protection both of his Son, and the Empire. A choice that was singularly appro∣ved by all the Christian Princes of that time, and so much the more, for that the king of Persia not only accepted the charge▪ but moreover worthily acquitted himself of his trust to the hour of his death. efore Hraclius suffer'd himself to be infected with the poyson of Heresy, he served himself in an infinite number of Wars with Saracen Soldiers. Basile, and Constantine sons to John Emperor of Constantinople, took Apulia, and Calabria, by the means and assistance of a great number of Saracens, which themselves had first driven out of the Isle of Candie. I could say as much of Frederick, who by the help of the Saracens, Lorded it over the greatest part of Italy. I could present before you the Example of Henry, and Frederick, brothers to the King of Castile, who in the time of pope Clement the fourth, accompanied with Conradin, called the Saracens, both by land and sea▪ not for the security and defence of their own Country, but to drive the Frnch out of Italy, and with the same Army of Bar∣barians, in a short time, made themselves Masters of a great part of Sicily. I could speak of Ludovico Sorza, who with several other Princes of Italy, made use of the Forces of Bajazet. What shall I say of Maximilian of the ouse of Austria who not to defend himself, but to ruine your state (most illustrious Senators) tryed to nettle, and incite the Turk against
you, to your great prejudice and ruine? as it is faithfully recorded by Signir Andra Moce∣nigo, one of your own Historians, together with the remedies you were fain to oppose in that exi∣gency, and distress. If yet neither natural reason, nor exemples drawn from holy Scripture, and Christian History wre sufficient to confirm you in, or to perswade you into the truth of this cause, I could accompany them with several others, which I am willing to omit, both because I would not ire your ordships patience, nd also for that I believe there can remain no man∣ner of scruple in you, considering, that, by the Exemples before alledged, I have already disco∣ver'd the weak foundation of that Article of Faith, lately forged by the Imperialists, to serve for their own ends. And which is more, I do say, and will maintain, that the most Christian King my Lord and Soeraign, by the Exemple of so many renowned and religious Princes, may, without any prejudice to the place he holds, or to the Title of most Christian, which be ears, serve himself in all affairs and ncessities, with the aid and assistance of the Grand Signior. And if this with truth and reason may be understood of all his necessary affairs; how much more ought his most Christian Majesty, not only be excused, but highly applauded, who for no need, how great soever he has to defend himself, for no single revenge His Majsty might desire for so many injuries done, and so many wrongs received, so many assassinations, and slaughters exe∣cuted upon his people, by the Emperor, or by his procurement, would accept of no other suc∣cours, but only thse which we by experience see are to all Christins, of greater utility, than disadvantage? And if any one of thse who adhere to the Emperor's party should demand how the Turkish Army can remain in our Ports, no lss for the benefit of Italy, than for our own particular convenience; I could ask him by way of answer, which way be can prove that Christendom has received any detriment by our having received, and refresh'd this Naval Ar∣my in our Heavens? To which I am certain the wisest, and most affctionate of the Imperial party could return me no answer, unless it were some one, who delights to argue for controver∣sies sake, and takes more pleasure in hearing himself talk, than that he has really a desire to enter into a serious examination of things, to understand the negotiation, and to be enfomed of the reasons thereof. But that we may not leave any thing, that may beget the least imaginable doubt in the minds of such, as are not perfectly inform'd of this Affair, I shall handle the point us succinctly, and with as much brevity, as I can. So oft as your Serenity has, by the Emperor's Embassadors, been applyed unto, for leave to pass thorough the Territories of any of your Seigniory, with his Alman, Italian or Spanish Forces, immediately thereupon there have been heard a thousand outeres, and complaints of Rapes, Assassinations, and other Riots and disorders of their Soldiers, and it is but a few months since, that the Germans, who pretended to go to Carignan to keep their Easter, to outdo the villany of those, who before had so barbarously treated your Subjects in their persons, and so lewdly spoiled them of their Estates, displaid part of their rage, and Insolence against the Church, to the great disgrace, and contempt of Christian Religion, cutting off the ears, nose, and arms of the Crucifix, and other Images representing the Saints who are in Heaven. This numerous and mighty Army (most Serene Prince) departed from Constantinople, being composed of Soldiers who were strangers to our Religion, and being designed, and accordingly sent for the relief of the King, my Lord and Master, sailed thorough the midst of your Islands, landed in the Dominions of the Church, pass'd thorough the Territories of the Siennois, and Genoses (people both of them, greater favourers of the Emperor's Greatness, than friends to their own proper liberty) yet is it not to be perceiv'd, nor can any man be found to complain of any insolence offerd to him: but on the contrary, all men have been treated with all humanity, and free passage granted to all those they met upon the Seas, and just payment made for all the provisions they were necssitated to take for the support of the Army upon their March. An effect of moderation in that rough sort of men, which must chiefly be attributed to the presence, and dexierity of Captain Polin, the king's Embassador; and with so great advantage to him, that never in times past, did either Turkish or Christian Army behave themselves so modestly upon such an occasion. Who is e (most Serene Prince) that can, or will deny, but that had not this Army been en∣tertain'd by the King, my Master, for the defence of his Frontiers, Christendom had been as∣saulted by it to their infinite damage? Who is he that will not judge, that this Army (its puissance considered) must have triumph'd over an infinit number of Christian Souls, together with some City of great importance, had not we converted that power to our own advantage, which otherwise must necessarily have succeeded to the general advancement of the Grand Signior's affairs, and to the private benefit of his Captains, who are Enemies to our Faith? this Ar∣my then being a Body disposed to Enterprize, and capable of performing high exploits, any man of a sound judgment will coness, that it has been of much greater advantage to Christendom, that is has been employed in the service of his Majesty, my King and Master, than that they had invade the Christian borders upon their own account. So that besides that it was
needful, and necessary for the King, my Master, to serve himself with this Army, therewith to correct the insolence of the Emperor's people, who had already seized upon four of his Gallies at Toulon, it may moreover be affirmed without reply, that to this private benefit of ours, is con∣joyned the publick utility of all Christendom. I flatter myself (most Serene Prince) clearly to have demonstrated to you, and to have con∣firm'd by evident reasons, and infallible Arguments, these two principal things. First that the King without prejudice to his title of most Christian, has accepted the succours that have been sent him by the Grand Signior: and in the second place, that these succours so sent have been of greater profit, than disadvantage to the Christian Common-weal: to which I shall add a third, and that with as much brevity, as the importance of the subject will permit; and that is, that the Kings Majesty has not accepted these forces, either out of any ambition of Rule, or out of revenge for injuries received; neither to enrich himsel with the spoils of others; nor to recover what has been unjustly usurped from himself; but has only entertained them for his own defence, that is (Illustrious Senators) for the defence of his Kingdom, which the Emperor both by open violence, and clandestine practice, by all sorts of intelligences, and treacheries, contrary to all rea∣son and justice, has evermore labour'd to overthrow: and yet his Ministers are not ashamed to say, that his Caesarean Majesty has had no other motive to invade the Kingdom of France, but only to break the friendship that was said to be contracted betwixt the Kings Majesty, and the Grand Signior. O tender Consciences! O holy pretences! fit indeed to delude the credulous, and ignorant, but that will hardly pass (Illustrious Senators) with you, who in your admirable and celebrated wisdom, even before I could open my lips, must needs be satisfied in your own bosoms of the contrary, and in your prudence easily discern the foundation of this War to have been no other than a design to ruine that Kingdom, which for thse thousand years past has approved it self the true and willing refuge of the oppressed, and the only Sanctuary of all sorts of afflicted persons. I would fain know of these men, who invent these subtil Arguments, what holy mo∣tive of Faith spurr'd on the Emperor, combined with the King of England, to invade France on the side of Champagne and Picardy, an expedition that only ended in the burning of some few inconsiderable Villages, and the Siege of Mezieres, very dishonorable for him? What de∣votion prick'd him on, at a time when Italy liv'd in peace, and assurance, by reason that Naples, Millan, Florence, and Genoa were possessed by several Princes, to come and shuffle all things into discord and confusion? What Religion (I say) moved him to league and combine himself with Pope Leo, to ravish away the state of Millan, which in a direct line of succession appertai∣ned to to the Children of my King and Master? What mighty zeal for Religion prompted him to cause our King to be murthered by means of a Prince of France, whom, to that end, he had suborned with prayers and tears? when seeing his execrable practice, (before it came to executi∣on) to be wholly detected, he sent the Seigneur de Bourbon, with an infinite number of people into France, in hope to effect that by open force, which (the bounty and providence of God not permitting him) by secret treacheries he could not bring to pass? What inspiration of the holy Ghost might it be, that seven years since conducted the Emperor, with seventeen thousand Foot, and ten thousand Horse, to invade the Kingdom of France, then, when he entred by Picardy, and Provence? What command of the Gospel can ever be found out, such as these men have found, who make a shew of so great devotion to the Christian Name, that can justifie to the world the con∣federacy betwixt the Emperor and the King of England, especially the said King by the proper solicitations, and pursuit of his Caesarean Majesty being at that time by the Pope declared a Schismatick, a Heretick, and a Rebel? A conspiracy that cannot be baptiz'd by the name of a necessary succour: but an unjust, wicked, and detestable confederacy complotted betwixt them two, to the end that they might divide betwixt them a Christian, and a Chatholick Kingdom; which in all times, when any occasion has presented it self for the propagation of our Faith, has ever shew'd it self prodigal, both of its Blood, and Treasure. But the whole world (most Serene Princes) were too little to satisfie his appetite of Rule;He means when Henry the eighth re∣pudiated Queen Katha∣rine so precipitously is he hurried on by his Ambition and Revenge. Would he not have been sensible of the shameful affront put upon him by the English King in the person of his Aunt, had not the design to subjugate all Christendom transported him to forget that outrage? How often, to frustrate the Turkish attempts, and to prevent the manifest ruine of Hungary and Germa∣ny, have means been tryed, and endeavours used, to procure a peace and union amongst those Princes, and still in vain? Whereas now all particular animosities, and private interests, the respect to Religion, the common desire of liberty, the obligation of so many benefits anci∣ently received from our Forefathers, and of late from us, laid aside, and forgot; they are, to our great prejudice, confederated, and united like Herod and Pilate, who from mortal Ene∣mies that they were, became friends, and Associates only in order to the persecution of Iesus Christ. Shall then this Emperor (most Serene Prince) go about to possess himself of the Kingdom of
France, and to offend this King, who, after so many injuries receiv'd, so amicably and so free∣ly consented to the ten years Truce? shall the Emperor go about to ruie this Prince, who after having been so many times undeservedly invaded in his own Kingdom, and as it were coming from the Obsequies of that most Illustrious and Serene Dauphin, his Son (so basely by the Em∣perors corruptions poysoned) neverheless with the rest of his Children, and Princes of the Blood, at the peril of his life, went even into the Emperors own Gally, by that security to manifest to him, how much the peace, so necessary to all Christendom, was by his Majesty coveted and desired? Shall the Emperor go about to ruine, burn, and put to spoil this Kingdom, in his passage thorough which, he was so welcom'd, treated, honored and caressed, as if he had been an Angel descen∣ded from Heaven? Shall e attempt, by all undue and all violent ways, to make himself So∣vereign of this Kingdom wherein for fifty days together, by the courtesie, and bounty of the King my Lord and Master, he saw himself more highly honoured, and respected, then their own natural Prince, with a power to command all things more absolute, than if he had been in his own Palace? Shall the Almans go about to make Hinds, and Slaves of those, who for the conservation of the German liberty, have so liberally exposed themselves, at the vast expence, and loss of their substance, and the effusion of their own blood? Shall the Germans and the English go about to ruine the Religion, that we with our valiant Armies, and by the Doctrine of an infinite number of men, eminent for piety and learning, have esserted and publish'd to all the world? Shall the Spaniards a people whom so often, and by dit of Arms we have redu∣ced to the Christian Faith, go about in revenge to compel us to forsake that Religion, which so long, and with so great honor to the name of Christ, we have maintained and upheld? If it must be so that (contrary to all duty and right) we must be abandoned by the rest of the Chri∣stian world (which God avert) we who are the Subjects of the King, my Lord and Master, may with great reason and justice, cry unto God for vengeance against them all, for so foul an in∣gratitude. These are returns, by no means suitable to the merits of our Forefathers, for (having by the di∣vine assistance) gain'd so many signal victories for Christendom under the conduct of Charles Mar∣tel in those times when they fought with, and cut pieces fifty thousand Saracens, that were come into Spain. These are by no means fit rewards for the desert of our Ancestors, who (by the favour of the Almighty) acquir'd great advantages for Christendom, at the time, when by their Forces under the conduct of Charlemain the Infidels and Saracens were driven both out of Spain, and a great part of Asia. These are by no means acknowledgments proportionable to the reputation our people (by the Grace of God) acquir'd in the time of Urban the second, who without any difficulty, or the least contradiction, dispased our King, his Princes, Nobility, Gentry, and generally the whole body of the Kingdom, against the adversaries of our Faith; insomuch that altogether, and through our assistance, they coquer'd the Kingdom of Jerusalem, and the Holy Land. These are by no means fit recompences for the desert of so many expeditions against the enemies of our Faith, fortunately undertaken by our Progenitors, under the Reigns of Philip and Charles of Valois And when his Holiness shall see so many Nations confederated, with a mischievous intent to ruine the rest of Christendom, and resolved to oppress this Kingdom, which of all other has best merited of the Christian Common-weal, I cannot doubt, but that he will lend us such succours, and assistance as he shall judge necessary o our pro∣tection, and defence. And should his Holiness do otherwise, he would do very much against himself, and contrary to the duty of an Italian, a Christian, and a Prelate. Of an Italian, forasmuch as our Holy father does very well understand, that the servitude, and calamity of Italy, can proceed from no other accident, than from the ruine and desolation of the Kingdom of France: Of a Christian forasmuch as the name of Christ having in all Ages been defended and propagated by this Kingdom, and it being at this time invaded by the means and ambition of the Emperor, and so many Nations strangers to our Religion, it cannot in this exigency be de∣serted by any but such, as are no very good friends to the Christian Faith: Of a Prelate for as∣much as it were contrary to the duty of his Holiness, being, as he is, thoroughly informed, and very well in his own knowledg assured, that the Emperor, obstinate in his own will, and resolute to subjugate both the French, Italians, and all other Christians, would never hearken to any over∣ture of accommodation, that has by his Holiness been propounded to him. Whereas on the contrary the King my Master (equally desirous of his own, and the publick quiet) has often offered to sub∣mit all his interests, and differences to the judgment of our Holy Father. To discharge then the office of a true Prelate, and a true Iudg, may he not take arms against him, who has not the confidence to deny, but that he is the sole perturbator of the publick peace, and the universal good? Which though his Holiness should forbear to do, yet to reprove his ingratitude in this re∣spect, the very bones of Gregory the third, Stephen the second, Adrian the first, Stephen the fourth, Gregory the ninth, Gelasius the second, Innocent the second Eugenius the first, Inno∣cent the fourth, Urban, and several other Popes would start up; who being persecuted, partly by
the Enmies of the Faith, and partly by the Emperors, have been relieved by the Forces of this most Christian Kingdom, and by the Treasure of this Crown, as the sacred Anchor of all Christendom, and have been proteced, and restored to the holy Chair. The bones and ashes of pope Clement would rise up, who being, contrary to all reason, and equiy, reduced to the ex∣treamest calamity by the Emperor (who at this very time, allyed and confederated with Here∣ticks, prpares, and stirrs up so many Tragedies, for good, and true Christians) was delive∣red from all his oppressions by the arms of the King my Master, and that at the price of a great number of his people. I do not believe (Illustrious Senators) that you have in the least orgot the Vnion, and Ally∣ance, which for seven years past, has been so iniolably observed betwixt your Illustrious Republick, and the Crown of France. Can you forget the strict league that was maintained betwixt you and us in the late Wars? Neither can you have forgot that Enterprize wherein you, and we, in so short time, conquered Constantinople. Can you then endure, that a Nation your forefa∣thers have so loved, honored, and esteemed, should be weakened by the means of your Enemies; a people with whom (neither you, nor we being degenerated from the vertue of our Predecessors) you may yet expect to perform more exploits; and such as may be for the enlargement of your own Dominions, and the universal benefit of all Christendom. I hope you consider (Illustrious Senators) with your wanted prudence, that if (as God forbid) any sinister accident should be∣fall the King, my Lord and Master, the liberty of your most serene Republick, would be with∣out all manner of Remedy, exposed as a prey to him, who aims at nothing less, than to subject us both to the same servile Yoke, as those who have ever been united for the defence of the com∣mon liberty. Which though you should not do, yet the very bones of our forefathers would rise up in our favour, those Ancestors who seing Philip Maria Visconti to have subdued Genoa, and already to have reduced all Tuscany to a deplorable condition, not able to susser so great an injustice, nor to permit the Territories of so great Princes to be invironed by so dangerous an Enemy, with the Assistance of the Florentines, retook Genoa, and by this means, not only frustrated and repelled the Ambition of that Tyrant, but moreover with the singular applause, and obligation of all Italy, recovered Brescia, Bergamo, and Cremona. I flatter myself by the remembrance of so many glorious actions, and by so many great exem∣ples of the French fidelity, piety and honor, to have been so happy, as to have removed all difficul∣ties, and impediments, wherewith by the calumnies of thse of the Imperial party your Lordships may have been prepossessed, and as a most humble servant to you all, do beseech, and conjure you (most illustrious Senators) to consider the miserable estate of Italy, and generally of all Christen∣dom, and before you resolve or declare for either party, not only to bear the most Reverend, and Illustrious Cardinal of Ferrara: but also thoroughly to weigh, and examine what be shall pro∣pose to you in the behalf of the King my Master. And once more most humbly beseech your Serene Highness with your accustomed Prudence to consider the Emperor, not only as the cause of the ruine, and misery of Italy: but moreover to look upon him as the Insidiator of the li∣berty of this most Serene Republick. Acknowledg, acknowledg, I beseech you, the house of Aus∣tria for your Capital Enemy, and such a one, as has at all times used all sorts of endeavour to encroach upon, and to usurp the Territories and Dominions of others, and especially those of your most Screne Republick. And on the contrary that most Christian King, my Lord and Master, for your ancient, faithful, and affectionate friend, and remember with what promptitude, and alacrity, he has ever divided his Forces with you, for the recovery of your places unjustly possessed by those of the House of Austria, of which the recovery of Brescia, and Verona may serve for a sufficient proof. Neither is there any cause to fear, that such a friendship can by any means suffer it self to be violated, or dissolved; forasmuch as there having been betwixt that Crown of France, and this Illustrious Seigneury no kind of difference, either ancient, or of later date, and the one holding nothing of the other, the occasions must consequently be wanting upon which the amities of Princes de ordinarily dissolve: but on the other side, their Vnity, Allyance, and Conormities are such that the ruine of the one does threaten, and almost assure the calami∣ty, and dissolution of the other. What opinion the Senate might retain of so nice an affair, I am not able to say, neither do I know whether my Brothers eloquence made them approve of a thing, at which they had before been so highly scandalized: but this I know, that I have ever heard that action highly censured both then and since: and in plain truth, I do believe our affairs were not much better'd by it, but it is not for me to meddle with so great affairs. So soon as these mighty succours of the Turk arrived, every one thought the whole Earth had not been capable to receive them, such judgments men make of things before they come to be tryed. Monsiur d' Anguin who was at that time the Kings Lieutenant in Provence, having
gathered together some Ensigns of Provençals,Nice besieged by the Turs. came to sit down before Nice; where after a great Battery had been made, the assault was given by the Turks and Provençals together: but they were repulsed. In the end the Town surrendred, but not the Ca∣stle. In the mean time the Duke of Savoy solicited the Marquis de Gnast for relief, who accordingly with a good Army put himself into the Field. The Turks very much de∣spised our people, yet I do not believe they could beat us number for number: they are, 'tis true, stronger men, more obedient and more patient of any hardship, than we are; but I cannot allow them to be more valiant; they have indeed one advantage over us: which is, that they study nothing but War. Barbarossa at this Siege was very much displeased, and cast out very tart and passionate language, especially when we were con∣strain'd to borrow of him powder, and bullet, insomuch that he reimbarked himself, and departed,Barbarossa dis∣gusted. without doing any great feats, as also the winter indeed drew on; but they behaved themselves very civilly towards all our confederates in their retreat, and the Provençals likewise disbanded. I had forgot to tell you, that after the ill success at Perpignan, the King sent us or∣ders to march straight away into Piedmont, and Monsieur d' Annebaut (who was Admi∣ral) went to besiege a Cony,Siege of Cony. where we sped as ill as at Perpignan, and were very well drub'd in giving the assault, for not having well discover'd the breach; and where I saw the brave and valiant Captain Santo Pedro Corso behave himself admirably well,Santo Pedro Corso. who was almost wounded to death. The said Admiral having taken some few little places, and seeing the winter at hand, returned back into France, leaving Monsieur de Boitieres in the quality of the Kings Lieutenant there, whom he sent to Garrison at Ga∣varet; and we to Savillan, where Monsieur de Termes was Governor, who was very glad of our coming, for he stood in need of us. During our abode there, several at∣tempts were made both upon Turin, and upon us, and we likewise attempted some∣thing upon the Enemy, wherein our fortune was sometimes better and sometimes worse: but there being nothing that particularly concerned me, I shall pass them over, and in∣deed should I give a relation of all the Actions wherein I have been engaged, I should ne∣ver have done. After that the Turks were retir'd, as has been said, the Duke of Savoy, and the Mar∣quis de Guast laid Siege to Montdevi, where the Seigneur de Dros a Piedmontois was Go∣vernor The Swisse not good for the keeping of places. having with him four Italian Companies, and two of Swisse, who there behaved themselves exceedingly well, though it be none of their trade to keep places, and there were given two or three Scalados. Monsieur de oitieres, had no possible means to re∣lieve it, for the King had at that time very few Soldiers in Piedmont; and the Swisse, who had lost their Captains and Lieutenants with Canon shots, began to mutiny against the Seigneur de Dros the Governor, insomuch that he was constrain'd to capitulate. Now you must know,A device of the Marquis de Guast. that the Marquess de Guast (who was one of the most cautelous and subtle Captains of his time) to take from him all hopes of relief, had counterfeited Let∣ters from Monsieur de Foitieres, wherein he writ him word to shift the best he could for himself, there being no possibility to relieve him: which coming to the Governors hands, and the cheat not being to be discover'd, and the Swisse at the same time begin∣ning to mutiny, he surrendred the Town upon condition, to march away with Bag, and Baggage.Mount Devi surrendred. However the Articles (to the great dishonor of the Marquis de Guast) were very ill observed, and the Seigneur de Dros pursued, who sav'd himself upon a Spanish Horse, and it was well for him that he did so; for all the Gold in Europe would not have sav'd his life, for the hatred the Duke of Savoy had conceived against him, being that he, who was his Subject, had revolted to the Eenemies side. 'Twas said that he made his escape in the habit of a Priest by the means of an Italian Soldier, who had formerly serv'd him: but I believe it was after the manner I have related: but this I can say without lying, that he was one of the bravest men,Commenda∣tions of the Seigneur de Dro. and the greatest Wits, that ever came out of Piedmont, and dyed afterwards very honorably at the Battel of Seri∣zolles. The same day that Montdevi was surrendred, I had departed from Savillan (to the great regret of Monsieur de Termes) with five and twenty Foot, to try if I could find means to put my self into it; for with a great party it would be a matter of extra∣ordinary difficulty; and took with me a Guide, who would undertake to conduct me by the deep vallies, and by a River that runs by Montdevi, in which we were to march a great way together, the water being but knee deep, and I do believe by that way I might have got in, though it would have signified nothing if I had, forasmuch as I must have done as the rest did, considering that the strangers by their number gave the Law: but they dearly paid for't, many of them being massacred at their marching out of
the Town. I had moreover drawn out ten Soldiers, over and above my five and twen∣ty, to convoy me over the Maupas, a place so call'd, and within half a mile of Marennes, where a man should hardly ever fail of meeting some of the Garrison of Fossan. And above, and on the right hand of Maupas, there stood an empty Inn, from whence one might discover all that came from Savillan straight to Cairas, and from Cairas, to the said Savillan. As I descended therefore into the plain that leads directly to Maupas, I was there aware of threescfore Italian Soldiers of Fossan, that were scouting towards that Inn, which stands upon an eminence, and presently saw the Party move, who made hast to gain the Maupas on that side towards Cairas, to sight me in that straight, which made me turn off on the right hand with intent to fall upon their Rar, so soon as I should arrive at the Inn; when they perceiving my design, endeavour'd to recover the road of Fossan to retire: but I pursued them so close, that I conrain'd them to take a house, which had a stable directly opposite to it, to which I set fire; who thereupon seeing themselves lost, they began to cry out for Quarter, casting themselves headlong, some out of the Windows, and some by the door, of which my Soldiers dispatch'd some in revenge of one of their companions,A combat near Maupas. very much beloved by them, who was kill'd, and two more wounded, the rest I sent back to Savillan bound together with match, for∣asmuch as they were more in number, than we that took them. I went thence staight to Cairas, and at the Mill below Cairas found Monsieur de Cental, Governor of the said Cairas, who told me that Montdevi was surrendred, having yet the Letters in his hand, that had been sent him to that effect. I then presently turned about to recover Savillan, and to carry the news to Monsieur de Termes, that he might send it to Mon∣sieur de Boitieres: but as I was on this side Cairas, and upon the skirts of the plain near unto some houses there called les Rodies, looking behind me I saw a Troop of Horse, that came fromwards Fossan, along by the meadow leading towards Albe which they then held: which made me to halt at those houses, to see what they would do; in which po∣sture, they drawing nearer, discover'd me; and attempted to come up to me by a little ascent there was, enclosed with hedges on either side: but when I saw them advanced half up the Ascent, I sent out four or five Harquebusiers, who, firing upon them, shot one of their Horses, whereupon they very fairly saced about. Which I seeing, and conclu∣ding it was for fear, advanced boldly into the plain, where I had not march'd five hun∣dred paces, but I discovered them again in the said plain (for they had passed a little lower out of sight) being fourteen Launcers, and eight Harquebusiers on horseback, with another who came after leading the wounded horse. I had in all but five and twenty Soldiers, of which seven were Pikes, and Captain Favas and my self each of us a Halbert on our necks: Their Harquebusiers came up at a good round trot to charge us, firing all the way as they came, as some of ours also did at them, and their Laun∣ces made a shew as if they would charge in amongst us; but it was very faintly; for upon the firing of our Harquebusiers they made a halt, and gave way, at which we took heart, and march'd boldly up to them with good smart claps of Harquebuze shot, upon which one of their men falling dead to the ground, they very fairly left him behind them, and descending once more into the plain retreated directly towards Albe. And thus I retir'd to Savillan, it being two hours within night before I got thither, which I thought sit to commit to writing, to the end, that other Captains may take exemple whenever Horse comes to charge the Foot, never to spend more than half of their shot, and reserve the other half for the last extream, which being observd, they can very hardly be defea∣ted without killing a great number of the Enemy, who will never venture to break in whilst they see the Harquebusiers ready presented to fire upon them; who being resolute men, by the favour of any little bush, or brake, will hold the Cavalry long in play, the one still firing whilst the other is charging again. For our parts we were all resolv'd never to yield; but rather to fight it out with the sword, fearing they would revenge what we had done in the morning, for the four horse that escap'd to Fossan had carried back the news of their defeat. So soon as Monsieur de Termes understood that Montdevi was taken, he resolved in the morning to put himself into Beme, which he accordingly did, where being arriv'd he there found two companis of Swisse, which were there in Garrison (having receiv'd also the others of Montdevi) who immediately abandoned Beme, and went to Cairas, leaving on∣ly the Count's own Company, another of Italians, and that of Captain Renovare. From thence Monsicur de Termes dispatch'd away a Mssenger to me on horseback, writing me word, that if ever I would do the King a timely service, I should immediately come a∣way, and this was the next day after the said Seigneur arrived at Beme, which was Sun∣day, and we were but just come from Mass.
After therefore having eaten a snap or two, I immediately put my self into the field to go thither; yet could I not make so much hast, but that it was above three hours within night before I got thither: it being necessary for me to pass thorough uneasie val∣leys, forasmuch as we believ'd the Town already to be besieged, all the Enemies Camp being at Carru, but three little miles from Beme, and they having skirmish'd all the day before the Town. By good fortune Monsieur de St. Iulian Colonel of the Swisse, was at the said Beme, it being his Garrison, and Monsieur d' Aussun also, who was come to give him a visit, and to see what would be the issue of the Siege of Montdevi:The Sieur de Montluc puts himself into Beme. but it was impossible for the said St. Iulian to detain the Swisse, for I met all the four Companies already within half a mile of Cairas. I had so much honor done me, that both the Count, and the Countess his Mother, together with several other great persons, came to meet me at the Gates of the City, who were very glad of my coming, expecting in the morning to be besieged; but two days after my arrival their Camp march'd away toward Trinitat, having cast a Bridge over the River, near to Fossan; and the morning that the Camp re∣mov'd, five or six light horse of Monsieur de Termes, and four or five Gentlemen belonging to the Count de Beme (who serv'd for Guides) with five or six Harquebusiers on horseback of mine, went in pursuit of their Camp. It was so great a mist that they could scarce see one another, which was the reason that they went to the very head of their Artillery, and took the Commissary (whom they call the Captain of the Artillery;) and the day be∣fore Messieurs de Termes, d' Aussun, and de St. Iulian were gone away, having had intelli∣gence that the Enemy were making this Bridge; whereof Monsieur de St. Iulian went straight to Cairas, where the Swisse likewise would not abide, but went thence to Carig∣nan; Monsieur de Termes who doubted also they might go to Savillan, of which he was Governor, went thither; and Messieur d' Aussun went in great hast directly to Turin; In short every one was in fear of his own charge. The said Bridge was further advanc'd than was imagin'd, for those of Fossan made it in three or four days, that their Camp lay at Carr, and at the time that the Commisary was taken, the greatest part of the Army was already pass'd over, and was encamp'd to∣wards Marennes: particularly the Battaillon of the Germans, who were quarter'd in the Ca∣stle, and the out-houses of the Palace of Messire Phillibert Canebons, a Gentleman of Savillan. Monsieur de Termes had brought with him to Beme Monsieur de Caillac, the Commis∣sary of the Artillery, who would needs stay with me out of respect to the great friend∣ship betwixt us (which does yet continue) and we were in despair of ever getting any thing out of the said Commissary prisoner, till it grew to be very late, and then he told, and assured us, that the Army was gone to besiege Savillan: At which Monsieur de Caillac and I were almost at our wits end; for the said Sieur de Caillac had his residence more at the said Savillan, than at any other place, and I also, being it was my Garrison, and where I had continued for seven or eight months before. In the end we both of us resolv'd to go put our selves into it at all hazards and adventures that might befall. I had five and twenty Soldiers of mine own on horseback, which I took together with four of five more of Monsieur de Termes, which he had left at Beme (to the great grief of the Count, who would never be persuaded to permit Captain Favas, and the rest of the Company to depart) and about two hours within night, we arriv'd at Cairas, where we spoke with Monsieur Cental, whom we found in a very great chase, for that the Swisse had that day forsook him, and he told us that it was very great odds we should find the Camp lodg'd in the Countrey houses belonging to Savillan, the Germans excepted, who were quarter'd as I have said, and took up all the space betwixt that and Marennes, thorough which we were to pass; for my other way it was all ditches and Rivolets very troublesom to pass, especially having no Guide with us, which we had not provided our selves of, by reason we all of us very well know the ordinary way. How∣ever we pass'd thorough the middle of the Village of Marennes, without any encounter at all (forasmuch as the Enemies Cavalry was yet about Fossan) and so came to Savillan, about two hours after midnight, where at the Gate of the Town we found Captain Cha∣reze, Brother to Bquemar, whom Monsieur de Termes sent to Monsieur Boitieres, de∣siring him to assure him, that we were all resolv'd to dye, or to preserve the place. Monsieur de Caillac, and I then went to find out Monsieur de Termes at his Quarters, where stealing upon him before he heard any thing of us, we found him writing down the order of the Siege, with his back towards the door, which being open, he never heard nor saw us, 'till I coming behind him, and taking him in my arms said to him, Did you think to play this Farce without us? at which he suddainly start up, and leap'd about my neck, being scarce able to utter a word for joy, and likewise embrac'd Monsieur de Callac, telling me, that he wish'd he had given half his estate, my Company was there also with
me; to which I made answer, that I would make them to fly, provided he would sud∣dainly find a messenger to carry a Letter to my Lieutenant Captain Favas; and im∣mediately hereupon we dispatch'd thither a Fooman of his, who before noon got to Beme, where so soon as the said Captain Favas had read my Letter, he presently went to acquaint the Count, that he must of necessity depart. The Count was again very importunate with him to stay; but nevertheless he march'd out about three of the Clock in the afternoon, and left the Flag of my Ensign as he pass'd by Cairas with Monsieur Cental, who plainly told him that he must not expect to pass without fighting, to which he made answer, that it was also all he did desire. We had given instructionsv to the Fooman, that so soon as he should come to the end of the plain, he should lead him straight towards the Mill of the said Messer Philibert, which was about a Harquebuze shot distant from his Palace, and that then he should follow on along the side of the River, preparing himself to sight at the said Mill, not doubting but that he would there certainly meet with the Germans: but that nevertheless if he would avoid fighting, he should by all means do it, and make it his only business to get into the Town. A caution that was very much in season, for the Germans had dislodg'd the very morning that we pass'd by, and were encamp'd at Ma∣rennes: but about two hours after midnight he safely arriv'd, which redoubled the joy, not of Monsieur de Termes only; but moreover of all the other Captains and Soldiers, and the Inhabitants of the Town; for to say the truth, I had one of the best, and the fullest Companies in all Piedmont. And indeed I would never have other than the best men I could choose, for when once I perceiv'd any one not to be right, I ever found one pretence or another to be rid of him. Two hours before day, Monsieur de Termes had news brought him that the Duke of Savoy, and the Marquis de Guast were come that very night to Cavillimor, two miles from Savillan; which made us still more confident that the Camp was advancing with a resolution to besiege us, because they planted themselves upon the way by which we were to receive our relief; and so soon as the day began to appear there came some from Marennes to give us notice, that all the Infantry was upon the Road towards Montiron, and descen∣ded into the plain of St. Fré, taking the way rather towards Carignan, than Savillan, of which we had still more and more intelligence. I then begg'd of Monsieur de Termes to give me leave to go out towards Cavillemor, to follow in the Rear of their Horse, which he presently granted, causing Captain Mons his Ensig with fifty Launces to mount to horse. Now in the time that I was gone to Beme, our Colonel Monsieur de Tais had sent the Companies of Bogedemar and the Baron de Nicolas in great diligence to Savillan, and my own men being weary, I took only Captain Favas, and those who had come in with me, who were pretty well re∣fresh'd, and some forty of the others, that were come overnight. Captain Lienard at that time Liutenant to Gabarret with thirty or forty of his Company, and Captain Breü∣il the Baron's Ensign, who (as I was very lately assur'd) is yet living, and has since been shot in the leg of which he is lame (as I am told) with as many of the Company of the said Baron, and went straight to Cavillemor, along the banks of a great Rivolet, lea∣ding to the said Cavillemor, and on the left hand the great high way, when being ad∣vanc'd within half a mile of the Town, I was overtaken by one of Captain Gabarret's men, whom he had sent to me, to desire I would stay a little for him, he being moun∣ting to horse to come after me with all possible speed. I therefore made a halt, but (as he was ever very tedious and slow) he made us there to tarry for him above a long quarter of an hour, and so unhappily for me, that had I held on my way without stay∣ing for him, I had met with the Duke of Savoy at a little Chappel without Cavillemor, towards Savillan, where he was at Mass, with only five and twenty Horse for his Guard, the Marquis being gone away with all the Cavalry towards Rouy, and already advanc'd above a long mile from thence upon his way. Thus a little delay oftentimes causes a great inconvenience, otherwise we had at this time perhaps light of a good booty: but so soon as the said Gabarret came up to us, I went on, and came presently to Ca∣villemor, where the people of the Town enform'd me, that the said Duke could not yet be above half a mile from thence, which made both Captain Mons, me and all the Soldiers ready to eat our own flesh, to think what a prize we had lost through the negligence of Gabarret, whom to his face we curs'd to all the Devils of Hell. After we had here staid a pretty space, not knowing what we should resolve to do, we at last began to put our selves upon our return home, when the intelligence we had from Marennes coming into my head, I presently alter'd that resolution, and took the way thorough the Meadows that leads towards that plain, still hearing the Drums
of the Enemies Camp both before and behind us at the same time; for it is not above half a mile from Cavillemor to the sight of the plain, and so soon as we came within sight of it, we discover'd three or four Lacquais that follow'd the Camp. Two or three of our light horse spurr'd out to take them, and accordingly brought them in, by whom we learn'd that after them follow'd two Ensigns of Foot, and a Troop of Horse commanded by Monsieur de la Trinitat: the said two Companies of Foot were those of the Count Pedro d' Apporta Governor of Fossan, which were conducted by a Lieutenant of his call'd Captain Ascanio, and the Horse were commanded by the said Seigneur de Trinitat, together with the ammunition, bread, and a good part of the bag∣gage of the Camp, whereof a great deal belong'd to the Gormans and Spaniards, and was guarded by fifty Soldiers of the one nation, and as many of the other; so that they might be some four hundred horses of carriage, or more, and fourscore and ten wa∣gons laden with Provision, and the equipage belonging to the Artillery. Captain Mons thereupon went out to discover Monsieur de la Trinitat, and went so near, that he had his horse shot under him, who presently returning back said these words to me; Captain Montluc, yonder is enough for us both to give, and to take. Where∣upon I suddainly leap'd upon a little Mare of one of my Souldiers, and taking one of my Serjeants with twenty Harquebusiers along with me, went my self to discover the Enemy, who making no reckoning of those few Horse they had seen, still with Drums beating, held on their March; when being come pretty near, I saw a multitude of men and horses marching along the plain, which was the Baggage, and the Waggons, and afterwards upon the eminence on that side where I was, perceiv'd the two Ensigns and the Horse upon their march, and counted the Foot to be betwixt three and four hun∣dred men, and likewise the Horse to be betwixt thirty, and five and thirty Launces; which having done I presently return'd back to Captain Mons, and told him, that having miss'd one great good fortune, we were now to attempt another, to which he made answer that he was ready to do whatever I would command him. Whereupon I desir'd him to stay for me, whilst I went to speak to my Soldiers, which he did, and I spurr'd away to them. Captain Gabarret was with the said Captain Mons on horseback, and Captain Favas, Lyenard, and le Breüil conducted the Foot, when coming up to them, I spoke both to them, and to the Soldiers, telling them, that as God had deprived us of one good fortune, he had put another into our hands, and that although the Enemy were at this time three times as many as we were, yet if we re∣fus'd to fight them upon so fair an occasion, we were unworthy the name of Soldiers, as well out of respect to the honor we should acquire thereby, as in regard to the Riches we saw exposed before us, which was no contemptible prize. To which all the three Cap∣tains made answer, that it was their opinion we ought to fight, whereupon, raising my voice, I spake to the Soldiers saying, Well, fellow Soldiers, are not you of the same opinion with these Captains? I for my part have already told you mine, that we ought to fight, and assure your selves we shall beat them, for my mind tells me so, which has never fail'd me in any thing I have ever undertaken, therefore I pray Gentlemen conclude them already as good as our own. Now it was a custom I always had, to make the Soldiers believe, that I had a certain kind of presage, which whenever it came upon me, I was sure to overcome: a thing that I only pretended to amuse the Soldiers, that they might think themselves secure of the vi∣ctory, and have ever found an advantage by it; for my confidence often emboldned the most timorous, and simple fellows, nay sometimes the most crafty knaves amongst them are easie to be gull'd, as these were, who thereupon with one voice cry'd out, Let us fight Captain, let us fight. I then declar'd to them, that I would place four of my Pikes in the Rear, to keep every one from linching back, which if any one should offer to do, they should kill him, with which they were very well content: but I had much ado to make the said Pikes to stay behind, according to that agreement, so ardently for∣ward was every one to be the first to fight, though it was very necessary they should do so, for that evermore disorders are most likely to happen in the Rear. I then began to march, when so soon as the Enemy discover'd the Foot, they made a halt upon the edg of a great hollow, that had in the process of time been worn by the land flouds, which stretch'd it self in length till it ended under the Hill where we were. I saw them in the plain with their Launces all advanc'd, not offering to move, and saw also Captain Ascanio upon a little gray Nag, who plac'd his Pikes all in file along the hollow, and then spurr'd up to the Waggons to draw them up at the end of the hollow, and then to th Baggage placing them behind, and afterwards to the Horse, by which order and diligence, I knew him to be a brave man, and fell to consider with my self, what would be the issue of the fight, of which I now began to be in some doubt,
thorough the good order of this Chief. I nevertheless nothing alter'd my resolution; but whilst Captain Ascanio was busie ordering his Battail, I was as diligent to order mine, giving the Harquebusiers to Captain Gabarret, who was on horseback. And you must take notice, that the Enemies Foot was upon the top of the hollow directly over against us. I took then the three Captains with the Pikes, and left order with the Harquebu∣siers by no means to shoot till they came within the distance of four Pikes, and to Cap∣tain Gabarret by all means to see this order observ'd, which he also did. I then desir'd Captain Mons to lend me five and twenty of his Launceers to help me to kill; for they were so many that in a whole day, though they had had one hand tyed behind them, we should have had much ado to dispatch them, and with the rest he was to fight their Cavalry, though they were a great many more then ours. To which he readily consented, and gave five and twenty of his Launces to the younger Tilladet (the same who is now call'd Monsieur de Sainctorens) and moreover to Captain Ydrou some light horse of the said Company, who are both of them yet living, as also several others, who were of the same Troop. These orders being given, all of us both Foot and Horse march'd directly towards the Enemy, and when I expected their Harquebusiers should have thrown themselves into the hollow, so soon as they should see our men come full drive upon them, they quite contrary march'd straight up to our men, and all at a clap gave fire within less than four Pikes length of one another. Now I had given order to our men, that so soon as they had powr'd in their shot, without standing to charge again, they should run up to them▪ and fall to the Sword, which they also did, and I with the Pikes ran to the end of the hollow, and fell in desperately amongst them. In the mean time Ydrou and Tilladet charg'd Monsieur de Trinitat, and put him to rout, and our Harquebusiers and theirs threw themselves altogether into the hollow: but ours had the upper hand, and our Pike men had thrown away their Pikes, and were fallen to't with the Sword, and so couragiously fighting we came all up to the Wagons,The Imperi∣alists defea∣ted. Captain Mons, and all, which were all overturn'd in a moment, and all their men put to flight towards two houses which stood in the bottom of the plain, where, still pursuing our Victory, and the Horse still firing amongst them, very few of them reach'd the houses. At the houses some particular men were ta∣ken to Quarter: but of the rest very few were sav'd, and those who were left alive were so grievously wounded, that I do verily believe they had little benefit of their mer∣cy. Our Gens d' Armes in those days wore great cutting Fauchions, wherewith to lop off armes of Male, and to cleave Morions, and indeed in my life I never saw such blows given. As for the Cavalry they were all taken running away towards Fossan, Mon∣sieur de Trinitat excepted, and five others, who being better mounted than the rest, esca∣ped; though young Tilladet with two others only pursu'd him within two Harquebuze shot of Fossan, and took one who attended one of the Colours, which the Ensign that car∣ried it, had thrown upon the neck of him who carried off his horse. Presently after we began to march, leading off the Wagons, and Baggage, which were of necessity to return by the same way they had come from Marennes, forasmuch as the Car∣riages could pass no other way, and there I saw so great a disorder amongst our people, that had twenty of the Enemies horse turn'd back upon us, we had certainly been defea∣ted; for all the Soldiers both Foot and Horse were so laden with Baggage, and with horses they had taken, that it had been impossible for Captain Mons to have rallyed so much as one Launce, or I two Harquebusiers: insomuch that we left all the dead un∣risled and untouch'd; but the Country people of Marennes came thither presently after, and performed that office for them, and have since several times told us, that they got there above two thousand Crowns; for not above three or four days before, those two Cap∣tains had muster'd for three months. The booty is very often the occasion of ruine, where∣fore Captains ought to be exceeding careful, especially when they know there are enemies Garrisons near at hand, that may sally out upon them; though it is a very hard thing to take order in, for the avarice of the Soldier is such, that he oftentimes quails under his burthen, and no reason will serve his turne. After this defeat we return'd to Savillan, where we found that two Country fellows had given an Alarm to Monsieur de Termes, having brought him news that we were all defeated, and indeed we found him almost at his wits end, but afterwards he was the most overjoy'd man, that ever he had been in his life. There a man might have had flesh enough good cheap; for we took above forty German Whores and more than twen∣ty Spanish, which kind of Cattel was the greatest cause of our disorder. We had an in∣tention to have shar'd all the spoil equally amongst us, and found that we were but an hundred forty and five men, and fifty horse, but every one begg'd that he might keep
what he had gotten, promising upon that condition to make me a present, forasmuch as I had not made it my business to look after spoyl, which I consented to, seeing every one was content, and they gave me six hundred Crowns, as also the horse presented Cap∣tain Mons, but how much I am not able to say, and this we did that day in the Rear of their Camp. Of our people there was slain upon the place one Soldier only belonging to Captain Baron, with five or six more hurt, and one Corporal of mine, who all recove∣red. There are a great many both of the Horse and Foot yet living, who were present at this business, who when they shall read this Book, I am certain will not give me the lye. I cannot remember (which I wonder at my self for) whether Monsieur de Caillac was with us at the engagement or no, or whether Monsieur de Termes did not detain him at home, but I am sure that if he was not there, he was in Savillan, and may very well re∣member all this to be true. Now the design of the Marquis de Guast soon discovered it self, which was to put him∣self into Carignan, and there to raise a Fort, and leave in it a strong Garrison of Foot, as he did, and the very day that I gave them this defeat he encamp'd at a Village near Carmagnolle, on the right hand of the Road from Recoins to the said Carmagnolle (I have forgot the name) and at midnight sent the greatest part of his Cavalry to get over the Bridge at Lombriasse, over which an hour or two before there had passed two Light horse of Monsieur de Termes (who had been with us at the fight, and were stollen away with their booty, fearing they should be made to discount) who gave intelligence to Monsieur d' Aussun, and Signior Francisco Bernardin, who were both at Carignan, sent thither by Monsieur de Boitieres, on purpose to dismantle that place, calling to mind that Monsieur de Termes, and the said Signior Francisco had told him four months before, that the Marquis would do so, and possess himself of it in order to the raising of some Fortificati∣ons there, which would be very prejudicial to the Kings Service. I had nothing to do to write this, if it were not for a caution to the young Captains, who shall read this Book, that they must never attempt to retreat at the head of an Army, to which they are not strong enough to give Battel. But (as I was saying) so soon as these Light horse had spoke with Monsieur d' Aussun, and told him of the defeat we had given them, he had a great mind (as his heart was in a right place) to do something also before he retir'd: but the said Signior Francisco understanding by these Light horse where the Enemy was, presently concluded, that by break of day they would certainly be upon them, which made him very importunate with Monsieur d' Aussun to retire: but he would by no means hearken to him, and so soon as day appear'd, they saw the Marquis de Guast, all the Infantry, and part of the Horse marching all along the side of the River, when the Marquis advancing he caus'd Monsieur d' Aussun to be talk'd withal, only to hold him in play, which Signior Francisco perceiving, call'd out to him, that the Marquis did only this to amuse him; but he was deaf as before, and would believe nothing (a man cannot avoid his Destiny) till two Light horse he had sent out upon the Road towards Lombriasse, came and brought him an account of the truth: but it was too late, for already the grea∣test part of their Cavalry was got over. There was but two Boats there, but they were very large, and they had begun to pass an hour after midnight. Upon this Monsieur d' Aussun commanded Signior Francisco to retire as far as the Bridge of Loges, and there to make a halt, which he did. Foot he had none, but the Chevalier Absal, with his single Company, to whom he gave order to march softly, after the said Signior Francisco, and halt very often to relieve him, if occasion were, which he accordingly obeyed, when on a suddain came up fifty or threescore of the Ene∣mies Horse to begin the skirmish. It is very true, that besides his own Troop, and that of Signior Francisco, he had thirty Launces of the Company of Monsieur de Termes, com∣manded by the elder Tilladet, which had parted from Monsieur de Termes seven or eight days before, by the command of Monsieur de Botieres, and at his entreaty to send them, which the said Monsieur de Termes very much repented after, wanting them himself, at the time when he expected a Siege. The said Seigneur d' Aussun then began himself also to retire, dividing his men into three Squadrons, whom the Enemy follow'd very close: his Lieutenant, call'd Hieronymo Magrin, commanded the first Squadron, whom the Enemy sometimes beat up to the second, commanded by Monsieur de Aussun, and otherwhiles the said Hierenimo recharg'd the Enemy, who were continually supplyed by a great number of fresh men, and who, as they found themselves the stronger, charg'd Captain Hieronimo with might and main, driving him back into the Squadron of Mon∣sieur d' Aussun, who thereupon gave a charge, and repell'd the said Enemies up to their main body, which again charg'd the said Seigneur d' Aussun, and beat him back to the forenam'd Captain Tilladet, and at the same time another Troop of the Enemy, besides
those, who came up upon the Gallop, charg'd the said Tilladet, who was advanc'd to relieve Monsieur d' Aussun; so that the Enemy was four times stronger in Horse, than we were, and fresh supplies, as they landed, still came up to them, insomuch that all was put to rout and confusion,Monsieur d' Aussun defea∣ted, and taken prisoner. Monsieur d' Aussun beaten down to ground his Lieutenant, and above fifty more taken prisoners, Captain Tilladet twice taken, and rescued by his men, who closing together, and often facing about, made good their retreat in spite of the Enemy even to the Bridge of Loges. Signior Francisco Bernardin, who stood drawn up close by the Bridge, seeing this torrent coming upon him, and knowing that he with his Troop was not sufficient to remedy the disorder, took it into consideration, and passed over the Bridge, where he again made head, by which means a great many more of our People sav'd themselves, who under his protection fac'd about at the end of the said Bridge. In the mean time the Chevalier Absal, who had taken his way a little on the left hand, was still retreating a foot pace, and often made a halt, which was the reason that he could never recover the Bridge; for one part of the Enemy seeing the victory already secure, ran up to him, who having seen all our Cavalry rou∣ted and defeated, any man may judge what courage he, or his men, could have, who were all cut to pieces, their Colours taken, and himself upon a little horse very hardly escap'd. After this manner was Monsieur d' Aussun defeated, more out of vanity to do some notable feat, than out of any default of courage or conduct; for in the first place he order'd his Troops so well, that thay all fought, and secondly himself was taken, overthrown to ground, with his Sword bloody in his hand, for his horse was killed under him, and would he have been satisfied with reason, he had never enter'd into dispute with Signior Francisco Bernardin,Dispute be∣twixt Mr. d' Aussun, and Signior Fran∣cisco Bernar∣din. who had perform'd all, both in his person, and conduct, that a brave Leader ought to do. But the King, after the said Seigneur d' Aussun was set at liberty, made them friends; for Signior Francisco had sent him a Challenge for the wrong he had done him, in reporting to the Marquis de Guast, and elsewhere, that he had abandon'd him in time of need: but Monsieur d' Aussun made him an honorable satisfaction, and indeed both the one and the other had very well perform'd their duty, though had Monsieur d' Aussun taken the advice of Signior Francisco, he had not been defeated; neither was it reasonable, that he should throw himself away to no purpose, when he saw it was too late to repair the fault committed in deferring the time of their retreat so long, as at last to be forc'd to do it in the face of an Army. I could give several exemples of it, if it were convenient so to do, where the advice of retreating at the head of an Army, has been as fatal, as it was here, witness Monchaut, where Monsieur le Mareschal de Strozzy lost the Battail, not for want of courage, for he was there desperately wounded; nor through default of conduct, for he had order'd his men for his retreat to Lusignan, as well as any man upon earth could have done. I could also instance le Seigneur Marion de Santa Fiore, who lost me almost all my Cavalry near unto Piance, in attempting the same at the head of an Army.The danger of retreating at the head of of an Army. Many others out of inconsideration have committed the same error, as I have already instanc'd, and I could name several others, which would be too tedious to recount. But, I beseech you, fellow Captains, despise not my coun∣sel, for many brave and prudent Leaders having lost themselves after this manner, no good is to be expected. A man is only to attempt what he can, and ought to do, and not attaque his Enemy, and offer to retreat in the face of an Army stronger than himself. The Marquis de Guast,Carignan fortiied. at the same instant, with all his Camp, passed the Bridge, and put himself into Carignan, where he designed a Fort enclosing the Bourg within it, which he was not long in doing, forasmuch as the ditches that enclosed the said Bourg and the City, very much contributed to the work; and he there left two thou∣sand Spanish, and as many German Foot, with Signior Pedro de Colonne to command them: wherein, in truth, he made a very prudent choice, and deceived none in the good opinion they had conceiv'd of him; for he was a man of great judgment and valour: having then left Caesar de Naples at Carmagnolle with some Ensigns of Italians (the number of which I have forgot) and two thousand Germans;The Chara∣cter of Pedro de Colonne. and at Reconis, four Ensigns of Spaniards, (that is to say, Loys Quichadou, Don Iuan de Guibarra, Mandossa, and Argillere) and his Cavalry at Pingnes, Vinu, and Vigon, he afterwards (having first sent back the remainder of his Camp to Quiers, and the Duke of Savoy to Verseil) reti∣red himself to Milan. Sometime after Monsieur de Termes carryed on an enterprize,A notable en∣terprize car∣ried on by a Merchant. that was never discove∣red to any but to Monsieur Boitieres, and my self, so much as to Monsieur de Tais, though he was our Colonel; and it was thus. There was a Merchant of Barges, a great
friend, and servant to Monsieur de Termes, and good French man, call'd Granchin, who, coming from Barges to Savillan, was taken by some Light horse belonging to Count Pedro d' Apporte, Governor of Fossan, and being a prisoner was sometimes threat∣ned to be hang'd; and sometimes promised to be put to ransom, with so great uncer∣tainty, that the poor man for seven or eight days together was in despair of his life: but in the end he bethought himself to send word to the Count, that if he would be pleased to give him leave to talk with him, he would propound things that should be both for his advantage and his honor. The Count thereupon sent for him, where, be∣ing come, Granuchin told him, that it should only stick at himself if he were not Lord of Barges, for that it was in his power to deliver up the Castle into his hands, the City not being strong at all. The Count greedy to listen to this enterprize, presently clos'd with him about it, agreeing and concluding, that Granuchin should deliver up his wife and his son in Hostage; and the said Granuchin proposed the manner of it to be thus; saying, that he was very intimate with the Captain of the Castle, and that the provisions that were put into it ever passed thorough his hands, and that moreover he had a share in some little Traffick they had betwixt them, to wit, betwixt the said Captain of the Ca∣stle, call'd la Mothe, and himself; and that the Scotch man, who kept the Keys of the Castle was his very intimate friend, whom he also evermore had caused to get something amongst them, and whom he was certain he could make firm to his purpose; not the Captain de la Mothe nevertheless; but that he was sick of a Quartan Ague, that held him fifteen or twenty hours together; so that he almost continually kept his bed; and that so soon as he should be at liberty, he would go and complain to Monsieur de Termes of two men that were reputed Imperialists, who had told him, and given the Enemy intelligence of his Journey, and that after having left his wife and his son in hostage, he would go and demand justice of Monsieur de Boitieres, by the mediation of Monsieur de Termes, and then would go to Barges to the Castle, and that upon a Sun∣day morning he would cause fifteen or twenty Soldiers that la Mothe had there, to go out (leaving only the Scotch man, the Butler, and the Cook within) to take those who had told him, as they should be at the first Mass in the morning, and in the mean time the Count should cause forty Soldiers to march, who before day should place themselves in ambush in a little Copse about an Harquebuze shot distant from the Postern Gate, and that so soon as it should be time for them to come, he would set a white Flag over the said Postern. Now there was a Priest of Barges, who being banish'd thence, lived at Fos∣san, that was a great friend to Granuchin, and had labour'd very much for his delive∣rance, and he also was call'd into the Council, where amongst them it was conclu∣ded, that the said Priest on a night appointed, should come to a little wood the half way betwixt Barges and Fossan, where he was to whistle, to give notice that he was there, and that if he had corrupted the Scot, he should bring him along with him, to resolve amongst themselves how the business should be further carried on. Things being thus concluded, Granuchin writ a Letter to Monsieur de Ter∣mes, wherein he intreated him to procure for him a safe-conduct from Monsieur de Boitieres, that his Wife and his Son might come to Fossan, there to remain pledges for him, for he had prevail'd so far by the intercession of certain of his friends, that the Count was at last content to dismiss him upon a ransom of six hundred Crowns; but that if he was not abroad, and at liberty, no man would buy his goods, out of which he was to raise that sum; which safe-conduct if he should obtain in his behalf, he desir'd he would please to deliver it to a friend of his he nam'd in Savillan, to whom he also had writ to desire him to make what hast he could to send his Wife and Son to the said Fossan. All this being accordingly procur'd, and done, and the said Granuchin set at liberty, he forthwith came to Savillan to find out Monsieur de Termes, to whom he gave an ac∣count of the whole business. Whereupon Monsieur de Termes (who already began to feel himself falling sick of a disase that commonly held him fourteen or fifteen days at a time) sent for me, to whom he communicated the enterprize, where it was by us all three concluded, that Granuchin should go talk with Monsieur de Boitieres, and in∣form him at large of the whole design. To which purpose Monsieur de Termes gave him a Letter to Monsieur de Boitieres, who, having received and read it, made no great matter of the business, only writing back to Monsieur de Termes, that if he knew Gra∣nuchin to be a man fit to be trusted, he might do as he thought fit: by which slight an∣swer Monsieur de Termes enter'd into an opinion, that Monsieur de Boitieres would be glad he should receive some bassle, or affront, (and indeed he did not much love him)
which made him once in mind to break off the design, and to meddle no more in it: but seeing the said Granuchin almost in despair to think, that the business should not go for∣ward, and I being more concern'd than he, that such an opportunity of trapping the Enemy should be lost, earnestly entreated Monsieur de Termes to leave the whole business to my care; which he made great difficulty to grant, ever fearing, that should any thing happen amiss, Monsieur de Boitieres would do him a courtesie to the King, as the custom is: for when any one bears a man a grudge, he is glad when he commits any oversight, that the Master may have occasion to be offended, and to remove him from his command; condemning him for that he would not be govern'd by the wise: but in the end with much importunity, he was content to refer the management of the business wholly to my discretion. The said Granuchin departed then to go to Barges, where he made discovery of all to Captain la Mothe and the Scotch man, to whom Monsieur de Termes writ also, and the night appointed being come, they both went out, and alone (for Granuchin was very well acquainted with the way) and came to the wood, where they found the Priest; with whom they agreed, first that that the said Count should acquit Granuchin of his ran∣som, giving him as much as the Soldiers, that took him, had taken from him, and moreover appoint him an Apartment in the Castle with the Captain he should put into it, with a certain Pension for his support; and secondly that he should marry the Scotch man to an Inheretrix there was in Barges, and also find out some handsom employment for him, forasmuch as he was never after to return either into Scotland, or into France. All which was agreed and concluded betwixt them, and moreover that the Priest should bring all these Articles sign'd and seal'd with the Arms of the said Count to a Sum∣mer house in the fields belonging to the Brother of the said Priest, to which he sometimes repair'd a nights; and that the Sunday following the business should be put in execution. Having accordingly received all these obligations, Granuchin returned again to Savillan, where he gave us an account of all, and shew'd us the Bond. Now there was only three days to Sunday, wherefore we made him presently to return, having first agreed that he should bring along with him two Guides of the very best he could find out; not that he should however discover any thing to them of the business, but only shew them some counterfeit Letters, wherein mention should be made of some Wine he had bought for me. The Guides came accordingly by Saturday noon to Savillan, when, seeing them come, I took Captain Favas my Lieutenant apart, and privately in my chamber commu∣nicated to him the whole design, telling him withal, that I had made choice of him for the execution of it; which he made no scruple to undertake (for he had mettle enough) and it was agreed that he should tye the Guides together, and that they were by no means to enter into any high way, or Road: but to march cross the fields. We had much ado to persuade the Guides to this, forasmuch as they were to pass three or four Rivers, and there was Snow and Ice all along, so that we were above three hours disputing this way: but in the end the two Guides were content, to each of which I gave ten Crowns, and moreover a very good Supper. We were of advice, that we should not take many men, that less notice might be taken; and at that time we were making a Rampire at that Gate towards Fossan, where, in order to that work, we had broken down a little part of the wall, and made a Bridge over the Graffe, over which to bring in earth from without. By this breach I put out Captain Favas, and with him four and thirty more only, and so soon as we were without, we tyed the Guides for being lost, and so he set forwards. Now the Enemies assigna∣tion, and ours was at the same hour; so that Granuchin had directed them the way on the right hand to come to this Copse, and ours he had ordered to march on the left hand, near to the walls of the City; who, so soon as they were come to the Postern, there found Granuchin and the Scot ready to receive them, it being the hour that the Scotch man us'd to stand Centinel over the said Postern, so that they were never discover'd, and he disposed them into a Cellar of the Castle, where he had prepar'd a Charcoal fire, with some Bread and Wine. In the mean time the day began to break, and as the Bell rung to low Mass in the Town, the Scot, and Granuchin commanded all the Soldiers in the Castle to go take these two men (that Granuchin had accused to have betrayed him) at Mass, so that there remain'd no more in the Castle, but only la Mothe himself, his va∣let de Chambre, who also trayl'd a Pike, the Butler, the Cook, the Scotch man and Granu∣chin. The Scot then pull'd up the Bridge, and call'd out Captain Favas, making him to skulk behind certain Bavins in the base Court, kneeling upon one knee, which being done,
they went to set up the white Flag upon the Postern; soon after the Piest arriv'd, and with him about forty Soldiers, who were no sooner entred in, but the Scotch man shut the Gate, and at the same instant Captain Favas and his Company slew upon them, who made some little resistance, insomuch that seven or eight of them were slain; but Granuchin sav'd the Priest, and would not endure he should have the least injury offe∣red to him. In the mean time a Country fellow, as he was coming from a little house below the Castle, saw the Spanish Soldiers with their red crosses enter in at the Postern Gate, and thereupon ran down into the Town to give the Alarm, and to tell them that the Castle was betray'd; at which news, the Soldiers who had been sent out to take the two men at Mass, would have return'd into the Castle: but ours shot at them, though so high as not to hit them, taking upon them to be enemies, and crying out Imperi, Imperi, Savoy, Savoy, which was the reason that the Soldiers sled away to Pignerol car∣rying news to Monsieur de Boitieres, that Granuchin had betrayed the Castle, and that the Enemy was within it. Monsieur de Boitieres thereupon in a very geat fury, dispatch∣ed away a Courrier to Monsieur de Termes, who lay sick in his bed, and almost di∣stracted at the disaster, often crying out, Ah Monsieur Montlu you have ruin'd me, would to God I had never hearkened to you: and in this error we continued till the Wednesday following. In the mean time the Soldiers who had enter'd were clap'd up in the Cellar, my Soldiers taking the Red Crosses, and moreover setting up a white Flag with a Red Cross upon a Tower of the Castle, and crying out nothing but Imperi, Imperi. Things being in this posture, Granuchin immediately made the Priest to subscribe a Letter, wherein he had writ to the Count, that he should come, and take possession of the Town and Castle, for that Granuchin had kept his word with him, and then sent for a Labourer, who was tenant to the Brother of the said Priest, to whom he caused the Letter to be given by the Priest himself, saying, and swearing to him, that if he made any kind of Sign, either in giving the Letter, or otherwise, that he would pre∣sently kill him; making him moreover deliver several things to the messenger by word of mouth; The fellow went away, and upon a mae of his own made all the hast he could to Fossan, it being but twelve miles only, immediately upon whose coming the Count resolv'd that night to send away a Corporal of his call'd Ianin, with five and twenty of the bravest men of all his Company, who about break of day arriv'd at Bar∣ges. So soon as he came to the Castle, Granuchin, the Priest, and the Scot were ready to let him in at the foresaid Postern, whilst Captain Favas went to plant himself be∣hind the Bavins as before, although Granuchin was something long in opening the Gate, both because he would clearly see, and observe whether the Priest made any sign, and also for that he had a mind those of the City should see them enter; when so soon as it was broad day, he opened the Postern, telling them that the Soldiers who came in with the Priest were laid to sleep, being tir'd out with the long labour they had sustein'd the day before, and so soon as they were all in, the Scot suddainly clap'd to the Gate, and as suddainly Captain Favas start up, and fell upon them, without giving them time, saving a very few, to give fire to their Harquebuzes, as ours did, who had them all ready; nevertheless they defended themselves with their Swords, so that six of mine were hurt, and fifteen or sixteen of this Company were slain upon the place, of which Corporal Ianin was one (which was a very great misfortune to us) together with a Brother of his, the rest were led into the Cellar ty'd two and two together, for there were already more prisoners in the Castle, than Soldiers of our own. Now this fight continuing longer than the former, the Enemy in fighting stll cry'd out Imperi, and ours France; insomuch that their cries reach'd down into the City, and especially the rattle of the Harquebuze shot, so that to avoid being so soon discove∣red, their design being to Train the Count thither (for to that end tended all the Farce) they all got upon the walls of the Castle, and from thence cryed out Imperi and Savoy, having on their red crosses, as I said before. Now the Country fellow that had been sent with the Letter to the Count, did not return with those men up to the Castle, but staid at his Master's Country house by the way, wherefore he was again suddainly sent for, and another Letter deliver'd to him by the hands of the Priest to carry to the said Count to Fossan, wherein he gave him to understand, that Corporal Ianin was so wea∣ry he could not write, but that he had given him in charge to render him an account of all, and that he was laid down to sleep. So soon as the Count had read this Letter, he put on a resolution to go, not the next day which was Tuesday, but the Wednesday fol∣lowing (when God intends to punish us, he deprives us of our understandings, as it
happened here in the case of this Gentleman.) The Count in the first place was reputed one of the most circumspect (and as wise as valiant) Leaders they had in their whole Army, which notwithstanding he suffered himself to be gull'd by two Letters from this Prist, especially the last, which he ought by no means to have relyed upon; nor to have given credit to any thing, without having first seen something under his Corporal's own hand, and should have consider'd whether or no it were a plausible excuse, to say, that the said Corporal was laid down to sleep. But we are all blind when we have once set our hearts upon any thing of moment. Believe me, Gentlemen, you that are great un∣dertakers of Enterprizes, you ought maturely to consider all things, and weigh every the least circumstance, for if you be subtle, your Enemy may be as crafty as you. A Trom∣peur trompeur et demy, says the Proverb, Harm watch harm catch, And The cunning' stsnap may meet with his match. But that which most of all deceived the Count was, that the Tuesday those of the Town, who thought themselves to be become Imperialists, and yet in some doubt by reason of the various cries they had heard during the fight, had sent five or six women to the Castle under colour of selling Cakes, Apples, and Ches∣nuts, to see if they could discover any thing of Treason (for all those that remain'd in the Town had already taken the Red Cross;) whom so soon as our people saw coming up the Hill, they presently suspected their business, and resolving to set a good face on the matter, went to let down the little draw bridge to let them in. My Soldiers then fell to walking up and down the base Court with their red crosses, all saving three or four that spake very good Spanish, who fell to talk with the Women, and bought some of their Wares, taking upon them to be Spaniards, insomuch that they afterwards re∣turning to the Town, assur'd the Inhabitants that there was no deceit in the business: and moreover brought a Letter which la Mothe writ to a friend in the Town, wherein he entreated him to go to Monsieur de Botieres, and to tell him, that he had never consented to Granuchin's treachery; which Letter he delivered to one of the Women, knowing very well, that the party to whom it was directed, was not there to be found; but would be one of the first to run away, as being a very good French man: but their de∣sign was, that the Letter should fall into the hands of those of the Imperial party, as ac∣cordingly it did. As the Count was coming on Wednesday morning, our people in the Castle disco∣ver'd him marching along the plain, and the people of the Town went to meet him without the Gate, where being come, he ask'd them if it were certainly true, that the Castle was in his hands, to which they made answer, that they believed it so to be: but that at the entrance of his men the first time, there were a great many Harquebuzes shot off within, and a very great noise was made: and that on the Munday morning, when the others entred, they likewise heard a very great noise, that continued longer than the former, and that they once thought they heard them cry one while France, and another Imperi and Duco: but that notwithstanding they had yesterday sent their Wives into the Castle with Fruit, Bunns and Chesnuts, whom they had permitted to enter, where they saw all the Soldiers with red crosses. The Count hearing this, com∣manded his Liesutenant to alight, and to refresh his horses and men, bidding those of the Town speedily get something ready for him to eat; for so soon as he had taken or∣der in the Castle, he would come down to dinner, after which he would take their Oath of Fidelity, and so return back again to Fossan. Now you must know it is a very steep and uneasie ascent from the Town to the Castle, by reason whereof the Count alighted, and walk'd it up on foot, accompanied with a Nephew of his, another Gentleman and his Trum∣pet. So soon as he came to the end of the Bridge, which was let down, and the Gate shut; but the Wicket left open, so that a man might easily pass, and lead his horse after him; Granuchin and the Priest being above in the window, saluting him, desir'd him to enter; to which nevertheless he made answer, that he would advance no further, till he had first spoken with Corporal Ianin; seeing then that he refused to enter, Granuchin in his hearing said to the Priest (o get him from thence) Pray Father go down, and tell Corpo∣ral Janin that my Lord is at the Gate, where he stays to speak with him, and at the same time himself also departed from the window, pretending to go down; whereupon Captain Favas and his Soldiers ran to open the Gate, which was only bolted, and all on a suddain leap'd upon the Bridge. Seeing this, the Count who was one of the most a∣ctive men of all Italy, and who held his horse by the bridle (the best one of them, that ever that Country bred, and which I afterwards gave to Monsieur de Tais) vaulted over a little wall which was near to the Bridge, drawing his horse after him, with intent to have leap'd into the Saddle (for there was no horse so tall (provided he could lay his hand upon the Pummel) but he could am'd at all pieces, vault into the Seat) but
he was prevented by the Bastard of Bazordan, call'd Ianot (yet living, and then of my Company) who by misfortune being he either could not, or would not, get over the wall to lay hands upon him, let fly at him an Harquebuze, which taking the de∣fault of his Arms, went into his belly,Count  Governor of Fossan wounded. piercing thorough his bowels almost to the other side, of which shot he sunk down to the ground. Captain Favas took his Nephew, and another the Trumpet, but the other Gentleman escap'd down the Hill, crying out that the Count was either kill'd or taken; whereupon the Lieutenant, and all his Company skutled to horse in so great a fright, that they never look'd behind them till they came to Fossan. Had it so fallen out that Ianin at the second entry had not been slain, they had not only snap'd the Count, and by degrees all his whole Troop (for they might have compell'd him to have spoke to them, with a dagger at his reins ready to stab him should he make a sign) but moreover might perhaps from hence have spun out some contrivance against Fossan it self; for one Enterprize draws on ano∣ther. These things being done, they in the evening dispatch'd away Captain Milhas (a Gentleman of my Company) to bring me the news, and to relate to me from point to point how all things had passed; together with a Letter from the said Count, wherein he entreated me, seeing he was my prisoner, and that greater advantage was to be made of his life than of his death, to do him the courtesie, as to send him with all speed a Physician, a Chirurgeon, and an Apothecany. Captain Milhas arriv'd just at the time that they open'd the Gates of the City, so that he found me putting on my cloaths, and there related to me the whole business, thereby delivering me from the great anxiety, and trouble wherein from Sunday till Wednesday I had continually re∣main'd; for though I was really concerned for the place, yet was I much more afflicted for the loss of my Lieutenant, and my Soldiers, who were most of them Gentlemen, and all very brave men. Immediately upon the news, I ran to Monsieur de Termes his Lodgings, whom I found sick a bed: but I dare say, that neither he nor I were ever so overjoy'd; for we both very well knew, that had it fallen out otherwise, there were Rods in piss. So soon as I departed from him, I presently sent away a Phi∣sician, a Chirurgeon, and an Apothecary, whom I mounted upon three horses of my own for the more speed; neither did they either stop or stay until they came thither: but it was impossible to save him, for he died about midnight,His death▪ and was brought to Savillan, whom every one had a desire to see, even Monsieur de Termes himself, as sick as he was, and he was very much lamented by all. The next day I sent the Bo∣dy to Fossan, but detein'd the Nephew, and Trumpet with the rest that were taken prisoners at Barges, until they should send me back the Wife, and Son of the said Granuchin, which the next day they did, and I also deliver'd up all the Prisoners. I beseech you, Captains, you who shall see and hear this Relation, to consider whe∣ther or no this was a stratagm for a Merchant; believe me, the oldest Captain would have been puzled, and have had enough to carry it on with so much dexterity, and reso∣lution as he did; wherein although Captain Favas was the performer of it, when it came to execution; nevertheless the Merchant was not only the original contriver, but also a prin∣cipal Actor throughout the whole business, having the heart in order to his revenge, to expose his Wife and Son to the extreamest danger. In reading of which (fellows in Arms) you may learn diligence with temper, and take notice what sleights, and po∣lices were used, and continued for the space of four days together, such as no man either of theirs▪ (or which is more, of our own) could possibly discover, both parties being held equally suspended. The Count for a prudent Cavalier, behav'd him∣self herein with very great levity, especially upon the second Letter; but he repair'd his fault when he refused to enter the Castle, without first seeing his man; though that caution signified nothing as it fell out. Whenever therefore you design an enterprize, weigh every thing, and never go hand over head; and without precipitating your selves, or being too easie of beliefe upon light foundations, judge and consider whether there be any appearance, or likelyhood in the thing; for I have seen more deceived than otherwise, and whatever assurance is given you, or whatever promises may be made, be sure to raise your Counter-battery, and never rely so wholly upon him, who is to carry on the work, but that you have still a reserve to secure your venture, should his faith, or conduct fal. Its not, I confess, well done to condemn him who has the management of an affair, if it do not succeed; for men should always be attempting how ever they speed, and hit or miss 'tis all one, provided there be neither treason nor absurdity in the case. Men must try, and fail; for being we are to conide in men, no one can see into their
hearts: but however go warily to work. I have ever been of opinion (and do think that every good Captain ought to have the same) that it is better to assault a place upon a surprize, where no one is privy to the design, than to have perhaps some Traytor for your Guide; for as much as you are certain there can be no counter-treason against you; and though you fail, you retire with the less danger, for your enemy can have laid no am∣buscados to entrap you. Caesar de Naples being this day at Carmagnolle, had there news brought to him of the Count's disaster and death, at which he was extremely afflicted; and to secure Fssan, would send thither three Companies of Italians, which had formerly been in Garrison there, to wit, that of Blaise de Somme a Neapolitan, that of Baptista a Millanese, and that of Rassanne a Piedmontois, who nevertheless refus'd suddainly to depart (fearing we would fight them by the way) and would not stir till they might have a good and strong Convoy; and the Germans he had with him would not be perswaded to go, by which means he was constrain'd to send to Rconis to the four Spanish Companies which were in Garrison there; that is to say, that of Don Iuan de Guebara Camp-Master, of Louys de Quichado, Aquilbert, and Mendoza, which made it two days before they durst set out to march. In the mean time Monsieur de Termes was advertised by his spy, that the said Italian Companies were to set forth the next morning, to go put themselves into Fossan, and that they were to have two Troops of Horse to conduct them: but he had heard nothing that the Spaniards were to go. The said Seigneur was at this time but newly recovered of his sickness, who the same morning communicated the affair to me, and at the very instant we concluded to draw four hundred Foot out of all our Companies, all pick'd and choice men, to wit, two hundred Harquebusiers, and as many Pikes wearing Corslets. Captain Tilladet (who had lost but two or three of all his Launces) was not yet return'd to Savillan, which was the reason that Monsieur de Termes his Company was not so strong; and on the other side Monsieur de Bellegarde his Lieutenant was gone to his own house, and had taken some few with him, by which means Captain Mons could make but fourscore Horse in all;A design to cut off the succours of Fossan. and the Spy told us, that the Italian Companies were to take the same way by which their Army had march'd when they went to Carignan, which was by the Plain, where we before had fought the Italians. We therefore concluded to take the way of Marennes, and to be there before them; when as we were going out of the Town Mon∣sieur de Cental arriv'd, who came from Cental, having with him fifteen Launces of Seigneur MaurYé, and twenty Harquebusiers on horseback, which hindred us a little, forasmuch as he entreated Monsieur de Termes to give him a little time to bait his hor∣ses, for he was also of necessity to pass the same way we were design'd to march, to go to his Government of Cairas. To whom we made answer, that we would go but very softly before, and stay for him at Marennes: but that he should make hast; for in case we should hear the Enemy was passing by, we could not stay for him. Monsieur de Termes had once a great mind to have gone along with us himself; but we entreated him not to do it, both because he had been so lately sick, and also that the Town being left in a manner naked, should any misfortune happen to us, it would be in great danger to be lost. Being come to Marennes, we there made a halt, staying for Monsieur Cental, where we orderder'd our Battail in this manner, to wit, that the Captains Gabarret and Ba∣ron should lead the two hundred Corslets, and I the two hundred Harquebusiers, with whom I presently took the Vanne, the Corslets following after me, and so march'd out of the Village. Captain Mons also divided his Horse into Troops: but to whom he gave the first I am not able to say, they being all Camrades, but I do believe it was either to Masses, Mousserie, Ydrou, or the younger Tilladet; and when we had march'd a little way, before we would discover our selves to the valley, thorough which the Ene∣my was to pass, we made a stand. I then took a Gentleman along with me call'd la Garde (he being on horseback) and advanc'd a little forward to discover the valley, where presently on the other side in the plain of Babe, (a Castle belonging to the Castellano of Savoy) I discover'd the three Italian Companies, and the Cavalry march∣ing directly towards Fossan. At which I was ready to run mad, cursing Monsieur de Cental, and the hour that ever he came, thinking there had been no more than those I saw on the other side, who were already got a great way before us; when being about to return to tell the rest, that they were already pass'd, and looking down into the valley (for before I had only look'd into the plain on the other side) I discover'd the Spanish Foot shewing them to la Garde (who before saw them no more than I) having almost all of them yellow breeches▪ and moreover saw their Arms glitter against the Sun,
by which we knew they were Corslets. We never dream'd of meeting any more than the three Italian Copanies only, so that had we not by accident made some stay in expecta∣tion of Monsieur Cental, we had met the Spaniards and the Italians together, and do verly beleve had been dfeated, considering what defence the Spaniards made alone. I presently then went and gave the rest of the Captains an account of what I had seen, advising them withal, by no means as yet to discover themselves; for the Spaniards had made a halt, and stood still. I also began to lose sight of the Italians, who march'd directly to Fossan: it was a very great oversight in them to separate themselves as so great a distance from one another; la Garde then return'd, and told me, that Monsieur Cental was coming hard by, bringing a Trooper along with him, whom I made to stay above, keeping always his eye on the Italians, whilst I, with la Garde, went down to number their men, who let fly some Harquebuze shot at me: but I notwithstanding went so near, that I made shift to count them, to betwixt four and five hundred men at the most, and pre∣senly return'd to the top of the Hill, where I saw their Cavalry returning towards them, having left the Italians, who were already a great way off, and clean out of sight. I then sent the Soldier to my Companions to bid them presently march, for the Spaniards began to beat their Drums to return. The Troops of Horse they had were those of the Count de Saint Martin d' Est, Kinsman to the Duke of Ferrara; who himself was not there, but his Lieutenant only, and of Rozalles a Spaniard. Their Companies of Foot were those of Don Iuan de Guibara, Aguillere, and Mendoza, with one half of that of Louys de Gui∣chadou, h with the other half having put himself into the Castle of Reconis. Here Mon∣sieur de Cental and Captain Mns came up to me, they two only, and saw as well as I, that the said Spauiards pu themselves into ile, which we judg'd to be eleven or thirteen in Fle, and in the mean time their Cavalry came up to them. Now they had already discover'd us, although they had hitherto seen no more than five, and I for my part was particularly known, when I went down to discover, by the Ser∣jeant of Mendoza, who had been taken at the defeat of the Italians, and deliver'd three days after; whereupon they plac'd all their Cavalry before, and only twenty or five and twenty Harquebusiers at the head of them, a great Company at the head of their Pikes, and the remainder in the Rear; in which order with Drums beating they began to march. I took my Harbuebusiers which I divided into three Squadrons, the first whereof I gave to Captain Lienard, the second to le Pallu Lieutenant to Monsieur de Carces, who had his two Companies at Savillan, and I my self led the third in the Rear of them, the Cor∣slets following after; where, at the first coming up, I had la Garde killed by my side. The Enemy still held on their march, without making any shew of breaking, firing upon us all the way with very great fury, and we also upon them, so that I was constrain'd to call Captain Lienard to come and join with me, forasmuch as a Squadron of Harque∣busiers was drawn off from their Front,Encounter betwixt the Imperialists and the French. to reinforce their Rear. I likewise call'd up le Pallu, and after this manner they march'd on till they came within sight of the Castle of St. Fré, which was three miles, or more, continually plying us with their Harquebuze shot. I had once almost put them to rout, at the passing over a great ditch, near to a house where was a base Court, where we pursued them so close, that we came to the Sword, whereupon twenty of five and twenty of them leap'd into the base Court, and there some of curs falling in pell-mell amongst them, they were all cut to pieces, whilst in the interim of that execution, the rest got over the ditch: Our Cavalry had thought to have charg'd them, but did not, being kept off by the Harquebuze shot, by which many of their horses were slain, and as for Captain Gabarret and Baron, they committed an error, who, seeing us in the ditch, all shuffled pell-mell together, forsook their horses, and took their Pikes, yet could they not come up in time, which if they had, and that the Corslets could have march'd at the rate the Harquebusiers did, they had there been infallibly de∣feated: but it was not possible, being hindred by the weight of their Arms, so that the Enemy march'd on, still ridding ground, till being come near to a little Bridge of Brick, I▪ left our Harquebusiers still fighting, and gallop'd to our Cavalry, that was in three Bo∣dies, Monsieur de Cental leading his own, which still keeping at distance out of the reach of the shot mach'd sometimes before, and sometimes a little on one side, to whom, coming up to him, I said, Ah Monsieur de Cental Will you not charge? do you not see that the Ene∣my will escape us, if they once ge over that Bridg, and immediately recover the wood of St. Fr? which if they do, we are never more worthy to bear Arms, and for my part I will from this h ur for swear them. Who in a great fury made answer, that it stuck not at him, but that I was to speak to Captain Mons, which I also did, saying to him these words. Hah Cam∣rade! must we this day receive so great a disgrace, and lose so fair an opportunity, because your will not charge? Who thereupon answered, What would you have us do, your cor∣slets
cannot come up to the fight, would you have us fight alone? To which I made answer, swearing for rage, that I had no need of Corslets, wishing they were all at Savillan, since they could not come up to fight; he then said to me, go speak to the foremost Troop, and in the mean time I will advance; I then spurr'd to them, where I began to remon∣strate to Monsieur de Termes his Gentlemen, that it was not above nine or ten days since we had fought with the Italians, and beaten them, and now that we should fight with the Spaniards to obtain greater honor, must they escape from us? Who thereupon with one voice all cryed out, It does not stick at us, It does not stick at us. I then ask'd them if they would promise me to charge so soon as I should have made the Harquebusiers betake them∣selves to their Swords, to run in upon them, which they did assure me they would upon pain of their lives. There was at that time amongst them a Nephew of mine call'd Serillac (who after was Lieutenant to Monsieur de Cyplerre at Parma, and there taken prisoner with him, and since slain at Montepullsianne, and, in truth, amongst these thirty Launces there were the best men that Monsieur de Termes had in all his Troop) to whom I said; Serillac, thou art my Nephew, but if thou dbst not charge in the first man amongst them, I benceforth disclaim thee, and thou shalt no more be any Kinsman of mine; who immedi∣ately return'd me answer, You shall presently see, Uncle, whether I will or no. Which said he clap'd down his Beaver, as also did all the rest, to charge. I then cryed out to them to stay a little, till I first got up to my men, and thereupon ran to my Harquebusiers, where being come, I told them, that it was now no longer time to shoot, but that we must fall on to the Sword. Captains, my Camrades, whenever you shall happen to be at such a feast as this, press your followers, speak first to one, and then to another, bestir your selves, and doubt not but by this means you will render them valiant throughout, if they but half so before. They all on a suddain clap'd hands to their Swords, when so soon as Captain Mons, who was a little before, and Monsieur de Cental, who was on one side, saw the first Troop shut down their Beavers, and saw me run to the Harquebusiers, and in an instant their Swords in their hands, they knew very well that I had met with Lads of mettle, and began to draw near. I for my part lighted from my horse, taking a Halbert in my hand (which was my usual weapon in fight) and all of us ran headlong to throw our selves in amongst the Enemy. Serillac was as good as his word, for he charg'd in the first, as they all confess'd, where his horse was kill'd at the head of the Enemies Harquebusiers, and our own Horse, with seven Harquebuze shot. Tilladet, Lavit, Ydrou, Montselier, les Mau∣rens, and les Masses, all Gascon Gentlemen of the same Troop, and companions of the said Serillac, charg'd the Horse thorough and thorough, whom they overturn'd upon the head of their own Foot. Monsieur de Cental also charg'd in the Flank, quite thorough both Horse and Foot,The Imperi∣alists over∣thrown. Captain Mons charg'd likewise on the other side, so that they were all overthown, and routed both Horse and Foot. And there we began to lay about us, above fourscore or an hundred men being left dead upon the place. Rozalles, Captain to one of the two Troops of Light horse, with four others got away, as also did Don Iuan de Guibara upon a Tuk with his Page only, who happened to be on horseback, being shot thorough the hand, of which he ever after remain'd lame, and I do believe is yet living. This is the true relation of this fight, as it pass'd, there being several at this day alive, who were present at it, and I desire no other testimony to prove whether I have fail'd in one tittle of the truth. Monsieur de Cental carried away prisoner with him the Lieutenant of the Count St. Martin, he having been taken by some of his people, together with some others both of Horse and Foot, and with us went Captain Aguillere, and Mendoza the Lieutenant of Rozalles, he that carried the Cornette, and he that carried that of the Count Saint Martin, (though they had not their Colours with them) and all the rest both of Horse and Foot to Savillan. In ten days were all these three Actions performed, to wit, the rout of the Italians, the death of Count Pedro d' Apporte at Barges, and this defeat of the Spaniards. I must needs therefore say, for what concerns my self, that if ever God accom∣panied the fortune of a man,The good for∣tune of Mr. de Monluc. he went along with mine; and do stedfastly believe, that had he not put to his Almighty Arm, we had been overcome. But he sent us Cental, who de∣ferr'd the time in very good sason for us, which had it fallen out otherwise, a more fuious combat had never been heard of then that had been▪ for if they were brave and hardy, we were nothing indebted to them. Ours was a marvellous spritely little Body, and (that I may leave nothing imperfect) I would not that any one should imagine, that the Corslets came not up to the fight for want of courage, nothing hindering them from advancing so fast as need requir'd, but the weight of their Arms: for we had scarce made an end, when they arriv'd upon the place of Battel, cursing their arms, that had hindred them from having part of the feast. Now these three Companies and a half of Spaniards thus defeated, the three that went to
thoe who were retir'd with the Duke of Savoy, and the Marquis de Gust, and the four thousand German and Spanish Foot, which were lft in Carignan, had altogether very much weakened the Enemies Camp; so that after some time Monsieur de Boitieres resolv'd (having Monsieur de Tais and de St. Iulien with him) to draw all his Forces in the several Garrisons together, to make a slying Army. To this end he sent me order, with my own Company, the two Companies of Monsieur de Carces, and that of Count Landriano an I∣lian, to meet him at Pignerol. He also sent to Monsieur de Termes, that he should only keep two Companies with him at Savillan, namely those of Gabarret, and Baron; where also the Qarters were so good, that the forenamed Gentlemen were very glad, that Mon∣sieur de Termes invited them to stay with him. I will write a word or two to serve for a caution to my fellow Captains, and to shew them, that they ought to consider all the in∣conveniences that may happen to them, and to provide remedies against every accident that may befall. Monsieur de Termes had a mind to perform an exploit at Castillholle in the Marqui∣sate of Salzzo, upon three Ensigns of the Enemies, that had put themselves into three Palaces, one close by another, having Bastion'd the Streets in such manner, that they could go from one Palace to another, within their own lines, and his design was to kill two Birds with one stone; that is, to accompany me as far as Castillholle, and with two field pieces he intended to carry along with him to force the Palaces, and that from thence I should go on to Pignerol, and he (taking the two Companies of Baron and Nicholas to guard the Artillery) would return to Savillan. Now all the Enemies Forces were quater'd at Pinguons, Vimus, and Vigon, and in two or three adjacent places; so that I had no great stomach to this enterprize, forasmuch as the Enemies strength lying so near to the said Ca∣stillholle, they might in seven or eight hours time have intelligence of any thing should there be attempted, and consequently in as much more be upon us: But Monsieur de Terms, who had set his heart upon this design, would hear no argument of mine to the contrary, especially being that not four months before Monsieur de Aussun and St. Iulian had at the same place defeated two Companies, and taken their Captains, where I was present with them, they having borrowed me of Monsieur de Boitieres, and my Compa∣ny also: but I represented to him, that these were the same Captains, that having paid their ransoms, were newly come out of prison, and who having seen the rror whereby they had lost themselves before, had doubtless now provided against such surprizes. For after a man has once been trapp'd in a place, he must have a damnable thick skull, if, when he shall be again expos'd to the same danger, he look not better about him than before, and become wise at his own cost. And I have heard great Captains say, that it is convenient to be beaten sometimes, because a man becomes more circumspect by his disasters: but I am very glad that I never was, and had rather learn to be wise at another man expence than my own. All my remonstrances could do no good, so that in the beginning of the night we began to march, and an hour before day arrived at the place. Monsieur de Termes then planted his Canon within an hundred paces of one of the Palaces, which le Baron and Nicolas imme∣diately undertook to guard, and Captain Pallu, the Count de Landriano and my self were to fight. I won one of the Palaces, not that which was batter'd by the Artillery, but by break∣ing thorough from house to house, till at last I had broke a hole into the Palace it self, thorough which nevrheless they kept me from entring (besides I very well re∣membred the Hole where I had been so well cudgell'd, in the voyage to Nples) which made me set fire to a little house adjoyning to the said Palace. They then retir'd into one of the others, the fight having continued until two of the clock in the afternoon, with∣out any other laying to a helping hand, save our four Companies only. I there lost fifteen or sixteen of my men, Monsieur de Carces as many of his▪ and the Count de Landriano esca∣ped not scot-free. We had notwithstanding compell'd them to quit the other, which the Artillery had batter'd, and to retreat to the third; where, being we were to unwall two Gates, som were of opinion not to make any further attempt, but that Monsieur de Ter∣mes should return with all speed to Savillan, and I, with my four Companies to take my way directly to Pignerol, which (to my great grief) was concluded; for I would either have made an end, or, with the remainder of my men, have perish'd in the attempt. And it is a vice that has ever been observ'd in me, that I have always been too obstinate in fight: but let them all say what they will, I have ever done better than worse. But Monsieur de Termes consented to give over, fearing he might lose some Captain, for which he might afterwards receive a rebuke, the King's Lieutenant having no knowledge of the enterprize; and I march'd on straight to Barges. When I came to Borg the night fell upon me, and I had yet three long miles of plain to march over, before I could come to Caours, where I inten∣ded
to bait, and to take three or four hours repose; when being entred into the Plan, I sent Captain Lienard (who was with me) to go speak with Monsieur de Boitieres, to know what kind of way it was to Cabours (for I had never been in that Country before) who brought me word that it was all plain. I then made a halt, and fell to discourse with Cap∣tain Lienard, that we had set out from Savillan the night before, that in seven or eigh hours Caesar de Naples might have intelligence of our motion, and that two days before it had been known all over Savillan, that I was to go  Pignerol▪ of which Caesar de Naples might have notice, and it was not above six or seven miles to Vigon, where the greatest part of their Cavalry lay, wherefore we could not possibily pass over this plain without running a manifest danger, which (especially in the night, where there is no shame) we might without any dishonor avoid. Captain Lienard confess'd that all this might be, but that nevertheless I had no other way to go, unless I would go three or four miles about, and pass the streight near to the source, where he thought we should however meet with wa∣ter. Upon this my Guides overhearing our discourse, told me that there was water up to the middle of the thigh, and there was not a man amongst them, but was of a contrary opinion to mine: but I, contrary to the opinion of all, turn'd on the left hand, and took the way di∣rectly towards the Mountain, inding the water, by good forune, but knee deep, so that we recover'd the side of the Mountain leading straight to Barges, whither we did not however expect to come till break of day; which we did without sleeping from the day we set out: For the evening we slept not, at night we began to march, all day long w fought at the Palaces, and the night after we march'd to Barges, which was eight and forty hours. I have done the like without sleeping five or six times in my life, and six and thiry several times. You must (fellow Soldiers) enure your selves betimes to labour and hardship, with∣out sleeping, or eating, to the end, that in time of need, you may support all sorts of toyl, and travel with patience. Now you must know, that my suspition was not vain, for Caesar de Nples, having had intelligence of our design, parted from Carmagnolle with five hundred Harquebusiers on horseback, drawing out of Vinus and Vigon five hundred Horse, with which he came, and laid an Ambuscado in the middle of the plain, about a Cross-bow shot on the one side of my way, where he lay all night; so that when I came to Barges, a little after Sun-rise, as I was just laid down to sleep, I heard the Arrillery of Cabours, which shot at them as they went off; for they were of necssity to pass by the Suburb of the said Cabours. I was not certainly enfon'd of this Ambusado, till three days after my coming to Pignerol. that Monsieur de Boitieres put himself into the field, at which time we went directly to Vigon, to force the Cavalry that were there, for Foot they had none at all; where we gain'd the houses adjiing to the Gate: but being we could not enter the Town, our Camp retrea∣ted a mile off, and in the night the Cavalry secretly abandoned the place; insomuch that at brak of day, when we had thought to have gone on to the assault (Monsieur de Boitie∣res, having sent for two pieces of Canon from Pignerol) we found no body there, and the place totally empty. The same also did those of Vinus, Pingues, and the other places, with∣drawing themselves to Carmagnolle. I thought fit to discourse this affair, and commit this passage to writing to rouse up our Cap∣tians spirits, that they may look about them, and whenever they shall sind themslves enga∣ged upon the same account, may carefully compute, what time the Enemy may have where∣in to be advertis'd of their motion, and also what time is reuir'd wherein to make their retreat. Whereupon if you shall find, that your Enemy has time enough to take you upon your march, and that you are not strong enough to fight them, never scruple to turn out of your way, for the  of going three or four leagues about; for it is better to be wary, than to be kill'd or taken. You must not only have your eye at watch, but your under∣standing also. 'Tis under your vigilance and care, that your Soldiers repose, consider there∣fore every thing that may happen, always measuring the time, and taking things at the worst, and despise not your Emy▪ If you have the art, with chearful and srolick expressi∣ons to ajol and rouse up the Soldier, by times representing to him the danger of a little delay, you may make them do what you list, and without giving them leisure to sleep, con∣vey thm and your selves into a place of safety, without engaging your honor, as several, whom I have known taken a bed a la Françise (as the saying is) have done.The nature of he French. Our Nation cannot suffer long, as the Spaniard and German can; yet is not the fault in the air of France; nor in the nature of the people, but in the Chief. I am a French man, impatient (they say) and moreover a Gascon, who exced the other French in choler and impatience, as I think they do in valour; yet have I ever been patient of all sors of toyl and suffering, as much as any other could be, and have known seveal of my time, and others whm I have bred, that have enr'd and hardned themselves to all pain and travel, and believe me (you that
command in arms) if you your selves be such, you will make your Soldirs the same in time. I am sure, had not I done so, I had been kill'd or taken. But let us return to our Subject. The next dy we went to pass the River of Pau, over which we made a Bridge of Wag∣gons for the Foot only, the Horse fording it over at great ase, it being no more than bel∣ly deep: we were all night in passing, and at break of day when they were almost all got over, I with a Company of Harquebusiers went up close to the Town, where I fll to skimishing, having some Horse also with me. Caesar de Naples then immediately put his men in order to quit Carmagnolle, and began to march, retiring towards a River there to retreat to Quiers. Where had it not been that our Cavalry fetch'd a great compass to get clear of the ditches, we had certainly fault, and perhaps defeated them, as (to say the truth) we might have done however, had some been so dispose. I'm sure it stuck not at our Companies; nor at Monsieur de Tais: But Monsieur le President Birague, if he will speak the truth, knows very well where the fought lay, for he was then in the Army with Monsieur de Boitieres, and both heard and saw all they said and did, and knows very well that I with two hundred Harquebusiers pursued them upon their retreat, fiting all the way for above a mile and a half together, and ready to tear my flesh to see how faintly they advanc'd, which shew'd they had no great stomach to fight. 'Tis an ill thing when a Generall is in fear of being beaten, and whoever goes timerously to work will never do any thing to purpose: had there been no greater men in the Com∣pany than my self, without trisling after that manner, I had done as I did by the Spani∣ards, which I defeated but fifteen days before. There were a great many excuses however on all sides, why we did not fight, and not only there, but also throughout all Piedmont, where they spoke of us God knows with what Characters of honor. After the report of this Cowardise (for it can be call'd by no other name) was spread abroad, Monsieur dc Boitires was not very well satisfied with himself: but I shall leave this discourse, and fall upon some other Subject; only this I must say, that the world had after, no great opinion of him; he was ill obey'd, and worse respected: f there was any fault on his part or not, I leave others to judge, and there are enough yet living, that can tell better than I; yet was he a prudent and a good Cavalir: but God makes no body perfect at all points. Three or four days after came Ludovico de Birague, who propos'd an enterprize to Mon∣sieur de Boitieres, which was, that in case he would leave Monsieur de Tais about Bou∣longne (where he was Governor) with seven, or eight Companies of Foot, that then would ngage to take Cassantin, St. Germain, and St. Iago; a thing that, because Monsieur de Boitieres was upon the design of breaking the Bridge at Carignan, he made very great difficulty to consent unto, until the said Bridge should first be broken down: but Mon∣sieur de Termes, being come with his own Company, and the two Companies of the Baron de Nicolas, it was concluded amongst them, that Monsieur de Tais might be spar'd to go with Signior Londiné, with seven Ensigns, being that still there would remain five or six; the three Companies of Monsieur de Dros, which he had again recruited, and seven or eight others of Italians. I do not well remember whether Monsieur de Strozzi was himself yet arriv'd or no, for the last nam'd were his men: but it may suffice, that we made up, what French and Italians, eighteen Ensigns besides the Swisse. It was therefore concluded in the Council, that before they should take in hand the breaking of the Bridge, they should first see how the enterprize of the said Signior Ludovico should succeed▪ which should it miscarry, and that they were defeated, all Piedmont would be in very great danger. But in a few days after news was brought to Monsieur Boitieres, that they had taken St. Ger∣mans and St. Iago, with four or five other little enclos'd Towns. Neither must I forget that Monsieur de Tais stiffly insisted to have had me along with him, insomuch that there arose some dispute about it: But Monsieur de Boitieres protested he would not undertake to break the Bridge unless I was there: Monsieur de Termes, Monsieur d' Aussun, the President Birague, and Signior Francisco Bernardin stood very high on Monsieur Boitieres his side, so that I was constrained to stay, very much against my will, I having a very grt desire to have gone along with Monsieur de Tas, both because he lov'd me, and had as great confidence in me as in any Captain of the Regiment;The enter∣prize of brea∣king the Bridge of ∣rignan. as also that he was a man of exceeding great mettle, and would seek all occasions of fighting: however the foremention'd news being brought, the breaking of the Bridge was conccluded, and after this manner. It was order'd that I with five or six Companies of Gascons, should go fight the hun∣dred Germans, and hundred Spaniards that had every night kept Gaurd at the end of the Bridge, ever since our Army had been at Pingues. To which I made answer, that I would not have so many; for being to pass through narrow ways, so great a number of men would make so very long a Fle, that the sixth part of them could never come up to
fight: and in short, that I would only have an hundred Harquebusiers, and an hundred Corslets, to be equal to the Enemy; not doubting, but, before the Game was done, to make it appear, that our Nation were as good, as either German or Spaniard: but withal that Boguedear, la Pallu, and another Captain (whose name I have forgot) should bring all the rest of the men after, at the distance of three hundred paces, to assist me in case the Enemy should sally out of Carignan, to relieve their own people. Which accordingly was left to my discretion. There was a house on the left hand the Bridge, which it was order'd the Italians (who might be between twelve and fourteen Ensigns) should possess themselves of, to favour me, should the Enemy make a Sally; that Monsieur de Boitieres should advance with all the Cavalry, and the Swisse within half a mile; that Captain Labarda with his Company should advance on the other side of the River, with two pieces of Canon, to make some shot at a little house which was on the Bridge end on our side, where the Enemy kept their Guard, and that Monsieur de Salcede (who but a little before was come over to us) with three or fourscore Country fellows (every one bringing a hatchet along with him) should attempt to break the Bridge.Order for breaking the Bridge. For whom also seven or eight Boats were prepared wherein to convey themselves under the said Bridge, where they were to cut the Posts, not quite tho∣rough, but to the thickness of a mans leg, and that being done, to cut the long beams that supported the Bridge above, which dividing from one another the Pillars would totter and break of themselves; they had moreover certain fire works deliver'd to them, which they were made to believe, being applyed to the Pillars, would in a short time burn them down to the water. Every one then going to execute the orders they had received; I with my two hundred men, chosen out of all the Companies, went full drive directly towards the Bridge, where I could not however so soon arrive, but that the Canon had already made one shot at the little house, had broken into it, and kill'd a German, whom at my coming I found there not quite dead. And although it was night, yet the Moon shone out so clear that we might easily see from the one end to the other, saving that by inervals there fell a mist, which continued sometimes half an hour, and sometimes less, during which we could not see a yards distance from us. Now either frighted at the report of the Canon, or at the noise I made at the house (it being not above an hundred paces distant from the Bridge) the Enemy took their heels, and fled away towards Carignan, after whom I sent some Harquebuze shot: but follow'd no further than the end of the Bridge. At the same time also Monsieur de Salcede, with his Boors and his Boats, arriv'd underneath, who at his first coming presently fastned his artificial fires to the Pillars: but it was only so much time thrown away, and he must of force make the fellows fall to't with their Axes, who having ty'd their Boats fast to the said Pillars, began to lay on at that end where the Swisse were, cutting on straight towards me, who kept the other end of the Bridge towards the Enemy. This fury of the Clowns lasted for four long hours, continually laying on upon the Pil∣lars, insomuch that though they were rank'd four and four together, and of a very great thickness, yet before we had any disturbance, they were all cut to the very place where I was. Monsieur de Salcede ever caused one Company to rest themselves upon the Bank of the River, where he had caus'd a little fire to be made, and from hour to hour made them to relieve one another; during which employment, the Enemy sent out thirty or forty Har∣quebusiers to discover what we were doing, just at a time when the Fog fell, whom I could neither see nor hear for the noise of the axes, till they were got within four Pikes length of me, and let fly amongst us, which having done they immediately retir'd: yet could they not see us by reason of the mist. Messieurs de Termes then and de Monins with three or four horse came up to us to know the meaning of those Harquebuze shots; and sent back to Monsieur de Boitieres to tell him that it was nothing, and that for them we nothing desisted from the work, themselves alone still remaining with me. They had not staid an hour but that the mist again began to fall, and the Enemy as soon return'd upon us, that is to say, six hundred Spaniards chosen men, and six hundred German Pikes, Pedro de Co∣lonne (as I have since understood) having order'd the business thus. That two hundred Harquebusiers again chosen out of the six hundred should charge full drive directly upon us, the other four hundred to march at an hundred paces distance, in the Rear of them, and the six hundred Germans two hundred paces after all. Now I had plac'd the Captains who led the Ensigns after me, against a great ditch bank some two hundred paces behind me, and sometimes Captain Favas my Lieutenant, and sometimes Bogutdemar came to me to see what we did, and again return'd back to their place. On that side of the Bridge towards the Swisse we pdvure had broken down some twenty paces, having begun to cut the beams above, and found that as the Bridge divided it fell down for fifteen or
twenty paces together, which gave us hope that we should make an end of the work. In the mean time Monsieur de Slcede still made the Pillars to be cut over again, yet not quite thorough; but only a little more then before, which was the reason that he had divided his workmen into three parts, wherof one was in the Boats, the other upon the Bridge cutting the Traverse beams, and ten or twelve by the fie ide. As God is pleas'd smetimes to be assisting to men, he this night wrought a real miracle; for in the first place, the two hundred Harquebusiers came up to me, finding me in such a posture, that scarce one Sol∣dier had his match cock'd, for they went by ns ten or a dozen at a time to the Coun∣try mens ire to warm their hands, having two Centinels out a hundred paces from me, upon the way towards the City and not doubting but the Italians on their side would al∣so have the same, for they were a little nearer than I; but it was a little on one side. How they order'd their business I cannot tell, for I had no more than my two Centinels, who came running in to me, and as they came in with the Alarm, the Spaniards also arriv'd crying out Spain, Spain, all the two hundred Harquebusiers firing upon us together. Whereupon Messieur, de Termes and de Moneins being on horseback, and alone, ran unto Monsieur de Boitieres, who had already seen the beginning of the disorder; and note that almost all the the two hundred men I had at the end of the Bridge ran away straight to the Ensigs, and on a suddain the Ensigns also fled, and in like manner at the sam time the Italians who were on our left hand did the same, neither once looking behind them till they came to the head of the Cavalry, where Monsieur de Boitieres himself stood. Our word was St. Pierre, but that did me no good; seeing which, I began to cry out Montluc, Montluc, you cursed cowardly whelps will you forsake me thus? By good fortune I had with me thirty or forty young Gentlemen, who had never a hair on their faces, the hand∣somest and the bravest youth that ever was seen in one little Company, who thought I had run away with the rest: but hearing my voice, returned immediately towards me; with whom, without staying for any more, I charg'd straight to the place, from whence the shot came whizzing by our ars: but to see one another was impossible for the mist that fell, together with the thick smoak that was mixt with it, and in running up to them my men discharg'd all together, crying our France, as they cry'd out Spain; and I dare affirm that we fir'd at less than three Pikes distance,Disorder in the night. by which charge their two hundred Harque∣busiers were overturn'd upon the four hundred, and all of them upon the six hundred Ger∣mans; so that all in a rout, and confusion, they fled full speed towards the City, for they could not discover what we were. I pursu'd them about two hundred paces: but my pursuit was interrupted, by the great noise in our Camp (I never heard the like) you would have sworn they had been all stark string mad, calling and bawling upon one another: yet these great bawlers are none of the greatest fighters. There are a sort of men who bustle up and down, call, command, and keep a great clutter, and in the mean time for one step advance, retire two paces backward: but this hideous noise was the reason, that I could never discover the enemies disorder; neither could they discover ours, by reason of the great outcry they made, at their entrance into the City, which was no other than a Postern near to the Castle, into which three or four men only could march a-breast. Thus then I return'd to the end of the Bridge, where I found Monsieur de Salcede all alone, with ten or a dozen of the Country fellows whose turn it was to rest; for the others that were in the Boats, cut the Ropes, and fled away with the current of the River straight to Montcallier, those on the top that were cuting the travers beams, on that side towards the Swisse leaving their axes and hatchets upon the Bridge, cast themselves into the water, which was there no more than wast deep, they being not yet come to the depth of the River. The Swisse, likewise, who heard this dismal noise, fell to running towards Carmagnolle, having an opinion that both we and all our Camp were in a rout, and taking the two Cannons along with them made all the hast they possibly could to recover Carmagnolle. I sent one of my Soldiers after the run-aways, to enquire news of my Lieutenant Captain Favas, whom he met (having rallyed thirty or forty of his men) returing towards the Bridge, to see what was become of me, believing me to be slain; who presently dispatch'd away to Boguedemar, la Pallu and some other Captains, who had made a halt, rallying some part of their men, whom he caused in all hast to march directly towards the Bridge, telling them, that I had beaten back the Enemy, who there∣upon came at a good rate, to seek me. Captain Favas was the fist that came, all torn and tatter'd like a skare-crow; forasmuch as the Soldiers in a crowd all run over his belly as he thought to have rallyed who found Monsieur de Salcede and me at the end of the Bridge consulting what we were best to do. So soon as he came he gave us an account of his fortune, and that of the rest of his companions, when seeing him so accoutred, we urn'd all into laughter; but the hubub in our Camp continued above a long hour after.
The other Captains being come up to us, we concluded to make an end of breaking down the Bridge▪ or there to lose our lives: whereupon I presently took fify or three∣score Soldiers, and Monsieur de Salced the ten or twelve Country fellows he had left, giv∣ing order to Captain Favas, Boguedemar and la Pall to remain at the end of the Bridge, and to set out Centinels almost as far as the Gates of the City. I believ'd that the Italians notwithstanding the hurly-buly in our Camp, were yet at their post, and therefore com∣manded Captain Favas himself to go and see if they were there or no; who at his return found, that I had caused fifteen or twenty Soldiers to take up the axes the Peasants had left upon the Bridge, who, together with the ten or twelve Country fellows, were cutting the cross beams above; where he told us, that he had been at the house, but that he had found no body there. This news put us a little to a stand, what we were best to do: but nevertheless we stopt not to execute our former resolution; and so soon as the tumult was a little over, came Messieurs de Termes and de Moneins, who brought me a Command from Mr. de Boitie∣res immediately to retire. The said Sieur de Moneins alighted from his horse, for Monsieur de Termes could not for his Gout, and came to me on foot, where he found that since the dis∣order, we had at two cuttings made above thirty paces of the Bridge to fall, and were falling upon the third, each of them being fifteen, or twenty paces long; who thereupon return'd to Monsieur de Boitires to acquaint him how all things had pass'd, Monsieur de Salcede having lost almost all his Peasants: but that our Soldiers had taken their axes, with which they did wonders in cutting, and that all the Captains and Soldiers, Monsieur de Salcede and I were resolved to die rather than depart from thence, till first the Bridge was totally bro∣ken down. Monsieur de Boitieres thereupon sent him back to protest against me for any loss, that might happen contrary to his command, which the said Sieur de Moneins did, telling us moreover, that the said Sieur de Boitieres was already upon his march to return, though he halted within a mile of us; which I conceive he did to the end, that by that means he might draw me off; for he wanted no courage, but he was always in fear to lose. Whoever is of that humor, may perhaps make a shift to save himself, but shall never atchieve any great conquests. Monsieur de Termes had made a stop at the end of the Bridge, so soon as he had heard Monsieur de Boitiere to be upon his march, and return'd no more back with Monsieur de Moneins to carry my answer; but presently sent orders to his Company not to stir from the place where he had left them, and so we cut on all the remainder of the night,The Bridge broken down. 'till within an hour of day, that we march'd towards the little house upon the Hill. Monsieur de Moneins return'd again to us, just at the instant when the last blow was given, and Monsieur de Termes ran to his Company, to cause them to advance a little towards us, that they might favour our retreat, and Monsieur de Mo∣neins ran towards Monsieur de Boitieres, whom he found expecting his return; so that having deprived the Enemy of a great convenience, we retir'd without any manner of impediment at all. I was willing to commit this to writing, not to magnifie my self for any great valour in this Action; but to manifest to all the world, how God has ever been pleased to conduct my fortune. I was neither so great a Fop, nor so fool hardy, but that could I have seen the Enemy, I should have retir'd, and perhaps have run away as fast as the rest, and it had been madness, and not valour to have staid. Neither is there any shame attends a rational fear, when there is great occasion; and I should never have been so senseless, as with thirty or forty Foot only to have stood the fight. Captains by this may take exemple, never to run away, or (to put it into a better phrase) to make a hasty retreat, without first discovering who there is to pursue them, and more∣over having seen them, to attempt all ways of opposition till they shall see there is no good to be done. For after all the means that God has given to men have been employed, and to no purpose; then flight is neither shameful nor unworthy: but believe me (Gen∣tlemen) if you do not employ it all, every one will be ready to say (nay, even those who have run away with you) if he had done this, or if he had done that, the mischief had been prevented, and things had fallen out better than they did; and such a one vapours most and speaks highest, who perhaps was himself the first that ran away. Thus shall the re∣putation of a man of honor (let him be as brave as he will) be brought into dispute with all the world. When there is no more to be done, a man ought not to be obstinate, bt to give way to fortune, which does not always smile. A man is no less worthy of blame for wilfully losing himself, when he may retire, and sees himself at the last extremity, than he who shamefully runs away at the first encounter: Yet the one is more dirty than the other; and this difference there is betwixt them, that the one will make you reputed rash and hair∣brain'd, and the other a Poltron and a Coward. Both extreams are to be avoided. You are never to enter into these ridiculous and senseless resolutions, but when you see your selves fallen into the hands of a barbarous and merciless Enemy; and there indeed you are to fight
it to the last gasp, and sell your skin as dear as you can. One desperate man is worth ten others. But to fly, as they did here, without seeing who pursues you, is infamous and un∣worthy the courage of a man. It's true that the French man is accus'd for one thing, that is, that he runs and fights for company: and so do others as well as they. There are ill work∣men of all Trades. Now after the place was surrendred, I will tell you how I cam to know the Enemies disorder. It was by the people of Carignan themselves, and from Signi∣or Pedro de Colonna's own mouth, who related it to Snsanne, in the presence of Captain Renovard, who conducted him to the King by the command of Monsieur d' Anguien, ac∣cording to his capitulation after the Battel of Serizolles, which you shall have an account of in its proper place. The breaking of this Bridge was not undertaken but upon very mature consideration, and the Enemy soon after began to be very much distress'd, being no relief was to be had from Quiers, as before they had every night duly received. So soon as Monsieur de Tais and Signior Ludovlco de Birago had heard the success of this enterprize of the Bridge, they sent word to Monsieur de Boitieres, that if he would come into those parts where they were, they believ'd they might carry Ivreé. Whereupon both Monsieur de Boitieres and his Council were of opinion, that he ought to go, leaving Garrisons at Pingues, Vinus, Vigon and other places, nearest to Carignan. And as I remember Monsieur d' Aussun, with twelve or fourteen Italian Ensigns, and three or four of ours, his own and some other Troops of Horse (which I have forgot) remain'd behind to command in chief. The Enemy had no Horse at all at Carignan, which was the reason they were kept to short on every side. Monsieur de Boitieres then departed, with Messieurs de Termes, de St. Iulien, President Birague, and the Sieur de Mauré, and went to joyn Forces at St. Iago and St. Germaine, and afterwards sate down before Ivreé, where we did just nothing, because it was not possible to break the Causey that damm'd up the water; which thing could it have been done, we had infallibly taken the place, forasmuch as there was no other defence but the River on that side: but we were constrain'd to let it alone, and to go to besiege St. Mar∣tin, which also we took upon composition, after it had stood out two or three hundred Canon shot; and some other places thereabouts. And as we were returning towards Chi∣vas, in the interim of the Siege of Ivreé, Monsieur de Boitieres had notice given him, that Monsieur d' Aussun was coming to command in his stead. The King, in truth, was highly dissatisfied with him; both for that he had suffer'd Ca∣rignan at so much leisure to be fortified, and also upon other particular accounts. A man must walk very upright to satisfie all the world. The said Sieur de Boitieres was however very angry at it; and 'twas said thereupon withdrew from before Ivreé in despite, which otherwise in the end 'twas thought he might have taken: but I am not of that opinion. So it was that Monsieur d' Anguien arrived, bringing with him for supplies seven Companies of Swiss, commanded by a Colonel call'd le Baron; and, as I remember, it was at this time, that Monsieur de Dros with seven or eight Ensigns, what of Provençals and Italians, came up also, and Monsieur de Boitieres retir'd to his own house in Dauphiné. There is much to do in this world, ad those who are in great command are never without vexation; for if they be two adventurous, and come by the worst, they are look'd upon as fools and mad men; if tedious and slow, they are despised, nay reputed Cowards; the wife therefore are to observe a mean betwixt both. Our Masters in the mean time will not be paid with these discourses, they expect to have their business done, but we must ever be prating, and censuring others, when were we in the same condition we should find we had enough to do. The End of the First Book.
THE COMMENTARIES OF Messire Blaize de Montluc, MARESCHAL of FRANCE. The Second Book. AT the arrival of this brave and generous Prince, which promis'd great successes under his conduct, he being endu'd with an in∣finite number of shining qualities, as being gentle, affable, va∣liant, wise and liberal; all the French and all those who bore arms in our favour, did very much rejoyce, and particularly I, because he had a kindness for me, and was pleased to set a higher esteem upon me than I could any way deserve. Afer he had taken a view of all the Forces,Mr. d' Angui∣en the Kings Lieutenant in Pidmont. Magazines and Places that we held, and that he had taken order for all things after the bst manner he could, about the beginning of March he dispatch'd me away to the King, to give his Majesty an account how affairs stood, and withal to acquaint him, that the Marquis de Guast was raising a very great Army,Monsieur de by Montluc sent Monsieur d' Anguien to the King. to whom new succours of Germans were also sent, and moreover that the Prince of Salerna was also coming from Naples with six or seven thousand Itali∣ans under his command. It was at the time when the Emperor and the King of Eng∣land were agreed, and combin'd together joinly to invade the Kingdom of France, which they had also divided betwixt them. I had waited at Court near upon three weeks for my dispatch,1544. having already acquitted my self of my Commission, which was in sum only to demand some succours of the King, and to obtain leave to fight a Battel. And about the end of the said Month came Letters also to the King from Monsieur d' Anguien, wherein he gave him notice that seven thousand Germans were already arriv'd at Millan, of the best of those the Emperor had had before Landreci, where there were seven Regiments of them; but being he could not at that time fight with the King, he com∣manded the seven Colonels to choose each a thousand out of their respective Regiments, ordering them to leave their Lieutenants to get their Regiments ready, and so sent them into Italy to joyn with the Marquis de Guast. Wherefore the said Monsieur d' An∣guien humbly besought his Majesty to send me speedily away to him, and also reque∣sted him, that he would please to do something for me, as a reward for my former services,The Sieur de Montluc made a Gentleman Waiter. and an encouragement to more for the time to come. Upon which Letter his Mjesty was plesed to confer upon me the Office of a Gentleman Waiter (which in those times was no ordinary favour; nor so cheap as now a days) and made me to wait upon him at Dinner, commanding me in the afternoon to mke my self ready to return into Piedmont, which I accordingly did. About two of the Clock Monsieur de Anneba sent for me to come to the King, who was already entred into the Council, where there was assisting Monsieur de St. Pol the Admiral, Monsieur le Grand Escuyer, Gallio, Mon∣sieur de Boissy (since grand Escuyer) and two or three others, whom I have forgot, to∣gether with the Daphin who stood behind the Kings Chair: and none of them were set, but the King himself, Monsieur de St. Pol, who sate hard by him, and the Admi∣ral on the other side of the Table over against the sad Sieur de St. Pol.
So soon as I came into the Chamber, the King said to me, Montluc, I would have you return into Piedmont to carry my determination, and that of my Council to Monsieur d' Anguien,, and will that you hear the difficulties we make of giving him leave to fight a Battel according to his desire, and thereupon commanded Monsieur de St. Pol to speak. The said Monsieur de St. Pol then began to lay open the enterprize of the Emperor, and the King of England, who within six or seven weeks were determin'd to enter into the King∣dom, the one on the one side and the other on the other; so that should Monsieur d' Anguien lose the Battel, the whole Kingdom would be in danger to be lst: for as much as all the Kings hopes (for what concerned his Foot) resided in the Regiments he had in Piedmont, for that in France there were no other but what were now Legionary Soldiers, and that therefore it was much better, and more safe to preserve the Kingdom than Pied∣mant, concerning which they were to be on the defensive part, and by no means to hazzard a Battel, the loss whereof would not only lose Piedmon; but moreover give the Enemy footing on that side of the Kingdom. The Admiral said the same, and all the rest, every one arguing according to his own fancy. I twitter'd to speak, and offering to interrupt Monsiur de Galliot as he was delivering his opinion, Monsieur de St. Pol made a sign to me with his hand, saying not too fast, not too fast, which made me hold my peace, and I saw the King laugh. Monsieur le Dauphin said nothing, I believe it is not the custom, though the King would have him present, that he might learn; for be∣fore Princes there are evermore very eloquent debates, but not always the soundest determi∣nations; for they never speak but by halves, and always sooth their Masters humor, for which reason I should make a very scurvy Courtier; for I must ever speak as I think. The King then said these words to me, Montluc, have you heard the Reasons for which I cannot give Monsieur d' Anguien leave to fight? to which I made answer, that I had both heard and weigh'd them very well; but that if his Majesty would please to give me leave to deliver my opinion, I would very gladly do it: not that nevertheless for that his Majesty should any ways alter what had already been determin'd in his Councl. His Majesty then told me that he would permit me so to do, and that I might freely say whatsoever I would. Where∣upon I began after this manner. I remember it as well as it had been but three days ago; God has given me a very great memory in these kind of things, for which I render him hearty thanks; for it is a great contentment to me now that I have nothing else to do, to recollect my former fortunes, and to call to mind the former passages of my life, to set them truly down without any manner of addition; for be they good or bad you shall have them as they are. SIR, I Think my self exceedingly happy, as well that you are pleased I shall deliver my poor opinion upon a subject that has already been debated in your Majesties Council,The Sieur de Montluc's speech to the King to ob∣tain leave to fight a Battel. as also that I am to speak to a Warlike King; for both before your Majesty was call'd to this great charge, which God has conferr'd upon You, and also since, you have as much tempted the fortune of War, as any King that ever rul'd in France, and that without sparing your own Royal Person any more than the meanest Gentleman of your Kingdom; wherefore I need not fear freely to deliver my opinion, being to speak both to a King and a Soldier. (Here the Dauphin, who stood behind the Kings Chair, and just over against me, gave me a nod with his head, by which I guess'd he would have me to speak boldly, and that gave me the greater assurance, though, in plain truth, I had ever confidence enough, and fear never stop'd my mouth.) Sir, said I, we are betwixt five and six thousand Gascons upon the List,Gascons. for yor Majesty knows that the Companies are never fully compleat; neither can all ever be at the Battel; but I make account we shall be five thusand, and five or six hundred Gascons com∣pleat, that I dare make good to your Majesty upon my Hnor: Of these every Captain and Soldier will present you with a List of all their names, and the places from hce we come, and will engage our heads to you, all of us to fight in the day of Battel, if your Ma∣jesty will please to grant it, and give us leave to fight. 'Tis the only thing we have so long expected and desir'd, without sneaking thus up and down from place to place, and hiding our heads in corners. Believe me, Sir, the world has not more resolute Soldiers than these are, they desire nothing more than once to come to the decision of Arms. To these there are thir∣teen Ensigns of Swisse:Swisse. Of which the fix of St Julien I know much better than those of le Baron, which Fourly commands, yet I have seen them all muster'd, and there may be as many of them as of ours. These will make you the same promise we do, who are your natural Subjects, and deliver in the names of all to be sent to their Cantons, to the end that if any man fail in his duty, he may be be cashier'd, and degraded from all practice of Arms for ever. A condition to which they are all ready to submit, as they assured me at my de∣parture.
And being of the same Nation, I make no doubt but those of le Ban will do the same. Your Majesty may have taken notice of them all before Landecy. Here then, Sir, are nine thousand men, or more, on which you may depend, and assure your self that they will fight to the last gasp of their lives.Italians, Pro∣vençals, and Fribourgers. As for the Italians and Provenals which are under Monsieur des Cros, and also the Fribourgers that came to us before Ivreé; I shall not take upon me to become security for them, but I hope they will all do as well as we, especi∣ally when they shall see how we lay about us (at which I lifted up my arm (in the earnestness of speaking) as if I were going to strike,Gensd'Ar∣mes. whereat the King smil'd.Archers.) You should also,Light horse. Sir, have four hundred men at arms in Piedmont, of which there may well be three hundred, and as many Archers, as well disposed as we. You have four Captains of Light horse, which are Messieurs de Termes, d' Aussun, Francisco Bernardin and Mauré, each of which ought to have two hundred Light horse, and amongst them all they will furnish you with five or six hundred Hrse, all which are ambitions to manifest the zeal they have to your Service. I know what they are, and what they will do very well. The King then began to be a little angry to hear that the Companies of the Gens-d' Armes were not all com∣pleat: but I told him that it was impossible; forasmuch as some of them had obtained leave of their Captains to go home to their own houses to refresh themselves, and others were sick: but that if his Majesty would please to give leave to those Gentlemen who would beg it of of him, to be present at the Battel, they would very well supply that default. Since then, Sir, said I, (continuing my discourse) that I am so happy as to speak before a Soldier King, who would you have to kill ten thousand Foot, and a thousand or twelve hundred Horse, all resolute to overcome or dye? Such men as these, and so resolv'd, are not so easily defeated; neither are they Novices in War. We have have sevral times attaqu'd the Enemy upon equal terms, and for the most part beaten them. And I dare boldly say that had we all of us one arm ty'd behind us, it would not be in the power of the Enemy to kill us all in a whole days time, without losing the greatest part of their Army, and the choicest of their men. Imagine then when we have both our arms at liberty, and our weapons in our hands, how easie it will be to beat us. Truly, Sir, I have heard great Captains discourse, and sy that an Army of twelve or fifteen thousand men is sufficient to confront an Army of thirty thousand; for 'tis not the crowd but the courage that overcomes, and in a Battel the one half of them never comes to fight. We desire no more than we have, let us deal it out. (The Dauphin all this while stood laughing behind the King's Chair, and still made signs to me, for by my behaviour I seem'd already to be in Battel.) No, no, Sir, these are not men to be beaten, and if these Lords who have spoken, had once seen them at their work, they would alter their opinion, and so would your Majesty too. These are not men to lye dozing in a Garrison, they require an Enemy, and have a mind to shew their valour; they beg leave of you to fight, and if you deny them, you take away their spirits, and give it to your Enemies, who will be puffed with vanity to see themslves fear'd, whilst your own Army shall moulder away to nothing. By what I have heard, Sir, all that these Lords stumble at, who have deliver'd their opinions before you, is the appre∣hension of losing the Battel, and that makes them always cry, if we lose, if we lose; but I have not heard one of them tell you, if we win it, what great advantges will thereby accrue. For Gods sake, Sir, fear not to grant our request, and let me not return with such a shame upon me, that men shall say you durst not trust the hazard of a Battel in our hands, who so voluntarily and chearfully make a tender of our lives to do you service. The King who had very attentively hearkened to me, and that was delighted at my gestures and impatience, turn'd his eyes towards Monsieur de St. Pol, who thereupon said to him, Sir, will you alter your determination at the importunity of this Coxcomb, that cares for nothing but fighting, and has no sence of the misfortune; nor the inconveniences that the loss of a Battel would bring upon you? Believe me, Sir, 'tis a thing of too great im∣portance to be referr'd to the discretion of a young hair-brain'd Gascon. To whom I made answer in these very words.The Sieur de Montluc's re∣ply to Monsieur de St. Pol. My Lord, assure your self I am neither a Bragadchio nor so arrant a Coxcomb as you take me for; neither do I say this out of Bravado, and if you will please to call to mind all the intelligences his Majesty has received sinse we return'd from Perpignan into Piedmont, you will find tht wherevr we encountred the Enemy, whether on horseback or on foot, we have always beaten them, excepting when Monsieur d' Aussun was defeated; who also miscarried through no other defalt than for attempting to retreat at the head of an Army, which a prudent Captain never ought to do. It is not yet three months (I am sure you have heard it, for it is known to all the world) since the two brave Combats we fought both on foot and on horseback in the plain over against St. Fr, first against the Italians, and since against the Spaniards, and both in ten days time; and Mnsieur d' Aussun fifteen days before he was taken, fought and defeated an entire Regiment
of Germans. Consider then we that are in heart, and they in fear; we that are Conquerours, and they beaten; we who despise them, whilst they tremble at us; what difference there is be∣twixt us. When should it be that the King should give us leave to fight, if not now, that we are in this condition in Piedmont? It must not be when we have been beaten, that his Majesty ought to do it; but now that we are in breath, and flsh'd with conquest. Neither is there any thught to be taken, save only to take good heed that we assault them not in a Fortress as we did at the Bicoque: but Monsieur d' Anguien has too many god and experi∣enced Captains about him to commit such an error; and there will be no other question, if not how to tempt them into the open field, where there shall be neither hedge nor ditch to hinder us from coming to grapple with them, and then, Sir, you shall hear news of one of the most furious Battels that ever was fought, and I most humbly beseech your Mjesty to expect no other news but that of a great and glorious victory, which if God give us the grace to obtain (as I hold my self assured we shall) you will so stop the Emperor and the King of England in the midst of their Carrer, that they shall not know which way to turn them. The Dauphin still conti∣nued laughing more than before, and still making signs, which gave me still the grea∣ter assurance to speak: All the rest then spoke every one in his turn, and said, that his Majesty ought by no means to rely upon my words: only the Admiral said nothing, but smiled; and I believe he perceiv'd the signs the Dauphin made me, they being almost op∣posite to one another; But Monsieur de St. Pol reply'd again, saying to the King; What, Sir, it seems you have a mind to alter your determination, and to be led away at the perswa∣sion of this frantick fool: to which the King made answer, By my Faith, Cozen, he has given me so great reasons, and so well represented to me the courage of my Sdiers, that I know not what to say. To which Monsieur de St. Pol reply'd, Nay, Sir, I see you are already chang'd; (now he could not see the signs the Dauphin made me, as the Ad∣miral could, for he had his back towards him) whereupon the King directing his speech to the Admiral, ask'd him what he thought of the business, who again smiling return'd his Majesty this answer, Sir, will you confess the truth? You have a great mind to give them leave to fight, which if they do, I dare not assure you either of victory or disgrace; for God alone only knows what the issue will be: but I dare pawn my life and reputation, that all those he has named to you will fight like men of honor; for I know their bravery very well, as having had the honour to command them. Do only one thing, Sir, (for we see you are al∣ready half overcome, and that you rather encline to a Battel than otherwise) address your self to Almighty God, and humbly beg of him, in this perplexity, to assist you with his Coun∣sel, what you were best to do. Which having said, the King, throwing his Bonnet upon the Table, lift up his eyes towards heaven, and, joining his hands, said; My God, I be∣seech thee, that thou wilt be pleased to direct me this day what I ought to do for the preser∣vation of my Kingdom, and let all be to thy honor and glory. Which having said, the Ad∣miral ask'd him, I beseech you, Sir, what opinion are you now of? When the King, after a little pause,The Battel concluded. turning towards me, with great vehemency cryed out, Let them fight, let them fight. Why then, says the Admiral, there is no more to be said, if you lose the Battel, you alone are the cause, and if you overcome the sam, and alone shall enjoy the satisfaction, having alone cosnted to it. This being said, the King and all the rest arose, and I was ready to leap out of my skin for joy. The King then ell to talking with the Admiral about my dispatch,Words of Mr▪ de St. Pol to the Sieur de Montluc. and to take order for our Pay which was a great deal in arrear. Monsieur de St. Pol in the mean time drew near unto me, and smiling said, thou mad Devil, thou wilt be the cause either of the greatest good or the greatest mischief that can possibly befall the King (now you must know that the said Sieur de St. Pol had not spoken any thing for any ill will that he bore me, for he lov'd me as well as any Captain in France, and of old, having known me at the time when I serv'd under Mareschal de Foix) and moreover told me, that it was very necessary I should speak to all the Captains and Soldiers, and tell them that the confidence his Majesty repos'd in our worth and valour had made him conde∣scend to permit us to fight, and not reason, considering the condition he was then in. To Whom I reply'd,Montluc's an∣swer. My Lord, I most humbly beseech you not to fear, or so much as doubt but that we shall win the Battel, and assure your self, that the first news you will hear will be, that we have made them all into a Fricassé,The King's saying to the Sieur de Mont∣luc. and may eat them if we will. The King then came to me and laid his hand upon my Shoulder, saying, Montluc, recommend me to my Cozen d' Anguien and to all the Captains in those parts, of what Nation soever, and tell them that the great confidence I have in their fidelity and valour has made me condescend that they shall fight, entreating them to serve me very well upon this occasion, for I never think to be in so much need again as at this present, that now therefore is the time, wherein they are to manifest the kindness they have for me, and that I will suddainly send them the money they desire,His answer▪ To which I made answer, Sir, I shall obey your commands, and this
will be a cordial to chear them, and a spur to the good disposition they already have to ight, and I most humbly beseech your Majesty, not to remain in doubt concerning the issue of our fight, for that will only discompose your spirit; but chear up your self in expectation of the good news you will shortly hear of us; for my mind presages well, and it never yet de∣cived me; and thereupon, kissing his hand, I took my leave of his Majesty. The Ad∣miral then bid me go and stay for him in the Wardrobe, and whether it was Monsieur de Marchemont or Monsieur Bayart that went down with me, I cannot tell: but going out, I found at the door Messieurs de Dampirre, de St. André and d' Assier, with three or four others, who demanded of me, if I carried leave to Monsieur d' Anguien to fight, to whom I made answer in Gascon, haresy harem aux pics, & patacs; go in presently, if you have any stomach to the entertainment, before the Admiral depart from the King, which they accordingly did, and there was some dispute about their leave: but in the end his Majesty consented they should go: which nothing impair'd their feast; for after them came above a hundred Gentlemen post to be present at the Battel. Amongst o∣thers the Siurs de Iarnac and de Chatillon, since Admiral, the Son of the Admiral d' Annebaut, the Vidame of Chartres, and several others; of which not one was slain in the Battel, save only Monsieur d' Assier, whom I lov'd more than my own heart, and Chmans who was wounded when I fought the Spaniards in the plain of Perpignan; some others there were that were hurt, but none that dyed. There is not a Prince in the world,Praise of the French Gen∣try. who has so frank a Gentry as ours has, the least smile of their King will enlame the coldest constitution, without any thought of fear, to convert Mills and Vineyards into Horses and Arms, and they go Volunteers to dye in that bed which we Soldiers call the bed of honor. Being arrived soon after at the Camp, I acquitted my self of my charge towards Mon∣sieur d' Anguien, and presented him my Letters from the King, who was infinitely overjoy'd, and embracing me in his arms, said these very words: I knew very well that thou wouldst not bring us peace, and turning to the Gentlemen about him, Well my Masters, said he, the King is pleased to gratifie our desire, we must go to't. I then gave him an ac∣count of the difficulty I had met witht in obtaining that leave, and that the King him∣self was the only cause of it, which ought the more to encourage us to behave our selves bravely in the Battel. He was moreover very glad when I told him, that the foremen∣tioed Lords were coming after me, being certain that several others would also follow after them, as they did. Bidding me by all means go discharge my self of his Majesties commands to all the Colonels, Captains of the Gens-d' Armes, Light horse and Foot; which I did, not observing one that did not mightily rejoyce, when I gave them to under∣stand, what assurance I had given the King of the victory. Neither did I satisfie my self with speaking to the Officers only; but moreover went amongst the Soldiers, assuring them that we should all be highly recompenc'd by the King, making the mat∣ter something better than it was; for a man must now and then lye a little for his Master. During the time of my absence Monsieur d' Anguien had block'd up Carignan, being he could not carry it by fine force without infinite loss,Carignan blocked up. quartering in the mean time at Vimeus and Carmagnolle, and soon after the arrival of these Gentlemen, the Marquis de Guast departed with his Camp upon Good Friday from Ast, and came to lodge at the Mountain near Carmagnolle, and upon Easter day remov'd his Camp to Cerizolles. The Company of the Count de Tande, was this day upon the Guard, to which Captain Van∣rines was Lieutenant, who sent word to Monsieur d' Anguien, that the Camp was upon their march, and that their drums were plainly heard. Monsieur d' Anguien there∣upon commanded me presently to mount to horse, and to go in all hast to discover them, and to bring him certain intelligence of their motion,The Sieur de Montluc sent to discover the Enemy. which I also did, Captain Va∣rines giving me twenty Launciers for my Guard. I went so far that I discover'd the Ca∣valry, who march'd thorough the Woods belonging to the Abby of Desteffarde, and heard the Drums, some marching before and some following after, which put me to a stand to guess what the meaning of this order might be. At my return I found Monsieur d' Anguien, Messieurs de Chatillon, de Dampierre, de St. André, Descars, (the Father of these now living) d' Assier and de Iarnac, in the Chamber of the said Seigneur d' Anguien, talking with him, having caused their Arms to be brought and laid upon the Beds in the said Chamber, where I made a report to him of what I had seen, whereupon all the Gentlemen cryed out to him, Let us go, Sir, let us go to fight to day, for it is a good day, and God will assist us. Upon which the said Seigneur commanded me to go bid Messieurs de Tais and de St. Iulien to draw out their Regiments into the field, at the same time sending another Gentleman to the Gens-d' Armes and the Light horse to do the same, which was perform'd in an instant, and we drew out of Carmgnolle into a plain leading
toward Cerizlles, where we were all drawn up into Battalia. Monsieur de Mailly Master of the Ordinance was there ready with his Artillery, as soon as any of us all, and we heard the Enemies Drums almost as plainly as we heard our own. In my life did I never see so chearful an Army, nor Soldiers so well disposed to fight, as this of ours was, excepting some of the great ones of the Army, who were evermore persecuting Monsieur d' Anguien, not to put it to the hazard of a day, representing to him what a blow it would be to the King should he lose the Battel, which might perhaps occasion the loss of the Kingdom of France; and others were still perswading him that he ought to fight, the King having granted leave, and expecting he should now so do; so that amongst them they put this poor Prince, being yet very young, into so great a perplexity, that he scarce knew which way to turn him,Moneur d' Anguien in suspence con∣cerning the Battel. nor what to do. You may imagine whether I was not mightily pleased with these doings, and whether I would not have spoke at mouth, had I had to do with my match; neither as it was could I altogether forbear. The Lords who were lately come from Court, were all for fighting, and I could very well name both the one and the other, if I so pleased; but I shall forbear to do it; for I have not taken my Pen in hand to blemish any one: but the Admiral Chatillon and Monsieur de Iarnac, who are both living, know it as well as I. Both the one and the other had reason for what they said, and were not prompted by any fear of their own persons; but only the apprehension of losing all witheld them; and some perhaps (as I have often seen) argue against their own inclinations, and the plurality of voices, to the end that if any thing fall amiss,Dissimulatio amongst Sol∣diers. they may afterwards say, I was of a contrary opinion, I told him as much, but I was not to be believed. Oh there is great cunning in dawbing, and in our trade especially of all others. Just as we should have march'd to go to fight, four or five drew Monsieur d' Anguien aside, alighting from their horses, where they entertained him walking up and down for above half an hour, whilst every one gnash'd their teeth for rage that they did not march: in the end the result of all was, that all the Regiments of Foot should re∣turn to their Quarters, and also the Artillery and the Gens-d' Armes, and that Mon∣sieur d' Anguien with four or five hundred Horse, and some of the Captains of his Coun∣cil, should go to the plain of Cerizolles to discover the Enemies Camp; that I should bring after him four hundred Harquebusiers, and all the rest to retire to their Quarters. I then saw a world of people ready to run mad for veaxtion, and do verily believe that if God had so pleas'd that Monsieur d' Anguien had march'd according to his determi∣nation, he had won the Battel with very little difficulty; for the Drums that I had heard return into the Enemies Rear, were all the Spanish Foot, who went back to draw off two pieces of Canon, which were set fast in such manner that they could not be stirr'd ei∣ther backward or forward; so that we had had nothing to fight with but the Germans, the Italians and the Horse, none of which, nor even the Marquis himself, could have escap'd us. But after we had stood above three hours facing the Enemy, which were in a plain betwixt Sommerive and Cerizolles, who expected no other but to fight; (and the Mar∣quis told Monsieur de Termes since (being a prisoner) as he has assured mee,The Marquis de Guast in fear. that he was never in his life in so great fear of being lost as that day, for his chiefest hopes was in the Spanish Harquebusiers) Monsieur d' Anguien return'd back to Carmagnolle as disconten∣ted as ever Prince was, and at the descent of a Wood, as we were upon our return to the said Carmagnolle, I said to him as we rid along, Messieurs de Dampierre and de St. André being by,A saying of the Sieur de Montluc to Mr. d' Angui∣en. these words; Sir, Sir, this morning what you arose what could you have desir'd of God Almighty more than what he has this day given you; which is to find the Enemy you have so much desired in the open fild; where there was neither hedge nor ditch to obstruct you? but I perceeve you are more enclined to believe those who counsel you not to fight than those who advise you to it. At which he fell to swear and curse, saying, that hereafter he would belive no one but himself, by which I well perceiv'd him to be nettled, so that still going on to appease him, I said, No Sir, no, in Gods name believe no body but your self; for we all know very well that you desire nothing more then to fight, and God will proper you, and so went on streight to Carmagnolle, vext to the blood, remembring what I had so largely promised to the King in his Council. So soon as the said Seigneur came to Carmagnole, he presently call'd a Council of War, and I at my arrival found our whole Regiment both Officers and Soldiers up to the ears in mutiny, demanding their pay: but they held them in hand with the coming of Mon∣sieur Langey, who brought some money along with him. I was then entreated by Mon∣sieur de la Molle the elder, who commanded two Ensigns, and the next day was slain, to speak to Monsieur d' Anguien in the behalf of all, and that he would bear the blame▪ and as we were all waiting in the Hall, by fortune Messieurs de Dampierre and de St.
André came in, and finding all in mutiny said to us these words; Have a little patience I beseech you, till Monsieur d' Anguien rise from the Council (and I do believe they had been talking to him by the way, for I found him riding betwixt them) and so they entred into the Chamber, where they staid not long, but came out again. Monsieur de Dampierre came out first, who, because Monsieur d' Anguien immediately followed him, looking at me, he laid his finger upon his mouth, for a sign that I should say nothing, and Monsieur d' Anguien all in rage went straight to his Chamber, and the o∣ther Colonels and Captains every one to his own quarters; but we stirr'd not from thence. Presently after Messieurs de Dampierre and de St. André came out into the Hall, and said to us these words:Resolution to fight. Get you home to your Quarters, and prepare your selves, for to morrow we must fight; as they came out we take notice of those who were for fighting, all of them smiling upon us, by which also we guess'd before hand how the matter went. In the evening when I accompanied Monsieur de Dampierre to his lodging, he told me the whole story, and what Monsieur d' Anguien had propounded to the Council, insisting upon the Error he saw he had committed in not fighting, by which he had lost an advan∣tage that he could not again recover, entreating them all to consider of it, and to resolve upon a Battel. Whereupon some fell again to discourse the same thing they had said be∣fore, of what a loss it would be to the King, with many other reasons to divert him from that resolution; and others maintain'd the same opinion they had over done, that he ought to put it to a Battel: But Monsieur d' Anguien, who saw himself fallen into the same dispute that before, broke out in a violent passion, saying, that he was resolved to fight at what price soever, and that if any one should any more dispute the contrary, he should never think so well of that man again, so long as he liv'd. Whereupon one in the Company, who before had so highly argued against it, made answer: O Sir, is it then a resolution you have taken that you will fight? yes replyed Monsieur d' Anguien, then says the other there is no more to be said; and thereupon it was concluded, that every one should repair to his com∣mand, and that an hour before day, we should be all in the same Plain where we had been the day before, to march directly towards the Enemy, wherever he was to be found; which was accordingly perform'd, some remonstrating in the mean time to the Cap∣tains and Soldiers, that it would be out of season to stad upon telling them out their pay in the face of the Enemy, and that they were to stay till the Battel was over, which was only a device to amuze those who were so importunate for their Pay. Now being we had the day before left the Enemy in the Plain betwixt Sommeriv and Cerizolles, Monsieur d' Anguien did not very well know whether they might be at Sommerive or at Cerizolles, notwithstanding that the Governor of Sommerive had sent him word, that the Camp intended to quarter there. Signior Francisco Bernardin therefore sent out three or four of his Light horse towards the said Cerizolles, who went so near that they discover'd their Camp, which was already in arms, and the Drums beginning to bear. That which had made them return to Cerizolls, was to stay for the Spanish Foot, who were gone for the two pieces of Canon, as has been said before. Monsieur de Termes likewise sent out again three or four of his people also, and in the mean time we march'd underneath toward Sommerive; but so soon as the Light horse return'd with the same intelligence, we turn'd on the left hand, and come up into the Plain, where the whole Army was, and there made a halt. And there Monsieur d' Anguien and Monsieur de Tais gave me all the Harquebusiers to lead, for which honor I returned him my most humble thanks,The Siur de Montluc com∣mands all the Harquebusi∣ers. telling him that I hoped, by Gods assistance, to ac∣quit my self so well of my charge, that he should remain satisfied with my service, and said as much to Monsieur de Tais, who was my Colonel, and who came and commanded all the Captains and Lieutenants, that I would take, to obey me equally with himself. I then took four Lieutenants, namely le Brüeil (whom I have mentioned before) le Gasquet, Captain Lienard and Captain avas, who was my own Lieutenant. To Fa∣vas and Lienard I gave the right wing, and my self with the two other took th left, leading towards the little house,The order of the Battel of Cerizolles fought the 11. of April, 1544 that was afterwards so much disputed; and it was ordered that the Swisse which were commanded by Monsieur de Bitieres (who a little before the rumor of the Battel had been recall'd from his own house) and we should fight toge∣ther in the Vantguard: the Battel was to be conducted by Monsieur d' Anguien, having under his Cornet all the young Lords that came from Court, and the Rear-guard was commanded by Monsieur d' Ampierre, wherein were four thousand Friourgers, and three thousand Italians, led by the Sieur de Dros and des Cros, together with all the Guidons and Archers of Companies. Now there was a little Eminence, that dipt towards Cerizolles and Sommerive, which was all on a little Copse, but not very thick: The first of the Ene∣my
that we saw enter into the Plain to come towards us, were the seven thousand Ita∣lians conducted by the Prince of Salerna, and in the lank of them three hundred Launciers, commanded by Rodolpho Baglione, who belonged to the great Duke of Florence.The begi∣ning of the Battel. The Skirmish began by this little Hill, on the descent whereof the Ene∣my had made a halt just over against us, and so soon as the skirmish was begun, I gave one Squadron to Captain Brueille, being that which was nearest to me, and the hind∣most to Captain Gasquet, about two hundred paces distant the one from the o∣ther, and of my own I gave forty or fifty Harquebusiers to a Serjeant of mine called Arnat de St. Clair, a valiant man and one that very well understood his business, and I my self stood for a reserve. Being at the foresaid little house, I discover'd three or four Companies of Spanish Harquebusiers, who came full drive to possess themselves of the house, and in the mean time Favas and Lienard fought the Italians in the valley on the right hand. The skirmish grew hot on both sides, the Enemy one while beating me up to the house, and I again other whiles driving them back to their own party; for they had another that was come up to second the first, and it seem'd as if we had been playing at Base: but in the end I was constrain'd to call Captain Brueille up to me, for I saw all their Foot embody tgether, with a Troop of Horse to sank them. Now had I not so much as one horse with me, notwithstanding that I had advertised Monsieur'd Anguien that their Cavalry was also with the Harquebusiers that came up to me. Let it suffice, that of a long time no body came, insomuch that I was constrain∣ed to quit the house; but not without a great dispute, which continued for a very great space. I then sent back Captain Brueille to his place, the skirmish continued for al∣most four fours without intermission, and never did men acquit themselves better. Monsieur d' Anguien then sent Monsieur d' Aussun unto me, commanding me to repos∣sess my self of the house,Monsieur de Montlucs con∣test about the fight. which was neither of advantage nor disadvantage to me; to whom I made answer, Go and tell Monsieur d' Anguien that he must then send me some Horse, to fight these Horse that slank their Harquebusiers (which he also saw as well as I) for I am not to fight Horse and Foot together in the open field. He then said to me, It is enough for me that I have told you, and so return'd to carry back my answer to Monsieur d' Anguien; who thereupon sent Monsieur de Moneins to tell me, that one way or another he would that I should regain it, with whom also came the Seigneur Ca∣bry, Brother to Seigneur Mauré, bringing with him threescore Horse, all Launciers, and Monsieur de Moneins might have about some five and twenty, he being then but beginning to raise his Troop. To whom I return'd the same answer I had given be∣fore to Monsieur d' Aussun, and that I would not be cause of the loss of the Bat∣tel: but that if they would go charge those Horse that slank'd the Harquebusiers, I would quickly regain the house. They then answer'd, that I had reason, and that they were ready to do it. Whereupon I presently sent to Captain Brueil to come up to me, and to Captain Gasquet to advance to his place, and immediately Captain Brueil coming up on the right hand, and the Horse in the middle, we march'd at a good round rot directly up to them; for we were not above three hundred paces di∣stant from one another. All this while the skirmish never ceased, and as we drew within a hundred or six score paces off them, we began to fire, upon which the Ca∣valry fac'd about, and their Foot also, and I saw their Launciers turn their backs, retreating to their Troops. Monsieur de Moneins, and Seigneur Cabry went im∣mediately hereupon to Monsieur d' Anguien, to tell him what they had seen their Cavalry do, and that if he did not send me up Horse to second me, I could not choose but be routed. I sent back Captain Brueil and Gasquet into their places. Now there was a little Marish near unto Cerizolles, and a great hollow way, which hindred the Enemy that they could not come up to us drawn up in Battalia: and the Marquis de Guast had caused six pieces of Artillery to pass over this marish, and they were already advanc'd a good way on this side, when seeing their people driven back, they were afraid that the whole Army followed the pursuit, and that they should lose their Canon. Wherefore they presently made the Germans to passover this marish, and thorough the said hollow way, who, so soon as they came into the plain, drew up again into Battalia; for it was not possible for them to pass, but in great disorder, and in the mean time the Cavalry and Spanish Harquebusiers came up to me as before; inso∣much that having no Horse with me, I was necessitated to quit them the place, and to retire to the place from whence I came. Now I had discover'd their German Foot and their Artillery, and as I was retiring Monsieur de Termes and Signior Francisco ernardin cae, and plac'd themselves on
the right hand of our Battaillon, and upon the skirt of the Hill (which was very straight) and over against the Battaillon of the Italians; for their Launciers were exact∣ly opposite to our Pikes. Monsieur de Boitieres with his Company, and that of the Count de Tande advanc'd on the left hand of our Battail, and the Swisse were three or four score paces behind us, and a little on the one side: In the mean time our Harquebu∣siers that were conducted by Lienard and Captain Favas sometimes beat back the Enemy as far as their main Battalia, and sometimes the Enemy repell'd them up to ours. I saw then that I must of necessity disarm our Battaillon of the Harquebusiers that made our slank on that side where Monsieur de Boitieres stood, and give them to them, where∣with to make a Charge, which they did, and with great fury beat them up to their Battail; and it was high time; for their Harquebusiers had almost gain'd the flank of our Horse.A furious skirmish. I therefore ran up to them, and we began a furious skirmish, which was great, and obstinately fought, for all our Squadrons were closed up together, and it continued a long hour or more. Now the Enemey had placed their Canon by the side of the little house, which play'd directly into our Battaillon; Monsieur de Mailly then advanc'd with ours and pla∣cing himself close by us, began to shoot at those of the Enemy by the little house; for there where we maintain'd the skirmish he could not do it, without killing our own men: when, looking towards our own Battail, I saw Monsieur de Tais, who began to march with his Pikes, charg'd directly towards the Italians; whereupon I ran up to him, saying, Whither do you go, Sir, whither do you go, you will lose the Battel; for here are all the Germans coming to fight you, and will charge into your flank. The Captains were the occasion of this, who ceased not to cry out to him, Sir, lead us on to fight; for it is better for us to dye hand to hand, than stand still here to be killed with the Canon. 'Tis that which terrifies the most of any thing,The Canon frights more than it hurts. and oftentimes begets more fear than it does harm; but however so it was, that he was pleased to be rul'd by me, and I entreated him to make his men kneel on one knee, with their Pikes down; for I saw the Swisse behind laid at their full length squatt to to the ground, so as hardly to be seen; and from him I ran to the Harquebusiers. The Enemies Harquebusiers by this time were beginning to retire behind the house, when, as I was going up to charge straight up to them, I discover'd the Front of the Germans Battaillon, and suddainly commanded the Captains Brueile and Gasquet to retire by degrees towards the Artillery, for we were to make room for the Pikes to come up to the fight, and I went to our Battel, where being come, I said to my men these words. Oh my fellow Soldiers let us now fight bravely,Th Sieur de Montluc's Speech to his Soldiers. and if we win the Battel we get a grea∣ter renown, than any of our Nation ever did; It was never yet read in History, that ever the Gauls fought the Germans Pike to Pike, but that the Germans defeated them, and to set this honorable mark upon our selves, that we are better men than our Ancestors, this glory ought to inspire us with a double courage to fight so as to overcome, or dye, and make our Enemies know what kind of men we are.A pardonable mistake in a Soldier not well read in History. Remember, Camerades, the message the King sent to us, and what a glory it will be to present ur selves before him after the victo∣ry. Now, Sir, said I to Monsieur de Tais, it is time to rise, which he suddenly did, and I began to cry out aloud, Gentlemen, it may be there are not many here who have ever been in a Battel before, and therefore let me tell you, that if we take our Pikes by the hinder end, and ight at the length of the Pike, we shall be defeated; for the Germans are more dextrous at this kind of fight than we are: but you must take your Pikes by the middle as the Swise do, and run head-long to force and penetrate into the midst of them,The Sieur de Montluc's ad∣vice to the Pikes, con∣cerning the manner of their fight. and you shall see how confounded they will be. Monsieur de Tais then cryed out to me to go along the Battail, and make them all handle their Pikes after this manner, which I accordingly did, and now we were all ready for the Encounter. The Germans march'd at a great rate directly towards us, and I ran to put my self be∣fore the Battail, where I alighted from my horse; for I ever had a Lacquey at the head of the Battaillon ready with my Pike; and as Monsieur de Tais and the rest of the Cap∣tains saw me on foot, they all cry'd out at once, Get up, Captain Montlc, get up a∣gain, and you shall lead us on to the fight. To whom I made answer, that if it was my fate to dye that day, I could not dye in a more honorable place than in their Company, with my Pike in my hand. I then call'd to Captain la Burre, who was Serjeant Major, that he should always be stirring about the Battaillon, when we came to grapple, and that he and the Serjeants behind and on the sides should never cease crying, put home, Soldiers, put home, to the end that they might push on one another. The Germans came up to us at a very round rate, insomuch that their Battail being very great, they could not possibly follow; so that we saw great windows in their bo∣dy, and several Ensigns a good way behind, and all on a suddain rush'd in among
them, a good many of us at least, for as well on their side, as ours, all the first Ranks,A furious Charge. either with push of Pikes or the Shock at the encounter, were overturn'd; nei∣the is it possible amongst Foot to see a greater fury; the second Rank and the third were the cause of our victory; for the last so pushed them on, that they fell in upon the heels of one another, and as ours press'd in, the Enemy was still driven back: I was never in my life so active and light as that day, and it stood me upon so to be; for above three times I was beaten down to my knees. The Swisse were very sly and cun∣ning; for till they saw us within ten or a dozen Pikes length of one another, they never rose; but then like savage Boars they ush'd into their slank, and Monsieur de Boitie∣res broke in at aOr Corner. Canton. Monsieur de Termes and Signior Francisco in the mean time charg'd Rodolpho Baglione, whom they overthrew, and put his Cavalry to rout. The Italians, who saw their Cavalry broken, and the Lansquenets and Germans over∣thrown and routed, began to take the descent of the valley, and as fast as they could to make directly towards the Wood. Monsieur de Termes had his horse killed under him at the first encounter,The Sieur de Termes taken prisoner. and by ill fortune his leg was so far engaged under him in the fall, that it was not possible for him to rise, so that he was there by the Italians taken, and carried away Prisoner, and, to say the truth, his legs were none of the best. Now you are to take notice, that the Marquis de Guast had composed a Battaillon of five thousand Pikes, namely two thousand Spaniards and three thousand Germans, out of the number of six thousand, being the same tha Count Laudron had brought into Spain, where he had remain'd ten years, or more, and who all spoke as good Spa∣nish as natural Spaniards. He had formed this Battaillon only to claw away the Gas∣cons; for he said that he feared our Battaillon moe than any of the other, and had an opinion that his Germans (being all chosen men) would beat our Swisse. He had placed three hundred Harquebusiers only in the nature of a forlorn hope, at the head of this Battaillon,A mistake of the Marquis de Guast. which he reserved to the forenamed effect, and all the rest maintain∣ed the skirmish. Now as he was by the little house on the same side with the Germans, he saw the Fribourgers, who were all arm'd in white, and took them for the Gascons, and thereupon said to his men, Hermanos, hermanos, a qui estant todos Gascones, sarrais á ellos. They were not gone two hundred paces from him, but that he perceived our Battail, which start up, and saw his error when it was too late to help it, for we all wore black arms. This Battaillon of five thousand Pikes march'd then at a good round rate directly up∣on the Fribourgers, and they were of necessity to pass hard by Monsieur d' Anguien who by some body or other was very ill advised; for as they pass'd by he charg'd with his Gens d' Armes quite thorough their Battaillon in the Flank,The errot of Monsieur d▪ Anguien. and there were slain and wounded a great many brave and worthy men, and some of very conside∣rable quality, as Monsieur d' Assier, le Sieur de la Rchechovard, with several others, and yet more at the second charge; there were some who pass'd and repass'd quite thorough and thorough; but still they clos'd up again, and in that manner came up to the Fribourgers Bat∣talia, who were soon overthrown without so much as standing one Push of Pike, and there died all their Captains and Lieutenants who were in the first rank and the rest fled straight to Messieur des Cros:Monsieur d' Assier and Mr. de la Roche∣chovart slain, and the Sieur des Cros. but this Battaillon of Spaniards and Germans still at a very great rate pursued their victory, and overthrew the said Sieur des Cros, who there dyed and all his Captains with him; neither could Monsieur d' Anguien any way relieve him, forasmuch as all the horses almost of his Cavalry, in these two furious, but inconside∣rate charges were wounded and walk'd fair and softly over the field towards the Ene∣my. He was then in the height of despair, and curst the hour that ever he was born, seeing the overthrow of his Foot, and that he himself had scarce an hundred Horse left to sustein the shock,Monsieur d' Anguien rou∣sted. insomuch that Monsieur de Pignan of Montpellier (a Gentleman of his) assured me, that he twice turn'd the point of his Sword into his Gorget, to have offered violence to himself, and himself told me at his return, that he was then in such a condition, he should have been glad any one would have run him thorough. The Romans might have done so; but I do not think it becomes a Christian. Every one at that time passed his censure upon it according to his own fancy. For our parts we were as well as heart could wish, and as much pleased as the Enemy was afflicted; but let us return to the blows,The Cowar∣dise of the Fribourgers. for there were yet both to give and to take. The cowardise of the Fribourgers occasioned a great loss on that side of the field; in my life I never saw such great lubbers as those were, unworthy ever to bear Arms, if they have not learnt more courage since. They are indeed neighbours to the Swisse, but there is no more comparison betwixt them than betwixt a Spanish Horse and an Asse. It is not all to have a great
number of men upon the list; but to have those that are true bred; for a hundred of them are worth a thousand of the other. And a brave and valiant Captain with a thousand men, that he knows he may trust to, will pass over the bellies of four thousand. After the same manner that Monsieur d' Anguien had seen his ple sacred before his eyes,The Marquis de Guast rou∣ted. without any power to relieve them, did the Marquis  Guast behold his peo∣ple also trampled under  by an equal fortune, so wantonly  on both hands with these two General; for as he saw Rudopho Baglione and his Germans, both of them routed and overthrown, he took his horse and rereated towards Ast. Monsieur de Sr. Iulien, who that day discharg'd the Office of Camp-Master and Colonel of the Swisse, was on hosback (and, to say the truth, he was but weak of person and wanted strength to support any great burthen of arms on foot) saw their Battail overthrown on the one side  other, and before he went to Monsieur d' Anguien saw us Swisse and Gascons  the  thousand Spaniards and Germans, killing on all hands. And then it was that he turned back and overtook Monsieur d' Anguien near to the Wood that leads towards Carmagnoll, but very poorly accompanied, and cried out to him, Sir, Sir, face about, fr the Battel is won, the Marquis de Guast is routed, and all his Ita∣lians and Germans out to pieces. Now this Battaillon of the Spaniards and Germans had already made a halt, giving themselves for lost, when they saw neither Horse nor Foot of their own come up to them; by which they very well knew that they had lost the Battel, and began to take on the right hand straight towards the mountain from whence they had departed the day before. I thought I had been the cunningst snap in all the whole Army, having contriv'd to place a row of Harquebusiers betwixt the first and se∣cond rank, to kill all the Captains fist, and had said to Monsiur de Tais three or four days before, that before any of ours should fall, I would  all their Captains in the first rank: but I would not tell him the secret till he had given me the command of the Harquebusiers, and then he called to him Burre the Serjeant Major, bidding him pre∣sently make choice of the Harquebusiers, and to place them after that manner. Upon my faith I had never seen nor heard of the like before, and thought my self to be the first Inventor of it; but we found that they were as crafty as we, for they had also done the same thing, who never shot no more than ours, till they came within a Pikes length, and there was a very great slaughter, not a shot being fir'd but it wrought its effect. So soon as Monsieur d' Anguien understood the Battel to be won, which before (by the defeat of those on his side of the field, and those cowardly Fribourgers, to encourage whom he had done all that in him lay) he had given over for lost; he presently put him∣self in the Rear of those Germans and Spaniards; which as he was doing, several of those who had taken fright, and were shifting for themselves, rallyed up to him, some of which now appeared wonderful eager of the pursuit, who had run away but a little be∣fore, and others had broke their bridles on purpose to lay the fault of their own fear upon the the poor horses, who by this means were to bear mre than the weight of their Masters. He had a little before the Battel, by good fortune, sent to Svillan for three Companies of very good Italian Foot, to be present at the business, who being as far as Reconis upon their way from thence heard the thunder of the Artillery, by which be∣ing assured that the attel was begun, they mounted all the Harquebusiers they could on horseback, and coming all the way a gallop, arrived in so optune a season, that they found Monsieur d' Anguien in pursuite of the Enemy,Monsieur d' Anguien pur∣sues the victo∣ry. not having one Harquebu∣sier in company with him; where, alighting from their horses, they put themselves in the Rear of them, whilst the said Seigneur d' Anguien with his Cavalry, one while in their Flnk and another in their Front, still push'd on the victory. Hee then sent a Trooper to us in all hast, to bid us turn that way, for there was more work to do, which messenger found us at the Chappel hard by the Gate of Crizolles, having just made an end of killing with so great fury and slaughter, that not so much as one man remained alive, save only a Colonel call'd Aliprando de Mandrca Brother to the Cardinal of Trent, Great slaugh∣ter at the Battel of Ce∣rizolles. who being laid amongst the dead with seven or eight wounds upon him, Caubois a light hors longing to Monsieur de Termes, as he came thorough the dead bodies, saw him,  yet alive, but stript stark naked, spoke to him, and caused him to be carried to , to redeem Monsieur de Termes in case he should recover and live, as he  did.The Swisse re∣vng'd for the foul play at Montdevi. The Swisse, in killing and laying on with their two-handed Swords,  id out Montdevi, Montdevi, where those of their Nation had recei∣ved no , and in short, all that made head against us on our side of the field were slam.
We had no sooner received the command from Monsieur d' Anguien, but that imme∣diately the Battaillon of the Swisse and ours turn'd towards him: I never saw two Bat∣taillons so soon reunited as these were; for of our selves we rallyed, and drew up into Battalia as we went, marching all the way, side by side. In this posture the Enemy, who went off at a great rate, firing all the way, and by that means keeping the horse at distance, discovered us coming up to them, who so soon as they saw us advanc'd within five or six paces, and the Cavalry in their Front ready to charge in amongst them, they threw down their Pikes, surrendring themselves to the horse: but here the Game began, some killing and others endeavoring to save, there being some who had fifteen or twenty men about him,Another body of the Impe∣rialists defea∣ted. still getting as far as they could from the crowd, for fear of us Foot, who had a mind to have cut all their throats; neither could the Cavalry so well defend them, but that above half of them were slain; for as many as we could lay our hands on were dispatch'd. Now you shall know what be∣came of me. Monsieur de Valence, my Brother, had sent me a Turkish horse from Venice, one of the fleerest Coursers that ever I yet saw; and I had an opinion which all the world could not dispossess me of, that we should win the Battel, wherefore I gave my said horse to a servant I had, an old Soldier, in whom I reposed a very great confidence; bidding him be sure always to keep behind our Battaillon of Pikes, and telling him that if it pleased God I did escape from the skirmish, I would then alight, and engage with the Pikes, and that when we came to close, if he should see our Battaillon overthrown, that then he might conclude me to be slain, and should save himself upon the horse; and on the contrary, if he should see us prevail over the Enemies Battaillon, that then he should still follow, (without offering to break in) in the Rear of our Battaillon. when so soon as I should be certain of the victory, I would leave the execution, and come to take my horse to pursue the Cavalry, and try to take some prisoner of Condition. I had a whimsy came into my head that I should take the Marquis de Guast, or dye in the attempt,A conceit of the Sieur de Montluc, trusting to the swiftness of my horse; for which I had already in my imagination swallow'd a mighty ransom, or at least some remarkable recompence form the King. Having then a while follow'd the victory, I staid behind, thinking to find my man; and indeed I was so weary with fighting, running, and moreover so spent with straining my voice to encourage the Soldiers, that I was able to do no more, when I was assaulted by two great mastiff Germans, who had thought presently to have done my business; but having rid my self of one of them, the other betook him to his heels, but he went not very far; in truth I there saw very brave blows given. I then went to seek out that Son of a whore my man; but the Devil a man that I could find, for as the Enemies Artillery plaid upon our Battaillon, and very often shot over, the shot falling behind it, had remov'd my Gentleman from the place where I thought to find him; who very discreetly went, and put himself behind the Swisse▪ when seeing the disorder of the Fribourgers and Provençals, he very learnedly concluded us to be in the same condition, and thereupon fled back as far as Carmagnolle. Thus are men oftentimes deceived in their choice; for I should never have suspected that this fellow would so soon have had his heart in his breeches, and have run away with so little ado. I then found Captain Mons, having no more than one servant only with him, who had done a great deal better than mine; for he had kept a little pad Nag rea∣dy for him, upon which he took me up behind him, for I was extremely weary, and so we pass'd on, still seeing the Germans knock'd down all the way as we went, till being sent for by Monsieur d' Anguien, we both alighted and went on foot, till the entire defeat of the Germans and Spaniards; when presently I saw my man come back, calling him a hundred Rogues and Cowards, for so basely running away; who replyed that he had not done it alone, but in company with better men and better clad than himself, and that he had only run away to bear them company; by which pleasant answer my anger was appeased, and upon my word he hit upon it in a lucky hour; for I was very near showing him a trick of a Gascon. We then rallyed together some twenty or five and twenty Horse, what of those of Mon∣sieur de Termes, of Signior Francisco Bernardin and the Sieur de Mauré, and rid a round gallop after the Marquis de Guast, and with us moreover a Gentleman whose name I have forgot, but he was one of those who came post from Court to be at the Battel, and as we went we met by the way two light horse leading prisoner Signior Carlo de Gonzaga, whom they had taken in the rear of the Enemies party, which still more encourag'd us to spur forward. So soon as we came so near to the Enemy as to discover what posture they were in, we perceived that they were rallyed and closed up
to the Crupper, still marching on in very good order, at a good round trot, and their Launces ready in the Rest. Which made me say to those of our Company, these people are ready for us, and therefore I do not think it convenient to charge in amongst them, lest instead of taking some of the chief of them, it fare with us as with the Scotch man who took a Tartar. So that we return'd without attempting any thing more upon them; but I am yet of opinion, that had not that rascally man of mine play'd me that dog-trick I had taken some man or other of Command amongst them.The Enemy rallios upon their retreat. As we were upon our return, the Gentleman I spoke of before accosting me, said these words, Jesu! Captain Montluc, what danger was this Battel in once to day of being lost? To which I (who had neither seen nor heard of any disorder, and thought that the last we had defeated had been those of Carignan, who were drawn out of their Garri∣son to be present at the Battel) made answer, why, which way were we in any danger, seeing that all day we have had the victory in our hands? I perceive then, said he, that you know nothing of the disorder has happened, and thereupon told me all that had befallen in the Battel. As God shall help me, I do believe, that had he given me two stabs with a dagger, I should not have bled, for my heart was shrunk up, and I was sick at the news, in which fright I continued for three nights after, starting up in my sleep, and dreaming continually of a defeat. Thus then we arriv'd at the Camp, where Monsieur d' Angen was, to whom I went, and making my horse curver, said to him sportingly these words; What think you, Sir, am I not as pretty a fellow on horseback as I am on foot? to which he made answer (though yet very melancholy) you will always behave your self very well, both in the one posture and in the other, and bowing his body was pleased to embrace me in his arms, and knighted me upon the place;The Sieur de Montluc Knighted up∣on the place of Battail by Monsieur d' Anguien. an honor I shall be proud of so long as I live, both for being perform'd upon the fild of Battel, and by the hand of so generous and so great a Prince. Accursed be he that so basely deprived us of him. But no more of that; I then said to him, Sir, have I served you to day to your satisfaction? (for Monsieur de Tais had already told him, that I had fought with them on foot) to which he replyed, Yes, Cap∣tain Montluc, and so well that I will never forget how bravely you have behaved your self; neither, do I assure you, will I conceal it from the King. Why then, Sir, said I, it lies in your power to do me the greatest kindness that ever you can do a poor Gentleman so long as you live: At which words, drawing me a part, that no body might hear, he asked me what it was that I would have him do for me, to which I made answer, that it was to dispatch me suddenly away with news of the success of the Battel to the King; telling him withal, that it was an office more properly belonging to me than any other, considering what I had said to his Majesty and his Council, to obtain leave to fight; and that the last words I had said to the King were, that he was only to expect news of the victory. To which, turning towards me, he made answer, that it was all the reason in the world, and that I should be sent before any other. And so all the Army returned victorious to Carmagnolle: but as I expected to have been sent away post in the night, I was told that Monsieur Descars had gained every one to speak for him, that he might go. Monsieur de Tais had also passed his word to me; but in the end he suffered himself to be overcome, as also did Monsieur d' Anguien, which was the greatest misfortune that possibly could have befallen me: for having overcome the King's Council and their deliberation, and that his Majesty had done me the honor to condescend to my opinion; here to have carried him the certain news of what I had promised and assured him so few days before, I leave every one to judge whether I should have been welcom or no; and what wrong I had done me, especially having been that day in a great and honorable command, and ac∣quitted my self of it to my Generals content. It had been a great good fortune for me, and also a great honor, to have carried to the King what I had before promised, and assured him of; there was however no remedy, and I was forced to submit, though they had much ado to appease me: but it was to no purpose to be angry or to complain of the injury was done me. I have since repented me a thousand times that I did not steal away the same night, which if I had done, I would have broke my neck or have been the first that should have brought the news to the King,The Sieur de Montluc dis∣contented. and, I am confident, he would not only himself have taken it in good part, but moreover have made my peace with o∣thers. But I, from that time forward, gave over all thoughts of advancement, and ne∣ver after expected to come to any thing, which made me beg leave of Monsieur d' An∣guien to be dismiss'd, that I might return into my own Country. Which said Seigneur promised me great matters (knowing me to be discontented) and Monsieur de Tais did the same, using all the perswasions he could to make me stay: but I press'd my departure so much that at last I obtain'd leave, upon my promise to return; and for
frther assrance of me, the said Sieur d' Anguien made me accept a Commission from him for the speedy raising of one thousand or twelve hundred Foot, to bring into Piedmont, to recruit the Companies, for in plain truth we had lost a great many men. Now I shall tell you what advantages accrued to the King from this victory, which I only had from Monsieur de Termes, to whom the Marquis de Guast had told it,The great advantages that the winning of the Battail of Cerizolles brought to the King. lying wounded in bed of a Harquebze shot in his thigh. He told him that the Emperor and the King of England were agreed at one and the same time to en∣ter the Kingdom of France, each on his own side▪ and that the Emperor had sent him the seven thousand Germans purposely to make him so strong, that Mon∣sieur d' Anguien might not dare to fight him, and afterwards to march directly to Lomrias there to throw a Bridge over the River, and to put ino Carignan the provisions that he brought along with him, and as much more as he could provide besides, and thence to draw out the four thousand Spanish and German Foot, who were to return towards Ivré, leaving four thousand Italians in their stead; which being done, he was to send back the seven German Colonels, with their Regiments to the Emperor. That then there would still remain with him in his Camp five thou∣sand Germans, and as many Spaniards, with which at the same time, that the King of England should enter the Kingdom, he was to descend by the valley of Ostia, thorough which he should march straight to Lyons, where he should mee no body to oppose him but the Inhabitants of the Cty, nor any Fortress at all: where lying between the two Rivers he might command all the territories of the Duke of Savoy, together with Dauphiné and Provence. All this was told me by Monsieur de Termes after his return; an enterprize that had not been hard to execute had we not won the Battel, in which betwixt twelve and fifteen thousand men of the Enemy were slain. The victory was very important, both in respect of the Prisoners, which were many of them very cosiderable, as also for the Baggage, which was ex∣ceedingly rich; and besides many places surrendred out of fear, and in the end Carig∣nan it self, of which I shall not meddle with the particulars, because I was not present at the surrender. Had they known how to make their advantage of this Battel, Millan had been in a tottering condition: but we never knew how to improve our victories to the best. It is also very true that the King had at this time enough to do to defend his Kingdom from two such powerful enemies. His Majesty having intelligence of the great preparation that was made both by the one and the other, withdrew the greatest part of his Forces out of Piedmont, where I arriv'd at the time when Monsieur de Tais had received a command to bring away all the men he could; for I never could stay long at home, and never hated any thing so much as my own house, so that although I had once put on a resolution (for the wrong that had been done me) never to go any more into that Country, yet when it came too't I could not forbear to go. Monsieur de Tais had made choice of two and twenty Ensigns, the Companies whereof were now very well recruited, to which he moreover raised a new Company, which, at my request, he was pleased to give to Captain Cestegeloux, who had been assisting to me in the raising, and conducting of my men, and had formerly carryed my Ensign in the Kingdom of Naples. And so we began to set forwards towards France, dividing cur Companies into five and five. Of these I had the first Division, and went before to Suzanne, to prevent the Soldiers from getting thither before us, and to take order for the provisions, much of which I found upon the way going thither, which made me redouble my diligence. I arri∣ved in the night two hours before day, at Villaume, and at the Inn where I alighted, found Signior Pedro de Colonna, whom Captain Renovard carried prisoner to the King, according to the capitulation at Carignan. They were already got up and the said Captain Renovard carried me into the Chamber of the said Signior, who at my coming told me, that he understood it was I who had broken the Bridge at Carignan, and that had commanded the Harquebusiers at the Battel. After which, falling into discourse concerning the said Bridge, I told him, that had his people follow'd their fortune, they had found no body to fight with, but my self and some forty men at most; and that our whole Camp was in so great disorder, that had he pursued them, we had all been defeated; and Captain Renovard also assured him, that what I said was true. At which, after a little pause turning towards me he said: E vi dicete che si la nostra Gente seguto havessi la sua fortuna: no havena a combatere piu di voi co quarante soldati, & havessimo poste in fuga tuta la vstra gente. Io vi dico che si vi hvesti seguita la no∣stra m' haveresti messo ri di Carignan, per che la mia gente havia pigliato il spavento
cssi forte che la citta no era bastante di vassecularli. Which in English is this. You tell me that if our people had followed their fortune, they had had to deal with no more of yours than forty Soldiers only, and had put your whole Camp to flight. And I tell you, that had you pursued your fortune, you had driven me out of Carignan, forasmuch as my people had taken so terrible a fright, that the strength of the City had not been sufficient to reassure them: And thereupon told us the great disorder his people were in, saying, that he had once thought the Spaniards had been men without fear, but that he was now satis∣fied, they had as much of that passion about them as other men; and that he was then in so great extremity that he was constrained to throw himself before the Gare, to try to stop them: but that in so doing he was like to have been born down by the torrent, and that they entred in such a crowd, that they had like to have lifted the Gate  the hinges. And so soon, said he, as they were all entred in this disorder. I step'd to the Gate to clap it to, and knowing all the Captains call'd them name by name to come to help me; but not a man would come, inso much that had it not been for a servant of my own, that heard me call out, and came to my assistance, I could never have shut it. Nay the disorder in the Town was moreover so great, that above four hundred threw themselves over the Curtines, who in the morning returning back were ready to dye for shame, and this is the reason why I have told you, that if you had followed your fortune, you had ta∣ken the Town with forty men. By which account of his I knew the Proverb to be true, that says,If one Ar∣my knew what the o∣ther Army did, that Ar∣my would soon be de∣feated. Que si l'ost sçavoit ce que fait l'ost, souvent l'on defferoi l'ost. Now notwithstanding that after the surrender of Carignan the nhabitants of the City assured us of this disorder, yet could we not by any means believe it, especially at the first; or at least that it could be so great; it seem'd so unlikely and so exceeding∣ly strange: but after it had been confess'd by their Governor himself, we were bound to believe it to be true: and that they were pursued by some Phantome, or possessed by some evil spirit; for we did them no harm, being as much frighted as they, and and it may be more: But the night is terrible when a man cannot see by whom he is as∣sanlted. However this make me conclude, that all befel me through good fortune; for it cannot be called valour, but rather the greatest folly that any man could com∣mit; and I do believe, that of all the good fortune God has pleased to bestow upon me, this was the most remarkable and the most stange: but let us proceed to our busi∣ness. The thirst of Revenge had prompted the Emperor (contrary to the faith he had en∣gaged to the Pope) to league and confederate himself with the King of England, who was fallen off from his obedience to the holy Chair, out of despite; which two Prin∣ces (as it was said) had divided the Kingdom (for so both the Marquis de Guast told Monsieur de Termes, and I have since heard the same from an English Gentleman at Boulogne) but however it was but disputing the bears skin.The strength of France. France well united within it self can never be conquer'd till after the loss of a dozen Battels; considering the brave Gentry whereof it is fruitful, and the strong places wherewith it abounds. And I conceive they are deceiv'd who say, that Paris being taken, France is lost. It is indeed the Treasury of the Kingdom, and an unexhausted Magazine, where all the richest of the whole Nation unlade their Treasure, and I do believe in the whole world there is not such a City, for 'tis an old saying, that there is not a Crown in Paris but yields ten Sols revenue once a year; but there are so many other Cities, and strong places in the Kingdom, as are sufficient to destroy thirty Armies. So that it would be easie to rally together, and to recover that from them again, before they could conquer the rest; un∣less the Conqueror would depopulate his own Kingdom, to repeople his new Conquest. I say this because the design of the King of England was to run directly up to Paris, whilst the Emperor should enter into Champagne. The Forces of these two Princes being join'd together consisted of fourscore thousand Foot and twenty thousand Horse, with a prodigious train of Artillery, by which any man may judge whether our King had not enough to do, and whether it was not high time to look about him. Without all doubt these poor Princes have greater care and trouble upon them than the inferior forts of men; and I am of opinion the King did very well to call back his Forces out of Piedmont, though some are pleased to say, that the State of Millan might otherwise have been won, and that the Emperor would have been necessitated to have called back his Forces out of France to defend that Dutey: but all this depended upon event. So it was that God would not suffer these Princes to agree betwixt themselves, each of them being bent upon his own particular advantage; and I have often heard, and sometimes seen, that when two Princes jointly undertake the Conquest of a Kingdom, they never
agree; for each of them is always  of being over reach'd by his companion, and evermore jealous of one another. I have not, I confess, much conversed with Books; but I have heard say, that after this manner we first lost the Kingdom of Na∣ples, and were cheated by the King of Spain. This suspition and jealousie at this time preserved us, as it has at other times one seral others, as the Hstorians report. For my part, I should more apprehend one great single Enemy than two who would divide the Cake between them, there will always be some exceptions taken, and two Nations do not easily agree, as you see here. The English King came and sat down before Bou∣logne, Boulogne sur∣rendred to the English. which was basely surrendred to him by the Siur de Vervin, who lost his life for his labour; an example that ought to be set before all such as undertake the defence of strong holds. This by no means pleased the Spaniard, who reap'd no ad∣vantage by it, saw very well that his confederate would only intend his own business. Our Colonl, Monsiur de Tais, brought three and twenty Ensigns to the King, be∣ing all the same which had been at the Battel, saving one nw Company; but I fell sick at Troyes, and came not up to the Army, till they were advanc'd near to Bou∣logne, where the said Sieur de Tais delivered me the Patent his Majesty had sent me for the Office of Camp-Master;The Sieur de Montluc made Camp-Ma∣ster. but there was nothing done worthy remembrance, till the Camisado of Boulogne. As we arrived near to la Marquise, the Dauphin who commanded the Army had intelligence that it was three or four days since the Town had been taken (though he knew it before) and that the Kng of England was em∣barked and gone for England. It is to be presumed that this Prince had made such hast away only to avoid fighting, forasmuch as he had left all things in so great dis∣order; The King of England re∣tires. for in the first place we found all his Artillery before the Town in a Mea∣dow, that lies upon the descent towards the Tower of Ordre; secondly there was found above thirty Casks full of Corslers which he had caused to be brought out of Germany, therewith to arm his Soldiers, which he had left for the defence of the Town; thirdly he had left all the ammunition of victual, as Corn, Wine, and o∣ther things to eat in the lower Town, insomuch that if Monsieur de Teligni be yet living (as I am told he is) the Father of this who is a Huguenot, and who treated the peace during these troubles, and was taken upon the Camisado in the lower Town, (where not one man but himself escap'd alive) he will bear witness that there was not in the higher Town provision to serve four days, for himself told it me. The occasion of the Camisado was this.The Cami∣sado at ullen; A Son in law of the Mareschal de Bies (not this fine Monsieur de Vervin, but another whose name I have forgot) came to Monsieur de Tais, and told him that a Spy of his, who came from Boulogne, had assu∣red him, that as yet nothing had been remov'd to the higher Town; but that all still remained below, and that if they would speedily attempt to take the lower Town (which might easily be done) they would in eight days time have the upper come out to them with ropes about their necks: and that if Monsieur de Tais so plea∣sed, he would in the morning lead him, where he might himself discover all: the Spy morcover affirming, that as yet not one breach in the wall was repaired; but that all lay open as if it were a village. Upon this information Monsieur de Tais was impatient to go to take a view of all, and took me along with him, together with this Son in law of the Mareschal. We might be about a hundred Horse drawn out of the several Troops, and just at the break of day we arrived before the Town, leaving the Tower of Ordre some two or three hun∣dred paces on the right hand, and saw five or six Pavillions upon the descent in the great high way leading to the Gate of the City. We were no more than five or six Horse only, Monsieur de Tais having left the rest behind a little Hill. This Son in law of the Mareschal, and I therefore went down to the first Pavillion, and passed close by it into the Camp on the left hand, till we came to the second, from whence we disco∣vered all their Artillery,Monsieur de Tais and the Sieur de Mont∣luc discover the Town. at no further distance than fourfcore paces only; neiher did we see any more than three or four English Soldiers that were walking up and down by the Canon, and in the foresaid second Pavillion we heard them jabber English. The Mareschals Son in law then made me return back to Monsieur de Tais, who imme∣diately upon my telling him what we had seen, went down with me to the place from whence I came, and there with the foresaid Gentleman stood still. In the mean time it grew to be fair broad day, so that the Centinels very well perceived us to be none of their own people, and thereupon presently gave the alarm: but for all that we saw not a man offer to sally out of the Tower (I have indeed since been told that Dondellat,
whom Monsieur de St. Pol had bred up of a Page, had the Guard at the Tower) and so we return'd. Monsieur de Tais then with the said Genlman presently went to find out the Dau∣phin, and Monsieur d' Orleans, where it was concluded, that the next inorning at break of day a Camisado should be given,A Camisado concluded on. and that Monsieur de Tais, with our Com∣panies, should give the first onset by three Breaches that were in the wall, on that side where we had been to discover; which were Breaches that had only been made for pleasure. The Rheingrave then entreated the Dauphin that he and his Germans might go on with us to the Assault: but Monsieur de Tais had already promised Count Pedemarie, that he would speak to the Dauphin to give him leave to go on with us, which was a very great misfortune: for had the Germans gone on with us to the Breach, the Enemy had never fir'd one shot, which would have invited a great many more to come in to our relief much sooner than they did. We set out in the night with shirts over our Arms, and met the Rheingrave with his Germans ready and resolved to pass over a Bridge of Brick there was near unto la Mar∣quise, which resolution he was not to be perswaded from; but would pass over after us, what promise soever he had made to the Count. Of which Monsieur de Tais sent pre∣sent word to the Dauphin, and whilst they were in dispute about it, came the Admi∣ral Annebaut, who so far prevailed with the Rhingrave, that at last he was perswa∣ded to retire behind, giving us leave to pass, and the Italians after us; but for his own part he would not stir from the Battail of the Gens d' Armes, that was drawn up near to la Marquise and Monsieur Dampierre also, who was Colonel of the Grisons, came up as far as the Tower of Ordre, where he drew up his men into Battalia. Now Mon∣sieur de Tais had given me one part of his men with them to fall on by the high way on his right hand, being the same he had discover'd the day before. I then charg'd up straight to the Artillery, and those who remain'd with Monsieur de Tais and the Ita∣lians fell on by the three braches, which they bravely carried; and being there was nei∣ther Gate not breach on that side where the Artillery was, I was fain to go all along by the wall on that side towards the River, where I at last found a breach of some ten or twelve paces wide, which I entred without any manner of opposition, and went on straight to the Church: where I saw no Captain of ours, save one only, who was running along by the River directly to the forementioned breaches, and him I call'd to, but he heard me not. Now you must know that Monsieur de Tais was wounded,Monsieur de Tais wounded. and enforc'd to retire; what became of Count Pedemarie I know not: but I was afterwards told that all the Captains, both Gascons and Germans, were gone out of the Town, and had made no stay there, by reason of an Alarm, that the English had recovered the breaches by the out∣side of the Town, as it was true: but there were of them not above two hundred men, that were sallied out on the outside from the higher Town: and I was moreover told that it was Dondellet, who led from the Tower of Ordre straight to the Town. All our Ensigns were left in the Town, but I never perceived any thing of all this: for had I seen the disorder, I do believe, I should have done as the rest did; I will not pretend to be braver than I am. Before the Church I found two Italian Captains only with their Companies and Colours, where so soon as I arrived, I fell to assanlting three or four houses, and forced them, wherein were a great number of English, and most of them without arms; some of which were clad in white and red, others in black and yel∣low, and a great many Soldiers also without those colours; but I soon understood that all those in Liveries were Pioneers; because they had no Arms, as the other had, who defended themselves, and so, that above two hundred of them were slain in the houses. I then march'd straight to the Church, where I found the said Italian Captains (the one call'd Caesar Porto, and the other Hieronimo Megrin, and with these Italians Messieurs D' Andelot and de Novailles, who was Lieutenant to Monsieur de Nemsurs) asking them where all our Captains were; who returned me answer, that they knew not what was become of them. I then began to perceive there was some disorder in the case, not see∣ing one man of all our Companies; excepting those who were entred with me, and a∣bout fifty or threescore others, who had staid behind to plunder, and were rallyed to me at the assault of the houses: whilst I was considering with my self what the matter should be, all on a suddain there came a great number of English full drive directly upon us, as we stood before the Church, and in the street adjoining, crying out, Who goes there? to which I made answer in English, A friend, a friend, (for of all the Langua∣ges that are scattered mongst us, I have learn'd some words, and the Italian and Spa∣nish passably well, which has sometimes been very useful to me) but the English pro∣ceeding
to further Interrogatories, they soon put me to to the end of my Latine; by which perceiving what we were, they presently fell on, crying out, Kill, kill, kill; I then call'd out to the Italin Captains, saying,Which I conceive is to be Englishe thus (for Mr▪ Montluc, by his leave, was no very good Italian) Assist me and stand ready by me, for whilst I go to assault them, there is no reason that you should permit them to en∣close me be∣hind. Ajutate mi, & state appreso me, perehe io me ne vo assablir li, no bisogno lassiar mi investire. Which having said, I ran full drive upon them, who immediately fac'd about, and pursued them, laying on in their rear, to the end of the Street, where they turned off on the right hand along by the wall of the upper Town; from whence they discharged at us some small pieces, and a whole Cloud of of Arrows. I then retir'd back to the Italians, where I was no sooner come and settled in my former order, but that they return'd to charge me again: but I had taken a little heart, having found them so easily to run away, and therefore gave them leave to come up close to us, where I then charg'd them, and we thought they ran away with greater facility than before; I therefore retir'd once more before the Church: but then there fell such a furious storm of Rain, that it seem'd as if God Almighty had been disposed to drown us all; during which shower there came up ten or twelve Ensigns of ours from one of the breaches, at which they had entred, not having above six Sol∣diers with them; and I might have about as many Ensigns with me. One of the Ensigns then told me that the Breaches were all taken, and that the Captains were fled away: Which having heard, I desir'd the two Italian Captains that they should a while make good that Canton,The English put to flight, where the Church stood (for there was a wall before the door of it) and I would go dispute the Breach by which I had entred, which so soon as I should recover, I would send them word, that they might draw off and come to me, and if peradventure the Enemy in the mean time, should come up to them, that then they should remember what they had seen me do, and boldly charge them. I then went to the breach, where I saw already ten or twelve English got thither, two of which stood upon their defence; but of the rest, some leap'd over the Breach, and others slipt on the right hand along the inside of the wall, and so soon as we were got out, we saw moreover fifteen or twenty that came running towards us, along on the outside the wall, and seeing us turn'd on the right hand towards the other breaches, by which our people before had entred. I then entreated a Gentleman of Burgundy (whose name I have forgot) who was mounted upon a horse he had taken, that he would go to Caesar Porto and Hieronimo Megrin to call them away, which he was very willing to do, provided I would promise to stay for him, which I assured him upon my life I would do, and that dead or alive he should find me at this Breach. The Rain still continued more and more violent, when the said Gentleman returning, told me that he could not possibly get to them; and that they were either retreated into the Church, or all dead. when behold on a suddain three or four hun∣dred English came at a good round trot directly upon us all along by the wall, just as we▪ were upon the point to enter again to go relieve the Italians: but seeing them come full drive upon us, we were constrained to alter that resolu∣tion. Messieurs d' Andelot, de Novailles, this Burgundian Gentleman and three or four others had never stirred from my side, from the time they had first met me before the Church (and it was well for them, for if they had they had gone to pot with the rest) and as the English came on in this fury, there arose a hubub amongst us, some crying out to me to fly towards the River,The French in fear. and others towards the Mountain: but upon the instant I resolv'd ro remonstrate to them, What have you to do to go to the Mountain? in our way thither we must of necessity pass close by the higher Town; for to go directly to the River, do you not see that it is rising, and got so high already that we shall be all drown'd? let no one therefore think any more of that; but let us make our selves ready, for we must fight these people. Whereupon Monsieur d' AndlotThe courage of Mr. d' A∣delot. cryed out aloud, I, I, Captain Montluc, I pray you let us fight them; for that is the best. He was a man of very great courage, and 'tis great pity he afterwards turn'd Huguenot; for I do be∣lieve he was one of the bravest Gentlemen in the Kingdom. We therefore march'd directly up to them, when so soon as we came within four or five Pikes length of them, they let fly a great shower of Arrows upon us, and we ran up to them to push a Pike; for there were but two Harquebuze shot fired, and immediately they faced about, and fled the same way they came. We follow'd after, and very close, and when they came to the Canton of the Town towards their own people, who kept almost all our Ensigns enclosed, they seeing them come, and we pursuing in the rear of them, quitted the Breaches to relieve their own men, and rallying all together came running directly upon us, who were all at the foot of the Mountain of the Tower
of Ordre. I then cryed to Monsieur d' Andelot, and to all the Ensigns and Solders, Get away as fast as you can and climb the Mountain; for I, for my own part, with four or five Pikes, would stay to see the event of all, retiring towards a Rivolet which was by the Artillery. So soon as the English had quitted the breach, to come to us, our Ensigns leap'd out of the Town towards the valley, by which they had come, and being got to the foot of the Mountain, where Monsieur d' Andelot and the Ensigns were marching up, the Enemy saw that our Ensigns were again pass'd over the Breaches, and that the said Andelot with the other Ensigns were got half way up the Hill; they then thought to turn after the others, as they did, but could never overtake above eight or ten Soldiers at the most, whom they cut all to pieces. Five or six English then came up to me, and I pass'd the Rivolet, where the Water was more than knee deep above the Banks. They bestow'd some Arrows upon me, and shot them into the Targuet, and another thorough a sleeve of Mail I wore upon my right arm; which for my part of the Booty I carried home to my Quarters,The Sieur de Montluc came the last man out of Bullen. and having received them, went to mount the Hill on the backside of the Tower of Ordre. Monsieur le Dauphin, having with him Monsieur d' Orleans and the Admiral, made his Lansquenets to march to relieve us within the Town; but before they could come near the disorder was already hapned, and they found Messieurs d' Andelot and de Novailles with the Ensigns, who were got up to the top of the Mountain. In the interim of this confusion the Vidame of Chartres, and my Brother Monsieur de Lieux, advanc'd as far as the bottom of the Hill, to see if they could learn any news of me; but they were sent back with a vengeance, and told the Dauphin that they did certainly believe I was slain within the Town: forasmuch as they had seen all the Captains, me only excepted; and whilst they were in this discourse Monsieur d' An∣delot arrived, of whom the Dauphin demanded if he knew what was become of me, to whom he made answer, that I had been the preservation of him and all those that were with him: but that (it seem'd) I had not known how to save my self, which I might have done, if I had so pleased, as well as the rest. The said Sieur d' Andelot conclu∣ded me for dead, believing that I had suffered my self to be snap'd about their Artillery, or by a Ship that lay upon the Rivolet I passed over; but I was no such fool: for I call God to witness, and let him punish me according to my perjury, if of all that day I ever lost my understanding, and it was a great blessing that God was pleased to preserve it to me entire; for had I lost my judgment, we had received a very great disgrace, which we could neither have concealed nor excused, and I had been in great danger never to have been a Mareschal of France. We had lost all our Ensigns, and those that carried them withall, which nevertheless God gave me the grace to save. When a man is once possessed with fear, and that he loses his judgment, as all men in a fright do, he knows not what he does, and it is the principal thing you are to beg at the hands of Almighty God, to preserve your undestanding entire; for what dan∣ger soever there may be, there is still one way or other to get off, and perhaps to your honor: But when fear has once possessed your judgment, God ye good even! you think you are flying towards the poop, when you are running towards the prow, and for one Enemy you think you have ten before your eyes, as drunkards do, who see a thousand candles at once. Oh 'tis a wonderful advantage to a man of our Trade, when his danger does not deprive him of his sence, he may then take his opportunity, and avoid both shame and ruin. In the evening I went to the Dauphin for the Word, because Monsieur de Tais himself was wounded and could not go; when, so soon as I came into his presence, Mon∣sieur d' Orleans, who always delighted to jest with me (as the Dauphin also himself sometimes would do) began to sing the Camisado of Bullen, and the assault of Cony, for the old Soldiers of Piedmont, jeering and pointing at me with his finger: at which I began to be angry, and fell to cursing those who had been the cause; at which the Dauphin laugh'd, and at last said to me; Montluc, Montluc, in plain truth, you Cap∣tains can by no means excuse it, that you have not carried your selves very ill. Which way, Sir, (said I) can you conceive me to be any way in fault? if I knew my self to be guilty I would at this instant go, and cause my self to be killed in the Town: but in truth we were a company of Coxcombs, to venture our lives in your service. Whereupon he said No, No, I do not mean you, for you were the last Captain that came out of the Town, and above an hour after all the rest. He gave me very well to understand, when he came to be King, that I had not fail'd of my duty, by the value he was ever plea∣sed to put upon me; for when he went his expedition into Piedmont, he sent an ex∣press Courrier to fetch me from my own house, to which I had retired my self by reason
of a certain pique, that Madam d' Estampes had conceived against me, about the quarrel betwixt Messieurs de Chstaign raie, and de Iarnac. A man has evermore one good office or another done him at Court, and the mischief on't is, the women evermore rule the rost: but I shall not take upon me to be a Reformer, Madam d' Estampes sent better men than my self packing from Court, who have made no boasts of it: but I wonder at our brave Historians that they dare not tell the uth. This was the success of the Camisado of Boulogne,Oversight in the Camsado at Bulln. whereas had the Camp follow'd after us, they might all have quarrer'd in the Town, and in four or five dayes (as I have already said) the higher Town had been our own. Let any one ask Monsieur de Teligni, if he be the man who was taken prisoner there, and see whether or no I tell a lye. I do not know who was the cause that the Dolphin did not march, but I shall al∣wayes affum that he ought to have done it, and know also very well that it did not stick at him; but it were to enter into disputes to say any more of that businss. Had they come, the English would not have known which way to turn them. I discover'd them to be men of very little heart, and believe them to be better at Sea than by Land. The Dolphin seeing the Winter draw on (having left Monsieur le Mareschal de Bies at Monstruille, to bdle and keep Boulegne in aw) return'd back to the King, who also had concluded a Peace with the Emperor:Peace conclu∣ded betwixt the Emperor and the King of France. all this great preparation, and those invincible forces, to our great good fortune, vanishing through the ill intelligence betwixt these two Princes, I mean the Spaniard and the English. Evil befal him that will ever love the one, or the other. Three months after I quitted my command of Camp-master, to go to de∣fend a little estate that had been left me by an Uncle of mine. I had much ado to ob∣tain leave of the King to go; but in the end the Admiral wrought so effectually in my behalf, that it was granted upon condition that I would promise him to take upon me the same employment in case the said Admiral should have the command of the Army. He fail'd not of that command, nor thereupon to summon me upon my promise I had made him, but obtain'd a Commssion from the King (which he sent me) to be Camp-master to fifty or threscore Ensigns that his Majesty would set on foot for the English voyage. I brought the men accordingly to Havre de Grace, where I delivered them in∣to the hands of Monsieur de Tais. We then put to sea, Our Navy consisted of above two hundred and fifty sail, and the most beautiful Ships that ever eyes beheld, with their Gallies. The ardent desire the King had to revenge himself on the King of England made him enter into a very vast expence, which in the end serv'd to very lile purpose, al∣though we first landed,A Naval E∣gagement be∣twixt the French and the English Ano 1545. and afterwards fought the English upon the sea, where many Ships were sunk on both sides: When at our setting out I saw the great Carrick (which was certainly the goodliest Vssel in the world) burnt down to the water, I had no great opinion of our Enterprize. But being that I for my particular perform'd nothing in that expedition worthy remembrance, and that moreover a perfect account of that Na∣val Engagement has been given by others, I shall let it alone to give a Narrative of the conquest of the Territory of Oye:The French no very good sea∣men. and indeed our business lies more properly by land than by water; where I do not know that our Nation has ever obtain'd any great victories. So soon as we were return'd from the Coast of England, and disembark' at Havre de Grace, the Admiral went to attend the King, and Monsieur de Tais went along with him, carrying all the Companies to the Fort of Outreau before Boulogne, where Captain Ville-franche had been left with the old Companies in the quality of Camp-master, he ha∣ving been put into the Command that I had formerly quitted. The Mareschal de Bics his Majesties Lieutenant in that Country,The Marschl de Bis before Bullen. had something to do, as Monsieur de St. Ger∣main, whom the King had given him for an assistant, can very well witness; for all the Pioniers had forsook him, and were stoln away, as is usual with those rascally people, if they be not narrowly look't unto: and yet had he all the Courtine leading towards the Bridge of Brick to make. Of which affair though there be no fighting in the case, I think fit to give an accont in this place, that it may serve for an example to others in command, upon the like occasion. The Mareschal being frequently solicited by the King to put this fort into a posture of defence to block up Boulogne, told me that there was a necessity the Soldiers should work, since the Pioneers were wanting; of which I accordingly carried word to the Captains, and they from me to the Soldiers, who all at once flatly deny'd to do it, say∣ing They were Soldiers,The Captains refuse to work at the For∣cation. and not Pioneers. With this answer the Mareschal was highly offended, and in great anxicty what to do, forasmuch as the Courtine remained open, and that the King of England had sent fresh supplies of men into Bullen. Wherefore the Mareschal having sent throughtout all the Country for Pioneers, and none being to be got, I contriv'd a way to make the Soldiers work, which was by giving them five
pence a day, the ordinary pay given to the Pioneers. The Mareschal very readily consented to the motion, but notwithstanding I could not find one who would once put his hand to the work. Seeing therefore their refusal, to invite them by my example, I took my own Company, that of Monsieur de Lieux my Brother, with those of Captain Leberon my Brother-in-law, and Captain Labit my Cousin German; for those I knew durst not refuse me. We wanted no tools, for the Mareschal had made provision of very great store, and moreover the Pioneers who were run away, had left all theirs in a great Tent, which the Mareschal had caused to be set up to that purpose. So soon as I came to the Courtin I began my self first to break ground, and after me all the Captains. I had cansed a Barrel of wine to be brought to the place, and with it my dinner, which I had order'd to be much greater than ordinary, and the Captains also had brought theirs along with them, together with a Sack full of pence which I shew'd to the Soldi∣ers; and after having wrought a start every Captain din'd with his own Company, and to every Soldier we gave half a loaf, some wine and a little slesh; of which also we were more liberal to some than to others, pretending they had taken more pains than their fellows, on purpose to encourage them; and so soon as we had din'd we again fell to our work, singing and plying our business until late in the evening, insomuch that one would have thought we had never follow'd any other Trade. So soon as we gave o∣ver, three Treasurers of the Army paid to every man five sols, and at our return to our Tents, the other Soldiers by way of dirision call'd ours Pioneers and Delvers. The next morning Captain Forcez came to tell me, that all his men also wold come to the work, and those of his Brother likewise (who is also yet living) all which I receiv'd, and we did as the day before; the third day they would all come, so that in eight dayes time we had finisht the whole Courtin; and all the Engeneers told Monsieur de St. Germin (who himself had never stirr'd from the work) that my Soldiers had done more in eight dayes, than four times so many Pioneers would have done in five weeks. And observe that Captains, Lieutenants, and Ensigns stuck all the while as close to the work, as the meanest Soldier did, and serv'd as inciters to the rest. I thought fit to commit this Exemple to writing, to let the Captains see, that it is not the Soldiers fault, if they do not perform whatsoever you would have them do: but then you must get the knack to make them do it chearfully, and with a good will, and not by force; put your hands first to the work your selves, and your Soldiers will for shame follow your exemple, and do more than you would have them do. But if you come to ill words and blows, it must be when out of spite they refuse to do a thing to which they are no ways obliged; and to that we are indeed sometimes by necessicy con∣strain'd. O Camrades, how often have I, seeing the Soldier weary, and ready to faint, alighted rom my horse to walk with them on foot, to encourage them to make a long march! how often have I drunk water with them, that they might chearfully suffer by my exemple. Believe me, Gentlemen, that all depends upon your selves, and that your Soldiers will conform themselves to your humour, as it is ordinarily seen. There is a mean in all things, sometimes a little roughness is very requisite, but then it must not be against a whole Company, but some particular person, who would grumble, and hinder the rest that are well disposed. I have ere now made some surly stubborn rascalls feel my anger of which I now repent me. Sometime after the Mareschal de Biez would attempt to seize upon, and lay waste the Territory of Oye,Oye is a Coun∣ty of Picardy wherein are the Cities of Calice, Oye, and some others of less note extend∣ing it self as far as Duakik in the Low Countries, and was possest by the English 210 years. having in vain tryed to tempt the English to a Battail. All our new Companies therefore march't, for the old stirr'd not out of the Fort, but were kept there to guard it, and the Marescal took six or seven pieces of great Artillery along with him; so that we set out secretly in the beginning of the night, and went to some little Villages that had formerly been burnt. This Enterprise was taken in hand contrary to the opi∣nion of all the Captains in the Army, out of the hope the said Mareschal had to bring it to a Batail, which had drawn several Princes and Lords to come from the Court: Where after there was no more hopes of drawing the English into the field, the Mares∣chal deliberated to take some Forts from them in the County of Oye. Now so soon as they drew very near to one of these Forts, the Mareschal, Messieurs de Brisac, and de Tais, drew themselves apart (I think Monsieur de Estre was with them, being then newly come out of prison) Monsieur de Bordillon, and three or four others (whose names I have forgot) and got up to a little eminence under the shadow of a Tree, from thence peeping and considering which of the said Bastions, that were opposite to us, they should as∣sault; and in the mean time I caus'd all our Ensigns to make a halt for the last, which were yet a league behind. Now you must know I had never been there till this time;
neiher have I ever been there since, but to the best of my memory I shall describe the sination of the place. I was to descend about thirty or forty paces,Description of the English Fort. to enter into a great Meadow, where on my right hand there was one Bastion, and on my left hand, at the distance of a good Haquebuz shot, another, and so consequently all along the Curine leading towards Calice (which Courtine was only of earth, and about two fathoms high) there was also two great Ditches with water middle deep, and betwixt the two Ditches there was a Terrace of earth. Whilst they were in cosultation under this Tree on my left hand, I took Cap∣tain Favas, and la Moyenne, having both been my Lieutenants, and about 300 Harquebu∣zeers, to whom I gave the leading of the sust Division, and I stood behind in the Rear of them.attempt upon the English Forts. There presently sallyed out of the Fort an hundred or sixscore English, who came into the Meadow, having planted five or six Muskeieers upon their Terrcss, betwixt two Ditches, and ply'd us smartly with their shot, having left betwixt the said Bassions and Ditches a little path, by which one man only could march a breast, to enter in, and fally out of their Fort, confident, it seems, that under favour of their Muskers, those of ours on the outside would not dare to charge them. Our men began then to Harque∣buz it at a good smart rate, and they to let sly their arrows: but me-thought they had still an eye towards their retreat; wherefore being mounted on a little pad Nag, I came up to the Captains, and said these words to them. Camrades, these people are mainly enclin'd to retreat, and I see it is out of a confidence they have in their Muskets, charge then briskly through and through, and I will second you. I needed not to bid them twice, for before I could return to the head of my men, I saw them together by the ears, and in a moment the English put to ligh: wherefore I stop my men from falling on, to make sirm in case any more should sally out. This little path was some∣thing narrow, and adjoyning to the Bastion, under which the one part of them stood sirm, the rest cast themselves into the Ditches in so great hast, that they had not leisure to carry off all their Muskets, for our Soldiers leapt into the water as soon as they, and brought away sour of them; and there were four or five of the said Soldiers that pass't over the said Terrace, and the other Ditch, to the very foot of the Courtine, who brought me word that the greatest depth of water was in the first Ditch; for the other next the Courtine was not above knee deep. I then presently spoke to the Captains, Favas and la Moyenne, that they should draw up my Division and theirs together, and finding Captain Aurioqui, and almost all the other Captains entreated them them to make two Divisions of theirs; for that so soon as I had spoken with Monsieur de Tais, I would go on to an Assault. They then told me, that they wanted near half of their Soldiers, who were not yet come up, to which I made answer, that it was no matter, seeing that with those we had we could do our business, who thereupon without further reply began to divide themselves into two Bodies, and I ran to speak with Monsieur de Tais, whom I found with the Mareschal and the rest, and said to him; Let us go, Sir, let us go to the Assault, for we shall carry the Courtine; I have tasted them, and find, that they have more mind to run than fight. The Mareschal then said to me, What is it you say Captain Mont∣luc, would to God we were certain presently to carry it with all the Artillery we have. Where∣upon I answered him aloud; Sir, we shall have strangled them all before your Artillery can come up to us,The Sieurs de Tais and Mont∣luc, go on to the Assault. and taking Monsieur de Tais by the arm, said to him; Let us go, Sir, you have believ'd me at other times, and have not repented; neither shall you repent you of this. I have discover'd by these approaches, that these people are little worth. Let us go then, answered he, and as we were entring into the Meadow, we already found our two Divisions of Pikes and Harquebuzeers separated apart. Look you, Sir, then said I, take your choice on which hand you will fight, whether on that of this Ensign over against the Bastion below, or on that of the Engsin opposite to those I have fought with: who thereupon said to me, Fight you that Body you have already attaqu't, and I will go fight the other, and so we parted. So soon as the Mareschal de Biez saw us begin to march, he (as Monsieur de Bordllon told me afterwards) said these words; now we shall see if Tais with his Gascons be so brave as he pretends. I then call'd all the Sergeans of my Division, saying to them aloud at the head of our Battail; You Sergeants have ever been accustomed, when we go to fight, to be in the Flanks behind, but I will have you now fight in the first Rink. Do you see that Ensign there? if you do not win it, as many as I shall meet slinking off in my way as I go, I shall make bold to cut his hamstrings; you know I am pretty dextrous that way: then turning towards the Captains, I said, and you, Camrades, if I am not there as soon as they, do you cut mine. I then ran to Captain Favas and la Moyenne (who might be at the di∣stance of some thirty paces) and said to them, March, and throw your selves headlong into the
Ditch, and in an instant return'd to my men, when havingA Ceremo∣ny formerly used when Sol∣diers went on to an Assault, or to any des∣perate Enter∣prise. kist the ground, I ran straight up to the Ditches, making the Sergeants still to march before, and passing over the first and the second, came up to the foot of the Courtin. I then said to the Sergeants, Help one another, help one another with your Halberts to get up, which they speedily did, and others pasht them on behind, throwing them headlong into the Fort: I had also a Halbert in my hand. In the mean time arriv'd all the Captains and Pikes, who found me making a great shew of endeavouring to get up with my Halbert, holding with my left hand by the wood;An Assault gi∣ven to the En∣glish Fort. when some of them, not knowing who I was, took me by the breech, and pusht me quite over on the other side, making me by that means more va∣liant than I intended to be; for what I did was only to encourage the rest to get over: but that follow, whoever he was, made me forget my policy, and take a leap that I had no intent to have taken; and indeed in my whole life I did never see people so soon get over a Curtine. After I had taken this leap, Captain Favas and la Moyenne, who were in the Ditch of the Bastion, put themselves into the little pah, and past on the other side into the Bastion, where all they found within it they put to the sword. Monsieur de Tais, who went on to his encounter, seeing us scrambling, up the Courtine, threw hmself into the Ditches of the other Fort,The English put to flight. when the English seeing their people put to flight, and we entring into it, quitted the Fort, and ran away as fast as they could towards Calice. The Mareschal this while seeing us run on so bravely upon the Enemy, cried out (as I was told after) Oh heavens! they are already got in; whereupon the Seigneurs de Brissac and de Bourdillon came full speed upon the spur, and the said Sei∣gneur de Brissac General of the Horse, put his horse into the little path, where one man could not very easily pass, stretching out his legs at full length upon the horse neck, at whose mercy he past over, Monsieur de Bordillon after him, and after them follow'd some fourty or fifty horse, all leading their horses in their hands. Monsieur de Brissac then presently came up to me, whom he found drawing up all the men into Battalion, be∣lieving that we should be fought with, and that those of Calice would certainly issue out to relieve their men. I had got an Ensign we had won upon my shoulder, which in his presence I restor'd to the Sergeant who had taken it, bidding him go and carry it to Monsieur de Tais, which he did, and the said Sieur de Tais so soon as he had receiv'd it, sent it by the same Sergeant to the Mareschal, who was very busie with his Pioneers, breaking down the Courtine (which was only of earth) to make way for the Gens-d'| Armes to pass over; and now we were all within, Artillery and all; where so soon as we were all arriv'd, Messieurs de Brissac and de Bordillon, with the forty or fifty horse that had entred with them, took the right hand toward the Sluces which separate the Couny of Artois from the County of Oye, where they met with forty or fifty of the English, bearing Launces, who presently began to retire full gallop towards Calice. Mon∣sieur de Brissac was jealous, that these had only run away to draw him into some Am∣buscado, and therefore made a halt, sending out Castegeac to discover a little valley that was on his left hand; which said Castegeac presently brought him word that he had seen above 400 horse, but it was no such thing, those he saw being no other than Country∣men and women of the neighbouring Villages, who were flying towards Calice, which was a great misfortune; for otherwise Monsieur de Brissac had pursued them, and they were all the Cavalry that the Enemy had in Calice, which had been no inconsiderable defeart. A General of all things ought always to send out an old Soldier, or some one whose intelligence he may absolutely rely upon, to discover; for men of little experience soon take the alarm, and fancy Bushes to be Battaillons. I will not say that CastegeacThe mistake of Castegeac. was no Soldier, but upon my word he here committed a very great error. Our Cavalry being got over the Breach, the Mareschal had caused to be made, Mon∣sieur de Tais would himself lead the Harquebuzeers, ordering me to remain with the Battail of Pikes. There were ten or twelve Ensigns which retir'd towards Calice, and had been coming to have disputed our entry, which, could they have come up in time, had found us enough to do, with our Artillery and all, as the Mareschal had told me when I went to call Monsieur de Tais to go on to the Assault: and although I know very well at whom it stuck, that we did not fight them ten or twelve Ensigns, I will however for∣bear committing it to writing,Fault of the French forasmuch as in delivering the truth, I should be ob∣lig'd to speak ill of some particular persons, and those none of the least, which I will by no means do: But if Monsieur de St. Cire (who was Lieutenant to fifty men at arms belonging to Monsieur Boissy, who died Grand Escuyer) were alive, he could tell where the fault lay, for he was there grievously wounded, had his horse kill'd under him, and above forty horses more of the same Troop kill'd and wounded. There fol∣low'd
a great quarrel upon it, which proceeded so far as almost to bring two men to fight in Lists. It was indeed a most infamous cowardise, and of great prejudice to his Majesties service; for had those been defeated, there had no body been left in Calice but old men and women, and I have since heard the Mareschal de Biez say, that had those Ensigns been cut off, with his Artillery he had taken the Town in two days. But seeing those people to be retreated safe into the City, they concluded to retire, which two days after we did; as also the season of the year began to settle into very great rain. Let me tell you Captains you ought not disdain to learn something of me, who am the oldest Captain in France, and who have been in as many Battails, or more, as any Captain of Europe, as you will judge at the end of my Book. Know therefore that the reasons which induc't me to attempt this affault, were these. First, because I had felt the pulse of the English at my first arrival, and found them a very easie Enemy. Secondly, because they had abandon'd their Fortifications, which we gain'd, having the Bastion that serv'd them for a Flanker. Thirdly, because from the little eminence where I had made a halt before I went down into the Meadow, I had seen coming along the Plain on the inside toward Calice a great number of people coming from thence, and observ'd all the Courtine to be full of men, by which I saw it was high time to fall on; and for a fourth reason, because that in the Ditch next to the Courtine there was very little water, and from the said Ditch to the said Courtine it was but two good steps, where the Soldiers might stand well enough, and with a little help of their Pikes or Halberts, and the assistance of one another (the Courtine being no more than two fadoms high) we should carry the place. When (Captains) therefore your eye shall have discharg'd its office in discovering the number of your Enemy, and the strength of the place where he is, and that you have tasted, and found him apt to fly, charge him whilst he is in the fear you have possest him withal, for if you give him time to recover his senses, and to forget his fright, you will be more often in danger of being beaten, than likely to beat. Wherefore you ought evermore to pursue him in his fear, without giving him leisure to re-assume his courage, and carry always about you the Motto of Alexander the Great, which is: Deferr not that till to morrow thou canst do to day; for many things fall out betwixt the lip and the cup, especially in war, and then it will be too late to say, I should never have thought it. You shall execute many things in your heat, which, if you give your selves leisure to consider of, you will think of it thrice before you once attempt it. Push home then, venture, and do not give your Enemies leisure to consult together, for one will encourage another. Being return'd to the Fort of Outrea; there was hardly a day past that the English did not come to tickle us upon the descent towards the Sea, and would commonly brave our people up to our very Canon, which was within ten or twelve paces of the Fort: and we were all abus'd by what we had heard our Predecessors say, that one English man would always beat two French men, and that the English would never run away, nor never yield. I had retain'd something of the Camisado of Bullen, and of the business of Oye; and therefore said one day to Mousieur de Tais, that I would discover to him the mystery of the English, and wherefore they were reputed so hardy: which was, that they all carried arms of little reach, and therefore were necessitated to come up close to us to loose their arrows,A discourse concerning the valour of the English. which otherwise would do no execution; whereas we who were accustomed to fire our Harquebuzes at a great distance, seeing the Enemy use another manner of sight, thought these near approaches of theirs very strange, imputing their running on at this confident rate to absolute bravery: but I will lay them an Ambus∣cado, and then you shall see if I am in the right or no, and whether a Gascon be not as good as an English-man. In antient time their Fathers and ours were neighbours. I then chose out sixscore men, Harquebuzeers and Pikes, with some Halberts amongst them, and lodg'd them in a hollow which the water had made, lying below on the right hand of the Fort, and sent Captain Chaux at the time when it was low water, straight to some little houses which were upon the Banks of the River almost over against the Town to skirmish with them, with instructions that so soon as he should see them pass the River, he should begin to retire, and give them leave to make a charge. Which he accordingly did: but it fortun'd so, that he was wounded in one of his arms with a Hurquebuz shot, and the Soldiers took him and carried him back to the Fort, so that the skirmish remained without a head.Encountet be∣twixt the Eng∣lish and the French. The English were soon aware of it, and gave them a very brisk charge, driving them on fighting up to the very Canon. Seeing then our men so ill handled, I start up out of my Ambuscado sooner then I should have done, running on full drive directly up to them, commanding the Soldiers not to shoot, till they came within the distance of their arrows. They were two or three hundred men,
having some Italian Harquebuzeers amongst them, which made me heartily repent that I had made my Ambuscado no stronger: but it was now past remedy, and so soon as they saw me coming towards them, they left the pursuit of the others, and came to charge upon me. We marcht straight up to them, and so soon as they were come up within arrow shot, our Harquebuzeers gave their volley all at once, and then clapt their hands to their swords, as I had commanded, and we ran on to come to blows; but so soon as we came within two or three pikes length, they turn'd their backs with as great facility as any Nation that ever I saw, and we pursued them as far as the River, close by the Town, and there were four or five of our Soldiers who followed them to the other side. I then made a halt at the ruins of the little houses, where I rally'd my people to∣gether again, some of whom were left by the way behind, who were not able to run so fast as the rest. Monsieur de Tais had seen all, and was sally'd out of the Fort to re∣lieve the Artillery,A pleasant dis∣course of the Siur de Mont∣luc concerning the English. to whom so soon as I came up to him, I said, Look you, did I not tell you how it would be? We must either conclude that the English of former times were more valiant then those of this present age, or that we are better men than our forefathers. I know not which of the two it is. In good earnest, said Monsieur de Tais, these people retreat in very great hast▪ I shall never again have so good an opinion of the English, as I have had heretofore. No Sir, said I, you must know that the English who antiently us'd to eat the French, were half Gascons, for they married into Gascony, and so bred good Soldiers: but now that race is worn out, and they are no more the same men they were. From that time forwards our people had no more the same opinion, nor the same fear of the English, that before. Therefore (Captains) as much as you can, keep your Sol∣diers from apprehending an Enemy; for if they once conceive an extraordinary opinion of their valour, they ever go on to fight in fear of being defeated. You are neither to despise your Enemy, neither should your Soldiers think them to be more valiant than themselves. Ever after this charge I observ'd our men alwayes to go on more chearfully to aque the English, and came still up closer to them; and let any one remember when the Mareschal de BiezThe remarka∣ble valour of the Mareschal de Biez. fought them betwixt the Fort of Andelot, and the Town, whe∣ther our people needed to be intreated to fall on. The said Sieur de Biez there per∣form'd the part of a very valiant Gentleman, for when his Cavalry were all run off the Field, he came alone to put himself in the head of our Battallion, and alighted, taking a Pike in his hand to go on to the fight, from whence he came off with very great honor. I my self was not there, and therefore shall say nothing of it; for two or three months after our return out of the County of Oye, I had askt leave of Monsieur do Tais to go to Court: but the Historians in the mean time are very unjust to conceal such brave acti∣ons, and that was a very remarkable one in this old Cavalier. Being at Court I pre∣vail'd so far with the Admiral, that he procur'd me a dismission from the King, for as much as I had reassum'd the office of Camp-Master upon no other terms, but only to command in the first Expedition that the Admiral should go upon; and having remain'd a month at Court, attending the King in the quality of one of his Gentlemen Waiters (who was now grown old, and melancholic, and did not caress men, as he had wont to do, only once he talkt with me about the Battail of Serisoles, being at Fountain-Bleau) I took my leave of his Majesty, and never saw him after. I then return'd into Gascony, from whence I never stirr'd till King Henry by the death of his Father was become King,Bullen deliver∣ed up to the French the 25. day of April, 1991. having all that while been opprest with troubles and sickness. And that is the reason why I can give you no account of the surrender of Bullen, which the King of England by the ob∣stinacy of Francis the first,The death of Francis the first. was constrain'd to quit for some consideration in mony. A little after he died, and our King stay'd but a very little behind him. We must all die; but this Surrender of Bullen hapened in the reign of King Henry, my good Master, who succeeded his Father. Our new King having peace with the Emperor, and after the redelivery of Bullen, being also friends with the King of England, it seem'd that our arms were likely long to rust by the walls; and indeed, if these two Princes sit still, France may be at rest. After having continued some time at home, the King was pleas'd to call me away, and to give me the command of Camp-master, and the government of MontcallierThe Sieur de Montluc Gover∣nor of Montcal∣lier. under the Prince of Malphé his Lieutenant-General in Piedmont, Monsieur de Bonnevet being our Colonel: he remembers me very well, and if those who have govern'd since had lov'd me as well as he, I had had as much riches and honour as any Gentleman that has come out of Gascony these many years. I there remain'd eighteen moneths, without doing any thing all the while worthy to be remembred; for I will write nothing, but that wherein I had some command. Having obtain'd leave to retire my self to my own house, I return'd into Gascony, where I heard a little while after, that by reason of the age and infirmness
of the Prince of Malphé, the King was about to send thither Monsieur de BrissacMonsieur de Brissac Lieure∣nant General in Piedmont. in the quality of his Lieutenant General there, which was the occasion that Captain Tilladet (who had also been dismist) and my self went together to Court, where at our coming, we found that the said Seigneur had taken his leave of the King in order to his Journey. We then presented our selves before his Majesty, who very graciously received us; and to the Constable, who was return'd to Court, and in greater favour than ever in the time of King Francis, which many did hardly believe he would have been: but the Ladies had now lost their credit, and others were entred in. Immediately upon our comming his said Majesty, who was all this time in a little Town betwixt Melun and Paris, called Ville-neufve Saint George, commanded us to go to Paris, and repair to Monsieur Brissac. The next day after our arrival, the said Sieur de Brissac departed, being very glad that we were come to him, and so we went as far as Suze, where we found the Prince of Mal∣phé,The death of the Prince of Malphé. who had put himself upon his way, to come to end his life in France, as also with∣in an hour after our arrival he died. Which, though I serv'd some time under his com∣mand, is all I shall say of him, having very little opportunity to know more of him, than what I have taken upon trust; and it is a great misfortune to a Captain, so often to change his General; for before you can come to be throughly acquainted with him, you are old; and new friendships, and new acquaintance are troublesome. Monsieur de Brissac presently hereupon dispatcht away Monsieur de Forquevaux to the King with an account of all, whom his Majesty sent speedily back again with the Patent of Mareschal of France,Monsieur de Brissac made Mareschal of France. which he was pleased to conferr upon him. We lay idle five or six moneths without any war; but it is hard for two so great Prin∣ces, and so near neighbours, to continue long without coming to arms, and indeed soon after an occasion presented it self: the King having taken upon him the protection of Duke Octavia, whom the Pope, and the Emperor his Father in Law, would deprive of his Duke∣dome. In order whereunto Don Ferrand de Gonzaga had laid siege to Parma, wherein was Monsieur de Termes, and to Miranda where Monsieur de Sansac commanded, who ere acquir'd very great reputation, for having worthily acquitted and approved himself a sin∣gular good Captain, as in truth he was; which he has also manifested in all places where∣ever he has been.The war be∣twixt France and Spain renewed. He was one of the best Horse-men that ever was in France: but be∣ing I can give no account of these affairs, but by report only; nor of what passed at these two Sieges, I shall let them alone. The King having intelligence that the Emperors forces were wholly taken up in Par∣mesan, sent to the Mareschal de Brissac,This war be∣gun in the year 1550. that he should break the Peace, and upon the rupture to attempt to surprize some Town or other upon the Frontier, which he did. For he took Quiers, and St. Damian: but the attempt upon Cairas did not succeed, as did the other two. Monsieur de Bassé went to execute that of St. Damian, which he surpriz'd betwixt break of day and Sun rise, and the Mareschal himself executed that of Quiers after the manner I am going to relate, and I think Monsieur le President de Birague, who was there present, will in this Book find that I have not much missed it in the rela∣tion. Monsieur d' Ausun was chosen to goe execute the design upon Cairas, who took with him the Baron de Cypi, and two or three other French Companies, together with Monsieur de Gental, and some Italians. The Scalado was given with great fury; but they were as well receiv'd.The Enterprize of Cairas. There died one of the Brothers of Monsieur de Charry, who was gone as far as Savillan, and being in their way as they marcht in the night, went along with them, and mounted a ladder the first man, from which he was beaten down. He was ill enough followed, as it was said. In the mean time Monsieur de Bassé took some Companies with him, with which by break of day he arrived within half a mile of St. Damian; they were once upon the point to return, seeing they should be discover'd before they could come to the place, but in the end marcht on to try their fortune. The custom of St. Damian was, that the Soldiers constantly opened the Gates every morning at break of day, to let all the people out to work, and afterwards placed some Centinels upon the wall; so that the Sieur de Bassé entered with his ladders into the Graff, and had rear'd them to the wall before he was discover'd. The Captains mounted first, and before they were espy'd by any, the one half of our people were got into the Town,St. Damian taken. where there was only one foot Company, which retired into the Castle, where there was not provision for one day, and in the morn∣ing yielded up themselves. By which, Captains, you may see of how great importance it is to be careful never to leave a wall naked of Centinels, or at least to have them upon some Tower or Gate, especially about break of day, for that is the time of greatest dan∣ger. People are weary of watching their walls, but your Enemy is not weary of watching his opportunity. All these three enterprizes of Cairas, St. Damian and Quiers should have
been executed in one night; and indeed whoever will break a Peace, or a Truce, let him do all the execution he can, and make all the noise at one clap; for if he go piece by piece, he is certain to lose either a leg or a wing. Three dayes before the Mareschal had been in consultation about the manner how to execute this enterpize upon Quiers,The Enterprise of Quiers. at which Council were assisting Messieurs de Bonivet, President Birague, Francisco Bernardin, de Bassé, and d' Aussun; and I cannot certainly say whether Sieur Ludovico de Biraga was present or no; but I am almost confident he was, forasmuch as the Mareschal resolved upon nothing without his advice, he being a man of a most approved judgment. It was there concluded that we should give a Scalado on the upper side by the Vinyards upon the way from Agnasse to Quiers. I had no fan∣cy to this Scalado, neither did I think it likely to take effect, which made me entreat the Mareschal, that seeing he was himself resolv'd to go in person upon this design, and that it was the first place he had undertaken since his Lieutenancy, it might be ordered so, as to succeed, and redound to his honour: for if in his first tryal he should fail of success, men commonly judging of things by the event, would look upon it as an ill omen, and be apt to suspect his fortune, which is a very great prejudice to a man in supreme command. That therefore he should with great secrecy cause four or five pieces of Canon to march all night,The opinion of Monsieur de Montluc. that they might arrive at the same time that the Scalado should be given at the Port Iaune, and so by one way or the other he would not fail to carry the place; for since he was resolved to attempt it, he was to try all ways conducing to the end proposed. Now the Artillery was already mounted on carriages, and fit for present service, before the Castle of Turin; for so soon as the Mareschal understood that his Majesty had taken upon him the protection of the Duke of Parma, and that the war was already broke out in those parts, he made no question but the rempest would soon fall upon him, and there∣fore had wisely made his preparations before hand, that he might not be to seek in time of need, being indeed one of the most prudent and circumspect Commanders that I ever knew. This advice of mine suffered a great dispute; for it was objected that in one night the Artillery could not be drawn to Quiers,His opinlon disputed. and that all the three enterprizes would be dis∣covered by the rattle of the Carriages, and the voice of the drivers of the Artillery: but in the end it was concluded that at Vespers the Gates of Turin should be shut, and that Oxen should be taken about Rivolle and Veillamie, and should be all brought in the Even∣ing into the City, and great Guards kept at the Gates, to the end that no one living should stir our. It was moreover concluded, that I at the same hour should draw some Canon, and the great Culverine out of the Castle of Montcallier, and should take the Oxen be∣longing to the Gentlemen and Citizens of Montcallier, which graz'd on the further side of the Bridge towards the Lodges. They made account that by one of the clock at night the Artillery would be at Montcallier, by the way beyond the Bridge, and Monsieur de Caillac and I were to stay together to convoy the Artillery with my Company, and the Mareschal, Messieurs de Bonnivet, and Francisco Bernardin would go the other way with all the rest of the Foor. The said Mareschal also left me Monsieur de Piquigni with his Company, and another, who were to go before us with the Pioneers, and ten Gabions that we took with us from the Castle of Montcallier, in which order we arriv'd both the one and the other at the time appointed before Quiers.The Ecalado fails. But the Camisado vanisht into smoak; for as much as all the ladders prov'd too short, and he Graffe was much dee∣per than had been reported to the Mareschal: which was the reason that we all turn'd to the Port Iaune, where we found that they had already filled the Gabions, and were ready to lodge the Canon for Battery. The Mareschal's good for∣tune began here to dis∣cover it self;The good for∣tune of the Mareschal de Brissac. for had the ladders been of a sufficient length, and that we had gone on to the Afsault, all the Citizens as well as the Soldiers were resolute to defend their walls to the last man; so that in my opinion we should have been very well swing'd, and beaten off: for as much as they would neither suffer themselves to be surpriz'd by night, nor taken by force: and we could not carry our design so close, but that they had had notice of it the day before; so that it had been no hard matter for them to give us a repulse, which perhaps might have discourag'd them to do, as they afterward did. Don Ferrand at his departure from thence had there left an Italian Governor with three Companies, and had drawn out all the Spanish foot, to take them along with him to Parma. Our Battery having for some space play'd against the Town,Quiers batter∣ed. wrought its effect, and made a breach on the left hand of the Port Iaune: but there fell thereupon so violent a storm of rain as almost spoild all our work; yet notwithstanding by eleven of the clock the breach was eight or ten paces wide. Hereupon the Inhabitants of the Town, who de∣sired nothing more than a fair opportunity of putting themselves into the Kings obedience,
by reason of the ill usage they had received from the Spaniard, began to ask the Gover∣nor if he thought himself sufficient with his Soldiers to withstand the Assault; to whom he made answer, that he was, provided the Towns-men also would take arms to assist him. Whereupon they plainly told him, that they would not do it, and moreover that they had not been so well entreated by the Spaniards, that they should take arms a∣gainst the French.Division in Quiers. By which answer the Governor, who was an understanding man, per∣ceiv'd himself to be lodg'd betwixt my Lord and my Lady, and doubted that those of the Town were more likely to assault him behind than otherwise, which made him say to them, Have a little patience friends, and I will make such a Capitulation with the Ma∣reschal, as shall preserve you from any injury, and be honourable for our selves; and thereupon caused a Trumpet to sound a parly, sending out a man to desire the Mares∣chal, that he would send him Signior Francisco Bernardin, and the Signieur de Monbasin, and in the mean time cause his Battery to cease. The Mareschal immediately then sent to us to give over shooting, which we accordingly did; and it was thereupon agreed, that the Governor should send out two or three in Hostage, and that then the two fore∣named should enter in to Capitulate,The Capitulation of Quiers, and I think President Birague went in with them, by reason he would not the Town should be sackt, his Wife being a Daughter of Quiers, and the most part of the Gentry in the Town being by that means ally'd to him: but that I may not li, I am not certain whether he went a third or no. Neither would the Mareschal himself by any means, that any violence should be offer'd to them, being this would be an exemple to the other places that were in the Enemies possession, to draw them on, that when they should happen to be in the like condition, out of consideration of the Civility he should shew to those of Quiers, they might be the more enclin'd to take part with the French. The greatest difficulty that hapned betwixt our Deputies and the Governor, and Inhabi∣tants, was, that the said Governor, it being already almost night, said he could not possibly retreat to Ast, and consequently should be in danger of being defeared by the way; wherefore he desired that the Surrender might be deferred till the next day: The Mares∣chal who stood upon thorns, fearing lest this night they might be reliev'd from Ast, de∣manded then to have la Roquette deliver'd up to him, to put into it threescore men, and that they should choose out of our Captains any one whom they would, to enter in with them; in the mean time making our Companies still advance nearer to the Breach, which the Governor having notice of, he himself came upon the wall of the Roquette, where he call'd to me, entreating me to make the Soldiers retire, and telling me that they had con∣cluded with the Mareschal. The conclusion of which agreement was, that they were to march away with Bag and Baggage, their Colours furl'd up, without beat of Drum the next morning; and for further assurance it was agreed, that la Roquette should be put into our hands.La Roquette surrendred. The Town then sent to the Mareschal to entreat, that I, with the three∣score men might be put into it; for I had in Piedmont acquir'd the reputation of a man of good discipline, to prevent all sorts of disorder in the Soldier: and I order'd it so well here, that not any one of the Citizens lost the worth of a straw. The avarice of a little plunder does oftentimes turn the hearts of such as otherwise are enclin'd to favour ones party. This business was very well consider'd by the Mareschal; for that very night 400 Harquebuzeers set out from Ast to try if they could get into the Town; but they met intelligence by the way, that we were possest of la Roquette, which made them re∣turn. There was one error committed in this business; for it was propounded in the Council, that without doubt the Enemy would come to us at the report of this Siege, and that therefore at the same time the Roquette should be deliver'd up to us, we should send out a good strong party to go the patrouille on the high way towards Ast, which had it been done as it ought to have been, we had certainly cut off this Relief. The next morning Monsieur de Bonivet who was encampt upon the road of Adezun, with fifteen or twenty Gentlemen in company with him came to Quiers, just at the time when the Italians were marching out of the Town, who being entred in, stayd at the Gate to sec them march away, when so soon as they were gone, Monsieur de Bonivet being under the second Gate to enter into the City, and the Mareschal having command∣ed me not to suffer any person whatsoever to enter till he himself was first come in, I heard my Liutenant very loud and angry at the Breach, where I had placed him to watch, that none should pass in that way; at which Monsieur de Bonivet said to me, there is some disorder, whereupon I presently ran to the place, and found that they were Thieves of the very Town of Quiers it self, who would have entred in to pillage the City: at which going hastily down the Breach to fall upon them, the ruines of the wall made my feet shp from under me, so that I sell upon my left side amongst the stones, with
so great violence, that I put my hip out of joynt. I do think that all the tortures in the world are not comparable to this, by reason of a little nerve we have in that joynt, where the bones are all enchac'c into one another, which was extended, in so much that I have ne∣ver walkt upright since;Monsieur Mont∣luc hurt with a tall. but have ever had pain more or less, notwithstanding all the Baths and other remedies I could use to remove it. Monsieur de Bonivet caused me to be carried by the Soldiers into a Lodging, and I before had brought in the Quartermasters, who were ordering the Quarters. About an hour after I was hurt the Mareschal entred the City, and did me the honour to light at my lodging to see me, expressing as much for∣row for my mischance as if I had been his own Brother; and indeed he heartily lov'd, and had a very esteem for me. During our abode there he came three times to keep his Council at my Beds head, as President Birague, who is yet living can witness. He took great delight to hear men discourse in his presence, but in few words; and if any one said any thing, he would presently demand his reason. At the said Quiers, and at Montcallier I kept my bed two moneths and a half of this unlucky fall. Don Ferrand leaving the war of Parma, came to Ast to draw his Forces together, thereof to form the Body of an Army, having left in Parmesan Signior Carles and the Mar∣quis de Vins. The King having notice thereof, commanded the Admiral that he should in all hast send away six of his Companies to the Mareschal de Brissac, which were con∣ducted by Captain Ynard,The arrival of the French No∣bility in Pied∣mont. who at that time was Sergeant Major onely. Monsieur d' Au∣male, who was General of the horse, came also, as did Monsieur de Nemours a few days after; and presently after him Messieurs d' Anguien, and the Prince of Conde, Brothers, then Monsieur de Montmorency, who is now Mareschal of France, and eldest Son of the Constable Monsieur le Compte de Charmy, and his Brother Monsieur de la Rochefou∣cault, having a great number of Gentlemen of very good quality in their Train, inso∣much that three Companies of foot being quarter'd in Quiers, the Mareschal was con∣strain'd to dislodge them to accommodate the Princes, and the Lords of their Train. Certainly there is not a braver Nobility in the world than the French,The Praise of the French No∣bility. nor more ready to put foot in the stirrup for the service of their Prince; but then you must take them in the heat. Certain days after their arrival the Mareschal laid a design to go and take the Castle of Lans, which Garrison very much infested the Road betwixt Suze and Turin, by reason of a valley that extends it self from Lans to the high way, so that the Soldiers of the said Lans were almost continually there, having a little Castle in the mid way, that serv'd them for a retreat. The Marescal then sent for me to Montcallier, whi∣ther six weeks after my fall I had caused my self to be conveyed in a litter: upon whose summons I made my self to be set upon a little Mule, and with extreme pain ar∣rived at Quiers, every day striving by little and little to walk. Behold these were the successes of the taking of Quiers and St. Damian, and I will now give an account of the taking of Lans. The Mareschal then,The Enterprise of Lans. and all the Camp (wherein were all the above-named Princes and Lords) march't directly to Lans, and because there are some of them yet living, who love me, and others that have an unkindness for me, I will come as near to truth as my memory will give me leave, to the end that those who hate me, may have no occasion to reprehend me, speaking the truth; and that the rest who love me, may take delight in reading what I have done, and call me to their remembrance, for the Historians I see mince the matter. The Mareschal with all the Camp went before, leaving me with five Ensigns of foot, and the Masters of the Ordnace, Messieurs de Caillac and du Noguy, who were also at the taking of Quiers, to conduct the Artillery. The day after he departed from Quiers he arriv'd at Lans about noon, and we with the Artillery came up in the beginnging of the night. The Bourg of Lans is large, and enclosed with scurvey wall; the Mareschal took up his quarter in another Bourge, about a mile distant from the said Lans, and round a∣bout him the Gens d' Arms, and all the Cavalry. All the Princes and Lords would be quarter'd in the Bourg of Lans, with some French and Italian Companies of foot, and particularly Monsieur de Bonivet, with his Colonel Company. At their arrival they went to the foot of the Mountain,Description of Lans. on the right hand as you come out of the Bourg. The Sergeant Major had already got to the top of the said Mountain behind the Castle round about which were very great precipices, and especially behind it, where the Mareschal was of necessity to go to take a view of the Place. There is nothing but precipice, saving in the front of the Castle, which looks towards the Town, and there were two great Bul∣warks, and the Gate of the Castle between them. To plant the Artillery there, was only to lose so much time, and to place it on that side by which we came, we should be en∣forc't to point the Mussel of the Canon upward, so that it could batter but one half of the
wall, and besides we were to climb above a thousand paces, with the greatest difficulty imaginable; before we could come to the foot of the said wall. On the right hand it was the same, and behind the worst of all: for alling thence, a man should tumble headlong a quarter of a mile down into the River. By reason of which great difficulty of bringing up Canon behind the said Castle, where there was a little even plot of some twenty or five and twenty paces broad, the Enemy had made no other fortification on that side, saving that they had cut a paltry Ditch of about half a pikes depth in the Rock, with two Ravelins on either side, that slanckt the Ditch; and it had not been a∣bove three moneths before,The opinion of the Engi∣neers. that two of the Emperors Engineers had been there, and had declar'd, that it was not possible for all mankind to bring up Artillery, either by this side, or any of the others, if they did not plant it on the Town side, before the Gate of the Castle, which also would be so much labour lost. The Mareschal at his fist arrival with all the Prince and Lords, and the Engineers he had with him, went to take a view of the backside of the Castle, up an ascent of above 300 paces, and as uneasie ones as ever they went in their lives, where after they had discover'd, and remain'd above two hours upon the place, they all concluded it impossible to be ta∣ken. At night I came with the Artillery, when it was presently told me, that the next day we were to return back again; at which I was very much dasht; but was so intolerably tormented with my hip, that I presently threw my self upon a Matrice, and saw not the Mareschal that night; for he was gone back to his Quarters, very much displeased with some who before had represented the Enterprise so easie to him, and would undertake to bring it about, and yet when it came to the push concluded it impossible. In the morning he came again, and again went to view the place; but the more they lookt, the worse they like't, and still discovered greater difficulties than before. Just as I had din'd Messieurs de Piquigny, de Touchepeid, and de Vinu, came to seek me out, and told me, that the re∣solution was concluded to return, and that I would not be unwilling to it, if I had seen the place, putting so many whimsies into my head, that they got me upon my little Mule, and carried me behind the ridge of the Mountain,The Sieur de Montluc goe to take a view of Laus. where Harquebuz shots were very good cheap, unless a man took on the right hand towards the River, and there it was hard to pass, and more hard to discover any thing; and both the Mareschal and all the Princes had gone up, and come down at the mercy of the Eemies shot. Whom God defends is well defended. I have seen the time when a thousand Harquebuz shot have been dis∣charg'd within an hundred paces of me, and done me no harm: but we all four made such shift, that at last we got up to the top, and they led me the same way by which the Mareschal and all his Company had ascended and descended before. I will here set down for an exemple to those that shall follow after us, how I found the thing feasible, and which way Canon was to be got up to this level; not however without very great difficulty: but how hard soever it appear'd to be, we concluded to bring up the Artillery to the top of the Mountain, and there to plant it in Battery. In the first place to look up from the foot of the Mountain to the height of it, was a per∣pendicular the Angels themselves would have enough to do to climb; but I began to take notice, that making one advance of about an hundred paces, to a little place which might be some ten paces in circumference, that there we might have conveniency to rest the Piece, for the little place was almost even. I then conceived that we might make another Stage, crossing over on the left hand towards the Castle, to another little even spot, that was sufficient to repose the Canon, and afterwards that we were to make a∣nother Stage, crossing again to the right hand to another level spot; and from thence indeed we had the ascent something steep to the backside of the Castle; but we should before have got past all the Rocks and Precipices. By all these three resting-places we descended the Mountain in great danger of our necks, where I shewed them that each of them, was to undertake to advance the Ca∣non from one reposing place to another, all which they took especial notice of, and af∣terwards remounted me upon my Mule; for before they had led me all the way under the Arms like a Bride, and so we went directly to the Mareschal's Quarters, where I found them all set in Council, to take order for our return. So soon as I came into the room, the Mareschal said to me, How now Monsieur de Montlu, where have you been? I have sent for you twice to come to the Council, that you might hear the determination we have made to return. You must carry back the Artillery by the same way you came. To which I made answer, what Sir, will you return without taking this place, that is a reso∣lution unworthy Monsieur de Brissac? I have been to view the place, and by the same way that you have view'd it your self, and do assure you that we will bring up the Artillery to the top of the Mountain. He then told me, that it must be God alone that must work
such a miracle, for that it was not in the power of man to do it; to which I made an∣swer, that I was not God, and yet that I would undertake to bring them up. He then said to me, yes in eight or ten days time perhaps with the help of Engines, and in the mean time Don Ferrand, who is at Verseil, shall gather together all the Forces he can make, both in the field, and out of the Garrisons, and come to give us Battail, who has 3000 Germains, and I have neither Germans nor Swiss to match him. Sir, then (said I) I will pawn to you my life and my honour, in two mornings to plant you four Pieces of Canon ready mounted on the back side of the Castle; notwithstanding which he was still harping up∣on the 3000 Germains; at which growing at last a little angry, I said, Do you make so great account of Don Ferrand's Germans? The Admiral has here six Companies commanded by Captain Ynard, Monsieur de Bonnivet shall give him four more of his, with which En∣signs he shall undertake to fight the Germans, and Monsieur de Bonnivet with the remainder of his shall fight the Spaniard. Our Italians will engage to fight theirs, and for Cavalry you have (reckoning the Train of the Princes) a third part more than Don Ferrand. If Cptain Ynard hd rather sight with the Spaniards than the Germans, Monsieur de Bon∣nivet and I will fight them, nd let him take his choice. To which Captain Ynard made answer, that he was ready to fight either the one or the other, as the Mareschal should please to appoint; Monsieur de Bonnivet also said, it was all one to him, whereupon I said, and must we then make such a piece of matter of the Germans? I dare lay a good wager of those three thousand, fifteen hundred have nere a tatter to their arses, whereas our Soldiers have most of them breeches of Velvet and Satin, and think themselves all Gentle∣men. Seeing then themselves so well clad as they are, shall they be afraid to fight with the Germans? let them but come to us once, and we shall handle them as we did at Cerisolles. Monsieur de Montmorancy then stood up,The Sieur de Montlucs con∣test in the Council. and said, Sir Monsieur de Montluc is an old Captain, methinks you ought to give credit to what he says; to which the Mareschal made answer, You do not know him so well as I, for he will never think any thing impossible, and one time or another will make us lose all; whereupon I made answer again, that where I saw a difficulty I fear'd my skin as much as another; but that in this I could discover no inconvenience at all. Monsieur de Nemours then spoke, and said, Sir, let him have his own way for once,A dispue in the Council concerning his advice. and see what he will do; Messieurs the Prince of Condé, and Monsieur d' Anguien laid as much, and Monsieur d' Aumalle the same. Monsieur de Gurnort who is now Mareschal of France, and Monsieur de la Rochefoucaut, the Count de Charney, the Sieurs de la Fayette, and de Terride, were all of the same opinion: which the Mareschal seeing, said, Well Gentlemen, I perceive you have all a desire that we should play the fools; let us do so then, for I intend to let you see, that I am as great a one as any of you all. And thus I got the victory against the whole Council. Things being thus concluded I said to Monsieur de Nemours, Sir, it will be necessary that you Princes and Lords put your helping hands to this business, and lead the Soldiers the way, to the end that if you would shrink away, and avoid the great toyl and labour they are to undergo for the execution of the thing in question, we may reproach them, that the Princes and Lords put to their hands before them. In the mean time I told him, that it would do well if he so pleas'd, that he with his own Company should take a Canon he himself had brought thither with him, and conduct it to the foot of the Mountain, who answer'd me, that he would very willingly do it. Now the Artillery was of necessity to be drawn thorough the Town, and they were moreover constrain'd to break three or four Corners of houses, to draw them out, and also to level a little descent at the going out of the Town, from whence they fell into a plain way to the very foot of the Mountain upon which the Castle stood, about a thousand paces distant from the City. I said as much to Monsieur d' Anguien, and the Prince of Condé, who very readily consented to take up∣on them the charge of other two, to whom also Monsieur de Montmorancy very frankly offer'd himself. As to the fourth piece of Canon, I cannot remember who it was, that undertook the care of that,The order a∣bout the Bat∣tery. for it was not Monsieur d' Aumale, being he was to go back to his Quarters to the horse with the Mareschal: but however it was they rested not of all night, all by Torch-light they had brought the Artillery to the foot of the Mountain. But before they went out of the Council, I said to Monsieur d' Aumale; Sir, will you go along,The Princes assist. and I will shew you which way we will get up the Artillery behind the Castle, and Sir (speaking to the Mareschal) I know you will not yet retire to your Quarters. Monsieur d' Au∣male then went willingly along with me, having only Monsieur de la Rochefaucault, the Sig∣neur Piquigny,The Sieur de Montluc goes again to view the Castle of Lans. and my self in company with him; who, though I was damnably plagu'd with my hip, nevertheless forc't my self that they might see with their own eyes which way it was to be done. So soon then as we had ascended the Mountain, and taken a view of the place, we returned back to the Mareschal, who stayd expecting the said Mon∣sieur
d' Aumale, who at his coming told him that my reason was very good, and that no body had taken notice of what I had perceiv'd; nor observ'd those resting places in the Rock. All the Princes and Lords were yet in the Hall where the Mareschal had din'd: where Monsieur de Bassé at that time was, I do not certainly remember, for the Mares∣chal sent for him to come with his Company, and two French Companies more, with command to Captain Tilladet, and Savallan, to advance night and day, and come to joyn with him, which they accordingly did. The next morning I went to see which way we were to get up this Mountain, with∣our being gall'd by the shot from the Castle; and here I first discover'd five little loop∣holes made for Harquebuzes only, to which we lay open and expos'd all the way we were to go: To countercheck these I intreated Captain Ynard to bring me three hundred Har∣quebuzeers of the bst marksmen he had in all his Companies; which, so soon as they came we divided to be set ten to each loop-lole, who shot as they do at a mark one after another, and all open; and when the last of the ten had made his shot, the first always began a∣gain. There was in the Town a house higher than the rest, from the roof of which one might play into the Castle, and all along the Curtain: but the Enemy, to shelter them∣selves from this inconvenience, had nail'd several plancks one above another, in such sort that those who were upon the top of the house could see nothing within the wall. Now these plancks were very thin, and before the beginning of the War I had put it into the Mareschal's head to cause four hundred Harquebuzes to be forg'd at Pignerol, of a bore to carry point blank three or four hundred paces, of which he might distribute twenty to each Company, with order to the Treasurers to allow twelveA Frank▪  Livre, and  Cardecue are twenty pence English. Francks pay to such as should carry those arms. These Harquebuzes were already made, and distributed, where∣fore I intreated Captain Richelieu (the same who was since Campmaster) to place twenty of those Haquebuzeers upon the said house, to shoot through the Planks along the Cur∣tine, whose shot broke thorough with as much ase as if they had been paper; insomuch, that what with the Harquebuzeers, that from the top of the house playd along the Cour∣tain, and what with the other who fir'd by tens against the loop-holes, the Enemy were in such a condition, that not a man durst venture to pass to and fro on the inside of the Curtain. We then deliver'd to every one of the three who had view'd the way up the Rock, twenty Pioneers and three Masons, with great hammers and picks of iron, wherewith to break some Rocks that were in the way. And thus about eight a clock in the morning we began to work upon the way, which by two in the afternoon was brought to perfe∣ction, The Artillery mounted, and at one of the clock in the night they began to mount the first Piece, with four∣score Soldiers of my company I had there with me (the rest being left behind at Mont∣callier) which they also mounted. This Piece gave them more trouble than all the o∣ther three; for they were after so well acquainted with the way, that the rest came up with much greater ase. Mnsieur de Piquigny all the way carried a little Lanthorn to light the wheels of the Carriages, by the aim of which the Enemy began to shoot, but no shot ever toucht us. Messieurs de Caillac and de Duno were in the mean time busie behind the Castle above, placing the Gabions, and filling them with earth; and as the Pieces were hall'd up to the top of the Mountain, they still came to receive, and plant them in battery: but not a man ever put a hand to the drawing up of the foresaid Canon but my Soldiers only; for although Monsieur de Bonnivet had brought one Company, and Captain Ynard another to assist them; yet would they not accept of their service, but told them that they needed no help, and that since they had had the honour to hale up the first Piece, they would likewise have the advantage to bring up all the rest: Which I was very glad of, because they were already very perfect in all the turns, and by three of the clock in the morning all the pieces were planted ready to batter.and planed in Battery. The Mareschal and Monsieur d' Aumale were by this time come from their Quarters, where I believe they had not slept much that night. The Mareschal out of the fear he had that it was not possible to hale the pieces up, and Monsieur d' Aumale on the other side was in no less pain, forasmuch as after he had viewed the place, he had assur'd him that I would infallibly mount them. The Princes and Lords, who had been at work the night before, took their rest, till the Mareschal sent to rowse them, which was not until Captain Martin (a Basque, who had a Company in his own Regiment) came and assur'd him that he had seen the last piece brought up to the top of the Mountain: Which Captain Martin I do verily believe made that night fifty journeys to and fro, for the Mareschal had sent him almost every moment to see in what forwardness we were. The Marchal and all the Princes and Lords being come, they found that all the four Canon were ready mounted to begin the batter. I had caused half a Sack of a very ex∣celln
sort of apples, four great leather Bottles of wine, and some bread to be brought to the place wherewith to refresh my Soldiers: But first the Mareschal, and after him all the Princes and Lords rob'd me of all my apples, and whilst they staid expecting the break of day, out of an ugly pot drunk two bottles of my wine. I leave those who shall read this History to judge, whether or no I did not swagger the Mareschal, seeing he had so highly oppos'd me, about the bringing up of the Artillery. I think in my whole life I was never in so good a humour, as well in respect to the conentment I discover'd in the Maeschal, as also in all the other Princes and Lords, who were present, and had all had their share of the . In the morning by break of day we made three or four vol∣leys against the Wall, which pirc'd it, and thorough the Stables entred into the Bas-Court, and from thence into the Lodgings of the Castle. The Mareschal had also caused three pieces of Canon to be planted below, on that side by which we came, which batter'd upwards, only to terrifie the Enemy, for hur they could do none: But so soon as our Artillery,Lans surren∣dered. had given their three or four volleys, they began to sound a parley, and pre∣sently surrendred. The Mareschal left Captain Brueil, brother-in-law to Monsieur Sal∣cde, with his Company in Garrison there, e being one of the Captains belonging to the Admiral; which being done, he march' with all his Horse and Foot towards the plain of Cauge, to see if Don Ferrand might not be upon his way to relieve the Castle: but he had there intelligence, that he was yet at Verseil; whereupon the said Mareschal return'd to Quiers, and I return'd to Montcallier, where I fifteen dayes kept my bed of my hip, and do verily believe, that had I not so bestirr'd my limbs in this action it had ne∣ver been cur'd. This (fellow Captains) ought to teach you never to trust one or two to discover a place, and without relying on your own judgment, to call those to your assistance, whom you conceive to be men, not of the greatest experience only, but moreover of the greatest cou∣rage; for what one cannot see, another may perhaps discern. Neither must you refue to take pains, where you discover a little difficulty in the thing, in order to the execution of a brave exploit, and learn to be wise at your enemies expence. When you have taken up a resolution to defend a place, take notice to smooth and cut off all the resting places that shall happen to be in any of the avenues, for wherever Canon shall find such places to re∣pose in, as will allow the men time to pant, and take breath, they will in the end infalli∣bly mount them. Neitherwithout this convenience could I possibly have brought what I had undertaken to pass. The taking of this place depriv'd the Enemy of a mighty advan∣tage, and vvas very convenient for us in order to the prosecution of this War. Some time after the Princes (seeing no likelihood of Don Ferrand de Gonzaga's being drawn to a Battail, nor hearing of any preparation he made for the assaulting of any Town) return'd back to Court. And soon after their departure, the Mareschal by the advice of President Birague,The Character or Monsieur de Brissac Mares∣chal of France. Signior Ludovico, and Francisco Bernardin deliberated to go take certain places about Tvré, to keep those in Yvrcé the better in aw. He was a General every way worthy his Command, always in action, never idle; and I do think that sleep∣ing his fancy was evermore at work, and that he was ever dreaming of undertaking, and executing some notable enterprize. To the forementioned end we march'd with all the Army directly to St. Martin, wherein was a Company of Italians, and where the Castle was batter'd, and taken, toge∣ther with the Castle of Pons, Casteltelle, Balpergue, and some others about Yvreé, and we began to fortiie the said Castle of St. Martin. Now Messieurs de Bassé and de Gordes had taken Sebe, wherefore so soon as the Fort of St. Martin was brought into a pretty good condition, the Mareschal went to Quiers, that he might be nearer to Monsieur de Bassé, to as∣sist him in time of need; for he had already received intelligence, that Don Abro de Cendé gathered together the Army in Alexandria (and I think Don Ferrand was at that time sick) which made the Mareschal doubt that he might have some degu upon Sebe, and therefore left Monsieur de Bonnivet, Signior Francisco, and me, making Signior Ludovico to retire to Chevas, and Bourlengue, to have an eye to those places, of which also he was Governour. Eight dayes were not past before the Mareschal sent orders to Monsieur de Bnivet, and to me, that we should march in all diligence day and night directly to Montdevi, with five or six French Companies we had at St. Martin, leaving Signior Francisco to pursue the Fortification, which accordingly he did, marching night and day, as it was necessary we should, for the Mareschal was engag'd in Sebe, for the relief of Monsieur de Bassé: but when Don Arbro heard of our coming, that we had drawn another Company out of Savillan by the way, and that he saw us arriv'd at the corner of the Town, he present∣ly drew off, and having recover'd a Bridg of brick, began to pass over his Baggage;
whether Signior Ludovico de Biraga was with us, or no, I am not able to say, because vve had some Italian in our Company. The Mareschal seeing himself disengag'd, allyed out of the Town with all the Forces he had brought with him, and went to attaque the Enemy at the Bridge, vvhere it ap∣peared Don Arbro had an intention to have encamped, for we there found many Huts, ready set up.Don Arbro de Cende a brav Spanish Cap∣tain, The skirmish was great, and smart on both sides; nevertheless I am of o∣pinion that had we charg'd him home horse and foot and all, we had put him very hard∣ly to't, and perhaps given him a shrewd blow; for after he had past the Bridge, he was to climb a steep mountain, where the way was so narrow, that they could only go one by one. But he made us know that he was a very able Soldier; for he first past over all his horse, fearing that ours would charge and overturn them upon his foot, then he past over his Germans, and himself remain'd behind with a thousand or twelve hundred Harquebuzeers, with which he still made good the Bridge, by the favour of three hou∣ses that stood at the end of it, vvhich vve could never gain from him, he having opened them so, that they flanck't and defended one another. On the top of the Mountain there was a Plain that extended it self to a little Town they held, being about the length of 1000 paces, or thereabouts, vvhere he first caus'd his people to make a halt, and afterwards retyr'd. But at his departing from the houses, we had thought to have fallen in amongst them, which we also attempted, and there were in that place some men slain, both on the one side, and the other, and we continually followed in their Rear up the forementioned narrow path, still plying them with our Har∣quebuz shot; for we saw not the preparation he had made for us on the top of the moun∣tain. Messieurs de Bonivet, and de la Moth Gondrin, and I were all on horse-back, and amongst the Harquebuzeers to encourage them, when so soon as vvecame to the top, he gave us a charge vvith a 1000 or 1200 Harquebuzeers, vvhich sent us back vvith a rattle di∣rectly to the Bridge, and full drive upon the Mareschal; Monsieur de la Moth's horse was kill'd under him, and mine so hurt that he died five or six days after; and God was as∣sisting to us, in having put it into our minds, to draw our men into two divisions, on the right and left hand of the way, though the ascent was very difficult and steep, for by that means we lost but very few of our men, whereas had we been all clutter'd together in the narrow path, vve had received a very great defeat, and had our selves remained upon the place. Take notice of this (young Captains) vvhen you shall happen to be in the like Ground, upon the like occasion; for the old and circumspect have been often snapt in such places as these, and know well enough how to avoid them. The Mareschal then withdrew with all his Army about Sebe, and the next day carried away the Canon, that Messieurs de Bass and de Gordes had brought along with them vvhen they took it, aving there three Companies, two French and one Italian, and so retired by Montdevi towards Turin and Quiers. How Sebe was after lost I do not remember, but lost it was, for we return'd a year after to recover it, vvhen it was much better defended, and longer disputed than before, as hereafter you shall hear. Sometime after Don Ferrand set an Army on foot, by much exceeding all the forces the Mareschal could make, he having neither Swiss nor German Foot: wherefore (being ad∣vertized by the Signeurs Ludovico de Birague, and Francisco Bernardin, that this Army was design'd for the retaking of St. Martin, and the other Castles we had taken before; and also to take Cassal, some seven leagues distant from Turin, and to fortifie it, to the end that Turin might receive no relief from the mountains and valleys of Lans, and espe∣cially from Cassal, from whence we had most of the fruit and wood that vvas brought to Turin) So soon as Don Ferrand's Army was ready to march directly to St. Martin,Monsieur Bris∣sac calls a Council at the approach of the Spanish Army. the Mareschal call'd a Council of his Officers to deliberate vvhat he should do concerning Cas∣sal, seeing it was neither fortified nor tenable: who amongst them concluded to quit t, and to dismantle it, though the dismantling could signifie nothing; forasmuch as Don Ferrand would soon have repair'd it again. I was the same night advertized at Mont∣callir of this determination, which was the reason that I went early the next morning to the Mareschal to Turin, where I made bold to ask him if it were true, that he had taken a resolution to abandon Cassal, vvho told me, that yes, because he could find no one, who would hazard his life and reputation in putting himself into it, and that therefore they had concluded in the Council, to put only one Company of Italian Foot into it, which was to surrender the Town so soon as they should see Don Ferrand approach with an in∣tention to attaque it. I then told him that that would signifie very little, for the Cap∣tain himself would however tell the Soldiers as much, to make them willing to stay; but that he must Garrison it in good earnest, and not after this manner. And who (said he) would you have so senseless as to undertake the defence of it? to which I made answer that
I would be the man. He then told me that he had rather lose the best part of his estate, than to suffer me to engage my self in it, considering that the place could not in a years time be fortified to resist Canon. To which I made answer, Sir, the King does entertain, and pay us for three things only: one to win him a Battail, to the end that he may overrun a great space of ground, and subdue several strong holds to his obedience; another to defend a Town; for no Town can be lost, but a great deal of ground goes along with it; and the third to take a Town;The Sieur de Montluc under∣takes the de∣fence of Cassal. for the taking of a Town brings a great number of people into subjection; all the rest are only skirmishes, and rencounters, that signifie nothing to any body but our selves, to make us known unto, and esteemed of our Superiors, and to acquire honor to our own particular persons; for the King has by this no advantage at all, nor by any other effect of war, saving by the three ferementioned services; wherefore before this place shall be so quitted I will lose my life in its defence. The Mareschal hereupon disputed it very strongly with me, to divert me from this intention; but seeing me resolv'd, at last gave me leave to do as I would. He was a man that would be govern'd by reason, without relying too much upon his own judgment, as did Monsieur de Lautrec, who was ever observed to be guilty of that fault, as I think I have said elsevvhere. Cassal is a little City enclsed with a rough wall of Flints without any one Axler stone amonst them;Description of Cassal. a Graffe that environs it, into which the water comes and goes, so that the Grale can neither be made deeper, nor the water retain'd in any place, to be much above knee deep. There was no manner of Trench either within or without, neither were the four Flankers fill'd at all, so that the Enemy having once batter'd me a Courtain by the Canton, they might afterwards batter me in the flank. I demanded of the Mares∣chal 500 Pioneers of the Mountain, which he sent presently to raise, so that within four dayes they were all at Cassal: I demanded likewise a great number of Instruments, and iron Tools, wherewith to furnish my Soldiers also for the work, which he also sud∣denly sent me, together with great store of grain, bacon, lead, powder, and match; I de∣manded moreover the Baron de Chipy la Gard (Nephew to the Baron de la Gard) le Mas, Martin, and my own Company. All these five Companies were exceeding good, and their Captains also; who having understood that I had made choice of them of my own accord, took it for a great reputation, and a high honour to them. I demanded of him also le Gritti a Venetian, who had a Company of Italian foot: all which were granted to me, In the morning then I went to put my self into it, and at night all the Companies arrived. Monsieur de Gye, eldest Son of Monsieur de Maugiron was there in Garrison with the men at arms belonging to his Father, to whom the Mareschal sent order to march away, and to carry his Company to Montcallier: but he writ an answer back, that he had not continued so long in Garrison at Cassal, to abandon it at a time when a Siege was going to be laid before it, especially when so old a Captain as I had undertaken the defence thereof, and that therefore he was resolv'd there to live and die with me. The Mareschal would not take this answer for currant pay; for the next day betimes in the morning he came himself to Cassal, having Monsieur d' Aussun, Monsieur de la Mothe-Gondrin, Monsieur de Brissac visits Cassal. and the Vicount de Gourdon in company with him. I had there already as∣sign'd all the Quarters for the Foot, without dislodging the Gens d' Arms, forasmuch as I saw Monsieur de Gye, and all his Company obstinately resolute to stay. And although the Mareschal himself was come in person, yet could he never prevail with Monsieur de Gye to depart the Town, who plainly told him, that he, if he so pleased, might com∣mand his Company away from him, but for what concern'd himself, he was resolv'd not to stir a foot; which was the reason that the Mareschal returned very much dissa∣tisfied with himself, that he had granted me leave to take upon me the defence of that place, which was conceived to be so desperate an undertaking, that Monsieur de la Mothe-Gondrin, and the Vicount de Gordon wept at parting with me, and all of them gave me over, as also did President Birague himself, who is yet living, for lost either in my life o my honour, and so after dinner they departed. At their going away I entreated the Mareschal and all my Companions, that they should no more come to see me, for I would not be hindred so much as a quarter of an hour from intending my fortificati∣on. I moreover desired the Mareschal to send me Coloel Charomond, who was at Riboulle, to assist me in the said fortification, with two Engineers which the said Ma∣reschal had, one of which was slain at the taking of Ulpian, and the other is the Cheva∣lier Reloge, who is now in France. We began then to fill the four Cantons,The dligence of the Sieur de Montluc in the fortifying of assal. each Captain of four having taken one, and afterwards divided the other two Companies to the four Curtains, and also the 500 Pioneers, for all the Inhabitants of the Town above ten years of age carried earth for the
four Captains. But (that I may deprive no one of his due honour) I shall tell you that Monsieur de Gye had an Ensigne of Dauphiné called Montfort, and the Gidon Monsieur de l' Estanc, who being arrived at Montcallier in the Evening, bega to consider and la∣ment their Captain's condition, insomuch that all the Company mutiny'd, resolving to go and dye with him, and never to stir from his side. Whereupon l' Estanc entreated the said Captain Montfort to stay, for it might fall out that the Mareschal would let them all go, when he should see that one part were already gone; and to the end the Mareschal might not be overmuch offended, that he should keep with him all those who were wil∣ling to stay; which being agreed betwixt them, the said Estanc fearing lest the Mareschal should have any inkling of his design, stole away at midnight, and was followed by the whole Company; for not a man save only two Gens d' Armes and three Archers would stay behind with the said Montfort. They left their great horses and arms, excepting their Cuirasses and pots, mounted themselves each upon a little Curtal only, and leaving their Launces at their Quarters, took every one a Pike and a Footman, and so at sun-rise came to Cassal, six miles distant from Montcallier. Monsieur de Gye and the Baron de Chipy had undertaken to Terrass up the Gate, from whence they saw these people coming, and stood still a good while to discover what they were, and then both ran out together to meet them.Commendati∣on of Monsieur de Gye. I saw by this that Monsieur de Gye was well belov'd by his Company, and he did very well deserve so to be; for I dare boldly say he was one of the worthiest and the bravest Captains in France. Monsieur de Monfort went in the morning to the Mareschal, and told him that he had lost the Guidon and all the Company, who were stollen away by night to their Captain, and therefore begg'd his leave that he might follow after with two men at arms, and three Archers only that were left behind, which he would by no means permit him to do, but expresly forbad him, and made him return back to Mont∣callier. Now our order in the Town was thus, that every morning generally all, as well Cap∣tains, Soldiers,The excellent order in the City of Cassal, and Pioneers, as men and women of the Town, came every one before day upon pain of death to their work, which to compel them to I erected a Gallows, that they might see what they were to trust to; and indeed I had, and have ever had so, a little scurvey Character of being liberal of the rope, so that there was not a man great nor small who did not fear my Gascon humour and complexion. It being then winter, and in the shortest of days, they were to work from break of day till eleven of the clock, and then every one went to his dinner, and at twelve return'd again to his work, which he after∣wards never left till it grew to be dark. As for their dinner, every one din'd of himself: but the supper was alwayes at my Quarters; or at those of Monsieur de Gye, or at one or another of the Captains, every one in his turn. To which place constantly there repair'd all the Engineers and Commanders of the work, where if any one had not advanc't his work so much as another, I assign'd him either Soldiers or Pioneers, that by the next night his work might be as forward as his neighbours. Now my business was to run up and down every where on horseback, one while to the Fortifications, then to those who were sawing the plancks at the Mill, of which I made a great many half a foot thick, and other posts and beams of timber, that were very necessary for us. The water of this Mill did us great good service, for by means of that the Saw never rested; and the most part of the night I went by torch-light quite through the Town; one while I went out to the place where they digg'd the Turf, another while where they made the Gabions, then re∣turned into the Town, and went the round within: afterwards I went out again to view all the places, and never rested in a place, excepting at dinner, no more than the meanest Soldier in the Town, encouraging in the mean time all people to work, and caressing all both small and great. I there learned what it is to take a business in hand where all people generally concur to the bringing a thing to pass, as also what a mass of people, ambitious to acquire honour in the place they have undertaken to defend, may do; and moreover that there is great praise to be obtain'd in so well ordering of things, and disposing of time, that not so much as a quarter of an hour shall be spent in vain; and indeed a Commander shall never do a∣ny thing worthy speaking of, if they be not all of one mind, and have not equally a desire to come off from the Eterprize in hand, with great honour and reputation, as it was in this place. This (Captains) is a thing that principally depends upon you, if you have once got the knack to vvin the Soldier by a word, you shall do more than with a thousand Bastinadoes; it is true, that if there be some mutinous stubborn spirit amogst them, vvhich gentle ways cannot reclaim, you are to make others wise at his expence. But I will return to Monsiur de Gye, who never stirr'd from the Gate with his Gens d' Armes, till it was fully and sufficiently terrassed both within and without, who there all of
them wrought as hard as the meanest common Soldier in the Town. Oh (Captains) vvhat a beautiful exemple you have here, if you please to observe it, when an occasion shall present it self, to undertake the defence of a place! I will moreover say that I had taken such order, that there was not a morsel of bread eaten, nor a glass of wine drunk, but by weight and measure; and if you will take exemple by Cassal, you shall not only be able to undertake the keeping of a Town, let it be as ill fortified as it will; but even a Meadow enclos'd vvith no more than a contemptible ditch only, provided there be unanimity amongst you, as there was here: for we had all one vvill, one desire, and one courage, and the labour vvas a common delight to us all. Now my good fortune was such, that Don Ferrand gave to Caesar de Naples the one half of his Army, almost all his Infantry, vvith a part of his horse, to lead them to Riverol seven little miles from Cassal, Vlpian being between; and the said Caesar de Naples staid two and twenty days about the taking of St. Martin, and the other Castles. During this time I had by my great diligence put the Town into a good posture of defence, and had caused great Trenches and Rampiers to be made behind all our Cantons, vvell ter∣raed all the Gates, and gabion'd all the upper Gabions with a doble row of Baskets, vvell resolv'd to cause our selves to be soundly battered, and get a brave share of honour. At last Caesar having taken St. Martin, and the other Castles, arriv'd at Riverol vvith his Cmp, vvhere immediatly Don Ferrand called a Council to determine, vvhether he ought to attaque us, or to let us alone, considering the time I had had vvherein to fortifie my self, and that I had finisht all the fortification I intended to make for my defence; vvhere also he forgot not to put them in mind, that vve vvere six Companies vvithin, all resolute to fight it out to the last; and that he doubted he should lose more valiant Cap∣tains, Spaniards, and Italians in the assault than the Town vvas vvorth, giving them an account vvithal of all that I had done vvithin.A consultation of the Spani∣ads concen∣g Cassal. The Spanish and Italian Captains, vvho vvere present at this Council, seeing the danger vvould fall upon them, caused it by their Camp master to be remonstrated, that the Emperor had there the best Officers he had in all Italy, and of vvhom he made greater account than of all the rest, and that therefore they entreated Don Ferrand to reserve them for a Battail, or some Enterprize of conside∣rable moment, and not to expose them for the gaining of so trivial a place as that of Cassal. There followed therupon a great dispute, and three days the Council were in debate about this very business. Caesar de Naples, and the Governor of Vlpian obstinately maintain'd, that they ought to assault us; but the Spanish Soldiers who understood what Caesar de Naples had said, plainly told their Captains, that they might then go on to the assault with the Italians, if they so pleased, for as for them they would have nothing to do in the business, being resolv'd to stand to what by their Camp-master had been pro∣posed. All these disputes came to the Mareschal's knowledge▪ after Don Ferrand was risen from before Riverol, by Letters that he writ to the President of Millan, which by some of Signior Ludovico de Biragu's people were intercepted, and whilst they were disputing a∣bout a Town that was none of their own,Alb surprised  the Spa∣iard. the Mareschal surpriz'd Alba from them by Messieurs de la Mothe-Gondrin, Francisco Bernardin, and de Panau, the Lieutenant to his own Company, and some others whom I do not remember. The Mareschal by break of day had notice of the surprize (for our people entred at eleven of the clock in the night) who presently dispatcht a footman of his to me with a Letter which contain'd these words. Monsieur de Montluc, I have just now receiv'd intelligence that our design upon Alba has taken effect, and our people are within is which it, the reason that I am just now mounting to horse to go thither in all diligence. The Footman came to me about ten of the clock, and being the Governr of Ulpian deein'd a Trumpet of Monsieur de Maugiron,A Bravado of  Siur de Montluc. I sent thi∣ther a Drum of Captain Gritti, to whom having shewed the Mareschals Letter, I gave him charge to tell the Governor of Ulpian, that Don Ferrand could not better revenge himself for the loss of Alba, than to come and attaque us at Cassal. So soon as the Drum came to the Gates of Vlpian he found that the Governor was gone by break of day to the Council to Riverol, and therefore told the Soldiers at the Gate of the taking of Alba, at which they were so incens'd, that they would thereupon have kill'd him, and in order thereunto began to pinion and bind him; but the Governor in the interim arrived, to whom I sent word, that he should restore me my Trumpet, considering that we had al∣ways made fair war, and that he should take heed of beginning to shew foul play; for our people also had given good quarter at Alba. The said Governor then took the Drum from the Soldiers, and carried him to his lodging, where he told him, that if what he had said concerning Alba did not prove to be true, he would hang him; to which the Drum reply'd, that provided he would give him but a Teston, if it was true, he would be content to be hang'd if it prov'd otherwise. Whereupon the Governor return'd to
horse, and went again to Riverol, where they continued all night in Council, to consider whether this news could be true, or no: but the next day arriv'd the Captain of the Castle of Montcalvo, who brought them certain intelligence from the Governor of Ast, that Alb was certainly taken; which was the reason that the next morning Don Ferrand departed in all hast, and went to pass the River at the Bridg of Asture, to go directly to the said Alba to try if he could not recover it before the Mareschal could have leisure to better fortifie the place. So soon as I saw my self delivered from all apprehension of a Siege, I immediately sent away my Pioneers to the said Alba, who at that time stood the Mareschal in very great stead. I did not there stay for a Command, and it is often necessary to do before we are bid∣den, provided there be no hazard in the case. Monsieur de Bonnivet, and Santo Pedro Corzo, with seven Ensiges put themselves into it. Now of Don Ferrand's arrival at the Bridge at Asture, and of his passing over the River there, Monsieur de Salvazon who was Governor of Berüe gave me speedy notice.The Sieur de Montluc sends succours to Alba. I therefore sodainly sent away the Baron of Chipy, la Garde, and le Mas, who were the next morning by break of day at Alba, of whose coming the Mareschal was exceeding glad, as also was Monsieur de Bonnivet, foras∣much as they came from a place where they had undergone extraordinary labour in forti∣fying, hoping that these would shew others the way, as they also did. Monsieur de Mau∣giron would remain at Cassal, because it was a very commodious quarter for horse; I there left Captain Martin with him, and sent le Gritti to his Garrison, and Colonel Cha∣ramond, and I went to wait upon the Mareschal at Turin, who was then but newly re∣turn'd from Alba, and my Company went back to Montcallier. If I was welcome no to the Mareschal, or whether caress'd by President Birague, and the whole Court of Parliament after such a service, I leave every one to judge. When (Captains) therefore from any undertaking great profit and commodity may accrue, as there did from this (considering that Turin, had Cassal been possest by the Enemy, would have suffer'd a mighty inconvenience) do not stick boldly to hazard your persons for the defence of any place whatsoever. And when you shall be there, remem∣ber after what manner, and with what diligence I carried on my work; for by that means you shall make your Enemy afraid to attaque you. He is more afraid to affault, than you are to defend. He meditates and considers who are within, and that he has to do with men that know how to fortifie themselves, which is no little advantage to a Sol∣dier. It is true that Caesar de Naples committed a great error in squandring away so much time about those paltry Forts, and in the mean time giving us so much leisure to fortifie; for had he come directly to us at first, he would have put us to our Trumps: but I think he was afraid. My good fortune also would have it, that Don Ferrand should divide his Forces, who had he come to attaque us at the beginning, would have been the death of a great many good men; but we should have sold our skins very dear. Now as Don Ferrand was at Ast, in his way towards Alba, he there met intelligence that Monsieur de Bonnivet was very strong within it, and that lately three Compaies were entred into the Town of those that I had at Cassal, together with a great number of Pioneers, which made him enter into a very great debate, whether or no he should go to Alba,Delays and negligence ru∣inous to Mar∣tial affairs. as he did before at Riverol whether or no he should go to Cassal. After five or six days then he departed from Ast with all his Cavalry to go take a view of Alba, where, after he had spent a whole day in discovering the place, he went to sit down be∣fore St. Damian, having been told, that the Mareschal had taken thence almost all the amunition of powder, bulle, and match, to put into Alba, and had given order to some one to lay in as much more; but oftentimes the sloth and negligence of men intrusted with the care of affairs occasion very signal disadvantages; I never saw man that was slow about his business, idle or negligent in war, that ever perform'd any great matters; nei∣ther indeed is there any thing in the world, wherein diligence is so much required. A day, an hour, may a minute is enough to make the bravest enterprizes vanish into air. Now the Mareschal conceived that Don Ferrand was more likely to put himself into Carmagnolle to fortifie the Town, and to take the Castle, than to make any attempt up∣on any other place, believing St. Damian to be replenisht with powder, and therefore came himself thither to take order for the security of that Fort, where Monsieur de Bass who was Governor of the Marquesate of Saluzzo, would undertake the defence of the place. The Maeschal then went to Carignan, leaving me with the said Sieur de Bassé to assist him in pung provision and ammunition into the Castle, which he did at the re∣quest of Monsiur de Bessé himself, and the very same day that the Mareschal departed from us,Th: Siege of St. Damian. the had in ligence by a letter from Messieurs de Briquemaut, and de Cavigy, that the Enmy was  down before St. Damian, and that they therefore entreated him to
relieve them with powder, bullet, and match for the Harquebuzeers, they having not re∣ceived that which he had promised, and taken order for; at which the Mareschal was the most highly concern'd imaginable, and immediately sent thither six loads of powder, and four of bullet, with a proportionable quantity of match, sending order to the Governor of la Cisterne (a Fort two little miles distant from St. Damian) who had three Conpanies of Italians in Garrison with him, that he should by all means venture that night to put those ammunitions into the Town. Monsieur de Bassé, and I had already heard that the Camp was set down before St. Damian by the same Massenger that carried the news to the Mareschal, he being of necessity to pass by, Carmagnolle, as also did this ammunition, three or four hours after, which was in the close of the Evening. Monsieur de Bassé and I exhorted him who had the conduct of the Ammunition to remonstrate to the Captains, that the powder must of necessity he put into the Town that very night; for otherwise it could not be possibly convey'd into it; and that he who undertook the conduct of it, was likewise to enter in himself: but we found the fellow so cold in the business, that we very well perceiv'd he would do no good: It is very easie to discover by a mass counter∣nance if he be afraid or no, and whether he have the heart to execute what he hath un∣dertaken;A mans cou∣rage is to be known by his countenance. and we saw so much by this fellow, that we were rather afraid he should dis∣hearten the Captains when he came to la Cisterne, than any wayes encourage them to the Enterprize enjoyn'd; which made me, resolve to go my self, to try by this relief to save the place, and Monsieur de Bassé would that Monsieur de Classe his eldest Son, with ten men at arms, he being Lieutenant of his own Company, should go along with me, At one of the clock at night then we departed, and by eleven the next day came to la Cistrene, where I found the Governor and his Captains in a great perplexity, forming a great many difficulties about the conduct of the Ammunition, and which way it was possible to be convey'd into the Town; and in truth they had some reason so to do; For St. Damian is a little place, and Don Ferrand had in his Camp 6000 Germans, 6000 Italians,Monsieur Mont∣uc undertakes to relieve St. Damian. and 4000 Spaniards, 1200 Light-horse, and 400 men at arms, and all these were encampt close by the Town, about which the Court of Guards in a manner toucht one another, so that to carry it into the Town upon the horses that had brought it to la Ci∣sterne had been impossible, for it was a snow knee deep, and all the wayes were full of Soldiers Huts. But I presently caused a great many Sacks to be brought me, and made them to be cut each Sack into three parts, which by certain women, who were ready for the purpose, were handsomely sowed together again, and into these bags I put the pow∣der. I then got together thirty Countrey fellows, upon whom I caused the powder and bullet to be tyed, with the match at their Girdles, and gave to each of them a good staffe in his hand to support him. Monsieur de Briquemant, the Governor of St. Damian, had sent six Swiss of his Guard out of the Town, who could not get in again, and so hapned to be at la Cisterne, who also took their share of the Ammunition. Being then ready to set out, there arrived the Seigneurs de Pied-de-fou, and de Bourry (who I am told is sinceturn'd Hugonot) de St. Romain (Nephew to Monsieur de Fayette) and three or four Gentlemen more, who were going to put themselves into the Town, and slighting put themselves on foot, and sent back their horses. The Mareschal had writ to two of the Captains, who were at la Cisterne, that they should attempt to put the powder into St. Damian;An old Soldier feats death. which said Captains were old Soldiers, which made me that I had no great hopes of their doing any thing to purpose; for whoever would execute a hazardous enterprize, and where there is like to be good store of blows, must of all things take heed of employing an old Captain and an old Soldier, for as much as they too well understand the peril, and too much apprehend the danger of death, so that you shall sel∣dom have any good account of their undertaking, as I have found by experience both in this, and upon other occasions: whereas a young fellow is not so apprehensive of his danger (it is true that there ought to be conduct in the case) and will easily undertake any execution where diligence is required; he is prompt and active, and his youthful heat enlames his heart, which in old men is often cold and bloodless. About two hours after midnight they departed, and so soon as they were gone out of the Town▪ I went up to a Platform hard by the Gate, from whence I could discover the Enemies whole Camp, excepting a little on the other side of the Town; and in the mean time sent out the Governors Lieutenant to give an allarm on the left hand by the Springs, which signified very little, the Enemy making very small account of it. So soon as our peo∣ple were arriv'd at a little eminence near to the City, from whence they might discover all the fires,The relief can∣not get into St. Damian. and even the men by the light of them, one of the Italian Captains said to Monsieur de Pied-de-fou, and the rest. Videte il Campo, Ecco la Cavalie ecco la Gen∣darmerie,
co li udsci, ecco li Espaniolli, cco li Italiani (pointing to them with his finger) non si intrareble una Gatta, bisogns tournar en dietra. Behold the Camp, see yonder the Cavalry, see the Gens d' Armes, see the Germans see the Spaniards, see the Italians, a Cat cannot possibly get in; and therefore 'tis convenient to turn back again. All this while I remain'd upon the Platform, with my pain in my hip, which plagu'd me to death, of which I was not yet cur'd, nor of two years after. Behold then at break of day all our people return'd, where they gave me an account of what they had seen, which gave me trouble, but no satisfaction; wheresore I pre∣sently dispatch't away a Messenger post to the Mareschal (who knew nothing of my be∣ing at la Cisterne, but believ'd me to be at Carmagnlle with Monsieur de Bassé to whom I gave an account of all that had past, and with: Il sent him word, that he was not to hope that these Captains would ever put the powder into St. Damian; for that I had already prov'd the contrary, entreating him therefore to send away post to Montcallier to Captain Charry who carried my Ensign, that he should forthwith come away with fifty of the best Soldiers I had, to wi, thirty Harquebuzeers, and twenty Pikes, and that he should nt fail to be at la Cisterne by midnight. The Mareschal wondred to hear that I was there, and presently dispatch't away a Messenger post to Captain Charry, to whom I had also writ a word or two in haste to the same effect. This valiant young man, full of spirit, and good inclination to the service, needed not to be intreated twice, but immediately came away with his fifty men, and about an hour after midnight came to la Cisterne, where I had in Cellar prepar'd three or four good Charcole fires, and a long Table full of meat, having lockt up the Country fellows on the one side, whom whilst the Soldiers drank and made good cheer, I caused to be loaden, together with the Swiss; and would no more speak to the Italian Captains to go with Captain Charry, save only that I encreated one of them to lend me his Ensign called Pedro Antonio, a vain young Coxcomb, whom I had known at Montcallier,Captain Char∣ry undertakes the relief of St. Damian. and had there twice laid him by the heels for misdemeanors he had committed in the Town. I took him then aside, and said to him, Pedro Antonio, I will do thee more honor than thy Captain; thou hast seen what a fault thy Countrymen last night committed, in not striving to enter into the Town, from whence you all return'd with a company of pitiful excuses. For my part I am a man that take no excuse in payment, where the loss of a Town, and the men of honour within it, are in concern. I know thou hast courage enough, but thou art not wise; and if thou wilt now give a testimony of thy discretion, as thou hast at other times done of thy valour, I do engage to thee my word to make the Mareschal give thee a Company, and thou hast nw an occasion offers it self, wherein to let him see, that at thou art bold to execute, thou art also prudent to command. I will therefore that thou take fifty men of thy Captains Company, to whom I will presently speak to deliver them to thee,A discourse of the Sieur de Montluc to Pe∣dro Antonio. and at thy going out of the Town I will place all the Peasants and the Swiss that carry the Ammu∣nition in the midst of the fifty Soldiers, and will moreover that thou take three Sergeants, which I will also cause to be delivered to thee, to place one in either Flanck, and one behind, to the end that they may encourage to Soldiers to follow thee, and have an eye that the Peasants do not steal away: but when Captain Charry shall attaque a Court of Guard, pass thou on with∣out staying to sight, unless any on oppose thy way, and make still forwards, whether thou meet any opposition or no, until thou comest to the very gates of the City. He hereupon return'd me answer in Italian. Credete Signior, Chio la faro a pena di Morir, & voi connoscerle che Pietro Antonia sara divinuto Saggio; Whereupon taking him in my arms, I said to him▪ Io ti promtto ancora, che io mirecordero d ite, & che ti srarecognosciuto il servitio; no mi mancar di gratia, io ti giuro per la nostra Madonna se tu non sai chello che un huomo de bene debbe fare, io ti rro un tratto de Monluco. Tu sa come io ho manegiato non suono quindeci die uno delle nstri facendo d'il poltrone, Io non dimando sino un puoco di prudenza con pre∣stezza. And indeed he kept his promise with me, and carried himself very discreetly in the action. The Captains gave him whatever he desired, being glad themselves to be rid of the employment; I also entreated Pied-de-fou, and the rest before named, that since they were resolv'd to put themselves into the Town, they were to do it so as to be assisting to the conservation of the place, and not to lose themselves together with all those who were within it; forasmuch as the preservation of the said Town consisted only in supplying it with ammunition, and that therefore it would be necessary that they should divide themselves, some into the Flancks, and others into the rear, to the end that whilst Capta Charry should be fighting, they might encourage Pedro Antonlo's men to go on; which they accordingly did. All of them therefore having received their instructions from me what every one was to do, as well Italians and Peasants, as my own Soldiers; they all in the order prescrib'd,
marcht out of the Town; when going out at the Gate, I told Captain Charry in the hearing of all my Soldiers, that I would never see him more, it they did not enter, or die upon the place, as many as were of my Company; to which he made answer, that he only desir'd me to go to my rest, and that I should presently hear news of him. In truth he was a Soldier without fear. In his Company there was a Corporal of mine called le Turk, a Picard by birth, who said to me, What do you make a question of our entring into the Town? Par la mort bien, we should have spent our time and our blood very well, having above an hundred times fought with you, and ever remain'd victorious, if we should now stand suspected to you; at which I leapt about his neck, and said to him these words. My Turk, I do assure thee upon my faith, I think so worthily of you all, that I am confident if any men upon earth can enter, you will do it; and so they departed, and I went to place my self again upon the Platform, where I had stood the night before, and the Captain of the Watch kept me company. About two hours after I heard a great alarm on that side by which our people were to enter,Relief put into St. Damian. and several volleys of Harquebuzshot: but they continued but a very little while, which put me into some fear that our men might be repulsed, or at least that that the Peasants were run away: who so soon as they were come to the enainence where the Italian Captains had told, them, that a Cat could not get in, they made a halt. There the Guides shewed them the Courts of Guard, from which, by reason of the ex∣cessive cold and the snow, the Centinels were not twenty paces distant. Capatin Charry then called Messieurs de Pied de-fou, Bourg, St. Romain, and Pedro Antonio, to whom he deliver'd two Guides, reserving one for himself, and said to them, this is the last Court of Guard of foot, for the rest are all horse, which can do no great matters by reason of the snow; so soon therefore as you shall see me attaque this Court of Guard, run on as fast as you can, and stop not for any thing you shall meet in your way, but make directly to the Gate of the City▪, who thereupon all of one accord see themselves in a posture to charge through. Captain Charry then drew near to the Court of Guard, which he put to rout, and overturn'd upon another Court of Guard, and both of them betook them∣selves to flight; which being done he past on forward straight to the Gate of the Town▪ where he found Pedro Antonio already arrived, and where they immediately delivered their Ammunition, without making any longer stay than whilst Messieurs de Chavigny and Briquemant mbrac't Captain Charry entreating him to tell me, that since I was at la Cisterne, they thought themselves certain to be reliev'd with all things they should stand in need of, and that it would be very necessary to send them in some more Am∣munition: but whilst the Enemy busied themselves about taking th hers of the Guards that were run away (of which a Captain was the next day hang'd) Captain Charry and Pedro Antonio, with their Peasants, taking them in this disorder, charg'd them thorough and thorough, and came clear away. I there lost not so much as one Soldier, either French or Italian, neither was there any one hurt, not so much as Peasant, but all arrived safe at la Cisterne, it being fair broad day, where they found me still upon the Platform. I hereupon immediately sent away a dispatch to the Mareschal to entreat him to send me some more powder, for bullet and match they had enough already, which he also speedily did from Quiers: to which place he was remov'd▪ that he might be nearer to me. Behold the age a Captain ought to be of, to whom you should entrust the execution of a hazardous and sudden enterprize, and I can affirm with truth, that these hundred years there has not died a braver, nor a more prudent Captain for his years than Captain Charry was, and am assur'd,The Character of Captain Charry. that Monsieur de Briquemaut will say the same, though he be of the Religion of those by whom he was since assassinated at Paris. The manner of his death I have nothing to do to meddle withall; for the King, the Queen, and all the Princes of the Court, knew it well enough, and besides it was so foul an act, that I will not blot my Paper with the relation, and I am sure very unworthy a Frenchman. When I lost him, together with Captain Montluc my Son, who was slain at the Island of Madera, belonging to the King of Portugal, it seemed to me that my two arms were lopt offf from my body, the one being my right, and the other my left. He had ever bred up Captain Montluc from the age of twelve or thirteen years, and vvherever he vvent had this young boy evermore hung at his Girdle: Neither could I have put him to a better Tutor,The Character of Captain Montluc. to teach him the trade of War: and in truth he had retein'd a great deal of his precept, insomuch that I may vvithout shame say (although he vvas my Son) that had he liv'd he vvould have made a great Soldier, daring, and discreet; but God vvas pleased to dispose otherwise of him. I shall therefore leave this discourse (vvhich extracts tears from mine eyes) to pursue my former subject.
Monsieur de Briquemant sent me word by Captain Charry, that they had no Engi∣neers within, nor any one that understood where a Gabion was fifty to be placed, with which he desired me to acquaint the Mareschal, entreating me moreover to send back to him Captain Charry, and my fifty Soldiers, whom he esteemed as much as the best Com∣pany he had in the Town, in return of which kindness he would be my servant for ever; which I did. Monsieur de Gohas that now is, was at that time one of my Company, and one of the fifty, though he was then but 17 years of age, it being in the beginning of his arms. The Mareschal therefore sent away post to Alba for the Engineers that were there, of which the Chevelier Reloge was one. So soon as Captain Charry returned back from St. Damlan, the Pikes took the Powder, and hung it at their own Girdles, as the o∣thers had done before, and would have no convoy at all, but took their way a little on the right hand on that side where the horse lay, where they charg'd through, and with∣out the loss of one man got safe into the Town; for Captain Charry was a man that understood his business very well. So soon as he was got in, he entreated Messieurs de Briquemaut, and de Chavigny, to entrust him with the defence of the Ditch, which they immediately did, and he there covered himself with loggs of timber, planks, and Gabi∣ons after the best manner he could, and so soon as ever the Guides returned back to me, I sent away to the Mareschal to give him an account of all, beseeching him to send me Captain Caupenne my Lieutenant, with another fifty of my Soldiers, which he did, whom two days after his arrival I made venture to carry some more powder to the be∣sieged. He went on that side where the Gens d' Arms lay, where the Enemy had now placed a Court of Guard of foot, who were aware of him at distance enough,Captain Ca∣penne carries powder into St. Damian. and did all they could to stop his way: which notwithstanding he made shift to lay down the powder upon the edge of the ditch of the Gate, and by him the forenam'd Seigneurs sent me their service, withall desiring me to assure the Mareschall, that the place was no more in danger of being lost, forasmuch as they now had every thing they needed or desired. The Baron de Chipy who was with Monsieur de Bonivet at Alba, would after∣wards try to put some powder into the Town, by that side towards the said Alba, and accordingly charg'd after the same manner that mine had done:The Baron de Chipy enter into S. Damian. but he lost his powder, and Peasants, and almost all his Soldiers, at least to fourteen or fifteen only who charg'd thorough with him, and got into the Town. There is luck in all things. Now the Camp lay sixteen or seventeen dayes before the Town, and the Battery con∣tinued for seven dayes, in which time Caesar de Naples had wrought two Mines which were carried on under the Ditch towards the Breach, and were already brought up al∣most to the wall. A Pioneer running away from the Enemy was taken by our Italians, who told me all, and whom so soon as it grew to be dark I deliver'd to Captain Mau∣ries, (who was at that time my Serjeant,The Mines at St. Damian discover'd. and in this last war Serjeant Major to Mon∣sieur de Montferrand at Bourdeaux) who bound him, and would take no more but one Soldier only to guide him, with which he carried the business so well, that he met but two Centinels by the way, who also sodainly retyr'd to their Court of Guard, insomuch that he past without any difficulty at all, and carried the Pioneer into the Town, where he remained all night, and so soon as it was fair light day, Messieurs de Cavigny, and de Briquemaut, carried him upon the wall of the Battery, from whence he might discover the place where the Mine lay. They then presently descended into the Ditch, and began to dig and scrape, so that they presently found the holes, and as we after understood, must but very little of trapping Caesar de Naples there, who was come thither to view the Mine. Now the two last dayes they made a very great Battery, and Don Frrand had caused a great number of Bavins to be made, which by the Spaniards, Italians, and Germans were thrown into the Ditch, having cut the Counterscarp in two or three pla∣ces; but as many as they threw in, Captain Charry, who lay in the Ditch, conveyed in∣to the Town through a hole they had made under the breach, so that thinking the said Ditch to be fill'd, they sent to discover in open day, being all drawn up in Battalia, ready to go on to the Assault: but they found all was gone, and not a Fagot left in the Ditch, which made them ply the Battery for two days with wonderful fury, and moreover part of the night by the light of the Moon; when after all, seeing the good countenance of our people within, and that neither their Mines, nor their Bavins had done them any good, they resolv'd at last not to attempt an assault, but to raise the Siege and depart. The last night that they gave over the Battery I made Captain Mauries again venture into the Town, who heard the rising of the Camp, and the drawing off the Artiller,The Siege of St. Damian raised. for Messieurs de Cavigny, and de Briquemaut would not let him depart, till he were first assur'd of the truth, that he might bring me certain news; and so he past and repast at his ease, with∣out out encountring any one person, forasmuch as all the Camp was already in Battalia, and
gone from their Huts. So soon as he return'd to me, which was about two hours be∣fore day, I immediately dispatch him away upon very good horses to the Mareschal, whom he found yet in bed, because he ad not slept one wink of all night, having been all day with President Birague, and Signior Francisco Bernardin upon the shoar of Quie∣ras, where from two of the clock in the afternoon, having observ'd the Artillery to cease, and having staid till one of the clock at night, without hearing any thing at all, they all concluded the place to be taken, or surrendred; but in the morning, a little after sun-rise, and just as his man had open'd his Chamber door, when Captain Mauries stept in, and told him the news, I leave you to judge how he was overjoy'd A sent me word to come speedily away to him. Now you must know I here plaid the part of a young Captain; for ain Mauries had told me that the Enemy's Camp was rising, I went in Damian,The Sie de Montluc goes to St. Damian, and naowly scapes. where so soon as Captain, Charry, who was upon the wall salled out with my other Soldiers, which I had afterwards cause to Enemy had clapt themselves down slat upon their bellies behind a fifteen or twenty fair to be seen; a sight by which I was so forsooth go and charge them, and did so; but so soon as I came rest, they all start up and charg'd me on all sides, and followed the very walls of the Town, which reliev'd me (in good time for volley of Harquebuz shot from the wall, and there Captain Charry was wounded, and taken,Captain Char∣ry taken priso∣ner. and had it not been for my Lieutenant whom I had left at the Gabions, they had cut me, with all the fifty Soldiers of Captain Charry, to pieces. I lost seven or eight men, of which three were slain, and Monsieur de Gohas was once round enclosed, but after∣wards escap't. The joy I was in to see the Siege raised, and the great mind I had to get some prise of the Enemy, were the occasions of this ridiculous sally of mine. This be∣ing done after. I had seen Messieurs de Chavigny, and de Briquemaut, I returned back to la Cisterne, and the same ight went to Quiers, where I was as much welcom'd by the Mareschal, and all those who were with him, as any man in the world could be▪ Which said Mareschal presently dispatcht away Monsieur de Biron to the King, to carry his Majesty news of the issue of this Siege, entreating of him the place of a Bedchamber man for me; and moreover at my great instance and importunity (and being I was e∣ternally tormented with my hip) was pleased to discharge me of my Office of Camp∣master though it was a request very unpleasing to him: but to gratifie me in whate∣ver I would ask of him, he was willing to content me in that particular. And the said Seigneur de Biron being at Court, the King would not transfer to any one the said Office of Camp-master, till first he should be better enformed whom he ought to give it to: and therefore ordered that the Mareschal should name one, Monsieur de Bonivet another, and I a third: I therefore nominated Monsieur de Chipy, which was the reason that the said Sicur de Biron continued very long at Court, because of the dispatches to and again, that he was enforc't to make, during which I still continued Camp-master, till the return of the said Seigneur de Biron (who at that time carried the Mareschal's Guidon) who brought me my discharge,The Sieur de Montluc quits his office of Camp-master. his Majesty having transferred that command to the Baron de Chipy, whom I had nam'd, and also brought me the place of Gentleman of his Ma∣jesties Bedchamber, for he would not depart till he had first seen me inroll'd in the room of one of the old ones that was vacant, and moreover brought me a Patent for the Government of Alha, which I never dream't of, and less imagin'd, that the King should prefer me to three or four others, in whose behalf the Mareschal had written to him. Behold the services I perform'd for the King, and the Mareschal his Lieutenant, all within fifteen or twenty dayes of one another. Happy (fellows in arms) is he who serves his King under a General who will not con∣ceal the merits of such as perform any remarkable exploit, which Monsieur de Brissac would never do: for never did any man under his command do any handsome thing, or any the least action which he thought worthy his Majesties knowledge, but he did forthwith give him notice of it: he was a Gentleman that would not cloath him∣self with the spoils of another man's honor, nor conceal the bravery of any from the greatest to the least. When therefore it shall please God that you are employ'd under such a General, fear not to hazard your lives, and employ all your vigilance and dili∣gence to do them the best service you can, if you have an intention to advance yourselves by your arms and virtue, if not, get you home, and never meddle with the practice of Arms. 'Tis an extreme grief and disappointment to a man, when he shall have exposed his life for the achievment of honor, to have his name then conceal'd from his Prince, from whom we are to expect the reward of our fidelity and valour. There is no these
comparable to that of robbing another man of his honor, and yet Generals for the most part make no conscience of it. During the time that Monsieur de Biron remained at Court, I still continuing Camp-master, as has been said before, and in the beginning of Iune when corn began to ripen, Don Ferrand would not sufer the great Army he had to lye idle, but at the per∣swasion of Monsieur de Trinitat, Brother to the Count de Benne,The Siege  Benne. would go lay siege to Benne, the said Monsieur de Trinitat advising him to cut off the water which turned certain Mills within the Town, saying that they had not within corn nor meal to serve them for a moneth, and moreover assuring him▪ that he would get him a pay for the Army, by cutting the corn that was now almost ready for the Sickle, which he would presently cause to be thrasht up by 300 Peasants he would take along with him for that purpose, knowing very well that those of Langues, and de Bernisse la Paille would be ready to buy it, and that so in a moneths time the Town would be surrendred with∣out one Canon shot. Monsieur de Savoy, who was then very young, that being his first aly into Arms,The Duke of Savoy in the Spanish Army. was at this time with the Army, and they came to set down their Camp within a mile of Benne, upon the Banks of a River that was there, of which they so turned the cur∣rent, that not so much as one drop came into the Town. Now, by ill fortune, the Mareschal had ordered a Governor (whose name I shall forbear) to cause twelve hn∣dred sacks of corn and meal, half of the one, and half of the other, to be brought into this place from his own Government, as the custom had been. I will no publish the occasion why the said Governor did not accordingly send in the said provisions, being it would too nearly reflect upon thin honor, and it is not my purpose to speak ill of any: But President Birague knows the reasons very well, he being present at the Council, when the Mareschal was pleased to send for me, and where there was a very great clutter, and high dispute about that affair. The Enemies Camp had already been eight days set down before Benne, and made no shew of any intention to assault it, hoping they should soon have it for want of victuals, although the Town was of it self sufficiently fortiied, and that the Count and the Countess were very affectionate to the Kings service. There was in all but three Companies of foot within it, to wit, that of the Count, that of the younger la Molle, and of Louys Duke, which was that of Montdevi, making in all two Companies of Italians, and one of French. The said Captain la Molle was sick, and by order of his Physitians for change of ayr, had caused himself to be carried to Montdevi; so that the Count had no man of Command with him, but the said Louys Duke, and which was worse,The Count de Bee in great perplexity. had never before been besieg'd, which put him into a very great per∣plexity, having no body with him who understood at all the defence of a Town. An affair wherein the most ardy are apt to be astonisht when they hear a furious rattle a∣bout their ears, and see a mighty preparation against them, if they have not been at such work before: and on the other side he saw himself totally without provisions; in∣somuch that he resolved to send the Mareschal word of all, and of the fear he was in, the place would be lost; as he had just reason, it being that where his chiefest interest lay, the Town being his own. He therefore presently dispatched away the Lieutenant to the Company of Montdevi, who arriv'd just as the Mareschal rose from dinner, he being then at Carmagnolle, and with him Mssieurs de Bonivet, President Birague, d' Aussun, Francisco Bernardin, la Moth-Gondrin, and some other whose names I have forgot. So soons, and that the Governor (whose name I have omitted) had not sent any in accord∣ing to his order, though he had still pretended to have done it, both he and all the com∣pany entred into a very great dispair, and concluded the place for lost, being the Mares∣chal had no visible way to relieve it, forasmuch as he had not men to resist the third part of the Enemy's Army. He then demanded of the Lieutenant what Captain he desir'd to have come to him to assist him, to which he made answer, that the Count lov'd me exceeding well, and often said, that I had once reliev'd him, and that he would give the one half of his estate, upon condition that I was with him. I was then but newly recover'd of a Feaver, with which my mouth and lips were much swell'd and broken out. The Mareschal then sent for me by his Valet de Chambre to come presently to his lodging,The Count de Benne demands the Sieur de Montluc to be sent to his re∣lief. where I found him in this trouble. He there made the Lieutenant to give me an account of the extremity they were in in Benne, as he did, and moreover complaining of the Go∣vernor by whom they had been so deceiv'd, earnestly entreated me to go and put my self into the Towr. To which I made answer, What would you have me do, there being nei∣ther corn nor meal? I can work no miracles; to which he return'd, that the Count had  high an opinion of me, as also all those in the Town, that If I could once get in, they
were very confident the place would not be lost, but that I would find some expedient to save it. Every one knows how these great Lords, when they would make one undertake an impossible thing, can wheedle and flatter a man into a good opinion of himself, and accordingly they here represented to me the exmples of Lans, St. Damian, and other places where I had had to do, and had ever been so fortunate, as that all things had suc∣ceeded according to my own desire. The President Birague then began to perswade me on the other side, but Monsieur de Bonivet and the rest said nothing, knowing very well how dangerous an Enterprise it was for the loss of my honor, and that I must in the end of necessity come to a Capitulation; as the Mareschal himself also told me, that for the last refuge I must proceed to that; to which I made answer, that I had rather die, than that my name should be found upon record subscribed to a Capitulation, or that any place should be surrendred I had once taken upon me to defend; but that I would do as God should direct me, in whose assistance I reposed my only confidence and trust. Monsieur de Bonivet then commanded twelve or fifteen Gentlemen of his to go along with me, (of which number the Governor de la Moth Rouge, who is yet living was one, and I took as many of my own, making up thirty horse, without taking any servant with me, save only a Valet de Chambre and a Cook) and writ to the Vicount de Gordon at Savillan, to furnish me with a good Guide, and to Captain Theodore Bedeigne, that he should con∣voy me with his Troop,The Sieur de Montluc puts himself into Benn. and this was upon the Saturday. Upon Sunday morning by break of day I entred into Benne, and the Count, if he be yet living, and will speak his conscience, will say that it was one of the greatest joys that ever he had in his whole life, as also the Countess, and the whole Town will witness the same. I presently laid me down to sleep in the Castle, and two hours after I awak we went to dinner. The Count in the mean time had appointed all the head men of the Town, as also all the Masons and Carpenters to repair to the Town-Hall, to which place the Count, the Countess, and all of us likewise came. I there proposed all that was necessary to be done, the Count complain'd of the little corn he had,Benne unfur∣nisht of pro∣visions. and the Towns-men declar'd, that they had not sufficient for eight days; so that although the Town was cituated advantagiously enough, yet were they in a very great necessity, by reason it was the latter end of the year, and on the other side they had sold all their corn to the Genoeses, and to those about Savona, being tempted so to do by the rates they gave, it being at that time sold for three Crowns a sack: and the Count who was a man that liv'd at a very great expence, had sold all his in expectation, and up| on the assurance of the 1200 sacks vvhich the Governor, that I forbear to name, ought to have sent in thither. We then fell to disputing in case we had corn, vvhich way we get it ground: But so soon as the Count had told me whereabouts the Camp presently conceiv'd that I should make a shift to get corn, though I would not say any thing to any one, till after we were return'd from the Council, then I told it to the Count and the Countess only. Whilest vve were sitting in Council there was a little man a Mason of above threescore years of age, who presented himself before us, saying that he had formerly got several great stones to lay upon the Graves of the dead, from a Quarry that be nam'd hard by, and that he conceiv'd if those stones were taken off the Graves, they would some of them at least, if not all, be proper to make Mill-stones: whereupon we deputed two of the Town, together vvith the Countess, vvho would needs go along vvith them, to make tryal vvith the Masons, vvhether they could be of any use or no: and not long after the said Lady return'd with great joy, and offer'd her self to take the pains to cause the Mill-stones to be made;The Countess of Benne her self takes care to see the work of the Town go forward. vvhich at the first I vvould by no means endure; but in the end she would be obeyed, and vvas so diligent in the business, that in two days and two nights she had got eleven hand-Mills finisht compleat, vvhich were distribued amongst those of the Town, vvho vvould thereupon undertake to nou∣rish the Soldiers, provided there might be a vvay found to get corn. We then concluded vvith those of the Town, that at one of the clock at night they should bring me five or six hundred men and women, the one carrying little ropes, and the others Scythes and Sides to cut the corn, and that the Gates of the Town, should in the mean time be kept shut, to the end that no body might go out to carry intelligence to the Enemy; for Monsieur de Trinitat had several friends in the City, that the Count himself had in some suspition. I then dispatcht away two of the Inhabitants with a letter to Captain Hieronimo,The way to ge . the Son of Colonel Givanni of Turin (who lay at a little Town, the name of which▪ I have forgot, but it was about a mile distant from the place where the Enemy had cut, and diverted the current of the River) entreating him that this night he would by one way or another attempt to repair what the Enemy had broken down, and do all that in
him lay, if possible to send the water to us again, which that very night e accordingly executed, though he was but a very young Gentleman, for I believe he was not then a∣bove twenty years old. We then went home expecting the night, when being return'd back to the Castle, I told the Count, that it would be convenient we should go alone upon the walls to look out a field of corn that should be neerest to the City, which we were to cut all that night, whilst I sent out Captain Theodore with 200 Soldiers to give a strong and furious alarm to the Court of Guard, who were set to inder those of the Town from cutting any Corn. So soon then as we had made choice of one, we return'd back to supper, and after we had supp'd, carried out Captain Theodore and two others, Commanders of Companies, that were there present upon the Wall of the Town, to shew them on which side they were to give the alarm, and the others to fight the Court of Guard. After which we appointed ten of the Townsmen on horse-back to overlook the people that cut the corn, to hasten them in their work. At one of the clock at night all these people went out, the Soldiers to fight,Great dili∣gence in the people and the people to cut; so that nothing was to be heard all night long but alarms, as well in the Camp, as at the Court of Guard, and as the people cut and bound up the corn, they still ran back to the Gate of the City, and there threw down their burthens, and im∣mediately went again for more; for some were appointed to reap, and the rest to bind and carry. In the mean time the day appear'd, vvhen we caused those to vvhom the field belonged to convey away the corn from off the place, so there was not one sack of corn loft of all night. The Enemy vvho saw this field all cut, and carried away, plac thereupon stronger Guards, and neerer than before; but the people vvho began to taste the sweetness of their gain, resolv'd to hazard themselves to get their corn off the ground, rather than the Enemy should have it; insomuch that at the beginning of the night there sallyed out above two hundred of the Inhabitants of the Town, of vvhich some ven∣tur'd further, and others did their business neerer at hand. Now Benne you must know is almost totally surrounded vvith velleys,The scituation of Benne. vvhich are pretty vve covered vvith Copse, and vvatered with several Rivulets: so that vvhen they heard any body coming, they hid themselves vvith their corn, and in the morning at the opening of the Gates return'd back to the City. The next morning after my arrival the vvater by the diligence of Cap∣tain Hieronimo, began to come down to the Mills, and for two days and two nights con∣tinued its course; vvhereupon ensued a great confusion at the Mills; but vve made an order that no one should grind any more than to make ten or a dozen loaves only, by vvhich means every body got some to serve them a little vvhile, and two dayes and two nights after Captain Salines a Spaniard came to vievv the vvater, vvhich the same night vvas again taken from us. I then gave Captain Hieronimo notice of the place vvhere they had again return'd to cut it off from us, vvho never ceased till he had made up the Bank again: but he could not do it so as to send the vvater to us for above a day; for from hour to hour the Enemy still came to visit the vvork: but by this time to Coun∣ess had made an end of her vvork, so that vve no more car'd for the vvater. Now by means of frequent skirmishes, which were here as many,Handsome skirmisthes be∣fore Benne. and as handsome as in any place where I ever had the fortune to be, and by the diligence was used in cut∣ting by night, we had at last as much corn as the Enemy. When Don Ferrand seeing himself frustrated of the assurance had been given him by Monsieur de la Trinitat, began to be highly discontented with him. Captain Theodore the night after we had made the first cutting,Don Ferrand discontented with Monsieur de la Trinitat in which he also was engag'd, return'd back to Savill, and in going a| way had three or four horses and men of his Troop wounded, who therefore staid be| hind at Benne; but he fail'd not to send away an account to the Mareschal of what I had done upon my arrival; of which the Mareschal was exceeding glad, as also all those who were with him; and thenceforward began to entertain some hope of the conserva∣tion of the place: though I am of opinion that had Don Ferrand better'd the Town with his Artillery, they must infallibly have been conforc' to a surrender: but he was still buz'd in the ars with this water,Don Ferrand's eror. and the want of provisions in the Town, which rendred him very much dissatisfied with those who had advised him to this course, and made him entertain some kind of jealousie of Monsieur de la Trinitat himself; where∣fore he raised his Camp the three and twentieth day after my arrival, having been et down ight dayes before I came. The Count is yet living as I am told,The Siege of Benne raised. and President Birague I know to be still in being, with several others who can bear witness, if I have inserted any thing but the truth; but whether Monsieur de Coff was yet return'd back to the Maes∣chal I am not able to say; for he was a little before gone into France. Thus then the Town was sav'd, and a few dayes after the Baron de Chipy, who was gone to Cour to give his Majesty thanks for the donation he had made him of the aforesaid office return'd,
and having taken upon him his command of Camp-master, I went to Alba to take pos∣session of my new Government. Oh Captains, the great things that a man may do, how little soever his judgment or experience may be, if he will intend nothing but that wherein he is immediately engag'd thence to come off to his own honor, and the advantage of his Master! and on the other side nothing but misfortune can attend him, who minds nothing of business, and only spends his time in pleasure, play, and feasting; for it is impossible but that the one must make you forget the other; we cannot serve so many Masters: whenever then you shall be engag'd upon such an account as this, strip your selves of all your vices, and burn them all, to the end that you may remain in the white Robe of loyalty and affection that we all owe to our common Master: for God will never prosper the vitious and voluptuous man; but on the contrary will ever assist him who is clad in the white Robe of loyalty. I give you the same advice that I ever gave my self, and it was therefore that God has ever assisted and been so favourable to me, that I have never been defeated, and have ne∣ver been in any engagement (if I commanded) that I was not alwayes victorious. Nei∣ther could I fail, for God evermore inspir'd me, and prompted my memory with what I had to do, and that is the reason that I have ever been blest with so good fortune. And he will also assist yu, as he hath done me, if you study, nor busie your selves a∣bout nothing but how to serve your Master with the loyalty and fidelity we all owe him. Afterwards when we have nothing else to do, we may freely enjoy our pleasures and de∣lights, for then it will be no prejudice to the King, nor to him we serve under him. Then you shall enjoy a sweet and pleasing repose, when you shall return home laden with honor, and shall present your selves before your Prince, to whom it shall be told what you have done for his service. All the treasure in the world is not comparable to that. Take then (Camrades) exemple by me, who have never had other thought, nor design, that how to acqu my self worthily of my charge, and doing so it will be im∣possible, but you must acquire great honor and reputation. In the mean time you that are put in trust to attaque or block up places: whenever you have a design to reduce a Town by famine, if you find you cannot totally hinder the besieged from fetching in corn from the fields adjoyning, set them on fire: for taking this commodity from them, they will be sufficiently distressed; but to say you preserv'd it for your self, it must be concluded that you were very improvident to offer to attaque a place without having means and power to carry away all near unto, and in the very face of the Town you would attaque; in such cases you must have no pity, for this affair requires survy re∣medies. Some time after the Mareschal undertook to go take Courteville,The Enterprise of Courteville which is a Castle and a little City in the Langues; the Castle is strong, and the River runs through the midst of the Town, over which there is a fair Bridge of Brick, and a Bourg adjoyning to it. The said Mareschal then came to Alba, and took me in his way along with him, with the one half of my Company, which he entertain'd for the Guard of his won person, leaving the other half in Alba and being come to the said Courteville, lodg'd in the Bourg on the further side of the River, on this side of which, and near unto the Castle was a Monastery wherein he lodg'd three Ensigs, which notwithstanding those of the Castle commanded us more than we commanded them. Monsieur de Salcede had kept this place all the time when he was with the Spaniard.Courtevilla batter'd by Monsieur de Brissac. The Mareschal planted on this side the Bridge eight or ten pieces of Canon wherewith to batter the Curtain that was oppo∣site to the Monastery, in which during the Battery, Monsieur de Bonnivet lodged himself, where although I was no longer Camp-master, I nevertheless never left him whilst the Battery continued day nor night. In two or three days time then we spent 1200 Ca∣non shot against this Curtain, and in the end were never the nearer, forasmuch as they had raised a great and thick rampier behind the wall within; so that when that was beaten down, the place remained stronger than before, by reason of the said Rampier. The Mareschal thereupon remained three days in suspence what he were best to do, whe∣ther he should send for more ammunition, or return without making any further attempt upon the place. Captain Richelieu had in the mean time gain'd the Town, and was with his own and two other Companies lodg'd within it: but so soon as I saw the Mareschal in this perplexity, I past the River on that side by the Monastery: for although I follow'd Monsieur de Bonnivet, I nevertheless now retir'd at night to the Mareschal. There was a Gate of this Monastery, that went out into a great high way, upon which one might mach undiscover'd and secure, without being seen by those of the Castle: but betwixt the Gate and the high-way there were some fifteen or sixteen paces, which were to be nimbly dispatch, for the whole Curtain playd upon this Gate. Afterwards it was ne∣cessary
to go stooping up to the Bridge at the entry into the Town, and then to run full speed till you was within it. So soon as I had past this danger, and was got into the high way, I began to look about me if it was possible to carry Canon into the Town, which I perceived it a matter of great difficulty to do, and that was the reason that I went into the Town to take Captain Richelieu along with me, with whom I went to discover the backside of the Castle, which lookt into a great space uninhabited, betwixt the Castle and the Wall of the Town.The Sieur de Montluc goes to discover the place. There was there a little house close by the wall of the City, into which we put our selves to observe at our ease, whether or no the Castle were much fortified on that part, and there I observ'd some cracks and chinks in the wall, through which one might plainly see the light on the other side, and shew'd Captain Richelieu, that if by any invention we could bring three pieces of Canon to this place we should cer∣tainly take the Castle, forasmuch as it had not been fortified on that side, by reason of the impossibility of bringing up Artillery to force it. That which appears impossible to one, is feasible enough to another, and many places are so taken. I then return'd by the way near to the Abby, and Captain Richelieu with me, where we fell to discourse about the business, and began to consider if there was any way to be found to get Canon to the backside of the Castle: whereupon it suddainly came into my head to cause the River to be sounded, to see if the bottom was firm ground; to which purpose I caused a Soldier of the Abby to be call'd, to whom so soon as he came to me I made an offer of ten Crowns, if he would venture to ound the River, telling him withall that he must creep on his hands and knees, till he came into the water, and that then he should chop up to the neck. I then call'd another Soldier by whom I sent vvord to the Captains in the Abby, that they should send out fifteen or twenty Sol∣diers, which should go to the very foot of the wall, as if they went to skirmish, which accordingly was done, and by that means I sav'd the Soldier, insomuch that the Enemy never perceiv'd him, till he was got into the water. First he went directly to the wall of the City, where the water dasht against it, and thence waded upwards as far as the foard, where we used to pass over betwixt the Mareschals Quarters and the Abby,The River founded to pass over the Ca∣non. and be∣hind the Abby he entred into it, whether we ran full drive to avoid the danger of the shot, and found him already got into the Abby, and the Soldiers that had been sent out to skirmish returned a pretty while before, where he told me that the bottom of the River was very good, and the water no deeper than to the ave of the wheels. Where∣upon I presently mounted to horse, and went to acquaint the Mareschal with what I had seen, the two Masters of the Ordnance Balazergues and Duno being by, for Monsieur de Caillac was not there.Dispute be∣twixt the Sieur de Montluc and the Masters of the Ordnance. There Duno disputed it against me, affirming he had discover'd all, and I affirming the contrary, till at last the Mareschal said it was their trade, and that to undertake a business, and not to effect it, were only to lose time and a great ma∣ny men to no purpose. At which I began to moved, having been netled by Duno be∣fore, and said to the Mareschal. Sir I have had the honor a great while to know Monsieur de Brissac, and never saw him so much afraid of Arquebuz shot, that he would forbear to discover a place he had a mind to see. I take you to be the same man, and that you are not become a Coward for being the Kings Lieutenant. Mount to horse, and I will make you confess, after you have seen it, that you shall take the Castle without the expence of ten Ca∣non shot. We hereupon all in a fume got to horse, taking Duno along, and leaving Ba∣lazergues behind, and went to pass the River above the Abby, into which we entred, and I had taken with me the Soldier who had founded the River. Now to get into the high way it was necessary suddenly to open the Gate, to which the Enemy had ever∣more an eye, and run fifteen or twenty paces till we got into it, out of the danger of the Curtain of the Castle. The Gate then was suddenly thrown open, and I pas run∣ning and the Mareschal did the same; but as he was running they fir'd three Harque∣buzes, with some of which I verily thought he had been shot, for I heard the noise of a Bullet, as when it enters a mans body, and when he came up to me, lookt him in the face, and saw that he shak't his head, and smil'd, and sitting down by me upon the ground (for we were to keep very low) I have scap't a scouring (said he) for the bullets flew betwixt my legs.The Mareschal de Brissac in great danger. You are very unwise Sir, said I, to follow me, do you not perceive that I aim at being the Kings Lieutenant if you die? which is the reason that I would be rid of you, and have brought you hither to that purpose; at which he laught only, seeing very well by my countenance, that I was very glad he had escap't the misfortune; for the fault would have been laid at my door, though God knows I could not have help't it: for those that go to such Weddings as these often bring away red Liveries. In the mean time Duno and the Soldier arrived, to whom the Mareschal engag'd to pay the ten Crowns I had promised him; but that he must return and do the same again in
his presence, and he would give him ten more, which the Soldier undertoo to do. Duno then caused his Boots to be pull'd off, and went in his doublet only with the Sol∣dier to enter into the water behind the Abby, for the man had heart enough, and men of his trade must no more care for a Bullet than a Codling, We saw them the one af∣ter the other wade down the River, and afterwards came to the wall of the City, into which they went, landing hard by the Gate: Which was not perform'd without infinite danger both for them and us, for it was there very hot; so that I often wisht Monsieur de Brissac at his Quarters, being more afraid of him than of my self. Seeing then Duno and the Soldier past over, we ran at the mercy of the Harquebuz shot, and recover'd the Town. Whom God defends are well defended; for it was a miracle that some one of us at least was not pepper'd: but either my fear or my affection made me go more upright and nimbly than I was wont, so that I felt no great pain of my hip. I then caryed the Mareschal, and shewed him all that Captain Richelieu and I had seen before; when after he had heard Duno's relation concerning the depth of the River, and found the truth of what I had told him, he began to break out into some passionate expressions against Duno; but I told him that he ought not to be angry, but intend the taking of the Castle, for that no one was  wie but he might be deceiv'd. Whereupon he gave order to Captain Richelieu to get together thirty or fourty great Wine-pipes, which at the beginning of the night he should cause to be carried to the place where Duno should appoint, and to another Captain to pull down a house, to furnish planks to put upon the Pipes after they should be filled with earth to raise the defence still higher, because of the great Tower of the Castle, that lookt into the recoyl of the Canon, commanding the other Captain also to provide great beams of Timber wherewith to raise the whole so high, that the Tower might not look into the recoyl of the Canon. And before we de∣parted from the little house which was behind the Castle, I shew'd the Mareschal; a Rock where thirty or fourty Harquebuzeers might lye covered to shoot at the Battlements of the Tower, when the Enemy should present themselves to shoot at the Artillery; for they must of necessity shew themselves from the Girdle upward. We afterwards went up the River to the Wall of the Town to measure what height the Canon was to mount to get into the City, and found that it was not two foot, be∣cause the way was very low, When a Gentleman belonging to the Mareschal came to us, the said Mareschal having expresly forbid that any other should advance further than the Abby, to whom I caused the charge to be committed of breaking the wall, and ma∣king it fall into the River, which being done we return'd, and Duno staid with Captain Richelieu. At the beginning of the night then came the aforesaid Gentleman with thirty or fourty Pioneers, and after him another Genntleman of the said Mareschal's with four∣score or an hundred more, where they found that Captain Richelieu had already got a∣bove half the Pipes upon the place. Monsieur de Bonnivet and I accompanied Balazergues, who drew three pieces of Canon with horses (the Mareschal having provided enow to draw ix) and went on horseback above twenty paces in the River with the Canon, as also did Balazergues himself, and the Carters up to the Codpiece in water: we then turn'd to go down behind the Abby, and so went into the Town, vvhere though the Enemy shot very hard, yet could they see nothing by reason of the extreme darkness of the night, and therefore shot at random, and the level of fortune, vvhich at this time smil'd upon us; yet does she not alwayes do so, especially upon me: there are some in∣deed so happy as never to be toucht, as for exemple that brave Cavalier Monsieur de San∣sac (I do believe there are not two Gentlemen alive,The good for∣tune of Mon∣sieur de Sansac. who have been in more engage∣ments than he and I) and yet he was never hurt that I know of, excepting at the Bat∣tail of St. Denis: vvherein I have not been so fortunate as he. Now vvhen vve came to the place vvhere the Gentleman vvas, vve ound the vvall already broken down, and tumbled into the River, and thereupon caused the Pioneers to break down two corners of houses that hindred the passage of the Canon, which presently came to the Wall, tho∣rough which the horses entred the Town, and by the help of the Soldiers we thrust the Canon in after them; which being done Balazergues return'd to fetch the other two, which also we brought after the same manner to the place where Duno had fill'd the Pipes; so that two hours before day they were ready to Batter, and the Soldiers lodg'd behind the rock to shoot at the Battlements. The Mareschal in the interim had intelligence brought him that Don Arlro de Cende was come to St. Stephe, within five miles of us, and would march by night to relieve the Castle, which caused the said Mareschal to send us word that he was going to possess him∣self of a mountain of advantage, and to fight him by the way, and that in the mean time we should do the best we could with the six Companies we had in the Abby, and
in the Town. The Mareschal accordingly gain'd the said Mountain by night, and set his people in order to defend the pass. At the break of day when we had thought to have given fire to the Canon, the Drum of the Castle began to beat a Parley. There was a Spaniard Governor there whose name was Don Diego,Don Diego Go∣vernor of Cour∣teville. as proud a vain-glorious Coxcomb as could walk upon the earth, and so he was reputed. Monsieur de Bonnivet made the Capitulation, for I was laid to sleep in the little house upon a Matrice the said Sieur de Bonnivet had caused to be brought thi∣ther for himself, till I was call'd to sign the Capitulation, for Don Diego knew me, he having been Lieutenant to one of the four Spanish Companies the King had when he took the County of Oye. The Mareschal in the mean time sent out a party of Horse to meet Don Arbro whom they found upon his retreat, by reason he had had notice that the Mareschal had gain'd the pass, so that about an hour after dinner he return'd back to us, where he found that Don Diego with his three Companies, one whereof was Spanish, was marcht away two hours before. There were several who made suit to the Mareschal for the Government of this place, it being very commodiously situated for the King's service: But Monsieur de Bonnivet, and I agreed together to cause it to be given to Cap∣tain Richelieu, who was Lieutenant to one of his Colonel Companies, and accordingly at our request the Mareschal was pleased to confer it upon him, and moreover writ to the King to confirm it, which his Majesty did, and Monsieur de Bonnivet left with him his Company for some time. Are these (Captains) I mean the taking of Lans, and that of Courteville two things fit to be omitted, weigh well I beseech you all that we did both at the one place and the other, and the account I gave of them both, without trusting to the report of others. And you Princes, and his Majesties Lieutenants, do not so much fear your skins, that you will not search into depth of things. Why have you that great authority, and those no∣ble Commands; to it still in your Closets? Observe how Monsieur de Brissac did; he needed not be importun'd to go to discover, but rather to be with-held; he was all bra∣very and courage. And ou that shall see your selves engag'd in a place, learn to be wise at the expence of these Bragadochio's, who surrender at the first summons, and yet pre∣tend to be Rowlands. Whoever is stout of his tongue, ought to be doubly tall of his hands. I am very sure, that if Don Diego had so pleased, he might have found us enough to do: but to lose a place, and to carry away no honour, either alive or dead, he that put you into it does you manifest wrong, if he do not cut off your head. Without all doubt he might have been reliev'd, or at least he ought to have stood an assault, for we could not have carried it at the first push, but it would have cost us very dear. What pitiful place so∣ever you have to defend, if you resolve to stay for the Canon, after it has endured a breach, it is very necessary, that he who commands it for his own honor, shall also abide an Assault, if he be not totally unprovided of all things, and have no means to make any entrench∣ment within. A few days after the Mareschal would go take Seve, and writ to me to Alba,The Enterprise upon Seve▪ that I should mak my self ready, and that he would pass by Alba. So soon therefore as he had given me this notice of his departure, and that I should draw three Ensigns out of Alba to carry them along with me, I presently made them ready, and likewise two Culverines, which he had writ for also. Waiting then in expectation of his coming, I went in the mean time to Sarvenal, which is a little Town about four miles from Alba towards the Langues, and two other little places upon the same Road, where the Enemy had Garrisons, especially at Sarvenal, where there were an hundred men strangers. After I had a while batter'd it by the Gate, those within began to parly with me; but in the mean while my people entred by another side through a Window with Ladders; so that whilst their Cap∣tain was dodging with me about the Capitulation, those within saw themselves taken, and were therefore enforc'd to render themselves upon discretion.The hours of a Parly dange∣rous for surpri∣zes. The moments of a Parly are always dangerous, and it is then that they ought the best to man their walls, to avoid surprizes: for betwixt the Fruit and the Cheese, as the Proverb says; at such an unexpected time a great mischief may be done. I have seen many very foolishly surpriz'd; therefore follow the Italian rule, which is, No te fidar, & no serai inganato: Do not trust, and thou shalt not be deceived: a lesson that ought to be very much studied by you Governors of places: for when a woman once endures a Parly, and has patience to hear, farewel Gossip, you have already one foot in the stirrup. In like manner when a Town once begins to hear∣ken to a composition, you may certainly conclude it for lost. It is true, that you must not then give them leisure to consider better of it; for there are certain Catch-dols, who make a shew of parly, but it is only to work their own advantage. If you therefore fear a relief, or that you find your selves weak, take them at their word, make use of your
time, and get Hostages betimes if you can. And on the other side, you who would de∣fend a place, of all things take heed you never open your mouths to parly if you have not an intention to surrender, and are not necessitated so to do: for your Enemy pre∣sently gets a marvelous advantage by it. 'Tis better the overture be made by some par∣ticular person, and it is better becoming the Besiegers than the besieged, though both the one and the other ought to set a good face upon the matter, it will soon be seen who has the worst of the Game. At these times however be sure especially to have an eye to the main chance; for so soon as ever it is rumour'd, that there is a surrender towards, those within instead of looking after their defence, think, one of saving his money, another his arms, and so forth; and those without seeing themselves defeated of all hope of Booty, if the Capitulation take effect, will try to shew you a slippery trick; for then they ap∣proach at greater ease to the wall, because of the Truce. Remember then that the hour of a Parly is dangerous. The other two little places surrendred upon summons, and sent me their Keys; and the next day after the Mareschal arrived,The situation of Seve. who was very well pleased with my exploit, and so we march't directly to Seve. Seve is a little Town very nearly built, and enclosed with a very good wall. A River runs either thorough it, or close under the walls, I am not certain which, for I was never there, but when Monsieur de Bonnivet and I came to re∣lieve the Mareschal, and at this time when we retook it, and then lay there but one night only: for the Mareschal sent me back in the morning, because Don Arbro with his for∣ces was within five miles of us, and in Alba there was only left my Lieutenant, and the half of my Company. Now there is above the Town a Mountain, on the top of which there stands a Church, and in the Rock an Hermitage, the entry into which was over a planck from the Church into the said Rock, and within were Altars for Mass, and a Chamber for the Hermie, but no light into it, save only by the door where you come in, which looks towards the Town; and they had so order'd the matter, that by pul∣ling in to them the planck, that lay over betwixt the Hermitage and the Church, all the world could not take them. They had also made another Fort on the right hand, at the distance of some twenty paces from this, which they had contriv'd after the manner of a pit, and the Countercarpes very high; so that coming upon the Counterscarp, no man could shew so much as a fingers length of his head without being discover'd and kill'd, and they had moreover cast up a Trench that ran along from this Fort to the ve∣ry body of the Church. As Signior Francisco Bernardin and I, who were for that time Mareschaux de Camp, came to encamp near to this place, and being about to lodge the Army, there sallyed out two or three hundred men, what out of the Fort, the Trench, and the Church, and fu∣riously charg'd upon us. I had no body with me but Captain Charry, with 50 Har∣quebuzeers, and some few horse to Guard us. Wherefore the Baron de Chipy, Camp-Master, sent to re-inforce me with 100 Harquebuzeers: but I was constrain'd to send him word that he must send me more, for that we were already at it, and very near to one another: at which instant of time Monsieur de Bonnivet return'd post from Court, who hearing the skirmish without alighting, said to the Baron de Chipy, Halt here till the Mareschal come up, and in the mean time I will go find out Monsieur de Montluc. The Captains follow'd him, and some Harquebuzeers on horse-back, when just as we were embracing, the Enemy camp up and charg'd our men, seeing which I said to Monsieur de Bonnivet, Sir for your welcome alight, and let us go charge these people, and beat them back into the Fort: whereupon every one immediately alighted, and he said to me, charge you directly upon those who would recover the Fort, which said he clapt a Target upon his arm, and I catcht up a Halbert, for I ever lov'd to play with that kind of Cudgel, saying to Signior Francisco Bernardin, Camrade, whilst we charge do you make the Quarters; to which he replyed, is that all the reckoning you make of the employment the Mareschal has entru∣sted us withal? if it be so, I will be a fool for company, and once play the part of a Gascon; and so alighted, and went on with me to the charge. He was arm'd with very heavy arms, and moreover age rendred him unweildy of himself, which made him that he could not go so fast as I. At such kind of Banquets my body me thought did not weigh an ounce, and I fancied that I did not touch the ground, I had quite forgot my hip. I then charg'd up straight upon those on that side by the Trench, and Monsieur de Bonni∣vet did as much on his side, so that we thundred them back with such a vengeance, that I past over the Trench pell-mell amongst them, and pursued them, killing all the way as far as the Church. I never laid so about me, nor did so much execution at one time. Those within the Church seeing their people in such disorder, and so miserably cut to pieces, quitted the place, and took a little path that went all along the rock of the Mountain
down into the Town, where one of my men caught hold of him that carried the Ensign; but he disingaged himself very bravely from him, and leapt into the path, making to the Town as fast as he could trip. I ran after him, but he was too quick for me, as well he might, for he had fear in his heels. The Captain was kill'd, whom they very much e∣steem'd, and I believe was a man of threescore years old, for he was all over white. They could not all recover the path, which made part of them return back into the Church, where they very bravely defended themselves. Thay had made a Raveline before the Gate, which we gain'd from them, and then they retreated into the Hermitage, and drew the planck after them like a draw-bridge. Monsieur de Bonnivet was very rougly handled, for he lost at least twenty of the best men he had, and had above thirty more wounded: for as our people would throw them∣selves at a venture from the Counterscarp into the Fort, before they could discover the Fort they were knockt 'oth head, and amongst others we lost four of those he had brought with him out of France; who came but too soon for them, as also two Basques, as valiant young men as the earth ever bore; I had known them before, but those people have such uncouth names I cannot remember them, which I am very sorry for; but after the loss of so many men the said Monsieur de Bonnivet vvas constrain'd to leave this Fort, and come to me to the Church. The Mareschal in the mean time had caused all the Camp to make a halt about a mile off, expecting when Signior Francisco and I should bring him the Billets for the Armies Quarters; when hearing no news of the one or the other, he sent a Gentleman to see what was become of us; who found us at the Church, where he told us, that the Ma∣reschal was discontented, and very angry, not knowing where to lodge, nor where the Quarters were made. To whom I then said, Get you back to him, and tell him that he has made two wise Quarter-Masters, who have thought of nothing but how to quarter him and his Army, but it has been by sending pople into another world. The Gentleman perceiving by this answer that there was nothing done, returned back, it being almost night, so that the Cavalry was constrain'd to draw into a valley on the left hand, and the Infantry into ano∣ther on the right. The Mareschal himself then came up to us, and could have found in his heart to have been very angry, but seeing what we had done was well enough satisfied, and began to laugh at the Mareschaux de Camp he had made. Signior Francisco Ber∣nardin laid the fault upon me, and I again upon him; but the Mareschal said, I know the white-head was too wise, and therefore it must needs be a Gacon extravagance. With the Mareschal came Colonel Santo Pedro Corso, and those of the Hermitage ask' for him, because there were many Corses amongst them, and the Captain himself who was kill'd at the Gate was one. The Colonel assur'd them of the death of the said Cap∣tain, and that if one or two of them would come out, he would shew them his body: Which they did, and the Mareschal was still with us, and staid there all night, for he knew not where to lye, and a great many were laid down,The Hermitage surrendred. who gave me many a black good-night After they had seen their Captain dead, they surrendred themselves upon the Colonels word, that they should march away with bag and baggage, whereupon the said Colonel entred the Hermitage with five or six of his own men only, and so soon as the day appear'd they went out, and almost all of them listed themselves under the said Colonel,The Fort sur∣rendred. sending their Drum to those of the Fort, to let them know that they had sur∣rendred, and that they advised them to do the like; which they likewise did upon the same conditions;The Town sur∣rendred. for Colonel Santo Pedro managed the whole business. We then went down, and presently the Governor surrendred the same, and at the same instant march' away with those men he had left; and the Mareschal lodg'd himself there with some few only, that the provision might not be devour'd, and to prevent any disorder in the Town. Of which he made Captain Loup Governor,Captain Loup. having with him four Ensigns of foot, and some Light-horse; which being done he retir'd back by the same way he came, and I (as I have already said) about one of the clock in the afternoon came to Alba. This is all that I did in Piedmont worthy remembrance whilst I staid there with me Mareschal de Brissac: But if I should give an account of all the skirmishes wherein I have been engag'd, I must have double paper, and especially that of Andesan, which was the greatest and most furious skirmish wherein I have ever been;The skirmish of Andezan. all the foot of two Armies being therein totally ngag'd, amongst whom I had no more but four and thirty Soldiers of my own Company, forasmuch as I then lay in Garrison at Savillan, and Monsieur de Termes would not suffer my Company to go out of the Town. I cover'd all my Soldiers Morrisons with yellow Taffata, out of respect to Monsieur de Termes, whose that colour was, who for so few men perform'd so great and almost miraculous ats of arms, that whilst any mas memory shall live, who was then alive, the yellow Morrions of Montluc
will be talkt of in Piedmont: In truth these four and thirty were worth five hundred o∣thers, and I have my self an hundred times wondred at what these people did; I may therefore very well say, it was a little body, but a very good one. I gave found that it is of great use to give your Soldiers some particular distinction; for seeing themselves to be so distinguished and known, it redoubles their courage. I am sure these did very well, and obtein'd for themselves such a mark of reputation, that every one pointed at them as they marcht along, shewing for a wonder the yellow Morrions who had perform'd such noble feats of arms. I have since also been in several other skirmishes, which I will not trouble my Reader withall, for being too tedious: though I cannot forbear ma∣king mention of one, which the Baron de la Garde may please to remember, when he brought the Gallies,The Skirmish before Bullen. we being then before Bullen. The great skirmish was at his land∣ing, which continued for two hours, where the Canon-shot flew so thick that they seem∣ed volleys of Harquebuzeers. I had all the Forces of Bullen upon me, notwithstanding which I made one of the bravest and most honourable retreats that man could possibly make. The late Monsieur de Guise saw it all, who had no more but five and twenty horse, and therefore could no wayes relieve me; to do which he must of necessity have come down into the plain, where he would immediately have been swallowed up by the Canon, and no man believ'd that I could possibly have made my retreat without mani∣fest running away; but I did it alwayes at four Pikes length, often facing about, and must needs say, that I never perform'd any thing from whence I deriv'd more honor than from this action. Monsieur de Guise did sufficiently magnifie it, and commended me but two much. But I shall speak no more of these kind of things, and content my self with writing what I perform'd commanding only, wherein such as will do me the honor to read my book may learn some thing as to the practice of Arms, which is not al∣together so easie as is believ'd. Great and commendable parts and qualities are required to the making up of a compleat Captain.What parts are required to make up a compleat Of∣ficer. It is not all to be hardy and brave, we must have other pieces in our harness besides. Neither will I pretend to be one of the first form of Souldiers; but being the eldest in this Kingdom, my opinion will nevertheless be al∣lowed a vote in the Chapter, which may serve to enform such as know less that I, and as for the rest they need no Tutor. I then left Piedmont to go home a little to refresh my self, and to take some repose, by reason of a great distemper I was fallen into: but what just occasion soever I might have to ask it,The Sieur de Montluc re∣turns into Gas∣cony. I had nevertheless much ado to obtain leave of Monsieur de Brissac, though he at last was pleased to dismiss me, upon my promise speedily to return. At my coming home I found my self honour'd and esteem'd of all the greatest persons of the Country. My name was up, and therefore for one thing I had done they would perswade me I had done four: Report goes evermore encreasing; and also at the time Piedmont was the only Scene in vogue for a Nursery of war. I did not however continue long idle at home, my Masters neither giving me leisure, nor my own disposition enclining me so to do, I having ever proposed to my self by the way of Arms to arrive to all the degrees of honour, to which man can attain; and you who are Gentlemen born ought to consider that God has sent you into the world to bear arms for the service of your Prince and Country, and not to hunt the Hare, and follow after Mistresses; when peace comes you may take your share of pleasures and delights. Every thing in its due time and season. The End of the Second Book.
THE COMMENTARIES OF Messire Blaize de Montluc, MARESCHAL OF FRANCE. The Third Book. WHilst the War was kept on foot in Piedmont, after the manner I have before related,Piedmont the Nursery of War. under the conduct of this great Soldier, Mon∣sieur de Brissac, who there established so admirable a Military Discipline, that it might with good reason be said to be the best School of War in Europe; they did not sleep in Picardy, Cham∣pagne, and Mets, which was at this time besieg'd by the Emperor. There it was that the great Duke of Guise acquir'd immortal glory. I was never more troubled at any thing in my whole life then that I had not the good fortune to see this Siege: but a man cannot be in so many places at once. The King, who desired to discompose the Empe∣ror's affairs in Italy, prevail'd so far by the practices and dexterity of some Cardinals of his party,Sienna revolts to the French the 5th of Au∣gust, 1552. and of Monsieur de Termes, that he made the Inhabitants of Sienna to revolt, which is a very beatiful and important City in Tuscany, insomuch that the Spanish Gar∣rison which was in it was driven out, and the Citadel raz'd to the ground. So soon as these people had thus shak' off the Spanish yoke, and saw themselves at liberty, having set up the Ensigns of France, they were not wanting to themselves in imploring succours and assistance from the King,The Sieur de Strozzy the King's Lieute∣nant in the State of Sienna. who accordingly gave the charge thereof to Monsieur de Strozzy, (the same who was afterwards Mareschal) who by the help and concurrence of the King's confederates and friends in those parts drew some forces into the field, being therein assisted by the Signiors Cornelio Bentivoglio, Fregosa, and other Italians, with the Sieurs de Termes, and de Lansac; where, though he had all the Forces of the Emperor and the Great Duke of Florence to deal withall, he nevertheless carried himself with so much bravery and conduct, as to make head against the Marquis de Marignano, who prosecu∣ted the War with might and main. Notwithstanding which Monsieur de Strozzy in de∣spight of him took several little Towns belonging to the State of Sienna, the particulars whereof I shall not meddle withal, forasmuch as I was not there present: but, by what I have heard, he there perform'd several very brave exploits: for the Emperor and the Duke of Florence desired nothing more, than to drive the King out of Italy, out of the appre∣hension they had, that having got in a foot, he should afterwards skrew in his whole body: But we never yet knew how to husband our Conquests; I know not what we may do hereafter, though I fear that matter will never be mended, at least I see no signs of it yet; God grant I may be mistaken. Monsieur de Strozzy then sent to the King to aquaint him, that it was not possible for him both to keep the field,Want of a Go∣vernor in Sien∣na. and to govern in Sienna too, and that therefore he most hum∣bly besought his Majesty to make choice of some person in whom he might safely confide to command in the Town, so long as he should continue in the field. The King having receiv'd this dispatch, call'd for the Constable, Monsieur de Guise, and the Mareschal de
St. André, where he acquainted them with Monsieur de Strozzy's request, desiring them to name each of them one for this employment; for all things past through the hands of these three, and nothing was determin'd without them. All our Kings have ever had this trick, to suffer themselves to be govern'd by some particular men, and perhaps too much, so that it looks sometimes as if they stood in awe of their own subjects. Of these the Constable stood in the highest degree of favour, and was ever more belov'd by the King than any other; he therefore first nam'd his man, Monsieur d Guise another, and the Mareschal a third. Which having done the King said to them, you have none of you nam'd Montluc,A dispute about the nomination of Monsieur de Monluc for the Government of Sinua. to which Monsieur de Guise made answer, that it was out of his head, and the Mareschal said the same, Monsieur de Guise moreover adding, if) you name Mont∣luc I have done, and shall speak no more of him I nominated before; nor I said the Mares∣chal, who has since related to me the whole debate. The Constable then stood up, and said, that I was by no means proper for this employment, as being too humorous, pee∣vish, and passionate, to which the King made answer, that he had ever observ'd and known me to be peevish and passionate, upon the account of his service only, when I saw hm not serv'd so well as he ought to be, and that he had never heard I ever had a quarrel with any one upon my own particular account. Monsieur de Guise and the Ma∣reschal said also the same, adding moreover that I had already been Governor both of Montcallier and Alba, without so much as any one man's opening his mouth to com∣plain of my Administration; and that also had I been a person of that temper, the Ma∣reschal de Brissc. would never have lov'd and favour'd me at the rate he did, not have reposed so great a confidence in me as he had ever done. The Constable hereupon answered very roundly again, and made good his former objection with great vehemency, and would by all means that the person he had nominated should stand: for he was impati∣ent of being controverted, and more of being over-rul'd; neither indeed did he ever much love me, nor any of his. The Cardinal of Lorrain was there present, who may better remember than I, who it was that the Constable nam'd: but (if I be not deceiv'd) it was Boccal, who is since turn'd Hugonot: however in the end the King would carry it, having Monsieur de Guise and the Mareschal de St. André on his side, and dispatch't a∣way a Courier to the Mareschal de Brissac to send me into Avignon, where accordingly I staid expecting a Gentleman his Majesty sent to me, who brought my dispatch to go presently away to Sienna. Now the Mareschal had some dayes before given me leave to retire to my own house, by reason of a sickness I was fallen into, as I have said elsewhere; who had no mind to do it, as he himself confest to me since; and has done me the honor to tell me, that had he known of what importance the loss of me, would have been to him, he would nat have so commended me to the King as he had done, and that in his life he never repented any thing so much as the letting me depart from him, telling me of a great many things wherein he had not been so well served after my departure out of Piedmont. Monsieur de Cossé, President Birague, and several others can witness how oft they have heard him lament any absnce, especially when matters did not succeed according to his desire. And if any one will take the pains to consider what I perform'd while I was there under his Command, he will find that what I say is very true, and that he had some reason to regret me. I was alwayes at his feet, and at his head. I will not say nevertheless, that any thing would have been better done for my being there: but however I must needs speak the truth, and there are who can say more if they please. He then writ a Letter to the King,Advice of the Mareschal de Brissac to the King concern∣ing his nomi∣nation of the Sieur de Mont∣luc for the Go∣vernment of Sienna. and another to the Constable, wherein he sent his Majesty word, that he had made a very ill choice of me to command in Sienna, for that I was one of the most cross-grain'd chollerick fllows in the whole world, and such a one as that for half the time I had been with him, he had been necessitated to suffer much from me, knowing my imperfections. That indeed I was very good for the main∣taining of discipline and justice in an Army, to command in the field, and to make the Soldiers to fight: but that the humour of the Siennois consider'd, it would be fire to fire, which would be the only means to lose that State, which was to be preserv'd by gentleness and moderation. He moreover entreated the Constable to remonstrate as much to the King, and in the mean time dispatcht a Courier to me, who found me very sick, by whom he sent me word, that the King would send me to Sienna; but, that as a friend of mine, he advised me not to accept of that employment,The Mareschal de Brissac's▪ pollicy to de∣tein Monsieur de Montluc, entreating me not to forsake him, to go serve elsewhere under another, and assuring me withal, that if any Command hapned to be vacant in Piedmont, that I had more mind to than what I aleady had, I should have it; which were all artifices to detein me. O that a wise Lieutenant of a Province ought to have an eye, and to take heed of losing
a man in whom he may absolutely confide, and whom he knows to be a man of valour, and ought to spare nothing that he may keep him; for oftentimes one man alone can do much. You must eat a great deal of Salt with a man before you can rightly known him; and in the mean time you are depriv'd of him with whom you were throughly acquainted, in whom you reposed your trust, and of whose fidelity you have already had sufficient proof. The said Mareschal had moreover sent word to the King, that I was in Gascony very sick, and in the morning as the Letters were read, the Constable, who was mighty well pleased with the contents, said to the King, Did not I tell your Majesty as much, you find the Mareschal to be of the same opinion, and no man living can know Montluc bet∣ter than he who has so often seen him at work. To which the King (who naturally lov'd me, and had ever done so, after he had seen my behaviour at the Camisado of Bullen) reply'd, that although all those of his Council should speak against me, yet should they prevail nothing by it: for it was his nature to love me, and that he would not after his election let them all say what they would. Monsieur de Guise then spake and said, here is a letter very full of contradictions: for in the first place the Mareschal de Brissac says that Montluc is cross∣gain'd and cholerick and that he will never suit with the Sienois, but will ruine your ser∣vice if you send him thither; and on the other side commends him for qualities that are re∣quired in a man of command, to whom the trust of great things is to be committed: for he speaks him:Cholerick men the best. to be a man of an exact discipline, and great justice, and fit to make the Soldiers fight in great Enterprizes and Executions; and who ever saw a man endued with all these good qualities, that had not a mixture of Choller amongst them? Such as are indifferent whe∣ther things go well or ill may indeed be without passion, and as to the rest, since Sir your Ma∣jesty has your self made the Election, I humbly conceive you ought not revoke it. The Ma∣reschal de St. André spake next, and said, Sir, what the Mareschal de Brissac complains of you may easily correct, by writing to Montluc, that your self having made choice of his person above all others for this employment, he must for your sake at much at he can govern his pas∣sion, having to do with such a fickleheaded people as those of Sienne. To which the King made answer, that he did not fear but that after he had writ me a letter, I would do as he should command me; and immediately thereupon dispatcht away a Courrie: to me to my own house, by whom he sent me word, that although I should be sick, I must nevertheless put my self upon my way to go directly to Marseilles, where I should meet my dispatch, and should there embark my self with the Germans that the Rhinceroc brought, and ten com∣panies of French foot, to which place he would also send me money for my journey, and that I must for a while leave my passion behind me in Gascony, and a little accommodate my self to the humor of that people. The Courrier found me at Agen very sick, and under the Physicians hands, notwithstanding which I told him, that in eight dayes I would begin my journey, which I did, and verily thought I should have dyed at Tholouse, from whence by the advice of the Physicians I was to return back again, which I would not do: but caused my self to be hall'd along as far as Montpellier, where I was again ad∣vised by the Physicians to go no further,Cholerick Captains more valiant than o∣thers. they assuring me that if I ventur'd to proceed on my journey I should never come alive to Marseilles: but whatever they could say, I was resolv'd to go on so long as life lasted, come on't what would, when just as I was going away there came another Courrier from the King to hasten me, and from day to day I recovered my health in travelling; so that when I came to Marseilles I was with∣out comparison much better than when I parted from my own house. In plain truth the King my good Master had reason to defend my cause, for my cho∣ler was never prejudicial to his service, it has indeed been sometimes prejudicial to my self and some others, who would not avoid not comply with my humour. I never lost Place, Battail, nor Rencounter, nor ever was the occasion of losing any one of his Subjects; my choler never so far transported me as to do any thing prejudicial to his service, and if it be violent and prompt, it is the sooner gone: I have ever observ'd that such people are bet∣ter to be employ'd than any other, for they have no malice in them, nor no dangerous re∣servations, and if they be more suddain, they are also more valiant than those who by their moderation would appear to be more wise: but leaving this discourse I shall return to my voyage. At my coming to Marseilles I found that the Baron de la Garde was already departed with the Army to go to Argiers,The Siege of Sienna was in the year 1555. there to prevail with the King of Argier to convoy him with his Fleet, forasmuch as the said Baron had been advertized, that Prince Auria lay waiting for him with a great Navy to intercept him by the way; and the Kings Fleet of it self was not strong enough to undertake him, which was the reason that we delayed the time for a few days. So soon then as the Baron arrived, having the Argier Fleet with him,The Baron de la Garde. we embarkt our selves at Toulon, and by the way met eight of nine Vessels laden with Corn, la Garde
that came out of Sicily, and was going for Spain, which the Baron caused to be set on fire, excepting two that he took along with him for the support of his Army, and so went on to Port' Hrcole, at which place we could not possibly land, forasmuch as the Marquis de Marignano lay with his Camp near unto the way by which we were of necessity to pass to go to Sienna. We were therefore constrain'd to reimbark our men, and to fall back, to land with greater safety, near to Escarlin, where Monsieur de Strozzy lay with his Camp.The Prior of Capua slain. We there heard news that the Prior of Capua had but two days before been slain in viewing Escarlin, which was a very great loss, he being as brave a man as liv'd, both by land and sea, and a true Servant of the Kings. He was Brother to Monsieur de Strozzy, and it was said, was kill'd by the hand of a Peasant, that fir'd a Harquebuz at him from behind a Bush. Behold what a sad misfortune this was, that so great a Captain should perish by the hand of a Rascal with his fire stick. And so we marcht on to Bonconvent, Monsieur de Strozzy going always a little before us for conveniency of victual, and there all the Army joyn'd together. Before the Germans and the French arriv'd at the said Bonconvent, Monsieur de Stroz∣zy went out in the morning before, with the three thousand Grisons (of which Mon∣sieur de Fourcavaux was Colonel) and the Italians, to make room for the Germans and French who had need to lye and rest an hour or two. I went over night to wait upon Mon∣sieur de Strozzy, and in the morning departed with him, that I might come betimes to Sienna; where we found Monsieur de Lansac, who at our coming treated Monsieur de Strozzy, Monsieur de Fourcavaux and me at dinner. At the coming up of the Grisons and Italians there hapned a great skirmish at St. Bonde, a Monastery of Nuns near unto St. Mark another Monastery of Religieux. The Mareschal de Marignano lay with his Camp at the Palace of Diau which is upon the road to Florence, within a little mile of Sienna, and this very morning had raised his Camp to go to St. Bonde, there to assault Captain Bartolmeo de Pesera, whom Monsieur de Strozzy with his Company had quartrd at that place. The said Marquis had left his Italians at the said Palace of Diau, and taken all his Spaniards and Germans along with him,The Skirmish before Sinna. and as we were at dinner the skirmish began very brsk and round at St. Bonde. The Grisons and Italians halted at la Palassot, half a mile from Sienna, and our Italians also, by the command or Monsieur de Strozzy, to the end that he might both the sooner determine where he should lodge the Army, and al∣so because he would, that before they should be lodg'd, the Germans and the French should be come up, that they might all at once sit down in their Quarters: but before we had made an end of dinner, we heard some little pieces go off at St. Bonde, that the Marquis had thither taken along with him. At which I said to Monsieur de Strozzy, Sir, the skirmish grows very loud, and is mixt with Artillery, they will deprive you of Captain Bartolomeo de Pesera, pray let us go see what they are doing; to which he replyed, let us go then, and we must go however to see where we are to lodge the Camp. Monsieur de Lan∣sac lent me a gray Turk, for I had not brought my horses by sea; and I then asked Mon∣sieur de Strozzy if he were pleased that I should go see what the business was, whilst he with Messieurs de Lansac and de Fourcavaux went to take order about lodging the Camp? to which he answered, with all his heart; and so we went out at the Port St. Mark. I went then directly to the place where the skirmish was, and they a little on the right hand to see where they should lodge the Army. So soon as I was on the other side the Tresse, where the skirmish was, I there found not so much as one Captain; so that the skirmish lookt like a very disorderly business, and the Enemy had got the advantage of our people; for they had drawn them from the little hills near unto St. Bonde, and driven them to the Medows that lye upon the banks of the River Tresse. At my arrival I askt for the Captains, but met not one that ownd that title, from whence a great disorder ensu'd: but upon the instant I saw one coming upon a gray horse, and gallopt pre∣sently up to him, to ask him if he was a Captain or no, who told me he was; I then askt him his name, to which he made answer, Io mj chiamo Marioul de Santa Fiore, and I said to him. Signior Capitano Io mj chiamo Montluco audiamo ensiemi, Now all the Army had already heard that I was coming with the recruits;Captain Mari∣ul de Santa Fior. so that though we had never seen one anothers faces before, yet we knew one another well enough by our names. I entreated him them to rally his men, and give a charge upon the Enemy, to beat them back again up the Hll, which he did, and we accordingly drave them up to the very top. In the mean while the skirmish extended it self all along the ridge of a Hill, and by the Vineyards directly to the Pallssot, which is a little Palace, behind which were the Grisons, and on the back of the Mountain a little further the Artillery playd, which the Marquis had brought to St. Bonde. There all the Italian Captains, and Signior Cornelio Bentivoglio, who was there Colonel, were at the corner of the Vineyards looking towards St.
Bonde and St. Mark, behind a little Oratory, by which they were covered from the Canon shot. Now betwixt la Pallassot and the little Oratory it might be about three hundred paces, and Signior Marioul and I so ruffled the Enemy, that we drave the skirmish all along the ridge of the Vineyards directly upon them: I had brought with me Captain Charry, who was my Lieutenant at Alba, with thirty good Soldiers, almost all Gentlemen, who would by no means by left behind with my brother Monsieur de Lioux, to whom the King had given the government of Alba, at the humble request of Monsieur de Valence my Brother, and I had preferred in his behalf. About which there hapned a very great dispute, for the Mareschal de Brissac deferr'd to accept him till he had first had on answer from me; who so soon as he understood the King's resolution to send me to Sienna, he sent me another Courier,The Sieur de Liouz Gover∣nor of Alba entreating me not to quit the Government of Alba, and that I might name, either my own Lieutenant, or any other to command in the place till my return, assuring me that he would accept whomsoever I should appoint, and in the mean time would take care that my pay should be kept for me, so that I should not lose so much as a denier; advising me withal to consider, that the Command the King gave me at Sienna would not be of so long continuance as that of Alba. But I most humbly be∣sought him to approve of my Brother, assring him that he would be as much his effe∣ctionate servant as I was, and that if it should please God I ever return'd from Sienna, I swore to come and find him out, and to serve him in the condition of a private Soldier, though the King should not please to conferre any command upon me, that I might have the honor to be near his person. Now to give you an account of the humour of the Ma∣reschal, I will say and maintain, that he was one of the bravest Gentlemen, and the best Masters that has been these fifty years in France, for such as he knew to be zealous and affectionate to the King's service; and if President Birague will lay his hand upon his heart, he will swear the same.Character of the Mareschal de Brissac. He was a man that had evermore a greater regard to an∣other man's profit than his own, a man could never lose any thing by him, but every man had his share both of advantage and honor, and so to the rest, he lov'd and honor'd a worthy man, even to the meanest Soldier. The best men he knew by their names, and would give ear to the advice of all, without relying too much upon his own head-piece as Monsieur de Lautrec was too much enclin'd to do. But to return to the Skirmish, I found at the Oratory Signior Corneli, and Colonel Charamont, whom I had not before seen, since my arrival. Betwixt the said Oratory and la Bonde there is a great High-way, and by the side of it two little houses, some ten or twelve paces distant from one another. In this High-way we gave the Enemy a charge, and gain'd from them the two houses, into one of which Captain Charry put himself, and our Italians into the other, they there conti∣nued about three quarters of an hour, almost alwayes fighting, insomuch that the Mar∣quis sent thither all his Spanish Harquebuzeers, and even the Italians who were at their Fort of St. Mark, and planted six Ensigns of Spanish foot upon the great High-way to maintain the fight. Now the hottest of the skirmish was on the right hand, and on the left amongst the Vines, so that the Cavalry could do nothing. Signior Cornelio then by the advice of his Captains was about to retire, when I remonstrated to him that he must by no means offer to stir, till first he had some horse, and also the Grisons to make good his retreat, to whom I would presently go, and entreat them to come up half way be∣twixt the Pallassot and the Oratory, and would likewise go to request the same of the Count de la Miranda, who was Colonel of the horse, and had halted in a Valley behind a little Wood near unto la Pallassot; which they approv'd of very well; and so I presently ran to the Grisons, entreating them to advance but two hundred paces only; but the Colonel that commanded under Monsieur de Fourcavaux would by no means be perswaded to it. I then spurr'd up to the Count, and pray'd him to send out four Corners of horse, which he presently did, and they were the Count de Pontavala, Cornello, Ioby, the Baron de Rabat, and my Nephew Serillac, who commanded the Com∣pany of Monsieur de Cipierre. Now as the Cornets were advancing at a good round gal∣lop, I saw Signior Cornelio, who at the importunity of his Captains was again begining to retire, and presently ran to him, remonstrating that the six Ensigns were upon their march, and that they were Spaniards, whose colours being so large, it was a sign the Mar∣quis was there in person with all his Army, who would infallibly charge him so soon as ever he should begin to descend the Hill, entreating him therefore to return back to the same place, which he did, being departed from it not above thirty paces. I then return'd to the Corners, and stopt them in the mid-way betwixt the Pallassot and the Oratory, which having done, I once more went to the Grisons, who after I had made them sen∣sible of the danger we were in to lose all the Officers, arose and began to strike up their
Drums, and marcht up close by the Horse. The Marquis seeing the Cavalry and the Gri∣sons begin to appear in the field, thought it now convenient to withdraw his six Ensigns out of the great High-way; there was not one Officer of ours on horseback but my self and Signior Marioul, who never stirred from my side, so that I could plainly see all the Enemy did: I then said to Signior Cornelio, Look you Sir, the Spanish Ensigns having discovered our Cavalry, and the Grisons are facing about, now charge them home, for now it is time: which being said, Signiour Marioul alighted, and clapt a Target to his arm, having his sword in his hand; I then said to Captain Charry, that he was now to shew what he had ever been, and must let these strangers see what a Gascon could do, bid∣ding him be sure to charge in before them all. Monsieur de Fourcavaux had brought four hundred Italian Harquebuzeers from Parma, very brave men, who were drawn up close by the Oratory (for my part) I will not make my self more valiant than I am, for I a∣lighted not, I already began to play the King's Lieutenant, and we divided the men to the right and left, all along a great High-way, and there we made our charge, which was a brave one, if ever any was, and such that we drave them as far as a descent on the left hand of St. Bonde, where the Marquis stood with the remainder of his Spaniards and Germans, and being the Spaniards stood just upon the edge of the ascent, those who were put to flight rusht quite through them, and both one and the other ran full drive upon the Germans. The Marquis who saw the torrent of this disorder coming upon him, be∣gan, as well as he could, to retire by a Valley, without sound of Trumpet, or beat of Drum. Those who were come out of St. Marks, retreated also in very great haste, car∣rying off with them the four little pieces with which they had batter'd St. Bonde, into their Fort. The Marquis told me after, when I came out of Sienna, as he accompanied me two miles from the Town, that had we follow'd the pursuit we had put all his Army to flight, and given him a total defeat: but we were not aware of his disorder; we thought our selves very happy, that we had come off so good cheap; and our Enemies thought themselves happier than we. Monsieur de Strozzy, who was in a Valley on the other side the Port St. Mark, as he was consulting with Messieurs de Lansac and de Fourcavaux about the situation of the Camp, heard very well that there was a very great skirmish; but he knew that all the Captains were there, and that I was also gone thither; neither did they ever imagine it had been half so sharp as it was; but in the end hearing it grow so loud, they left all and came gallopping to us; yet could they not come time enough to the charge, which the said Monsieur de Strozzy was very much troubled at, and something discontented that no notice had been given him of the fight, and Monsieur de Fourcavaux was the same, foras∣much as the Grisons, of which he was the chief Officer, were come up just to fight, and that his Harquebuzeers had fought. But I excus'd it to them both, telling them that I had never a horse-man with me, but Signior Marioul, and that he was too brave a Gentleman to leave the skirmish, having besides three or four Ensigns under his com∣mand, wherefore it had not been possible for me to send them word. Now Monsieur de Strozzy at his rising from dinner had sent away Signior Roberto his Brother in all haste, to cause the Franch and Germans to advance, which he did, and found the Germans be∣ginning to drink,The Germans are eating and drinking in the midst of the skirmish. and consequently could not suddainly get them from the Tables; for the said Signior de Strozzy had caused meat to be set ready for them upon the great High-way, which had he not done they had held on their march, and just in the nick had come into the heat of the fight, and so the Battail had been won; but we must say with the Italian. Fa me indevino, & io ti daro denari. This was that which was done the first day that I arriv'd at Sienna, where I so signaliz'd my self to the Siennois, and all the Italian Captains, that knew me not before, as purchased me a very great esteem, both with the Inhabitants of the City and the whole Army; for by running up and down amongst the foot now here, now there, ordering these on the one side, and those on the other, I gave them to understand that this was not the fist skirmish by a hun∣dred wherein I had been engag'd. The Mareschal then lodg'd his Camp betwixt Porto Novo and Porto Tuffo, in the beautiful Suburbs that are there, and not only there, for I dare boldly say, that if the Suburbs of Sienna had stood altogether, they would have been bigger than the City; for in the Suburbs were more goodly Palaces, and finer Churches and Monasteries than there were in the body of the Town. The next morning Monsieur de Strozzy carried us up to that part of the wall looking towards the Enemies Camp, where we fell into consul∣tation ,A Consultati∣on held at Si∣enna about fighting a Bat∣tail▪ whether or no it were good to hazard a Battail; and there the opinions were va∣rious, some thinking it the best, and others conceiving it not convenient so to do. Those who were of opinion that we ought not to fight objected, that we could not go to the
Palace of Diau, without passing close by a little Fort the Marquis had made, betwixt the little observance and the aforesaid Palace, where there was three or four pieces of great Artillery (as it was true), and that leaving that behind, we should also leave our own Fort of Camolia naked of defence. I then propounded that for any harm the Artillery of the little Fort could do us, we could pass by a little before day, and might leave an Ensign or two to bridle the little Fort from daring to sally out, and as for the Fort of Camolia, we could leave three or four Companies of the City to keep them likewise in aw,The Sieur de Montluc's ad∣vice. and that I on my part with the rest of the Forces of the City would go out by Porto Fontebrando, and should by break of day to got to the top of a little Mountain, ready to present my self in the Plain at so opportune a time, that just as our Camp should appear near to theirs, I should at the same instant be got so near them, that they must of ne∣cessity enter into some apprehension, to see us come the one on the one side, and the o∣ther on the other. The Siennois made account that they could draw four thousand good men out of the Town. There were some who approv'd of my proposal, and of the Siennois also which was to fight; and others were of a contrary opinion. The Game could not be plaid without being lustily disputed,The Forces of the Marquis of Marignan. for the Marquis had three Tertia's of Spaniards, namely that the Sicily, that of Naples, and that of Corsica (which we call Regiments) the two first composed of old Soldiers, and that of Corsica of new-raised men (wherein neverthe∣less there were very good Soldiers) together with two Regiments of Germans, each of them containing twelve Ensigns, and four or five thousand Italians. As to the Cavalry I think ours would have beaten theirs, for we had very good Officers, and very brave Light∣horse ; and for the rest, our Army consisted of ten Ensigns of Germans, ten of Grisons, fourteen of French,The French Forces. and betwixt five and six thousand Italians. Of all this day Mon∣sieur de Strozzy could not resolve what to do, by reason of the diversity of opinions, ne∣vertheless I think he was resolv'd the next day to have fought them; for the Siennols were stark mad of fighting, and I do believe fighting for their liberty would have playd the devils:The Marquis de Marignan dislodges his Camp. But the Marquis either had some knowledge of his intent, or else his design was not to stay any longer there; for he departed an hour before day in the morning; so that had God inspir'd Monsieur de Strozzy, that he had this day gone out to fight, we had in the morning found them all dislodg'd, and had fought them upon their retreat, and in disorder: but I must repeat what I said before, Fa me indevino, & io ti daro denari. The Marquis took the way towards Mauchaut, where the Mareschal had left four Ensigns, or else the Marquis held it, who went to another place hard by, and Monsieur de Strozzy directly to Mauchaut, I do not certainly remember whether: but so it was that their Camps lay eight or nine days within seven or eight miles of one another, the one going to take some place, and the other following after to relieve it. Nevertheless the Marquis at last arrived before Mauchaut, and began to batter either to take or re∣take it. I was not there, for I staid behind at Sienna, according to the King's intention, and in relation to my command; yet had it not been for a sickness that I began to fall into, I do believe Monsieur de Strozzy would have taken me along with him, and have left Monsieur de Lansac Governor, as before; but in the end, as Monsieur de Strozzy march't away, Monsieur de Lansac took his way towards Rome, to acquit himself of his Commission of Ambassador.Monsieur de Lansac goes Ambassador to Rome. So soon as the Marquis was sensible of Monsieur de Strozzy's coming, he gave place, and drawing off his Attillery, plac't himself a little on the right hand, at the distance of a hundred and fifty or two hundred paces from the Town, where he made his advantage of two or three little Mountains, under which lie entrencht himself on that side by the Fountains. Monsieur de Strozzy then came and encampt his Army all along a hollow way that there was betwixt the Marquis and the Town. Now Monsieur de Strozzy plac't himself so near in design to fight the Marquis, if he could once tempt him out of this Trenches, and there they lay seven or eight days to see which should first dislodge. The Marquis knew very well, that in case he should first move, Monsieur de Strozzy would infallibly fight him; and therefore would by no means be drawn to do it, being expresly forbid to put any thing to hazard, as we were after told by Don Iuan de LunaDon Iuan de Luna. himself, who was present with the Marquis at that time, and in his own person, a very brave Spaniard. Now betwixt the two Camps there was no more than the breadth of one little field, and that not above fifty paces over, wherein there daily hapned skirmishes betwixt the foot of both Armies, and so disadvantageous to us, that we always came off with the worse, by reason of the Artillery the Marquis had planted upon the three forementioned little Mountains; so that Monsieur de Strozzy lost more men by their Canon than by their smaller sho. The said Sieur de Strozzy was possest of one Fountain only, upon
which the Arillery from one of the Mountainers continually playd, and kill'd a great many men; so that they were constrain'd to etch all their water by night; neither could he ever draw up his Cavalry into Battalia,The Fench very much an∣noy'd by the Enemies Ca∣non. but that the great shot did great execution up∣on them, and I was told that in three or four dayes time he had above sixscore men and horses kill'd, insomuch that our Cavalry was infinitely discourag'd, and the foot also very much baffled and out of heart. Notwithstanding all which Monsieur de Strozzy per∣sisted obstinate not to remove his Quarters, and that both out of the hope he had that the Marquis would first dslodge, and give him an opportunity to fight him, as also out of punctilio, that he would not give him that advantage, as the first to forsake his ground. Both the one and the other of these Generals had mettle enough, and both of them had glory in their prospect: but it is better to do one's Masters business, than to stand upon nicities of honor; I mean if there be no manifest shame in the case. Monsieur de Strozzy every day sent an account of all he did, both to me and to the Senat, as we also met every day in Council to debate upon what he writ to us, and I eve∣ry hour advised, and entreated him not to consume his Forces with continual loss, which would encourage the Enemies Soldiers, and dishearren his own: the Lords of the Senate likewise counsel'd hm the same; but he had so passionate a desire to fight with the Mar∣quis, that that longing alone blinded his judgment, and depriv'd him of the knowledge of his daily loss. I dy'd with desire to go to him, but the Senate would by no means consent unto it: at last he writ me word, that within two dayes he would retire in the face of the Enemy, directly to Lusignano, whereupon I immediately dispatcht away a Gentleman to him, who was present when the Letter came, called the Sieur de Lescussan, by him entreating and conjuring him not to make his retreat by day, since the loss in the skirmishes had hapned on his side (for by ill fortune our poeple had lost more the two last dayes, than of all the time before and that whoever might advise him to the con∣trary, I begg'd of him to be rul'd by me, and to retire by night, for it was no more than two miles to Lusignano;The Sieur de Montluc's ad∣vice to Mon∣sieur de Stroz∣zy upon his re∣solution to re∣treat in the face of the E∣nemy. beseeching him withall to remember that King Francis had re∣treated from before Landrecy after this manner, and was so far from being condemn'd for so doing, that on the contrary he was highly applauded for it, and it was lookt upon by all the Princes and Potentates of Christendome for the most prudent thing he ever did; yet had he sustain'd no loss by skirmishes. I gave him moreover to understand, that hitherto I had never seen a good retreat made after this manner, neither by Friend nor Enemy, if they who made it were closely pursued. I further represented to him the re∣treat that Messieurs de Montegean and de Boissy would make at Brignolles, who would not be perswaded to retire without seeing the Enemy, for all the Captains who were pre∣sent with them could do or say, which was the cause they were defeated within less than half a mile of their Quarters. I also set before him the exemple of Monsieur d' Anne∣baut, at that time Mareschal of France, at Theroanne, of Monsieur d' Aussun at Carignan, and several others:Retreats at the head of an Ar∣my dangerous. and that since so great a Prince, and so great a Soldier, as King Francis was, had by all the world been commended for that discreet way of proceeding, he ought to take him for his president, considering also that so many valiant Leaders had lost themselves in retreating at the head of an Army; and that by such a loss (if it should so unhappily fall out) he might guess what would become of the City of Sienna. In short Monsieur de Lesussan brought me word, that once Monsieur de Strozzy was re∣solv'd to do it after his sort,Thom. d' Albene the cause of Monsieur de Strozzy's mis∣fortune. and had it not been for one unlucky fellow called Thomas d' Albene he had with him, he had retreated after the manner I advised: but as there are some men in the world, whom God has appointed to do good, so has he created o∣thers to do mischief, as he did this Thomas; for he represented to Monsieur de Strozzy so many things, and so preacht what a dishonor it would be to him to steal away by night, that in the end he made him to alter his determination; who thereupon sent me word that he was resolv'd to make his retreat in the face of the Enemy: Whereas before, to let me see that he was resolv'd to follow my advice, he had at one of the clock in the night sent away two pieces of Canon he had with him straight to Lusignano; at which place I do believe they were already arriv'd (for it was but two little miles) before he al∣tered his resolution. It was four of the clock in the morning before Monsieur de Les∣cussan parted from him, who brought me his determination, and arriv'd at seven of the clock in the morning a la mode de France. This hapned to be in August, and presently I sent to the Senate, desiring them all to meet me at the Palace, for that I had something of importance to deliver them,The Sieur de Montluc sick. which they did. Now my sickness was still more and more encreast upon me, and was at last turn'd into a continued Feavor, with a Flix, not∣withstanding which about nine of the clock I came to the Palace, where I began a Speech to them in Italian, which I spoke better then than I can write it now, which is one rea∣son
why I have here set it down in French, as also to the end that the Gentlemen of Gascony, who few of them understand that Language, and shall read my Book, as I am confident they will, may not be put to the trouble to have it interpreted to them. I very well remember what I said, and do truly believe I do not miss ten words, for my dis∣course was only what was dictated to me by nature, without any help of Art. Gentlemen,The Sieur de Montluc's Ha∣rangue to the people of Sien∣na. I have requested you to this Assembly, that I might remonstrate to you four things, which I conceive to be very important to your conservation, and have been moved so to do, by reason that Monsieur de Strozzy has this night sent me word by Monsieur de L'Escussan of the resolution he has taken this morning to retreat in o∣pen day to Lusignano, in the very face of his Enemy. You all know very well what perswasions and intreaties we have used, that he would take heed of retreating after this manner, and particularly what arguments and exemples I laid before him by the said Sieur de l'Escussan, which he relisht very well at first, and was once resolv'd to do as King Francis did before Landrecy; nevertheless, by I know not what misfortune, he suffers himself to be carried away by a man he has with him, one Thomas d'Albene, who has made him alter his determination, by making him believe that to retreat by night would be dishonourable to him: God grant the ill counsel of this man do not prove dishonourable and ruinous both to him and to you also. Now Gentlemen, whilst we are in expectation what will be the issue of this Battail, I have four things to remon∣strate to you. The first, and which most nearly concerns you, is, that you will please to call to mind, that you are Soveraigns in your own Republick, that your Predecessors from Father to Son have left you this honorable Title: that this War aims at nothing but the ruine of that Soveraignty; for if the Enemy remain victorious, you are to hope for no other, than from Soveraigns to be converted into Subjects, and Slaves; and that therefore it is much better for you to die with your arms in your hands in the defence of this honorable Title, than tamely to part with your Birth-right, and to outlive the loss of your Priviledges and Liberty with shame and infamy. The second is, that you will consider the friendship the King my Master has towards you, who pretends to no other advantage from you, than that your amity be reciprocal to his, and that since he has generously taken you into his protection, you will have this confidence in him, that he will never forsake you: for should you go less in your resolution for one little blow of fortune, consider with what contempt the whole world will look upon you; there is not a Prince upon the earth that will aid and assist you, should they once disover you to be a mtable and irresolute people.The Sieur de Montluc presa∣ges the loss of the Battail. For all these considerations therefore I be∣seech you to continue firm and constant, and approve your selves magnanimous and faithful in adversity, when you shall hear news of the loss of the Battail, which I ve∣ry much fear you will soon do, considering the resolution Monsieur de Strozzy has ta∣ken, though God of his goodness divert the misfortune. The third is, that you will consider in what a height of reputation your forefathers liv'd and dy'd, which also they have left you to inherit, that you may for ever carry the name of the most vali∣ant and warlike people of all Italy, and have moreover left behind them honorable memory of the Battails they have won of those of their own Nation. You also derive your selves from the antient warlike Romans, and pretend to be their true legitimate Sons, giving their antient arms, which is the Wolf with Romulus and Remus, Founders of their proud City, the Metropolis of the World.Monsieur de Montlue is a little mistaken in this point, for the Siennois are not descen∣ded from the antient Romans but from the Gauls. I therefore most earnestly beseech you Gentlemen, that you will call to mind who you are, and what your Progenitors have ever been; which title of honor should you once lose, what a shame and infamy would it be to your famous Ancestors, and what cause will your children have to curse the hour that ever they were descended of such Fathers, who have abandon'd their Liberty, to submit their necks to the yoke of servitude and subjection? The fourth thing I have to trouble you withal is to remonstrate to you, that as I have an entire confidence, you will manifest your valour and vertue upon this occasion, you in order thereunto will suddainly think of making provision of all things necessary to the conservation of your City; for the Battail I already give you for lost, not that it will nevertheless pro∣ceed from any default in Monsieur de Strozzy, but from the losses we have sustein'd in the several skirmishes that have been fought before Mauchaut, it being impossible by reason thereof, but that our people must be mightily Crest-fallen and dejected, and those of the Enemy in greater heart and courage. 'Tis an effect of victory to be exalt∣ed, and fear is the issue of misfortune and disgrace; neither do the little losses in skir∣mishes, which are the usual forerunners of a Battail, ever portend any thing but disaster and ruine. On the other side also, those who retire must of necessity shew their backs
to the Enemy; where, although they often face about, yet must they still make for∣wards, where it will be impossible but they must meet with some hedge or ditch, o∣ver which they must of necessity pass in disorder; for upon a Retreat every one will strive to be foremost,Fear ever ac∣companies a Reeat. because fear and terror are the ordinary concomitants of those who would retire; and for never so little disorderly haste they shall make all will be lost, if the Enemy have but half the courage that men should have. Remember (Gentle∣men) the Battail that Hannibal gain'd of the Romains at Cannee near to Rome.The Battail of Canuce. The Romans who were at home in the City never suspected it possible that their people should be beaten, and therefore made no kind of provision, nor took any order in their affairs; so that when news came of the defeat, they were strook into so great a terror, that the Gates of Rome remain'd for three dayes and three nights wide open, not a man so much as daring to go shut them; so that had Hannibal pursued his vi∣ctory, he might without any opposition have entred the City; as Titus Livie reports in his History. Therefore (Gentlemen) give present order for the securing of your Gates, and appoint men to guard them, which you must also choose out of those of best re∣pute for the bravest and most faithful amongst you: In the next place cause procla∣mation to be made throughout the Ciy, that all those who have Corn or Meal at the Mills, shall make haste to get their Corn ground, and bring it all into the City. Cause also all those who have grain, or any other sorts of ptovision in the Villages immediately to fetch it into the Town, upon penalty of having it burnt, or put to sack if by to mor∣row night it be not all brought within the walls; and all this to the end that we may have wherewith to support our selves, and maintain the Siege till the succours the King will send us shall arrive; for he is not so inconsiderable a Prince, but that as he has had the power to send you these aids that are already come, he is yet able to send you more; and moreover command your three Standard-bearers to have all their Companies in a readiness at the beat of Drum. My Fever pressing upon me, I am constrain'd to retire to my lodging, in expectation of such news as God shall please to send us, and you I hope in the mean time will take present order about such things as I have put you in mind of, in which assurance, for the service of the King my Master, and particularly your own, I make you a tender not only of the little experience God has given me, but more∣over of my life for the defence of your City, and the antient priviledges thereof. Thus then I departed from them, who immediately resolv'd to have patience in what fortune soever God should be pleased to send them, and to eat to their very children, before they would for any misfortune that should befall them, depart from the Amity and Protection of the King of France. I perceived both by their countenance and their speeches, that they were a people very well resolv'd to defend their liberty, and to pre∣serve inviolate the friendship they had promised and sworn to me. A resolution at which indeed I was mightily well pleased. They immediately then caused proclamation to be made, upon which every one ran to the field to fetch in what they had, and about five a clock in the Evening arrived Captain Cambas, Camp-Master to the French Infantry, who came to bring me news that the Battail was lost, and Monsieur de Strozzy wounded to death,Monsieur de Strozzy de∣feated the 3d of August 155. whom they had laid upon Poles to carry him to Montalsin, and that that very night all those of the Army who had escap't the Battail would be at the Gates of Sienna. I leave any one to judge what a condition I was in, being sick of a Fever and a Dissente∣ry, seeing our General dead, or what was as bad, it being not above fourteen or fifteen dayes since I arrived in this Republick, not having any acquaintance with any one person in the City, and consequently not knowing who were good Frenchmen, and who were not. Time is requir'd to the knowledge of men. Monsieur de Strozzy had left me but five Italian Companies, of which I did not know so much as one Captain, and those he had left in the Citadel and the Fort of Camolia, which were the Keys of the City. I then sent Captain Cambas to carry the news to the Senate, who were nothing dismai'd at it, but told him that three or four dayes before I had remonstrated to them, that this re∣treat would be dangerous; and that although by what I had said to them they had give the Battail for lost, they would nevertheless nothing after the good inclination they had for the King, nor despair of being reliev'd by him. Do not think it strange (fellow Captains) if foreseeing the loss of a Battail, I also fore∣told it to the Siennois, which I did, not to dishearten, but to assure them, to the end that the sudden news thereof might not strike a general astonishment throughout the whole City; 'twas this mad them resolve, this made them take counsel to prepare themselves▪ and in my opinion men do better in expecting the worst, than in being over confident of their Fortune. Upon what I had said to them every one put on a resolution to die in the
defence of their walls, and every thing was presently brought into the City. At break of day in the morning the Infantry arriv'd, for Cavalry were gone away with Monsieur de Strozzy; neither had there indeed at Sienna been any thing for the horses to eat. Co∣lonel Rheincroc, and Signior Cornelio Bentivoglio came to my lodgings, where amongst us it was determin'd, that the Rheincroc should out of ten Ensigns that he had make six Signior Cornelio six of Italians, and Captain Cambas six of French, and that all the rest should be sent away to Montalsin. The Foot were never permitted to enter the Town, till first the Election was made, and with the remainder we also sent away five Ensigns of Italians to goe to the said Montalsin: to which place I writ to Monsieur de Strozzy (upon the assurance Signior Cornelio had given me that there was yet hopes of his life) to give him an account of the order I had taken, which he did also very well approve. The Marquis knew not how to follow his victory,The Marquis de Marignan knows not how to make use of his victory. which if he had, all the Army had been cut to pieces, and all the earth could not have sav'd Monsieur de Strozzy from be∣ing put to a cruel death by the Duke of Florence. 'Tis the ordinary fault of Conque∣rors. You Generals of Armies therefore that shall come after us, learn to be wise at the expence of so many others, and suffer not your selves to be so far transported with joy for the winning of a Battail, that you forget to improve it to the utmost; follow your blow, and do not give your Enemy leisure to recollect himself. The Marquis came not till the next day to Lusignano, for he fear'd lest Monsieur de Strozzy might again rally his Army, considering that he had lost none of his horse, and not knowing him to be wounded, and came not of three dayes before Sienna. I shall not undertake to give any account how this Battail was fought, nor how it was lost; both because I was not present there, and that also there is some dispute about it, and various reports made of those who had done well and ill. This is like a trial at Law, all parties must be heard before judgment be pronounced: for I have heard the French and the Lansquenets accuse the risons and Italians for behaving themselves ill in this Battail (though they deny it) and the Cavalry much worse.Disputes about the loss of the Battail. Others say, and affirm that there was treachery in the business: for my part I can say nothing to't, for I know nothing but by hearsay; but shall stick to what I said before, that these retreats by day in the face of an Enemy are dangerous, and to be avoided, if possible; or if not, 'tis better to lay all at stake, Monsieur de Strozzy lay thirteen days without discovering any hopes of life,The diligence of Monsieur de Strozzy▪ which notwithstanding he fail'd not to send out Captains towards Romania to raise new For∣ces, and to furnish all the Garrisons upon the Sea Coast, and about Montalsin with foot and horse. He was a man of great vigilancy, diligence, and wisdome; but 'tis imposible to be alwayes fortunate.The Sieur de Montluc sick almost unto death. Now seeing my self reduc't to the last extremity, at the door of death, and given over by all my Physicians, I assign'd over the Government of the City to Signior Cornelio: but Monsieur de Strozzy hearing of my desperate condition, sent away post to Rome for Monsieur de Lansac to come and command there; who accord∣ingly being come as far as Montalsin, he was there advised to go by night, and on foot with two Guides and one Servant, and to balk the great high-wayes, by which means he might the better escape the Enemies Guards: but as he was come hard by Sienna, he was there met by some Soldiers who were going to the warre,The Sieur de Lansac taken prisoner. by them taken and carried to the Marquis, and by him sent away to Florence, where he remained prisoner during all the time of the War, and a good while after. The said Sieur de Lansac was in this ve∣ry ill advised, for he might have past well enough, had he known how to carry his busi∣ness. Had he come I do certainly believe I had died; for I had then had nothing to do, whereas my mind was so wholly taken up with the care of my business, that I had not leisure to think of my disease. Monsieur de Fourquevax was wounded, and taken prisoner at this Battail, and Captain Balleron Colonel of the French Foot, with several o∣thers, to the number of betwixt four and five thousand. 'Twas said that Monsieur de Strozzy in his own person, behav'd himself like a brave and valiant Leader. And this was the success of this unfortunate Battail. This History may serve for exemple to such as have a vanity in making retreats in the face of an Enemy, and I should ever advise that they would rather put it to the push of a Battail, than to retire after this manner; for I find nothing in the whole practice of Arms so difficult as a retreat. Of this that of the Constable at St. Quentin gives us more∣over sufficient proof; a man who in his time had known both how to shew, and teach o∣ther Commanders what they ought to do, though such was his misfortune here, that he could not make use of those precepts himself had at other times give to others. Though I must nevertheless needs say, that had he been well seconded by the Captains of Foot, who were without with him, he might perhaps have made his retreat; for they had only
needed to hazard three or four hundred Harquebuzeers with the Mareschal de St. André, who might very well have kept the Count d' Aignemont from seeing the disorder that was amongst the Baggage, which was yet mixt with the horse, and he would never have charg'd the said Mareschal, had he been sustein'd by the Harquebuzeers, forasmuch as the said Count had no foot at all,The Constable defeated at St. Quentin. and the Constable had had above half an hours time wherein to be gaining ground, as he had already begun to do, and had recover'd the wood to save his Infantry, and so had retir'd with all the Cavalry to la Fere, by which means they could have lost no more than the Harquebuzeers, and part of the Mareschal's horse only; which it had been much better to do, than to lose the General, and all, as they did. I have since talkt with several of the Foot Officers, who are yet living, and remon∣strated to them what a riddle this business was to all men of understanding, telling them that I at the age of eighteen or nineteen only had very well discover'd in the retreat of Captain Carbon and Monsieur de Grammont, at St. ean de Luz, that a small party was to be hazarded to save all, of which I my self had had experience, as I have writ in the beginning: but they excused themselves upon the Camp-Master, and laid all the blame to him, which was all they had to say for themselves. All these exemples I have set down that they may be of use to others for the time to come, and cannot forbear often to repeat, and much to insist upon the fault committed by these kind of retreats, by reason of the great inconveniencies that ensue upon them, to the loss of a Battail. It were not worth so much repentance, if they were resolv'd upon a Battail, and to fight it out, that every one might do his best: but to be beaten when they have a mind to retire, and apparently decline ighting is intolerable. You Generals and Lieutenants of Provinces may here see of what importance these errors are; when that of St. Quentin put the whole Kingdom in danger, and was the occasion that we quitted all our Conquests; and this put the King's affairs of Italy in a very ill condition. Be not then asham'd to cover your designs with the shades of night, which is so far from being shameful, that it is on the contrary honorable to fool and deceive your Enemy, that watches an opportunity to do you a mischief; and who when the day appears shall find nothing but the empty nest, and the birds flown and gone: it is a much grea∣ter shame and dishonor to you to be beaten turning your backs. If you be so nice of your honor ight in good earnest in God's name; it still in your Fort, if it be a place of the least advantage, and there quietly expect either till your Enemy shall be weary of wait∣ing upon you, or that he comes to attaque you in your Camp, and so you shall be sure at least to play your game above board as they say. Now the Marquis lodg'd the Tertia of Csica at the little Observance, the Tertia of Sicily at the Chartreux,The Marquis de Marignan before Sienna. where he entrencht them so well, that we could by no means come to them, and himself with the residue of his Camp remain'd at Arbeirotte, and part of his Cavalry were quarter'd at Bonconvent. He trusted to the Garrison he had in the Fort St. Mark every night to go the Patrouille, and so scour the road on that side towards Fontebrando, that no provision should enter into Sienna; yet could he not order it so, but that there entred Cows and Buffles for six weeks together. I think the thing that made the Marquis proceed with so much leisure and moderation, was that he waited for my death, and that of Monsieur de Strozzy; making account that we being once dead, and Messieurs de Lansac and de Fourquevax taken prisoners, our people wanting a French-man to head them would deliberate to retire:The hopes of the Marquis of Marignan. Monsieur de Strozzy nevertheless recover'd, and being told that I was dead (for by reason I had for three dayes been look't upon as a dead man, no one entring into my Chamber but the Priests to take care of my soul, for my Body was given over by the Physicians, they had sent him such word) Mon∣sieur de Strozzy, I say, seeing Monsieur de Lansac taken, and me dead, would venture to come from Montalsin, and to put himself into Sienna. According to this resolution then he departed in the beginning of the night from Montalsin, with six Companies of foot and two Troops of horse, one of which was commanded by my Nephew Serillac, who be∣fore he set out bethought himself to borrow three or four Trumpets of his Companions, fearing that would fall out which did; for Monsieur de Strozzy could not so secretly de∣part,The Sieur de Strozzy goes to relieve Sienna. but that the Marquis had intelligence of his design, and with all his Camp lay in wait for him about Fonterando, and all along the River Tresse. Monsieur de Strozzy had placed all his Foot before, and his Cavalry behind, being himself mounted upon a very little horse, and having his leg sustain'd in a Scarfe fastned to the pummel of his Saddle, and with him was the Bishop of Sienna. So soon as our Italian Foot came into the Enemies Ambuscado, they fell upon them with so great fury, and so sudden a terror,Monsieur de Strozzy in very great danger. that without much resistance they betook themselves to flight, and bore Monsieur de Strozzy over and over, who with the Bishop got amongst the ruins
of some old houses, where he staid holding his horse in his hand. The noise was so great that it was heard to Sienna, it being not above a mile off at the furthest. The Ene∣my follow'd their victory with great execution, when Srillac with his Trumpets charg'd through the middest of them; who hearing so many Trumpets, and seeing the horse fan in amongst them, faced about in rout and confusion, and ran full drive upon the Mar∣quis, who seeing the disorder was constrain'd to retire to Arberiotte. Now those who had given the charge, and who also had receiv'd it,The flight and fright of both Armies. were Spaniards and Italians mixt together, insomuch that our people fld on the one side, and the Enemy on the other. Two or three hundred Italians of ours recover'd the walls of Sienna, others fled away twelve miles from thence, and old Captains too, whom the Mareschal very much e∣steem'd: but the bravest men in the world having once lost their judgment, and giving all for lost, know not where they are. By this you may see how great the dangers of war are, and how infamous a thing it is to run away, without first seeing an apparent danger. During this bustle the day began to appear, when Serillac remaining upon the place, found he had lost no more than three or four of his Troop only, who were also run away with the Foot: but I believe there were not many left of the other Troop, they ha∣ving only a Lieutenant to command them. Monsieur de Strozzy hearing now no more noise, with much ado again mounted on horseback, beginning to discover our Cavalry, and was looking if he could find Serillac amongst the dead bodies: when seeing him come to him,Serillac and Monsieur de Strozzy meet. I leave you to judge what joy there was both on the one side and on the o∣ther, and so they marcht together straight towards the City. Now I must needs say that Monsieur de Strozzy herein committed one of the greatest follies that any man in his command ever did, as I have told him an hundred times since; for he knew very well, that had he been taken all the world could not have sav'd him from being put to an ig∣nominious death by the Duke of Florence, so profest and inveterate a hatred he had con∣ceiv'd against him. And although Serillac be my Nephew, I may with truth give him this honor and commendation, that he was the only cause of Monsieur de Strozzy's safety; which I may the better be bold to write, because Monsieur de Strozzy himself told me so. His Troop indeed was a very good one, being for the greatest part Gascons and French; for it was the old Company of Monsieur de Cypierre. Of Captains there came to the Town only Caraffa, who was since Cardinal, and another, as I was told, whose name I have forgot, and two or three hundred Soldiers, whom Monsieur de Strozzy would not suffer to come into the Town, but that night sent them away with the aforesaid Captain, and kept Caraffa with him. So soon as Monsieur de Strozzy came into the City he presently enquir'd how I did, and was answer'd, that for three or four dayes they had begun to conceive some hopes of my life,Monsieur de Strozzy goes to visit the Sieur de Montluc in Sienna. whereupon he came and alighted at my lodging, the Bishop and the said Gentleman being with him, where he found me so miserably worn away, that my bones had pierc't through my skin in several parts of my body. He comforted me after the best manner he could, and there staid twelve dayes expecting how God would dispose of me; when seeing me from day to day recover strength, and grow into a better posture of health, he resolv'd the thirteenth day in the beginning of the night to depart, without acquainting any one with his intention but my self only. A little before he took horse he and the Bishop came to take their leaves of me, knowing very well that his being there would cause the Marquis to proceed with greater vigour against the Town, and also that being abroad he might find some way or other to relieve me; where at parting I promised and assured him to hold out to the last gasp. The Mareschal had set Guards upon all the Roads to catch him,Monsieur de Strozzy goes out of Sienna. but he chose to retire by a way, by which of all other the Mareschal never suspected he would attempt to pass; for he went out at the Port Camoglia, from whence he descended on the right hand down into the Valley, leaving the Fort of Camoglia above, and going all along by the Ri∣ver towards the Palace of Dian. During his stay in Sienna he perfectly recover'd of his wounds, so that he arm'd, and mounted himself upon a good horse. He met by the way fourty or fifty of the Enemies foot, which gave him some alarm, but he still held on his way, without losing any but some few servants only belonging to some Gentlemen who went out of the City to attend him. It was not however without peril. In a few dayes he escap't three great dangers. A little after his departure I recover'd my health, and caused my self to be carried in a Chair about the Town. The Marquis lo∣sing no time, shut us up on every side, and every day we had very handsome skir∣mishes: but I knew very well that the Marquis would have me for want of bread; which was the reason that I made this Harangue to the Captains, whom I had assembled together to that effect.
Gentlemen,The Sieur de Montluc's Ha∣rangue to the Captains of Siea. I believe there is none of us who does not desire to come off from this Siege with honor and repute; the thirst of honor has brought us hither. You see we are here shut up for a long time, for we are not to imagine that the Enemy will ever rise from before us, till he have us by one way or another, seeing upon the reducing of this place depends his victory. You see also that the King is at a great distance from us, and that therefore of a long time it will not be possible for him to relieve us, for∣asmuch as he must of necessity draw our succours from Germany, and out of his own Kingdom of France, the Italians themselves without the help of others not being suffi∣cient to raise the Enemies Siege, who have not only the Forces of Italy, but moreover of almost all other Nations. Now in expectation of this relief we are to have a long pati∣ence, in husbanding as much as is possible our provisions; in order whereunto I am to tell you, that I have deliberated to lessen the Size of bread from four and twenty, to twen∣ty onces. I know very well the Soldiers would murmur at this, if you did not remon∣strate to them how far we are distant from the King; that his Majesty cannot suddenly-relieve us, and that you will rather die of famine, than that it shall be laid in your dish, that had you had the patience to lessen your diet the Town had not been lost. It would be an infamous reproach to have it said, that you fill'd your bellies to starve your honor; you have not shut your selves up within these walls to occasion the loss and ruine of the City, but to defend and to save it. Represent to them that they are here amongst strange Nations, where they may set a mark of honor upon their own. What glory do men acquire, when they not only obtain honor and esteem for their own particular persons, but moreover for the Nation from whence they come? 'Tis what a generous heart should principally propose to himself for the reward of his do∣ing and suffering. You Germans shall return home proud of the hardships you have sustein'd, and the dangers you have undergone, and we Frenchmen also: and as for you who are Italians, you shall acquire this renown, with invincible courages to have ought for the liberty of your Country, a reputation we can none of us obtein, but by a long patience, in giving the King my Master time to relieve us; and believe I beseech you, that his most Christian Majesty will in nothing fail of the friendship he has promised and sworn to you. If you remonstrate all this to your Soldiers, and that they see and know, that you your selves are thus resolv'd, I am assur'd they will follow the same wayes you take. Therefore, Gentlmen, never think to excuse your selves upon them; I have never known a mutiny happen (and yet I have seen many) thorough Soldiers alone, if they were not by their Officers set on, and encourag'd to it, If you lead them the way, there is nothing they will not do, no incommodity they will not suffer. Do it then I beseech you, or resolve betimes to discover the bottom of your hearts, and plain∣ly tell us you have no mind to undergo the length and inconveniencies of a Siege, that such as had rather dishonourably spend their time in eating and drinking, than stake their persons upon an account of honor, may depart, and not divert others from nobler resolutions. Now because the Germans did not understand my Gibberish, I bad the Rhein∣croc's Interpreter tell his Master what I said, which he did, and the Rheincroc made an∣swer, that both he and his Soldiers would put on the same patience that we our selves did: and that although it was said of the Germans,The Germans answer. that they could not endure without eating and drinking their fill, both he and his upon this occasion would manifest the contrary. I was in plain truth the most afraid of these people, because they love to make good chear more than we. As for the Italian he is more enur'd to hardship and suffering than we are. Thus then every one retir'd to his own Quarters to call their Companies together, to whom they accordingly remonstrated the same things that I had represented to them before.The resolution of the Captains and Soldiers. Which having heard the Soldiers all held up their hands, and swore they would suffer to the last gasp of their lives before they would yield, or do any thing unbecoming men of honor. I then sent to the Senate, entreating them the next morning to assemble all the chief men of the City to the Palace, to hear a remonstrance I had to make to them, that concern'd them and their affairs, which they did, and there in Italian I made them this following Oration. Gentlemen,The Sieur de Montluc's Speech to the Siennois. Sienna. had Almighty God been pleased sooner to restore to me my health and memory, I had sooner thought of what we are to do for the conservation of your li∣berty, and the defence of this City. You have all seen how I have by sickness been re∣duc't to the very door of death, and how God at last has rather by miracle than any operation of Nature raised me up again, to do yet more service for this Republick in such and so great a necessity. Now, Gentlemen, I very well see, that the conservation of your City and Liberty consists in nothing but the making your provisions hold out;
for should the Marquis attempt to have us by force, we shall I hope give him such an entertainment as shall make him curse the hour that ever he came to besiege Sienna: but I perce he has no mind to go that way to work; on the contrary he intends to reduce us by famine; against which we must if possible provide, and defeat him of that expectation. I yesterday called together the Colonel of the Germans and his Captains, Signior Cornelio here present with his, and Combas also with his French Officers; to whom I remonstrated, that to prolong time, and to give the most Christian King lei∣sure to relieve us, it would be necessary to lessen the Soldiers bread, from four and twenty to twenty ounces. Telling them that so soon as all the world should know, and particularly the King, that we are resolv'd to hold out to the last morsel, it will in∣cite his Majesty to fall speedily in hand with levying of succours, that so many brave men may not be lost, and that he may not seem to abandon those he has taken into his pro∣tection in a time of the greatest necessity and danger. Now, by what I have been told you have, during the time of my extremity, taken account of your provisions, and have only found so much as to last to the fifteenth of November. Of which you have also sent word to his Majesty, a thing that may very well give him occasion to grow cold in sending us relief, considering the great distance betwixt him and us, and that also Winter is drawing on. Armies do not fly, nor ride post. His succours will be worthy a great Prince, suitable to the friendship he bears to you, and sufficient to force the Ene∣my from your Walls, and therefore cannot so suddenly be set on foot. Now (Gentlemen) after I had remonstrated thus much to the Captains, I found them all ready to suffer to the last gasp of their lives, and Nation for Nation went to make the same Remonstrance to their Soldiers, whom they found all willing to have patience, and so have both pro∣mised and sworn.Order propos'd by the Sieur de Mountluc to the Siennois. See then what you Siennois ought to do, seeing it concerns the loss of your Liberties and Seigneuries, and peradventure of your lives; for you are to ex∣pect no good usage, having put your selves under the King's protection. I beseech you therefore, that since we who have nothing here to lose, neither wives nor fires have shew'd you the way, you will consider of it, to regulate the expence, and appoint Commissaries to take an account of all the corn you have in the City, and also of the mouths; and this being done, begin to reduce your bread to fifteen ounces, for it is not possible, but you must have some little conveniency in your houses, that the Soldiers cannot have. And of all this good order I shall advertize the King's Ministers at Rome, and from thence shall cause a Gentleman to go on forwards to the King himself, to the end that his Majesty may judge what time he may have wherein to relieve us, and for the rest rely upon me, who will have no more priviledge than the meanest Citizen. The Fast that we shall keep shall not only be for our ins, but also for the saving of your lives; for the conservation of which I well willingly lay down my own. Credee Signi∣ori, che sin a la morte, io vi gardaro quello che vi o promisso, riposate vi sopradime. They then return'd me very many thanks for the good advice I had given them, which only tended to their own preservation▪ entreating me to retire to my lodging forasmuch as they would go into the great Hall, where all the most eminent persons of the City were assembled, to whom they would give an account of what I had said to them, and that within two hours by two of their Senators they would return me an answer, and so I departed from them. They were as good as their words, and my Proposition being re∣presented in this Assembly, they at last all with one voice resolv'd to eat to their very wives and children rather than not to wait the King's pleasure, upon the confidence they reposed in him of a certain relief, and immediately went about taking of order for the contracting the allowance of-bread, and for the taking an Inventory of both Corn and other provision,Monsieur de L'Escusan sent to the King to acquaint him with the estate of Sienna. which in five or six days was dispatch't. I then sent away Monsieur de L'Escussan, but with very great difficulty, for the Marquis caused strict Guard to be kept to hinder any from bringing us in any provisions, and as many Countrymen as were ta∣ken attempting so to do, were immediately hang'd without mercy. L'Escussan went first to Montalsin, there to give Monsieur de Strozzy an account of all proceedings, that he might give notice thereof to the King's Ministers at Rome, and from thence went to his Majesty to represent unto him the miserable condition of the Siennois, as I had given him in charge to do, and this might be about the middle of October. From this time forward I could do nothing worth speaking of until Christmas Eve, saving that a little after the departure of the said l'Escussan, we again abated the Soldiers bread to eighteen ounces, and that of the City to fourteen, though all the while there were frequent skirmishes, and very handsomely fought on both sides. Upon Christmas Eve, about four of the clock in the afternoon, the Marquis de Marignano by one of his
Trumpets sent me half a Stag, six Capons, six Partridges, six Borachio's of excellent wine, and six loaves of white bread, wherewith the next day to keep the Feast. I did nothing, wonder at this courtesie, because in the extremity of my sickness he had ermitted my Physitians to send men throught his Camp to fetch certain Drugs from Florence, and had himself three or four times sent me a very excellent sort of Birds, a little bigger than the Beccaicco's that are taken in Provence. He had also suffer'd a Mule to enter the Town laden with Greek wine, which was sent me by the Cardinal of Armagnac, my people having sent the Cardinal word, that in the height of my sickess I talkt of nothing but drinking a little Greek wine. Whereupon he so order'd the business, that the Cardinal de Medici writ to the Marquis his Brother to suffer it to come in to me, it being sent un∣der pretence of making me a Bath. The wine came at a time when I was at the last gasp, and so was not deliver'd to me; but the half of it divided amongst the big-bellied wo∣men of the Town. Whilest Monsieur de Strozzy was there I gave him three or four bottles of it, the rest I drank as they do Hippocras in the Mornings. All these civili∣ties I had receiv'd from the Marquis before, which made me nothing wonder at the Pre∣sent he sent me now: Part of which I sent to the Seigneury, part to the Rheincroc, and the rest I reserv'd for Signior Cornelio, the Count de Gayas, and my self, because we com∣monly are together. Such little civilities as these are very gentile and commendable, even betwixt the greatest Enemies; if there be no thing particular betwixt them, as there was not betwixt us two. He serv'd his Master, and I serv'd mine: He araqu't me for his ho∣nor, and I defended my self for mine. He had a mind to acquire reputation, and so had I. 'Tis for Turks and Sarazens to deny an indifferent courteie even to an Enemy: but then it must not be such a one, or of such importance as to break or endammage your design. But whilest the Marquis caress'd me with his Presents,The Marquis of Marignam gives a Scalado by night to the Citadel and the Fort of Ca∣mogia. which I only payd back in thanks, he was preparing for me another kind of feast; for the same night about an hour after midnight he with all his Army gave a Scalado to the Cittadel, and to the Fort Ca∣mglia. 'Tis a strange thing, that above a month before my mind gave me, and seem'd to presage that the Marquis would give me a Scalado, and the Captain St. Auban would be cause of the loss of the Fort. This was evermore running in my head, and that the Germans also would occasion the loss of the Cittadel, into which an Ensign of that Na∣tion every night entred, to keep Guard there; and that was the reason why I plac't an Ensign of Siennois in Guard overagainst the Gate of the Cittadel. Signior Cornelio pre∣vail'd so far with the Rheincroc, that he promised him that in case of an Alarm, and that the Enemy should offer an assault to the Cittadel, the German Captain that he plac't there every night upon the Guard should from him have command to let in the Siennois to help to defend it, though I think he that night forgot so to do. Every night I went to see a Company of French Foot mount the Guard in the Fort Camoglia, and another of Sien∣nois betwixt the Fort and the Gate of the City, under a great Market-house, which on the two sides was enclosed with a little Trench; but in the front of it, which went di∣rectly to the Fort, it was all plain with the pavement, and it might be from this Court of Guard to the Fort threescore or fourscore paces, and as much to the Gate of the City. I plac't this Guard there for two reasons, whereof one was to relieve the Fort if occasion should be, as the other Company of Siennois was to do the Cittadel, and the other to watch that the Enemy did not storm the Wall of the City; forasmuch as on the left hand, at the going out of the Town, the wall was very low, and moreover a part thereof fallen down. I had several times before said to Signior Cornelio,The Sieur de Motluc presa∣ges some disa∣ter through the default of St. Auban a German Cap∣tain. and to the Count de Gayas, seeing Captain St. Auban's Company enter into the Fort, these words. Would you believe that it eter∣nally runs in my mind that we shall lose this Fort thorough the default of Captain St. Auban and his Company? I never saw him enter into it, that it did not put me into a it of an Ague, out of the ill conceit I had of him. I could never fancy him in my heart, be∣cause he never had twenty men of appearance in his Company, for he valued a Teston more than the bravest man under the Sun, and as to himself he would never stir from his lodging, for any thing either I, or any of his companions could say to him. I could have wisht him far enough off, I had so strange an aversion to him. And these were the rea∣sons why I ever fancied that this man would bring upon me some mischief or other. Our Fort of Camoglia was environ'd with a ditch of a Pikes length in wideness,Description of the Fort Camo∣glia. and as much in depth, and not much more on three sides; and in the front of it which but∣ted directly upon the Siennois Court of Guard, nothing but a little Rampire of six or se∣ven foot high, and no more; and about the middle of the Rampire there was a little lenh or half pace, where the Soldiers had so much room only as to sustein themselves upon their knees. The Enemy had another Fort three times as big as ours, and just opposite
to it, within an hundred and fifty paces the one of the other. So that neither they nor we durst pop up a head without being hurt from that Quarter; and in ours there was a little Tower exactly overagainst theirs, where for greater security we had evermore thre or four Soldiers which serv'd us for Centinels, and who got up into it by a little hand ladder, as they do into a Pidgeon-house. The said Tower had been broke through on that side towards the Enemies Fort, and we had there plac't barrels fill'd with earth, for the hole had been made by the Artillery from their Fort. Which Fort of theirs Monsieur de Termes had caused to be made; but when he went away it was not wholly finish't: nevertheless when the Duke of Florence broke with the King, the Marquis in one night made a very long march, carrying a great number of Pioneers along with him, and pos∣sesing himself of it (for there was no Guard kept there) immediately put it into de∣fence. Now, as I have said before, at one of the clock in the night the Marquis at once gave me a ScaladoThe Scalado; both to the Cittadel and the Fort Camoglia, where by ill luck the Com∣pany of St. Auban was this night upon duty. The Marquis with the Spanish and Ger∣man Foot assaulted the Cittadel, where by good fortune they had but three Ladders long enough, and at the very first so overcharg'd those three with men, that one of them broke. Our Grmans defended, and the Siennos presented themselves at the Gate, as they were appointed to do. But the Captain of the Germans who had the command of the Gate would by no means let them in.The Citadel seaz'd. This dispute lasted for above half an hour, during which five or six of the Enemy entred, and forc't the Germans, who began to turn their backs and fly. They then open'd the Gate to the Siennois, who ran to the head of the Cittadel, where the Enemy began to enter, and met these five or six, who were already entred, whom they cut in pieces, two of them being the Marquis his Kins∣men, one whereof did not immediately die; and this cool'd the courage of the rest who were upon the point to enter. At the same time they gave a Scalado to the Fort Camoglia. St. Auban was in the City, in bed at his ase, and his Lieutenant call'd Com∣borcy was at the Fort, a young man of no experience; but that I think had he had good men in his Company would have done his duty. They are both of them turn'd Hugo∣nots since. So soon as the Enemy presented their Ladders by the three Courtins, all his Company betook them to their heels, and the Enemy consequently entred in; and of the four that were in the Tower, three threw themselves headlong down, and the fourth beat down the barrels from the hole, and drew the Enemy in.The Fort Ca∣moglia seaz'd by the Enemy. This Rogue had been taken a few dayes before, and had remain'd above ten dayes prisoner, and I do believe it was upon his account that the Marquis resolv'd upon this Scalado; for he went away with them, and we never saw him after. Now Signior Cornelio and the Count de Gayas were lodg'd near unto the Port Camoglia, who immediately upon the Alarm ran to the Gate, where they found the greatest part of the Company of the Siennois before it, and the rest were firing at the Enemy, who fallyed out of the Fort to fall upon them. Signior Cornelio then left the Count de Gayas at the Gate, and came running to give me the Al∣arm, where he met me coming out of my lodging with two Pages, each of them carry∣ing two Torches, and whom I immediately sent back, bidding him both he and the Count de Gayas to go out, and of all things to take care that the Siennois did not for∣sake their Court of Guard, and to encourage them the best he could, for I would pre∣sently come out after him. He did as I bid him, and came in so opportune a season, that he found all abandoned, and gave the Enemy a charge with the Siennois, and beat them back into the Fort they had taken. The Alarm was already throughout the whole City, and some ran to the Cittadel, and others to the Fort of Camoglia. As I arriv'd at the Gate there came to me la Moliere and l' Espine, both on horseback, the one being Muster-Master, and the other Treasurer, whom I commanded, the one to the Port St. Mark, and the other to Port Nuovo, and that by the way as they went they should cry out vi∣ctory, the Enemy is repuls't. Which I did, fearing let some in the Town might have intelligence with the Enemy, who hearing this cry would not dare to discover themselves. In the mean time I was at the Gate of the City,A device to break Intelli∣gences. sending out the Captains and French Sotiers to succour Signior Cornelio, and when I saw there were enow gone out, I com∣manded the Lieutenant of Captain Lussan to stay at the Gate, and to shut the Wicker so soon as ever I was out, and that in case I should be beaten back, he should by no means open it, but rather suffer us all to be killed without, and me in the first place. I then went out with my four Torches, and found Signior Cornelio, the Count de Gayas, and the other Captains I had sent out, who had recovered the Rampire, and had pla∣ced the Soldiers upon the little half pace upon their knees, who shot at the Enemy into the Fort, and they again at ours, who could not put up their heads without being disco∣vered,
and on the other two sides the Enemy assaulted, and ours defended. Now whilst I was putting the men out at the Wicket St. Auban slipt by without my seeing him. The Gate into the Fort which we had lost was contrived after the manner of a hole, having one step forwards, and another one side, waving and winding to and fro, and so straight that one man only could enter a breast, In this Entry I found Captain Bourg, who was Ensign to Captain Charry, Signior Cornelio, and the Count de Gayas close by him. Monsieur de Bassompierre Master of the Ordnance was always with me, and one of his Canoneers. I saw very well that the fight was like to continue, and fearing lst our powder should fail us, bad Monsieur de Bassompierre dispatch away two of his Canoneers to fetch more, which he did, and I dare boldly say, he was as much the cause of our safety as all our fighting, as you shall hear. Those that we fought withal were Italians, for the Spaniards and Germans stormed the Cittadel. I continually ran first to one, and then to another, crying out to them Courage friends, courage camrades, and presently on that side on the right hand of the Gate, where the three forenamed stood, I spyed St: Auban, to whom (running to him, and setting the point of my sword to his throat, I said Rogue! Son of a whore! thou art the cause that we shall lose the City, which notwithstnding then shalt never live to see, for I will at this instant kill thee if thou dost not immediately leap into the Fort: to which (sufficiently terrified) he made answer, Yes Sir, I will leap in, and then called to him Lussan, Blagon, and Combas, who were his Companions, saying to them, Come on Camrades, second me, I pray leap in after me; to which they made answer, Do thou leap, and we will follow; whereupon I said to him, Tke th no care, I will follow thee my self, and we all set foot upon the half pace with him, and immediately after his first step, without any more delaying (for if he had he had died for't) he threw himself desperately in, having a Target upon his arm, and his Companions also, for he was no sooner in the air, but the rest were also with him, and so all four leapt in together, and it was within two steps of the Entry, that le Bourg, Signior Cornelio, and the Count de Gayas disputed. I then immediately made fifteen or twenty Soldiers leap in after the four Captains, and as all these were within, le Bourg, Signior Cornelio, and the Count de Gayas passed and entred into the Fort. I caused the Torches to be set upon the Rampire, that we might see, and not kill one ano∣ther, and my self entred by the same way Signior Cornelio had gone before me. Now neither Pikes, Halberts, nor Harquebuzes could serve us for any use here, for we were at it with Swords and Steeletto's, with which we made them leap over the Curtains by the same way they had entred, excepting those who were killed within. There were yet how∣ever some remaining in the Tower, when Captain Charry came up to us, though but eight days before he had received an Harquebuz shot in his head, and such a one as that there∣upon we had given him for dead, notwithstanding there he was with his Sword and Tar∣get, and a Morrion upon his head, ever the Cap that cover'd his wound: a good heart will ever manifest itself; for though he was desperately hurt, yet would he have his share of the fight.The Fort re∣cover'd by the French. I was at the foot of the Ladder, and had sent Signior Cornelio and the Count de Gayas out of the Fort, to encourage those who defended the Flanks, bidding them take the one the one side, and the other the other, as they did, and found work enough to do. I then took Captain Charry by the hand, and said, Captain Charry, I have bred you up to die in some brave service for the King, you must mount the first; which said, he (who was certainly a man of as much courage as ever any man had) without any more dispute began to climb the Ladder,The courage of Captain Char∣ry. which could not be above ten or twelve staves, and he was to enter by a Trap-door above, as I have said before. I had very good Har∣quebuzeers, whom I made continually to shoot at the hole of this Trap-door, and put two of the said Harquebuzeers upon the Ladder to follow after him: I had two Tor∣ches with me (for the other two Signior Cornelio and the Count had taken along with them) by the light whereof we saw so clearly, that the Harquebuzeers did not hurt to Captain Charry, who mounted step by step, still giving our Harquebuzeers time to fire, and so soon as he came to thrust up his head into the Trap-door, they fir'd two Harque∣buzes, which pierced through his Target and Morrion without touching his head. The Harquebuzeer who followed next after him discharged his Harquebuz under his Target▪ by which means Captain Charry advanced the last step, and so they all three leapt in the one after the other, where they kill'd three of the Enemy, and the rest leapt out at the hole. Those in the Flancks were also beaten off, and so our Fort was regain'd on every side. Now the Marquis had given order to him that commanded at the Scalado of the Fort, which was the Governor of their Fort of Camoglia, that in case he the Marquis should first enter by the Cittadel, that then he should come away to him with all his Italians▪
and if also he should first gain the Fort, that then he would come with his Spaniards and Germans to relieve him. According to this Agreement, so soon as the Governor of the Fort had gain'd ours, he presently sent to acqaint the Marquis with it; but there being several little valleys betwixt the Cittadl and the Fort Camoglia, the said Marquis could not come so soon as he would, though he had made so good haste, that when we had thought all had been at an end,The Marquis de Marignan comes to re∣lieve his men at the Fort Ca∣moglia. we saw their whole Camp coming upon us, having above an hundred and fifty torches with them; at which time by good fortune Bassom∣pierr's two Canoneers return'd with the powder, which in great haste we divided a∣mongst the Harquebuzeers, for they had none left, and turning about, I bad him send them again for more. At the same instant la Molire and L' Espine returned to me, when I immediately sent back la Molire to the Standard-bearer of St. Martin to send me two hundred of the best Harquebuzeers he had, and send them by the son of Misser Brnardi, a young man that carried a Colours in his Regiment, full of courage, and of Whom I had taken particular notice in several skirmishes, who accordingly came in all haste, and found us at it with the whole Camp. I then left Signir Cornelio and the Count de Gayas with the other Captains to defend the Fort, and my self, Bassompirre, and the Muster-Mster went along the Flancks, doing nothing but un up and down from place to place to encourage our people. It might be about three hours after mid∣night when we rebegan the ight, and it lasted till the day took them off. They there committed one of the greatest pieces of folly that ever men did; for by the light of so ma∣ny torches we saw them more plainly than if it had been broad day, whereas had they ta∣ken the advantage of the night,Error of the Marquis. and advanced with few lights, they had put us a great deal more hardly to't than they did. The two hundred Sinnois Harquebuzeers, that the Son of Misser Bernardin brought, did us notable service, as also did the Powder that Bas∣sompierre sent for, for we had use for it all before we parted, by reason of the long con∣tinuance of the fight, where it was well assaulted, and better defended. This was the issue of the fight, the greatest, and of the greatest duration without a Battail wherein I have ever been, and where I believe God Almighty did as much assist me, if not more, preserving my judgment allthe while entire, as at any time in my whole life; for had I fail'd in the least particle of command we had all been lost, and the City to boot; for on that side we had not fortified at all, and all our confidence was in this Fort: I protst to God, that for at least three months after my hair stood an end, so oft as I called to mind the danger we had been in. The Enemy there lost six hundred men killed and wounded, as we were enform'd by prisoners we took, and we lost but an hundred and fifty in all both hurt and slain. That which made them lose so many was the light of the Torches, which gave our men such aim that they could not miss, e∣specially being within a Pikes distance or two at the most of the one another, which made a great incongruity in the Marquis, as I said before: for we having but little light, and they so much, we discovered them so plain, as gave us a mighty advantage. So soon as it was fair light day we went to take a view of what dead we had in the Fort amongst theirs, where I found my Valet de Chambre and my Groom, who both leapt in after the Captains; in my life I never had two better servants. Signior Cornelio and the Count d Gayas went likewise to visit the Cittadel, for I was no longer able to stand, being yet so weak with my great sickness, that with a puff one might have blown me down; so that I wonder how I was ever able to take such pains: but God redoubled my forces in time of need; for in truth during all this great and tedious fight I never ceased running and skipping, now here, now there, without ever feeling my self weary, till there appeared no more an Enemy to molest us. They came and gave me an account of all that had past, to be carried to their Lodging, and his wounds dressed. I will not forget to insert here for an Exemple to others, that if ever man was well se∣conded in a time of so great danger, I was, and would for no consideration deprive the Chiefs who were there of their due honor, nor the common Soldiers: for from the time that Signior Cornelio and the Count went out before me and charged the Enemy; neither after I was gone out to them did so much as any one man ever offer to come in again (as Lussan's Lieutenant, whom I had left at the Gate, swore to me) excepting Bossompierr's two Canoncers, who were sent for powder.Loyalty of the Sieois. All the whole City remain'd in arms during the whole time of the fight, and I will give the Siennois this commendation, with truth (as God is true) that there was no so much as any one man, who staid in the houses, and who did not take arms, both young and old, nor a man that discovered the least affe∣ction to the Emperor; which gave me a great assurance of two things, one of their Loy∣alty, and the other of their Courage. Three dayes after the Marquis sent me a Trum∣pet
(the same who had brought me the Present before) to see if any one of those was living who had entred the Cittadel, and that he would not deny to me, but that there were two of his Kinsmen▪ Signior Cornelio then carried him to look upon that who was yet alive, and he prov'd to be one; whereupon the Trumpet immediately returned to the Marquis to acquaint him with it, who at the same instant sent him back again, entreating me to restore him back to him, and that he would be responsible to me for his ransome, which I did in a Litter he had sent to that purpose: but he died three dayes after he came into their Camp. Methinks you Governors of places ought here to take a fair exemle to present your selves to the fight: For there are some who say, that a Governor, or a Lieutenant of a Province never ought to hazard his own person, arguing that if he chance to miscarry all is lost. I grant them, that he ought not to expose himself at all times, and upon every light occasion, like an ordinary Captain; but when all lies at stake, what is it that you are made Governors and Lieutenants for? what question will be made of your courage? and how will your honor and reputation be brought into dispute? Will it think you ac∣quit you to say, I would not hazard my self in the fight, left losing my self I should lose all: especially in the night to relieve a Fort or a Citadel, considering I was how∣ever able to defend the Town? This excuse will not serve your turn; and believe me the loss of a Fort is of so great importance, that your Enemy has by that means one foot upon your throat already, you are therefore to die, or to recover what you lost, as I did, having at my going out caused the Wicket to be shu, to take from us all hopes of retreat, being resolv'd to die, or to expel the Enemy, and also letting them alone with their Conquest I had been infallibly lost. And you Captains my Camrades, take notice and exemple by St. Auban, that you may value valiant men above money, for the love of money will lead you to the loss of your lives and reputations, and valiant men about you will defend both one and the other, and preserve you from danger and dishonor. Admire, and follow as near as you you can the great heart of Charry, who although half dead, would yet come to the fight, and presented himself to enter the first, and pass by a Ladder through a hole, than which a more dangerous passage could not possibly be; for in such a place an Enemy has a mighty advantage. No danger nevertheless could deterre this brave Soldier from run∣ning the hazard. To conclude, I shall tell you Governors of places, that whenever you entertain an ill opinion of an Officer, you provide against his remisness, cowardise, or inidelity, as I did, by placing the Companies near to the Forts. But I had done better, St. Auban being suspected to me, since I could not totally rid my hands of him, to have employ'd him in some other place. It has since taught me to be wiser, and I have found advantages by it, having never since that time entrusted any man of whom I had a mis∣like. There are wayes enow to shake them off, without either offending any other, or disincouraging the party himself. A little after, as we understood, there came a Gentleman of the Emperor's Bed-Chamber, who brought letters to the Duke of Florence, and to the said Marquis, where∣in he writ them word,The Emperor complains of the Marquis his slow Pro∣ceeding a∣gainst Sienna. that he thought it very strange this War should continue so long, and that he very well knew Sienna was not a place to resist Canon, but that it was the Marquis his custom evermore to spin out a War in length. In answer whereunto the Marquis remonstrated, that he had done all that in him possibly lay, and knew very well that Artillery would not take the Town, for I had valiant men within, and the whole City were resolute to stand to me to the last, speaking more honourably of me than I deserv'd, commending my vigilancy, and the provision I had made for my de∣fence, so that he very well knew by the good order I had taken in the City, he should but lose so much time by attempting to batter. Notwithstanding the Gentleman being come from the Emperor to this effect, and having already spoke with the Duke of Flo∣rence, they together order'd it so, that they made the Marquis at last resolve upon a Battery. He had before omitted nothing that a good Soldier ought to do, having coop't us close in, without any hopes of relief, and yet he was accused of a design to protract the War: But it is the ordinary reward of a man's endeavour, when things do not suc∣ceed according to the appetite of such as talk of things at their cafe. The desires of those we serve and fight for run a great deal faster than we are able to follow. About the twentith of January we had notice that the Artillery set out of Florence, to the number of six or eight and twenty Canon,The Siennois frighted with the coming of the Artillery. or double Culverine to come to the Camp. The Siennois hearing this news were so curious as to send out a spy, that they might be certain of the truth of this report, who at his return bringing them word back, that the Artillery was already come as far as Lusignano, it put the whole City into some
apprehension, and made them resolve the next day to assemble all the Gentry and the chief of the City to the Palace, there to determine amongst themselves, whether they should abide the assault, or surrender upon composition. Now I was not to huffe and vapour with these people, for they were stronger than I: I was therefore necessitated to win them by gentle remonstrances, and civil perswasions, without the least heat or shew of anger, and you may believe it was not without great violence to my own nature, that I proceeded after this manner, contrary to my disposition, and the image the Constable had represented of me to the King, as he had seen me in my younger and more precipi∣tous age. A prudent and staid Governor, when he is amongst strange Nations must try as much as in him lies, to conform himself to the humour of the people with whom he has to do.A Governor ought to con∣form himself to the humour of the people over whom he is placed. With the Germans and Swiss you must be cholerick and rough: with the Spaniards you must observe their starcht face and formality, and pretend to be a little more religious and devout than you perhaps really are: with the Italians you must be discreet and cir∣cumspect, neither to offend them in themselves, nor to court their wives: as for the French man he is for any thing: but so it was that God gave me the grace, who am a Gascon, sudden, cholerick, willful, and forward, so to deport my self with this jealous and mi∣strustful Nation, that not so much as any one Citizen could ever complain of me. Now as all the Gentry and the Heads of the Corporation were going to the Palace, Misser Hi∣ronimo Hispano, a Gentleman of Sienna, a principal man in the City, and one of the eight of the Council of War, before he went to the Palace, came in all hast to speak with Sig∣nior Cornelio, where he told him that all the chief of the City were summon'd to repair to the Palace, and that it was to determine, whether they ought to stand out a Batery, or to enter into Capitulation with the Duke of Florence, and the Maquis of Marignano, and that he had already heard that the major part of them had voted, that they ought to condition, and not to endure a Battery, and an Assault, for fear they should come by the worse; that he was now going thither to them, wherefore he entreated him to give me notice of it. Hereupon Signior Cornelio came to me, and found me ready to take horse to go view the Guards: but so soon as he had told me the news we both went up into my Chamber, where we long debated by what means we might divert this blow; and whilst we were in this deliberation came Signior Bartolomeo Cavalcano, who told me as much as I had heard before, and moreover, that he thought the resolution was already taken throughout the whole City, and that he only went to the Palace, to cast in his lot, and that after the lots should once be cast it would be too late to speak. We were all three in a very great straight, they which way to advise me, and I was as much to seek whad advice to take. In the end I resolv'd to go to the Palace, and to take with me the Rhinecroc and his Captains, Signior Cornelio with his Italians, and Captain Combas with the French Officers. Our Germans began to suffer much for want of wine, and their bread was very small, for as for flesh there was no more talk of any, unless of some horse,Great scarcity of all things in Sienna. or some ass, that was exposed to sell in the Butchery, and as for money there was no such thing in nature; for Monsieur de Strozzy had no possible means to send any in to us: all which consider'd, it put us into some fear, lest the Germans should joyn with the City to enter into composition, which was the reason that I desired Signior Cornelio to go to the Rhinroc, and entreat him from me to bear me company to the Palace, and to bring his Captains along with him, and that he would in the mean time leave his Lieu∣tenants and Ensigns every one in his own Quarters, to the end there might be no sur∣prize about the Walls whilst we should be at the Palace: I wisht him also himself to do the same, and order'd Captain Combas to come likewise, which being done, I sent Bartolo∣meo in all haste to the Palace, to try if he could secretly gain any one to his party that might help to break this design: for I had an opinion, that if I could but divert this one blow,The Sieur de Montluc's pra∣ctice. I would deal with so many people afterwards, that the blancks should be the greater number in the Lottery, and so they all went out of my Chamber without be∣ing further acquainted by me what I intended to do. I was yet so exreamly lean, and worn with my late sickness, and the cold was at this time of the year so very great and sharp, that I was constrained to go continually with both my Body and my head so wrapt and muffled up in Furrs, that as they saw me go up and down the streets of the City, no one had any hopes of my recovery, believing that my inwards were decayed and perished, and that I would fall down and die on a sudden. What shall we do said the Ladies and the Citizens Wives, what will become of us if our Governor should die? we shall all be lost; for next after God all our hope is in him; it is not possible he should escape. I do verify believe that the prayers of those good women redeem'd me out of the extremity and languishing weakness I was in, I mean that of my body; for as to the vigour of my mind, and the quickness of my un∣nderstanding,
I never perceiv'd any decay there. Having then before been accustomed to go so wrapt and muled, and observing what moan the people made for me, to see me in so lamentable a plight, I call'd for a pair of Breeches of Crimson Velvet, which I had brought from Alba, said over with gold lace, finely cut, and very near, for I had made them at a time when I was forsooth in love. We had there leisure enough for those foles whilst we lay in Garrison, and having little else to do, it was fit to give the Ladies some part of our time. I put on a Doublet of the same, under which I had a Shirt fine∣ly wrought with crimson silk and gold twist very rich: (for in those dayes they wore the neck-bands of their Shirts a good way falling over the collar) I then took a buffe Collar, over which I put on the Gorget of my Arms, which was very finely gilt. I at that time wore gray and white,A pleasant Sal∣ly of the Siur de Montlu. in honor of a fair Lady to whom I was a Servant when I had leisure; I therefore put on a Hat of gray silk of the German fashion, with a great silver Hatband, and a plume of Heron's feathers, thick set with silver spangles; the Hats they wore in those dayes were not so broad as they wear them now: I than put on a short Cassock of gray Velvet garnisht with little plaits of Silver, at two fingers distance from one another, and lin'd with cloth of silver, all open betwixt the plaits, vvhich I vvore in Piedmont over my Arms. Now I had yet two little bottles of Greek wine left of those had been sent me by the Cardinal of Armagac, vvith vvhich I vvet my hands, and vvith them rubbed my face, till I had brought a little colour into my cheeks, and then drank a small draught with a little bit of bread, after which I look't my self in the Glass. I swear to you I did not know my self, and methought I vvas yet in▪ Pied∣mont, and in love as heretofore. At which I could not forbear laughing, for methought I had got on a sudden quite another face. The first that came to me vvith his Captains vvas Signior Cornelio and the Count de Gayas, Monsieur de Bossompierre and the Count de Bisque, whom I had also sent for; vvho finding me dress'd after this manner, all fell a laughing. I strutted up and down the room before them like fifteen Spaniards, and yet had not strength enough to have kill'd a Chicken, for I vvas so vveak as nothing more. Combas and the French Cap∣tains came also, and the vvhole Farce tended to nothing but laughter for all the compa∣ny: the last that came vvas the Rintcroc and his Captains, vvho seeing me in this po∣sture, laught to that excess that he sobb'd again, when pulling him by the arm, I said to him, What Colonel, do you think me to be that Montluc that goes every day dying through the streets? No, no, you are mistaken, that fellow's dead, and I am another Montluc sprung up in his room. His Interpeter told him what I said, which made him laugh still more, and Signior Cornelio had already acquainted him with the reason why I had sent for him, and that it was necessary by one means or another to disposses the Siennois of their fear. Thus then we went all on horseback to the Palace, where so soon as we were got up to the top of the stairs, we found the great Hall full of Gentlmen, and such other Burgers of the City as were of the Council. Within the great Hall on the left hand there is a lesser room, into which none were to enter but the Captains of the people, the twelve Counsellors,Of what the Snare of Sien∣na consists. and the Eight of the Council of War, all which are called the Magistracy. Thus then I entred into the great Hall, where I put off my Hat to them, but was known by no body at first; they all believing me to be some Gentleman sent by Monsieur de Stroz∣zy into the City to command at the Assault, by reason of my great weakness. I then entred into the little Hall, with all the Colonels and Captains after me, who kept at di∣stance by the door whilst I went and sat down by the Captain of the people, in the place vvhere those vvho represented the person of the King vvere used to sit, as I my self upon that account had often done. In going up with my Hat in my hand, I smil'd first upon one, and then upon another, they all vvondring to see me, and tvvo had al∣ready deliver'd their opinions, vvhen I began to speak to them in Italian to this effect. Gentlemen,Harangue of the Sieur de Montlue to the Siennois. I have been told, that since the time you have been certain of the truth of the Enemies bringing up Artillery to your walls, you have entred into some debates which have rather begot amongst you fear and astonishment, than any noble resolution to defend your City and Liberty by Arms. Which I have thought very strange, and grealy wondred at, not being able to perswade my self to believe any such thing. However in the end I resolv'd with the Colonels and Captains of all the three Nations the King my Master has in this City, to come to you to this place, and to understand from your own mouths the truth of all that has passed. Now I besiech you Gentle∣men weigh and consider well what you shall determine in this Council to which you are call'd; for upon this Council, and the resolution that shall be the issue of it, de∣pends all your honor, greatness, authority, and the security of your State, your lives
and honors, and the conservation of your ancient liberty; and on the contrary, all the shame, dishonor and reproach, with a perpetual infamy to your posterity, and dis∣honor to your famous Ancestors, who have left you for inheritance the Grandeur you now posses and uphold, having themselves ever defended and maintain'd it by Battels, with their weapons in their hands, against all those who have attempted to take it from them. And no when you ought to have purchast the occasion that presents it self at the price of half your wealth, that therein you might to all Christendom manifest and approve your selves the true legitimate Sons of those Ancient Warlike Romans, and of those Noble Ancestors, who have so often, and so bravely fought to assert and maintai your liberty, is it possible that so great and so generous hearts as those of the Siennois should enter into astonishment for hearing talk of Canon? will you be afraid for this? I cannot think that this proceeds from you, who have given so many, and so ample testimonies of your valour; neither is it out of any want of friendship to the most Christian King, nor out of any distrust you have in him, that he will not certainly relieve you, neither can it be out of any diffidence you have in one another, by reason of any factions in your City, for I have never observ'd the least division among you: But on the contrary, the greatest unanimity for the con∣servation of your liberty and Republick. I have ever seen you resolute to dye with your swords in your hands, rather than suffer it to be ravish'd from you. I have ever seen all men of all conditions move with the same motion, and inspir'd with the same resolution. Neither can it be for want of courage, for I never saw you sally out to skirmish, that some of your young men did not evermore sigualize themselves above our people, though much older Souldiers than they, who in a longer practice of Arms have perform'd acts worthy to be prais'd and esteem'd of all. I cannot then believe that men who do so well, should for the noise of Canon, which brings more terror than harm, enter into astonishment, and resolve to surrender themselves slaves to that inso∣lent and insupportable Nation of the Spaniards; or your neighbours, your ancient and professed enenemies. Since then this apprehension cannot proceed from any defect in your selves, it must of necessity proceed from me, who have the honour to be Lieutenant for the King of France your good Friend and Protector. If as to what concerns me, you apprehend, that I shall want health and vigour to undergo that toil and labour that will be necessary, and requir'd at the time when the Enemy shall assault us, by reason of the weakness wherein I now am, through my great sickness; that consideration ought not to beget in you the least distrust, arms and legs do not do all: The great Captain Antonio de Leva,Commendati∣on of Antonio de Leva. gouty and impotent as he was, has won more victories in his chair, than any other of our Age has done on horseback. God has ever been pleas'd to preserve my judgement, to preserve you. Have you ever known me fail? Was I then stretch'd at ease in bed when the Enemy gave you the great Camisado, and Scalado? Do but mark I beseech you, Gentlemen, the great grace God was pleas'd to shew me on a sudden, supplying me with as much strength as I had never been sick; by which you may per∣ceive, that Almighty God loves us, and that he will not that either you or we perish. I feel my self strong enough now to wear my Arms, you shall no more see me swath'd and furr'd up as before. If perhaps you do it out of fear of my incapacity, or little experi∣ence, you do therein a great wrong to the King, that being as much, as to give all the world to understand, that His Majesty has hither sent you a man void of all abili∣ty, and poorly experimented to know how to order what should be done for the de∣fence of your City? What? do you believe the King has so little kindness for you, as to send me hither, had he not had a great confidence in my capacity, and before hand made sufficient tryal elsewhere both what I am, and what I can do? I shall tell you nothing of my self, it would not become me to be my own Trumpet, something you have seen your selves, and the rest you may have heard from others. You may then well judge, that the King has not singled out me, amongst so many Gentlemen of his King∣dom, and has not sent me to you, without having well weigh'd what I am able to do by the long experience he has had, not only of my Politicks in point of Gorvernment, of which you may hitherto have taken some notice: But moreover, of my conduct in matter of Arms, when an Enemy would carry a place by fine force. Do you fear, Gentlemen, my courage will fail me in time of need? what then do all those testimones I have given you since my coming hither being sick avail? You have seen me sally out from the time I have been able to mount to horse, to go to see the skirmishes so near, that my self commanded them. And have you altogether forgot the day, that I en∣tred into this City, and the great skirmish I then made? Your people saw it, and had a share in the sight; and upon Christmas Eve yet a greater, where the sight last∣ed
for fix long hours together? Did I not then ight in my own person? Did you not then see, that I neither wanted judgement to command, nor valour to fight? I am asham'd to say so much of my self; but seeing you all know it to be true, I need not blush to speak it. I will tell you nothing, but what your selves have seen, I am no bragging Spamard, I am a Frenchman, and moreover a Gascon, the most frank and plain dealing of all that Nation. Now methinks, Gentlemen, you have so much ex∣perience of your selves, as will render you worthy of a perpetual reproach, should you go less in your resolution, besides the ruine it would infalliby bring upon you. Methinks you ought to know me sufficiently, having been so long amongst you, and that I have omitted nothing of what the King propos'd to himself, I should perform for his service, and yours in the greatest necessity and danger. All this that I have remonstrated to you, as well for what concerns your own particular, as what relates to my self, ought to make you lay aside all apprehension, and to assume the courage and magnanimity that your Predecessors and selves who are now living have ever had. Wherefore I beseech you, that you will unanimously take up such a resolution, as va∣liant men, such as you are, ought to take, that is, to dye with your weapons in your hands, rather than to loose your Sovereignty and the liberty you have so long exercis'd and enjoy'd. And for what concerns me, and these Coloness and Captains, whom you see present here, we swear in the presence of God, that we will dye with you, as at this instant we will give you assurance. It is not for our benefit, nor to acquire Riches, neither is it for our afe, for you see we suffer both thirst and hunger: it is only in pur∣suance of our duty, and to acquit our selves of our Oath, to the end that it may one day be said, and by you, that it was we who defended the liberty of this City, and that we may be called Conservators of the Liberty of Sienna. I then rose up, bidding the German Interpreter to remember well all I had said, to repeat it to Rhinecroc, and his Captains, and then directed my speech to the Colo∣nels, and said to them, Signori mi & frtalli juriamo tutti & promettiamo inanzi Iddio, che noi moriremo tutti l'arme in mano conessi loro, per adjutar lia deffendere lor sicuressa & liberta: & ogni uno di noi  obligi per le soi Soldati, & alsate tutti le vostre mani. Which being said, every one held up his hand, and the Interpreter told it to the Rhine∣croc, who also held up his hand,The Oath of the Soldiers, Foreigners. and all the Captains crying, Io, io buerlie, and the other, Oy, oy, we promise to do it, every one in his own Language. Whereupon the Cap∣tain of the people arose, and all the Council, returning me Infinite thanks; and then turn'd towards the Captains, whom he also very much thank'd, and with great chear∣fulness. They then entreated me, that I would retire to my Lodgings, till such time as they had spoken with all the Council, who were in the great Hall without, and given them an account of what I had remonstrated to them▪ which I accordingly did, and at my going out of the little room, I there met with Missr Bartolomeo Cavalcano, who knew nothing of the Proposition I had made (for he entred not into the Council Cham∣ber) who told me in my ear, that he thought they had all taken a resolution, not to en∣dure a Battery. I then carried him back with me to my Lodgings, and three hours after, came four of the Magistracy, of which Misser Hieronimo Espano was one, having in charge from all the Signeury in general, to return me infinite thanks; and he told me, that Misser Ambrosi Mitti had made a speech in the accustomed chair, which is in the middle of the great Hall, against the wall, giving them to understand, what a Re∣monstrance I had made to them, wherein he forgot nothing (for he was a man of great Eloquence and wisdom) and the Oath that all the Colonels and Captains had taken, final∣ly exhorting them to resolve all to fight. I do not remember whether they put it to the That is a ca∣sting of Lots by little Balls, in use in most Cities of Itlay. Balotte, or if they held up their hands as we had done: But they all four assur'd us, that they had never seen a greater joy, then what generally appear'd amongst them, after the Proposition of the said Ambrosia Mitti. Telling me moreover, that after I had been in the said Hall, and made an end of the forementioned Harangue, the two Gentlemen, who had deliver'd their opinions before, that they ought to capiculate, and come to a composition with the Enemy, had requested the Senate to do them that favour, as to con∣ceal what they had said, and take no notice of it, but give them leave to vote anew; which being accordingly done, they again deliver'd their opinions, that they ought to ight, and enter into no kind of composition,The resolution of the Sienois. but rather dye with their Arms in their hands. I then told Misser Hieronimo Espano, that I would retire my self for all that day, and for all that night, to write down the order of the fight; which having done, I would imme∣diately send it to the Germans in their Language, and to the French in theirs.
Governors and Captains, you ought to take some example here, forasmuch as there are some, who say, they have surrendred a place, that the Soldiers would not defend, and moreover, that the Inhabitants of the Town went about to betray them, and by that means compell'd them to Capitulate. These are mere excuses, believe me they are mere excuses. The thing that compels you▪ is your own want of experience. Gentlemen and Camrades, when ever you shall happen to be at such a Wedding, put on your best Clothes, make your selves as fine as you can, wash your faces with Greek wine, and rub a good colour into your checks, and so march bravely thorough the streets, and amongst the Soldiers with your faces erect, having nothing in your months, but that very soon, by Gods help, and the strength of your own Arms, you will in despite of them, have the lives of your enemies, and not they yours; that it is not for them to come to attaque you in your own Fort; that it is the only thing you desire, forasmuch as upon that depends their ruine, and your deliverance. And by carrying your selves after that manner, the very women will take courage, and much more the Souldiers: But if you sneak up and down with a pale face, speaking to no body, sad, melanchollick and pensive, though all the City, and all the Soldiers had the hearts of Lyns, you will make them as timerous as sheep. Speak often to those of the City in four or five words, and likewise to the Soldiers saying to them, Well friends, are you not in heart? I look upon the victory as our own, and hold the death of our Enemies already for certain: For I have I know not what Pro∣phetick spirit, which whenever it comes upon me, I am always certain to overcome, which I have from God, and not from men. Wherefore rely upon me, and resolve all of you to fight, and to go out of this place, with honor and reputation. You can dye but once, and 'tis a thing that is predestin'd, if God has appointed it so, it is in vain for you to fly. Let us then dye honorably; but there is no appearance of danger for us, but rather for our Enemies, over whom we have the greatest advantage imaginable. And who Gover∣nors and Captains, would you have dare to say he is afraid, seeing you so bravely resolv'd? Let me tell you, that though they trembled before, they will lay aside their fear, and the most cowardly will become as bold as the most couragious of the Company.All things de∣pend upon the Chif. The Soldier is never astonish'd, so long as he sees the confidence of his Chief continue firm and un∣shaken. As the Chief therefore carries away all the honor, and the rest have nothing, but what he shall give them, in his report of their valour to the Prince; so ought he to resolve never to discover the least shadow of fear: For behaving himself after that fearless manner, the Soldiers themselves will be sufficient testimonie for him, so that the reputation he shall have acquir'd, shall remain indisputably his own, without any one being able to contradict it. I do not then advise you any thing, I have not first tryed my self, not only here, but in many other places also; as you will find in this Book, if you have the patience to read it.The design of the Author. Now this is the order I set down for the fight, and for all the whole City, all which particularities I represent to you, without contenting my self to say, that Sienna was besieg'd, where I nine or ten months sustain'd the Seige, and was at last con∣strain'd to Capitulatety Famine; for of such a General account as that, a Kings Lieute∣nant, a Captain, or a Soldier, can make no benefit. This is the Historians way, and of these kind of Writers, there are but too many: I write of my self, and will instruct others that come after me; for to be born for a mans self only, is in plain English to be born a Beast. I then order'd in the first place that the City should be divided into eight parts,The order at Sienna for the Fortification. of which the eight of the Council of War should have every one a part; that every one of the Council of Eight should appoint a person for whom he should himself be responsible, to take a List of the Quarter should be assign'd him, how many men, women, and chil∣dren there were in that division, from twelve the males to sixty, and the females to fifty years of age, which were to carry Baskets, Barrels, Shovels, Picks, and Mattocks, and that each one of his own Quarter should make Captains of every Trade, without mixing them together: that every one should be commanded upon pain of death, so soon as ever their Captain should send for them to come to the place appointed immediately to haste away, as also the women and children; that every one should forthwith make pro∣vision of such things as were proper for his or her employment, and that the Masters of Men-servants and Maids, or their Mstresses should be obliged speedily to take order, that their Men and Maids be furnisht with tools and utensils wherewith to labour at the work, for which they shall be appointed, upon pain of two hundred Crowns, and the City to furnish the poor, who have not wherewith to buy them, at the expence of the pub∣lick Treasure: that the said Deputies shall make their Catalogues, and shall go from house to house to Register their people; and that so soon as the Captains▪ every one in his own Quarter should cry out Force, Force, every one both men and women should run
to their tools, and present themselves at the place to which the Captain should lead, or appoint them to come; and that the Deputies should deliver in the Lists of all both men and women, they shall have found in their respective Precincts to each of the Eight of the Council of War, Quarter for Quarter; that the old men and women above the fore∣mentioned Ages shall remain in their Masters houses, to get meat, and to look to the house. That the said Deputies should take a List of all the Masons and Carpenters, who should be found in their Quarter, which List they should also deliver to him of the Eight of the Council of War by whom they shall be deputed. And this was the order for the Laborers and Pioneers. The order for those who bore arms,Order for the Fight. was, that the the three Standard bearers, namely of St. Martin, of Ciotat, and of Camoglia, should forthwith take a view of all the Com∣panies, which were four and twenty, and examine every mans arms, if they were in good order for fight, and if not to make them presently to be repaired: that they should re∣ine all the Powder, and cause great store of Bullet and Match to be made: that the three Standard-bearers should every one keep in his own Qarter without stirring thence, till one of the Eight of War should come to give them order what to do; that the antient Gentlmen who were not able to bear arms, nor to work, should present themselves to sollicit the Pioneers of that Quarter where their houses stood, and to assist the Captains of the said Pioneers. Now I had ever determin'd, that if ever the Enemy should come to assault us with Artillery, to entrench my self at a good distance from the Wall, where the Battery should be made, to let them enter at pleasure, and made account to shut up the two ends of the Trench, and at either end to plant four or five pieces of great Ca∣non, loaden with great chains, nails, and pieces of iron. Behnd theA Trench within the wall of a City to re∣tire into in case of an Assault. Retirade I inten∣ded to place the Muskets, together with the Harqubuzeers, and so soon as they should be entred in, to cause the Artillery and small shot to fire all at once, and we at the two ends then to run in upon them with Pikes and Halerts, two banded Swords, short Swords and Targets. This I resolved upon, as seeing it altogeter impossible for the King to send us relief, by reason that he was engaged in so many places, that it would not be possible for him to set on foot Forces sufficient to raise the Siege, neither by sea nor by land; and Monsieur de Strozzy had no means to relieve us, wherefore I would per∣mit them to enter, and make little defence at the Breach, to the end that I might give them battail in the Town, after they had past the fury of our Canon and smaller shot: For to have defended the Breach had in my opinion been a very easie matter; but then we could not have done the Enemy so much mischief, as by letting them enter the breach, which we would have pretended to have quit, onely to draw them on to the ight. For five or six dayes before the Artillery came I every night sent out two PeasantsCentinels per∣dues. and a Captain, or a Serjeant, as Centinels perdues, which is a very good thing, and of great safety; but take heed whom you send, for he may do you a very ill turn. So soon as the night came the Captain set a Peasant Centinel at some fifty or sixty paces distant from the Wall, and either in a ditch or behind a hedge, with instructions, that so soon as he should hear any thing he should come back to the Captain at the foot of the Wall, which Captain had in charge from me, that immediately upon the Peasant's speaking to him they should clap down upon all four, and so creep the one after the other to the place where the Peasant had heard the noise, or rather fall down upon their bellies close to the earth, to discover if there were not three or four who came to view that place, and to observe if they did not lay their heads together to confer; for this is a certain sign that they came to view that place in order to the bringing up of Artillery. To do which as it ought to be done, they ought to be no other than the Master of the Ordnance, the Colonel or the Camp-Master of the Infantry, or the Engineer, the Master Carter, and a Captain of Pioneers, to the end that according to what shall be resolved upon by the Master of the Ordnance, the Colonel, and Canoncer; the Master Carter may also take notice which way he may bring up Artillery to the place; and the Canoneer ought to shew the Captain of the Pioneers what is to be done for the Esplanade, or plaining of the way, according to the determination of the rest. And this is the discovery that is to be made by night, after you have discover'd a little at distance by day; for if those within be an Enemy of any spirit, they ought either by skirmihes, or by their Canon to keep you from coming to discover at hand. The Captain had order to come give me a present account of what he and the Peasants had heard or seen, and to leave the Pea∣sants still upon their perdue, and a Soldier in his own place till his return. Three times the Enemy was discover'd after this manner, and immediately upon the notice, having also the List of the Eight Quarters, and of the Eight of War who commanded those
Quarters, I suddenly acquainted Signior Cornelio, who could presently tell me both the Quarter against which it was, and the Gentleman of the Eight of War that comman∣ded it. I had never discover'd my intention to any one, but to Signior Cornelio onely, who was a man of great wisdom and valour, and in whom I reposed a very great confi∣dence; who, so soon as he knew that I meant to give them Battail in the City, we did nothing of one whole day but walk the round both within and without, taking very good observation of all the places where the Enemy could make a Battery, and consequently by that knew where to make our Retirade. And so soon as ever notice was given me by the Captain who stood Centinel without the City, I presently advertized the Com∣mander of that Quarter, and he his Deputy, and his Deputy the Captain of the Pio∣neers, so that in an hours time you might have seen at least a thousand, or twelve hun∣dred persons beginning the Retirade. Now I had order'd the City to make great pro∣vision of Torches, so that those who had discover'd were hardly return'd to the Mar∣quis, but that they saw all that part within the Town cover'd with torches and people, insomuch that by break of day we had very much advanc't our Trench, and in the morn∣ing sent back those to rest, calling in another Quarter to the work till noon, and another from noon till night, and consequenty others till midnight, and so till break of day, by which means in a little time we performed so great a work, that we could by no means be surpriz'd. After this manner I still turn'd the defences of the Town towards the Marquis his attempts,A phrase sig∣nifying that a man is non∣plust, and knows not what to do, which is pro∣pely to lie at the house of Guillot the Dreamer. who lodg'd at the house of Guillet the Dreamer, and Signior Fer∣nando de Sylva, brother to Signior Rigomez (who commanded on that side towards the little Observance, with whom I had some discourse upon the publick faih, the Friday before we departed out of the City, betwixt their Quarters and the Fort Camoglia) told me that the Marquis had some jealousie, that some one of their Council betray'd to me all their deliberations, seeing he had no sooner design'd to batter any part, but that we alwayes fortified against that place; for by night the least noise is easily heard, and so great a bustle cannot be concealed; and because he told me that he had compiled a Book of the particularities of the Siege of Sienna. he entreated me to tell him by what means I so continually discover'd their intentions, whereupon I told him the truth. But to return to our subject,A new Enter∣prize upon Sienna. the Marquis in the end came and planted his Artillery upon a little Hill betwixt Port Oville and the great Observance. The choice of this place put me, who thought my self so cunning, almost to a nonplus, forasmuch as at Port O∣ville there is a very spatious Antiport, where the houses of the City do almost touch, having nothing but the street between, which made it impossible for me of a long time to make the necessary Retirade, to do which I must be constrain'd to beat down above an hundred houses, which extremely troubled me; for it is to create so many enemies in our entrals, the poor Citizen losing all patience to see his house pulled down before his eyes. I gave to the Count de Bisque the charge of terrassing up this Gate, for which use we took the earth out of the Gardens, and vacant places that lie a little on the left hand. O the rare exemple that is here, which I will commit to writing, that it may serve for a mirror to all those who would conserve their liberty. All these poor Inhabitants, without discovering the least distaste or sorrow for theThe noble re∣solution of the Siennois. ruine of their houses, put themselves their own hands first to the work, every one con∣tending who should be most ready to pull down his own. There was never less than four thousand souls at labour, and I was shewed by the Gentlemen of Sienna a great number of Gentlewomen carrying of Baskets of earth upon their heads.The praise of the Ladies of Sienna. It shall never be (you Ladies of Sienna) that I will not immortalize your names so long as the Book of Montluc shall live; for in truth you are worthy of immortal praise, if ever women were. At the beginning of the noble resolution these people took to defend their liberty, all the Ladies of Sienna divided themselves into three Squadrons; the first led by Signiora For∣tagurra, who was her self clad in violet, as also all those of her Train, her attire being cut in the fashion of a Nymph, short, and discovering her Buskins; the second was la Signiora Picolhuomini attir'd in carnatian Sattin, and her Troop in the same Livery; the third was la Signiora Livi Fausta, apparelled all in white, as also her Train, with her white Ensign. In their Ensigns they had very fine devices, which I would give a good deal I could remember. These three Squadrons consisted of three thousand Ladies, Gentlewomen, and Citizens, their Arms were Picks, Shovels, Baskets, and Bavins, and in this Equipage they made their Muster, and went to begin the Fortifications. Monsieur de Termes, who has often told me this story (for I was not then arriv'd at Sienna) has assur'd me, that in his life he never saw so fine a sight. I have since seen their Ensignes, and they had composed a Song to the honor of France, for which I wish I had given the best horse I have that I might insert it here.
And since I am upon the honor of these women,Of a young Mai of Siena. I will that those who shall come after us admire the courage and virtue of a young Virgin of Sienna, who, though she was a poor mans daughter, deserves notwithstanding to be rank't with those of the no∣blst Families. I had made a Decree at the time when I was Dictator, that no one upon pain of severe punishment should fail to go to the Guard in his turn. This young Maid seeing a Brother of hers who was concern'd to be upon duty, not able to go, she took his Morrion and put it upon her head, his Breeches, and a Collar of Buff, and put them on, and with his Halbert upon her neck, in this equipage mounted the Guard, passing when the List was read by her Brothers name, and stood Centinel in turn, with∣out being discover'd, till the morning that it was fair light day, when she was conducted home with great honor. In the afternoon Signior Cornelio shew'd her to me. But to return to our subject, it was not possible of all that day, nor the night follow∣ing for the Count to perfect his Terrass, nor we our Retirade, at which we wrought exceeding hard, leaving about forescore paces to the Marquis, if he had a mind to enter there. We had made a Traverse by the Port Oville, where we had plac't three great Culverins, laden as I have said before, at which place were Signior Cornelio, the Count de Gayas, and three Canneers, who were there left by Monsieur Bassompierre. On the right hand upon an Eminence was the great Observance, betwixt which and the walls we had planted five pieces of Canon ram'd with the same, which the said Bassompirre com∣manded in his own person; yet both the one and the other were so well conceal'd, that the Enemy could discover nothing from the te hills about us. Well did they perceive, that above at the Observance there were people; for they had evermore a clap at that: but we were all behind a Trench we had cast up betwixt the Observance and the Wall of the City, tapist, and squat, so that we could not be seen. The Soldiers were all before the houses, through which they had pierc't several holes to come, and go under cover. Be∣hind the Retirade, which was not much above the height of a man, they were also shel∣tred from being seen. Signior Corneli was also under cover, by reason that he lay in a low place, and under the shelter of a very thick wall, which join'd to Port Oville. The order of the fight was thus. Signior Cornelio had with him one Ensign of Germans, two of French, four of Italians,The order and design of the Fight. and four of Siennois, having also the Count de Gayas to assist him: and with me at the Observance was the Rhinecroc, with three Companies of Germans, two of French, two of Italians, and four Ensigns of Siennois. In all the two Troops both of Signior Cornelio's and mine there was not so much as one Harquebuz, but Pikes, Halberts, and two hand-Swords, (and of those but few) Swords and Targets, all arms proper for close fight, and the most furious and killing weapons of all other; for to stand popping and pelting with those small shot is but so much time lost; a man must close, and grapple collar to collar, if he mean to rid any work, which the Soldier will never do so long as he has his fire arms in his hands, but will be alwaies fighting at distance. All the night the Enemy were placing Gabions for six and twenty or seven and twen∣ty pieces of Ordnance, and by break of day they had planted twelve, as they would in that time have done all the rest, had it not been that they had been necessitated to draw their Canon up to this Mountain by strength of hand. The Wall is good enough, which not long since by one of the two Popes Pius's, who were of the house of Picolhuomini, and of the Order of the people, had caused to be made. At break of day they began their Battery within a foot or two of the bottom of the Walls,The Battery of the Imperial∣ists. at the distance of about an hundred paces; which they did to cut the Wall by the bottom, making account the next day with the rest of the Artillery in a short time to beat down the whole wall: but for all that the Count de Bique ceassed not continually to fill the Antiport, leaving us Flanckers, so that we could see all along the breach. About noon they gave over their Battery below, and began to batter the middle of the wall, when so soon as I saw them begin to let in light, I left Signior Cornelio, who continually went up and down from place to place, and took Monsieur de Bassomperre, with whom I went to the Fort Camoglia, from whence we could plainly see into the recoyle of their Canon: but I shall leave this dis∣conrse to finish the Order. I left a French Company at the Fort Camoglia, another at the Citadel, there being al∣ready two Companies of Siennois at each, more than two Companies of Germans at the place, each a part by themselves; one of Italians at the Port St. Mark, and all along the wall towards Fonde-brando, Siennois, and towards Porto Novo the same, having given the word to the two French Companies, that in case I should stand in need I would send for them, leaving the Siennois still in the Citadel, and in the Fort. The same Instructi∣ons I left with the Germans, and had taken order that from six hours to six hours we
would change the word, as well by day as by night, to the end that whilst every one lay close at his post, if there should be any Traytor amongst us, he might go to no place where he might have any Intelligence with the Enemy, to draw men from that part to weaken that Post, to carry them to another: but that no one should be believ'd if he did not bring the word, in changing of which it should be carried to the Siennois by two of the Council of Eight, by the one to the one half, and by the other to the other; so that unless those themselves brought the word they were not to stir from their Post. I was ever afraid that the Marquis had some intelligence in the City, which made me take this course to prevent him. The Germans who were at the great place had the same com∣mand, and moreover that an Officer, or a Serjeant of the others should come to fetch them: to which end there were six Serjeants chosen out of our Italian and French Companies, who had in charge, that during the time of the Battery, or of an Assault, they should continually be moving along the Curtain of the Wall to the Quarters I had appointed, and never to abandon their Quarter. It was also ordain'd that no one upon pain of death, of what Nation soever, not so much as the Siennois themselves should dare to a∣bandon the Retirade, being of the number of those who were there appointed for the fight, and the same was carried quite round the walls of the City. It was also order'd, that o eight of the Council of War, four were continually to remain with me and Signior Cor∣nelio, to the end that the two who remain'd with him might go continually on horse∣back with the word, to fetch such succours as Signior Cornelio should send for, to relieve him if occasion should be, and my two the like; that is to say of the Captains of the City, and the other four should go to the places where the six Serjeants were appointed to be, to the end that they might joyntly encourage the Soldiers to fight, if necessity should require. And there where there was no business to be done, and that any came to them with the word for succours, they should deliver him the one half, and keep the rest to defend that Post. That the Officers of the King, as Controulers, Commissaries of victu∣al, Treasurers, or their Deputies, should ordinarily be, part by day, and part by night, still on horseback, riding up and down the streets of the City, and that from hour to hour one of them should bring me news how all things stood in the body of the City, and about the Walls, bringing us still some token or another that they had spoke with the four of the Council, and the Serjeants who were deputed with them. This was the order I gave, at least as much as I remember, never failing my self every day to visit the Companies, and to encourage the Inhabitants to do well. I now return to what we did at the Fort Camoglia: Monsieur de Bassompierre ran to fetch a Canon we had in the Ciadel; but as he went out to remove it the Carriage broke, so that instead of it he brought a Demy-Canon, which a Siennois the said Bassompierre had entertein'd in the quality of a Canoneer evermore shot in, and so well that he could hit with it as small a mark as if it had been a Harquebuz. He was assisted by some Italian and French Soldiers of the Citadel to bring it, whilst I was making ready a Platform with the Soldiers of the Fort, till my Company of Pioneers came, which I had sent for in all haste, and in less than an hour and a half we dispatcht it, where I mounted my Demy∣Canon. I gave ten Crowns to our Siennois, that he might make some good shots with that Piece here, as he had done several at the Citadel before. The Enemy had plac't Ga∣bions on the Flanck of their Battery towards us. Bassompierre and I went a little on the right hand, and observ'd the Bullet in the air like a hat on fire, flying very wide on the right hand, and the second as much on the left, which made me ready to eat my own flesh for rage: Monsieur de Bassompierre always assur'd me, that he would presently take his level right, and still went and came to and fro betwixt him and me. The third shot light upon the bottom of the Gabions, and the fourth playd directly into their Artillery, and there kill'd a great many of their men, whereupon all those that assisted fled behind a little house which was in the rear of their Canon. At which I ran and took him in my arms, and seeing him with his Linstock ready to fire again, said to him, Fradel io da li da seno, per dio facio, ti presente dateri dieci scodi, & d'une biechier de vino Graeco. I then left him the French Captain, who had the Guard of the Fort, to furnish him continually with such things as he stood in need of, and Monsieur Bassompierre and I return'd to our Post. There then advanc't a German Ensign to the Enemies battery, who came along by the other Gabionade with his colours flying, and this might be about four of the clock in the afternoon, we could see him march from behind the Observance, and was no sooner come to the Artillery, but our Piece fir'd and kill'd the Ensign, upon which the Germans immediately fled away, retiring to the place from whence they came. And this Sienuois made so many brave shots, that he dismounted them six pieces of Ca∣non, and their Artillery remain'd totally abandon'd till the beginning of the night, with∣out
playing any more than two pieces of Canon, that were covered with Gabions, and lanckt towards the Fort Camoglia, which our Artillery could not touch, because they shot over by reason of the height of the Gabions, and in the twilight they made seven or eight shots at the Obsrvance where we were, and the houses adjoyning, and of all night after shot no more. We work't exceeding hard all night to finish our Retirade, and the Count de Bisque was no less diligent at the Antiport, so that two hours before day all was perfected, and every one settled in his Post where he was to fight. That which made us make so much haste, was, that we heard a great noise at their Artillery, and thought they were bringing up the rest, which made me put out a man to discover their Battery, who brought us word, that they had cut above fourscore paces of the wall, within a span or two of the bottom, and that he believ'd in a few hours they would have beaten it totally down, which we did not much care for though they did, for we hop'd to sell them their Entry very dear; and about an hour before day they ceased their noise, which made us think that they only expected the break of day to give fire. I then mounted upon the wall, having Captain Charry always with me, who by main force would needs have me down when the day began to break, and soon after I perceiv'd, that at the Windows of the Gabions there was no Artillery,The Marquis draws of his Canon. and that instead of planting more they had drawn off those there were. I then called out to Signior Cornelio, that we were out of danger of an Assault, and that the Enemy had drawn off their Canon; at which news every one began to come upon the wall, where the Siennois sufficiently rated the Enemy in their language, saying, Coioni marrani, venete qua vi metteremo per terra vinti brassi di muri▪ They were constrain'd to stay three days at the foot of the mountain to repair their Carriages, which the Demy-Canon we had brought to Fort Camglia had broken and spoild them. Now (as I have already said) the Gentleman of the Emperors Bedchamber had all the while kept a great deal of clutter what Canon would do to the winning of the Town: but after he had been an eye witness of all that has been related, and that the Marquis had remonstrated to him that the Retirade, and those other Fortifications I made within, was to let him enter, and to give him Battail in the City (for if I knew what he did, he was no less enform'd of my proceeding, there being evermore one Traytor or another amongst all people) he then was of the same opinion with the Marquis and the other Captains,The Marquis his resolution. that the Town was never to be taken by force; but that it was to be re∣duc't to famine, and therefore thought it convenient that the Artillery should be sent back to Florence. He then return'd back to his Master to give him an account of what he had seen, and that the Marquis could do no more than what he had already done. I do not know whether or no he acquainted the Emperor with the fright he had been in, which the Marquis himself gave me a relation of at my going out of Sienna, as he went along with me above two miles of my way, where he told me, that at the time when their Artillery was forsaken, by reason of the Havock our Demy-Canon made amongst them, he was close by the side of the little house in his Litter, being then very lame of the Gout, where his Litter being set down upon the ground, this Gentleman of the Emperor's was talking to him, having his hands upon the Cover of the Litter,The Marquis his danger and fright. and his head with∣in it, whispering with the said Marquis; when our Governor seeing the Artillery aban∣doned, and every one retyr'd under the shelter of the little house made a shot at it, with which a part of the wall, which was of brick fell upon the Litter, so that the said Gentle∣man was by it beaten down upon the Marquis's Legs, sc astonish't as nothing more, and the Marquis swore to me, that in his life he was himself nevr in so much far of being kill'd, as at that time: that they drew the Gentleman out from off his legs, and himself after with much ado, all the Litter being full of the ruine, and covering of the said house. And the said Marquis moreover told me, that at the great fright he was in his Gout left him, for the whole ruine fell at once upon him, and upon the Gentleman, who verify thought himself to be kill'd. I have often heard that the apprehension of death has cur'd many diseases; I know not if the Marquis his Gout be returned since, but he as∣sur'd me he had never had it after from that fright, till the time I saw him. If it be re∣turn'd or no I leave others to enquire. This might be about the middle of Ianuary,The Germans can no longer endure the want of bread and wine. and not above eight dayes after we be∣gan to perceive that the Germans grew very impatient at the little bread they had, ha∣ving no wine, which was the most insupportable of all. The Rhinecroc himself, who was sickly, could no longer endure, there being nothing to be had unless it were a little horse-lesh, or a piece of an Ass. Signior Cornelio and I then began to contrive which way we might get these Germans out of the City, and conceited that if they were gone we could yet keep the Town above two moneths longer, whereas if they staid we should
be necessicated to surrender: we therefore concluded to send a man privately to Monsieur de Strzzy to remonstrate all this to him, and to entreat him to send for them after the most plausible manner he could (which I also directed him how to do) and sent to him Captain Cosseil, who is now my Ensign, very well instructed. It was with exceed∣ing great difficulty that he was to pass, which that he might do, we were to fight two Courts of Guard, by reason that the Marquis had already cast up a great number of Tren∣ches, which came up close to the walls of the City on every side. Of these Captain Charry fought the one, and the Count de Gayas with a Company of Italians the other; so that whilst they were fighting he got over the Trench, and recovered the rear of the Camp with his Guides, and two dayes after return'd in Company with an Italian Gentle∣man call'd Captain Flaminio, who brought Letters to the Rhinecroc, and to me also wherein Monsieur de Strozzy writ to me to send the Rhinecroc with his Companies out to him, for that he intended to set on foot a flying Army, having with him great store of Italian horse and foot,A device of the the Sieur de Montluc to be rid of the Ger∣mans. and that without some of those Tramontane sinews he should never be able to relieve me, and that he would protest against me if the City was lost. To the Rhincroc likewise he sent very obliging letters, having before-hand made Captain Flaminio very perfect in his Lesson. The Rhinecroc upon the receiving these or∣ders broke out into very great complaints, saying that Monsiur de Strozzy reduc'd him to the greatest extremities, and that it was impossible for him to get away without being defeated: but that he would however speak to his Officers, which he did, and which begot a very great dispute amongst them. At length one of them in whom he reposed the greatest confidence, and who serv'd him in the quality of Camp-Master, remonstra∣ted to him, that he had much better hazard with his sword in his hand to make his way through the Maruis his Camp, than stay to die of famine, or by a Capitulation to sur∣render himself to the Enemies discretion, which however in a few dayes he must of ne∣cessity do; for there was nothing left to eat, and their Soldiers began to murmur, inso∣much that they evermore expected when a great part of them should go give themselves up to the Enemy, which made them resolve to depart. The Rhinecroc was not much to be blam'd for his unwillingness, it being a very perilous Journey, for at the very allying out of the Gate, he was of necessity to fight several Spanish Guards, and half a mile from thence another, at a Trench the Enemy had cast up near unto a certain Mill, which was in his way. Upon their determination to depart, I gave express charge that no one living should speak of this sally, causing the Gates of the City to be close shut, and at the beginning of the night they all came with their Baggage to the great place before Porto Novo. The Siennois,The Germans go out of Si∣na. who understood nothing of all this, at the seeing the Germans in this marching posture, began in all haste to repair to the Pallace in very great despair. I then caus'd three Companies to sally out, two of French, and one of Italians; the first where∣of was led by Captain Charry, the second by Captain Blacon (who since dyed a Hugonot at tonge) and the third by the Count de Gayas. Captain Charry had order to fight the first Court of Guard, which was in a great street of the Suburbs, the second was at the Au∣gustins in the same street, and the third at S. Lazaro. They had in command from me, never to give over ill they had fought all the three Courts of Guards, and the Count de Gayas took the way on the outside of the Suburbs on the right hand all along by the houses, still marching softly on to rally our men together, as they should be separated and scatter'd by the fight. The Tertia of Sicily lay at the Charter-house, consisting of very good Soldi∣ers, and the Rhinecroc at the going out of the Gate took on the right hand, entring into a valley, and the Count de Gayas remain'd upon the eminence moving still softly on, which produc'd two effects for the relief of our people, the one as has been said, by ga∣thering our squandred men together, and the other to succour the Rhinecroc also, if he should stand  need; and so we began to open the Gate, it being about one of the clock in the night. Captain Charry marched out first (for it was he who alwayes led the dance) Blacon after him, the Count de Gayas next, and then the Germans, who in a trice put themselves into the Valley.The Fight be∣twixt the French and the Imperialists. We immediately heard the fight betwixt our French and the Spaniards: Captain Charry routed the two Courts of Guards, the one after the o∣ther, and beat them up as far as that of St. Lazaro; whereupon those of the Charter-house came out to relieve their people, and came to the Augustins (where Blacon had made a halt expecting Captain Charry) and there clapt in betwixt them. Captain Charry having done his business, thought to return (hearing very well that they were fighting with Blacon) and met the Enemy, which redoubled the fight. The Count de Gayas could not come to assist him, by reason that I had expresly forbid him to engage in the fight, till he should first be sure that the Germans were out of danger: but in the end he was constrain'd to do as the rest did, our two French Companies being driven upon him.
The Fight continued above a long hour. Signior Cornelio and I were without the Gate by the Portcullis, and nothing was open but the wicket, and there as the Soldiers came one after another, we put them in, when on a sudden we heard the fight coming towards us, some crying France, and others Spain, when at last they all came up pel mel together to the Portcullis. We had torches within the Gates, and through the wicket saw a little light, by wich we drew the Soldiers in. I must needs say, there were very valiant men, both on the one side, and the other; for not so much as either French or Italian, ever once ran furiously upon us, but still fac'd about at the Portcullis, and never retir'd, but step by step, till we pull'd them in. All the three Captains were wounded, and we there lost what slain, and wounded above forty of the best Soldiers we had, both French and Ita∣lians, and in the end we got in all the rest of our people. And because before the Sally, the Siennois were astonish'd at the departure of the Germans, I made Signior Cornelio to go about to the several Guards, and to the Forts, to reassure our men, for no one knew that the Germans were to go away, and I my self went to the Palace, where I found all the Senate in a very great distraction, to whom I spoke as followeth: I see well (Gentlemen) that you have here assembled your selves upon the occasion ofSpeech of Monsieur de Motluc to the Siennois. the Germans departure, and that you are enter'd into some apprehension and jealousie, that by that means your City will be lost: But I must tell you, it is the conservation, and not the loss of your City; for those six Ensigns devour'd more, than the twelve of the Italians and French. On the other side, I know you must have heard that the said Ger∣mans already began to mutiny, being no longer able to endure. I also discover'd well enough, that even their Captains were not like to govern them, themselves apprehend∣ing that they would go over to the Enemy, and you your selves have for five or six days last past heard the Enemy call out to us at the very foot of our walls, that we were lost, and that our Germans would soon be with them. Yet did not this proceed from any de∣fault in their Officers, but from the impatience of the common Soldiers, who were no longer able to suffer. Now (Gentlemen) should you appear dejected upon their depar∣ture; the world would say, that both your courage and ours, depended only upon theirs, and so we should dishonor our selves, to honor them; to which I shall never give my consent: for you knew all the great fights that have hapned in this siege, have been perform'd by you, and us only, and they have never so much as sallied out of the Town, save once only, that in spite of me the Rhinecroc would send out his people un∣der the conduct of his Nephew and his Camp-Master, and would accept of no one of any other Nation, than his own, at which time you saw how soon, and how easily they were beaten back, even into the ditch of the Ravelin of Porto Novo; so that if, by good fortune,The Germans by no means proper for a siege. I had not been there, and had not made the Italian Guard sally out to their rescue, not a man of them had come off alive. I will not disparage them, but they are much more proper for a Battel, than a Siege. Why then (Signiors) should you be con∣cern'd at their departure? I will say one thing more to you, that although I had also sent away the telve Companies that remain with me in this Town, I would yet undertake to defend your City, provided the Captains stay'd behind to relieve me. You must make your Ensigns Captains of the Watch by turns, who shall have two nights of intermissi∣on, and ours shall have but one, and we must begin to contract our allowance of bread to fourteen ounces, and you of the City to ten. You must also put the useless mouths out of Town, and appoint six persons to take a lift of their names to morrow, without further delay, and that without regard of persons, and speedily thrust them out of your City, by which expedient we shall make our bread last three months longer, which will be a suf∣ficient time for the King wherein to relieve us, especially now that the Spring is drawing on. Cease therefore your apprehensions, and on the contrary approve what I have done in order to your service. If I have done it without pre-acquainting the Senate with my design, it was not out of any dis-respect to them, but to keep this departure secret, which was of very great consequence, as you your selves may have observ'd; I having been constrain'd to put Monsieur de Strozzy upon the business to deliver my self from a people so entirely devoted to their bellies. The Senate having heard my Remonstrance, desir'd me to go to my repose, and that they would consider of what I had said, rendring me very many thanks for the comfort and good counsel I had given them. In the morning my whole Speech was divulg'd all over the City, and there was no more thought of fear amongst them: But they could not well agree amongst themselves about the unprofitable moths,The Sieur de Mntluc choseo Dictator at Sienna for a month. forasmuch as every one was willing to favour his own relations and friends; wherefore by Ballotte they created me their Dictator General for the space of a month, during which time neither the Captain
of the people, nor the Magstracy had any command at all, but I had the absolute autho∣rity and dignity, anciently belonging to the old Dictators of Rome. I thereupon created six Commissaries, to take a list of all the useless people, and afterwards deliver'd the roll to a Knight of Malta, accompanied with five and twenty, or thirty Souldiers, to put them out of the Town,The useless mouths thrust out of Sienna. which in three days after I had deliver'd in the List, was performed. A thing, that had I not very good witness of, both of the Siennoi, the King's Officers, and the Captains who were then present in Sienna, I should not however have mention'd in this place, lest the world should take me for a lyar: but it is most perfectly true. The List of these useless mouths, I do assure you amounted to Four thousand and four hun∣dred people, or more, which of all the miseries and desolations that I have ever seen, was the greatest my eyes ever yet beheld, or that I believe I shall ever see again; for the Master was hereby necessitated to part with his servant, who had serv'd him long, the Mistress with her maid, besides an infinite number of poor people, who only liv'd by the sweat of their brows; which weeping and desolation continued for three days together: and these poor wretches were to go thorow the Enemy, who still beat them back again to∣wards the City, the whole Camp continuing night and day in Arms to that only end; so that they drove them up to the very foot of the walls, that they might the sooner con∣sume the little bread we had left, and to see if the City out of compassion to those misera∣ble Creatures would revolt; but that prevail'd nothing, though they lay eight days in this condition, where they had nothing to eat but herbs and grass, and above the one half of them perish'd, for the Enemy kill'd them, and very few escap'd away. There were a great many Maids and handsome women indeed, who found means to escape, the Spa∣niards by night stealing them into their quarters, for their own provision, but it was un∣known to the Marquis, for it had otherwise been death; and some strong and vigorous men also forc'd their way, and escap'd by night: But all those did not amount to the fourth part, and all the rest miserably perish'd. These are the effects of War. We must of ne∣cessity sometimes be cruel, to frustrate the designs of an Enemy. God had need to be mer∣ciful to men of our Trade, who commit so many sins, and are the causers of many mise∣ries and mischiefs. You Captains and Governors of places, if you be not perfect already, learn these Arts and Stratagems: It is not all to be valiant and wise, you must also be circumspect and cunning. Had I entreated the Rhinecroc to depart the City, he would have been dis∣pleas'd, and have reproach'd me, that I sent him to the slaughter, but I proceeded more discreetly, serving my self with the authority of Monsiur de Strozzy, wherein I had no other end, but to gain time to tire out my Enemy, and to give the King leisure to relieve us: But as I have said before, he emplo'd his Forces there where he had the most concern. Nearer is the skin than the skirt. Never far to discharge your selves of useless mouths, and bar your cars from all crys of the afflicted: Had I obey'd my own disposition, I had done it three months sooner, which if I had, I might peradventure have sav'd the Town, or at least I had longer held my Enemy in play; and I have a hundred times since repented me, that I did not. The Marquis seeing that I had put the Germans out of the Town (who were the great∣estThe Germans defeate. part of them dfeated by the way, and thorough their own great fault, which I shall not however give any further account of, for they were not defeated about Sienna, but elswhere upon their march, where their own fear surpriz'd them, without any great rea∣son) and seeing also that I had driven out the useless people, both which would help to prolong the Siege, with the contracting our allowance of bread (which he had also learn'd from those that went out) these things made him to think of some other way,The Marquis his design. to bring us to his bow; fearing lst some now should fall in the Spring (as it often falls out in those parts at that time of the year) which should it so happen, he should then be constraind to raise the Siege, and repa  to the Cities to eat, for he was almost in as great necessity 'as we, and the Soldiers of his Camp were fain to at Mallows, and other herbs,The Marquis his sufferings. as well as ours, by reason that oftentimes their provisions could not be brought in due time; for it all came from abut Florence, which was thirty miles of, and upon little Asses, excepting 100 Mules, and those were to bring sufficient to serve whlst they could go and come, which was five or six days, and every return some of their beasts of burthen dyed. For about the Camp there was no more, so much as one herb; neither hay, straw, nor grain to be found, and much less any one Inhabitant within ten miles of the Road. And all his Cavalry lay et ten miles beyond Florence, excepting the Company of Signior Cbri the Marquis his Nphew, which consisted of no more than fifty Horse, and was also eve∣ry fifteen days to be reliev'd, by fifty others that were quarter'd at Banconvent. So that had God been pleas'd to send us a little snow, though but for eight days only, his Camp
would have been necessitated to rise, and to shift for themselves in the most commodious quarters abroad in the Country. All these things together put the Marquis upon an attempt to shorten the War, wherein his design was one way or anotherto sow division amongst the quarters of the City, seeing us weak, and knowing very well, that although we had yet twelve Companies, there was nevertheless not eighteen hundred men: To which effect by those of the Siennois who were banish'd the City, and were with the Marquis, an inven∣tion was found out to gain a Citizen of the Town called Messer Pedro, a man with one eye, and of the order of the people (which was that wherein we most confided, toge∣ther with the order of the Reformators) and that by the means of certain little boys, who went with little sacks to gather herbs in the Meadows upon the River Tresse. By whom the Marquis so order'd the business, that he corrupted this man, and made him a Traytor to his People and Countrey; and the form of this practice was,The Marquis his practices in Sienna. that Messer Pedro should receive several blancks, sign'd by the Siennois, who were in the Marquis his Camp, which he himself should write over at his own discretion. The plot of this design was thus, that Messer Pedro should in his Letters write these words, that they wonder'd they should thus suffer themselves to be so manifestly abus'd by the Seigneur de Montluc; and that a child might discern all the assurances he gave them of relief from the King of France to be no other than gulleries and deceits: That although they had unworthily been thrust out of the City, yet did they nevertheless, with tears in their eyes, infinitely lament to see them so miserably loose themselves, and that if they would send out a man to go so far as Rome, to enquire if the King was raising an Army for their succour, they would then infallibly discover the Cheat: That they begg'd of them not to suffer themselves to be reduc'd to the last morsel, which if they should do, they would not then come off cheaper, than at the price of their heads, the ruine of their estates, their wivs and chil∣dren: That they had yet means to make their peace with the Emperor, by the Mediation of the Marquis, if they would let him into the Town, which was a thing asie enough to do, if they would consult and joyn with some of the City, who had already engag'd themselves to them; and that they might know who were of the intelligence, they were to go into such a street, and where they should see a little whie Cross under the door, the Master of tht house was one. This one ey'd Dog perform'd his oce exactly well, and directed his Letters to one of those in whom we repos'd an absolute trust, being very certain, that he would forthwith carry it to the Magistrate, and that the Magistrate would also in the morning send into the street mention'd in the Letter, and would seize upon the Gentleman of the house, at whose door the Cross should be found. However he resolv'd ever to make his Cross at some house of the orders of the Novl, and the Gentlemen, forasmuch as the other two Orders had them in suspicion, and the Marquis thought (knowing the humor of the Siennois, and the hatred they bore to one another) that immediately, so soon as that person should be taken, they would hurry him without any other form of Jstice to the Scaffold, by which means those two Orders of the Novi, and of the Genlmen, would enter into so great an animosity and despair, that to save their lives they wou'd be constrain'd to betake themselves to arms, to possess themselves of a Canton of the City near unto the walls, to favour the Enemy, and to help them into the City. This cursed Rogue then began to forge his first Letter, and by night went and thrust it under the door of the house of one of the Gentlemen, who was unsuspected, and made his little Cross in another street at the house of one of the richest Gentlemen of the Order of the Novi; so that in the morning the Gentleman to whom the Letter was directed, found it in the Entry of his house, presently read it, and careird it to the Magistrates, who so soon as they had look'd upon it, immediately sent it to me by Misser Hieronimo Hispano, sending me word withal, that they had determin'd to go apprehend the said Gentleman, and forthwith to carry him directly to the Scaffold. Whereupon I sent the Signiors Cornelio and Bartolomeo Cavalcano back to them, to entreat them not so pre∣cipitously to proceed to blood, for that it might be an invention of the Marquis to set division amongst us: but that they might do well to commit him to prison, which they accordingly did. Two days after there was another Letter found in the same manner, in the house of a Gentleman of the Order of the Novi, a man no more suspected than the other, and the little Cross under the door of one of the Order of the Gentlemen: At which the Senate was so incens'd, that I was fain my self to go to the Pallace, where I had much ado to obtain the favour, that they would defer execution for five days only, to see if in that time God would please to give us further light into this Fact. All the whole City was enrag'd, and talk'd of nothing but cutting off heads. As God help me, it could never sink into my head, that it was any other, than a device of the Marquis, for I knew very well with whom I had to do. I then entreated Messer Bartolomo Cavalcano,
that he would never cease day nor night, to go visit the said Gentlemen, and the Citizens of the Orders of the Gentlemen,The Sieur de Montluc's wis∣dom. and the Novi, whom the misfortune concern'd, to entreat them not to despair, and to tell them, that I would take order no blood should be shed, and that I gave no credit to those Letters and Crosses. Signior Cornelio also assisted me very much in this affair, who had a very great interest in the City, by reason of the Car∣dinal of Ferrara, with whom he had always liv'd during his abode in this City. Now three or four days after this, thinking the fury to be over, behold another Let∣ter, and another Cross found in the same manner as before: At which every boody lost all patience, and would immediately drag all three to execution. I then ran to the pallace, taking Signior Cornelio and Signior Bartolomeo along with me. As I was going it came into my head, that I had no way to divert this blow; but by a colour of devotion, and so soon as I came there, I found the great Hall already almost full of men of the Reforma∣tors, and of the Order of the people: when so soon as I enter'd into the Hall of the Ma∣gistracy, they all began to cry out, that it was now no longer time to forbear, but that they were to proceed to a speedy execution of Iustice; whereupon having taken my place, I spoke to them in Italian, as at other times, after this manner. Gentlemen, since the time that I have had the honor to Command in your City,The Sieur de Montluc's Ha∣rangue to the Senate of Sien∣na. by the appointment of the King my Master, you have never undertaken any thing, whe∣ther as to matters of War, or as to the Government of your Corporation, without first communicating to me your intention, and asking my opinion and advice. Wherein, by God's good pleasure, I have been so happy, that I have hitherto never advis'd you to any thing which has not succeeded to your advantage and honor; neither would I do it for the world, my own life and safety not being dearer to me, than your preservation. Seeing then (Gentlemen) I have been so fortunate, as ever to have given you sound and useful counsels; let me beseech you to retain the same opinion of me now, and to give credit to me in an affair of so great importance, as this that presents it self before you, with which your judgements seem to be very much perplex'd. I beg of you with joyn'd hands, and in the name of God, that of all things you take heed of embruing your hands in the blood of your Citizens till the truth shall be fully known; neither can it possibly be long conceal'd: 'tis to much purpose to cover the fire, the smoak will how∣ever issue out; in like manner they may endeavour to mask and disguise this practice, but the truth will infallibly appear. All the world (and I beseech you be of my opini∣on) cannot make me believe, that this is any other than an Artifice, and a trick of the Marquis, who having found that the Lyon's skin will do him no good, has therefore put on that of the Fox, the better to bring about his design. Which to do, he had no better, nor more subtile way, than by sowing division in the heart of your City. And which way could he better do it, than by making you believe there are Traytors among you, and within your own walls? Knowing very well that that would make you not on∣ly to imprison such suspected persons, but also to put them to death, and by that execution to set discord in your City, for true blood cannot lye. The Parents and friends of the sufferers will bear the death of their kindred, though it should be just, with great sorrow and discontent, and will eadeavour to revenge them; by which means behold you have created so many domestick enemies, much more dangerous than those without, and you will be perplexed about the death of your own people, at the time when you meditate that of your open and declared foes. See then (Gentlemen) what joy, what satisfaction and delight you will administer to your enemies when they shall know that you busie your selves about cutting off the heads of your own Citizens, and of those, who I dare say and swear are innocent. However it may prove to be, the expectation of the truth can no ways be prejudicial to you, for you have them in sure hold: you are secure of your prisoners, you have them under safe custody. I will also be vigilant on my part, why then should you make such haste to put them to death? For the honor of God be∣lieve me, you will not repent your patience. I have no interest but yours, let us have recourse to God in so great a necessity. Command that all your Clergy to morrow or∣dein a general Procession throughout the whole City, and let every one be enjoyn'd to be assisting at it, and let them joyn in prayer, that it may please God to do us that grace as to discover to us the truth of this affair, the treason, if treason there be, and the in∣nocency of the Prisoners, if there be none. I assure my self that God will hear us, and you will soon be satisfied of the truth, after which you may proceed to justice against the guilty if cause require: but to do it before, and in heat to embrew your hands in the blood of your Citizens, without having mturely weighed every circumstance, you would in my opinion do very ill, and bring a great mischief upon your City. Gentle∣men,
the sole affection I have to your service, your safety, and conservation, has made me speak thus freely to you without any other consideration, and I once more most earnestly beseech you to grant me this favour, as for a few dayes to supersede your sen∣tence, which in the mean time we will employ in prayers and supplications, that God will please, by manifesting to us the truth, to direct our justice. I had no sooner ended my Speech, but that a confused murmur arose throughout the whole Hall, some saying I, and others no, for there will be evermore some opposers; but in the end my advice was followed, and presently intimation given to the Churches, and to all the people, to prepare themselves against the next day for a general Procession, to pray unto Almighty God; for as for fasting we had enough of that already.A General Procession. I was my self assisting at the Procession, and all the Captains, together with all the Gentlemen and Ladies of the City, the Kindred of the Prisoners followed weeping; and to be short, all the whole body of the City this day, and the day following were in humiliation and prayer, every one beseeching of God, that he would please to afford us that grace, as to discover the truth of this treason. In the mean time I slept not, for all the night Signior Cornelio and I were in consultation, which way this practice of the Marquis could be set on foot. I consider'd with my self, that the business being gone thus far, he who carried on the de∣signe would not rest there, and that the Council of the City would not be kept so secret, that the Marquis would not infallibly have intelligence of what had been concluded, there being evermore some tell-tales in these great Assemblies; and then very well knew that I had committed an error, in so openly declaring that I was assur'd it was a trick of the Marquis, it being to be feared that it would make him enter into some jealousie of his Agent. Now because it was likely he would by his Letters and Tickets give us some new alarm, I thought fit to cause certain men to walk up and down the streets of the City by night, after the most private manner they could, to try if by that means something might not be brought to light, and after this manner caused Centinel to be made two nights together.The prudence of the Sieur de Motluc. By day I caused the people to be taken up with Processions in three respective Parishes, and when any of the Signiory came to tell me, that it was so much time lost, and that they must proceed to Justice, I entreated them to have patience, as∣suring them that I began to discover some light into the business; for it was necessary to proceed after this manner, to restrain the fury of the people. Now it hapned that the third night about midnight this Mssr Pedro was seen to pass by, and stopping at a house, put his hand to a Casement, which was low, and hapned to be shut, and one of the three Letters had been found to have been put into a low win∣dow as that was. He then kneel'd down, and under the door put in the Letter as far as he could thrust his arm, which having done he went his way along the street. A Gentleman who lay at watch went presently after him, and taking him by the arm said, ce siete voi? to whom the other replyed, Io sono Messer Piedro (I cannot remember the sir-name of this Rascal) the Gentleman then knew him,The Traytor surpriz'd. and said to him dove andate? who made answer me ne vo á la guardia, to which the Gentleman return'd, ado ado; which having done he knockt, and made them open the door, where he found the Letter of the same contents with the former. He then immediately went and carried it to the Magistracy, who sent me two of their Council, to give me an account of the whole bu∣siness, and those two went and call'd up Signior Cornelio, who came along with them; where amongst us it was concluded, that the Gates should not be open'd in the morn∣ing, nor the Guards and Centinels reliev'd, till he was first taken; and in the morning Signior Cornelio went with a hundred men to beset the house both before and behind. Sig∣nior Cornelio knew the man, and so soon as he had placed his Soldiers, knockt at the door, where he found him yet in bed, and presently sent me word of his being taken. Whereupon, the time of my Dictatorship being expir'd, I made use of entreaties, as before, requesting the Senate that he might be forthwith put upon the Rack, for he both denied the Letter, and also that he had seen the Gentleman of all that night. As he was upon the Rack he begg'd that they would toment him no more,Misser Pedro confesses his treason. for he would confess the truth, which he did from point to point, together with the Marquis his practices to set division in the City. Upon which confession they would in the heat have presently hang'd him at the windows of the Palace: but I enreated them not to do it yet, and so he was clapt up in a Dungeon. I then enreated the Captain of the people to deliver to me the three Gentlemen, who were prisoners, for that I had a desire to talk with them at my Lodging; which he accordingly did. They were brought by Signior Cornelio and Bartolomeo Cavalcano, and so soon as they were come to my Lodging I remonstrated to them, that they ought by no means to
stomach their imprisonment, nor to bear the Snae any ll will for seing of their per∣sons, affairs being reduced to such tems, that the Father ught not to trust his Son, nor the Son his Father, since it concern'd no less than their lives and fortunes; and that therefore I desir'd they would go to the Magistracy to give them hearty thanks that they had not proceeded to speedy execution, but had had patience till such time as God had discover'd the truth. They return'd me answer, that I should pardon them, that be∣ing a thing they would never do; neither was it they that had saved their lives, but that it was I, and that they would give God thanks and me; but that they had no obliga∣tion to them at all. We were all three above a long hour labouring to perswade them, where I remonstrated to them, that not to do the thing I requested of them was to ac∣complish the Marquis his designe, and to give him his hears desire, which was, that they should remain in division and mortal hatred; and whatever else I could contrive to say, that might any way serve to perswade them to go, I represented to their consi∣deration to pacifie and appease them. In the end remembring how highly they stood ob∣liged to me for the saving their lives, they promised me that they would do it, and Sig∣nior Cornelio, and Messer Bartolomeo at my request went along with them, for I was a∣fraid they might repent by the way; where so soon as they came before the Magistracy,The Prisoners go to the Se∣nate. one of them spake for the rest, remonstating their innocency, and the wrong that had been done them; which nevertheless they would no more remember, considering the ne∣cessity of the time, and the Estate of the City, affectionaely beseeching them to esteem them for their good Citizens and friends, and loyal to the Common-wealth; and that for the time to come neither they nor their posterity might have any blemish upon their names upon this occasion, they desired they would please to grant them Patents seal'd with the broad Seal for their satisfaction. The Captain of the people then made them a very ample Remonstrance, wherein he entreated they would excuse them, if the publick safety being in question, they had been constrain'd to shut their eyes to particular inte∣rests, and by the importance of the affair had been constrain'd to be so severe in their inquisition: but that they did acknowledge and esteem them to be good and loyal Ci∣tizens. Whereupon they all descended from their seats and embraced them, and as Messr Bartolomeo told me, the most of them with tears in their eyes: and so every one retired to his own house. Now because this one-ey'd Villain was of the Order of the People, which was the greatest party in the Town, and wherein was most Soldiers, I was afraid that should they put him to death, those of his Order might make some sr in the Town, saying, that now it was well enough known of what Order the Traitors were,The Sieur de Motluc bg the Tray life. which might occasion some mutiny or sedition, and make them in the end betake themselves to arms, which was the reason that I made a request to the Senate to give me his life, and to banish him for ever, that all things might be husht up, and that the Marquis might not say that any of his policies had succeeded any more than his attempts by arms. And thus were all things discovered and hudled up, for the Senate granted my request. I have often since wondred how I came to be so discree, and so moderate in an affair of this importance, considering how reasonable it was, that an exemple should be made; but it would peradventure have done more hurt than good. We must not alwayes be so severe, and the seeing others so hot upon blood I do believe made me a little more tem∣perate. And you (Gentlemen) who have the charge of places, do not suffer your selves to be transported at the first appearance of things, nor upon too light information; consider and weigh the circumstances, and hinder the violence of the people over whom you command by one pretence or another, as I did, amusing them with Processions; nor that that was not nevertheless well done, but I would see if time would make any dis∣covery; and had I suffered these men to have been put to death, their kinded might per∣haps have been prompted with some spirit of revenge. Above all things endeavour to preserve unon amongst those over whom you shall happen to command, as I did in this City, where all was accommodated and appeased. Consider also with what enemy you have to do; for you may well imagine that he will leave no stone unremov'd, nor no ar∣tifice untri'd, to set division in your City; as I have formerly read in Livie, the great Captain Hanibal did to sow dissension amongst the Romans. Your wisdom and pru∣dence (Governors of places) must discern if there be appearance in the thing; whether or no the party accused be a man capable of practice, or have any means whereby to bring his purpose about, and whether or no he have done any thing any wayes tending to such a design. If in apprehending him you discover any confusion in his countenance,Worthy consi∣derations of a Governor. or va∣riation in his answers. You ought in this to be very circumspect and discreet, and to consider that there is nothing more easie than to calumniate a man. God be praised.
all here passed with moderation, and the Prisoners with their friends came to give me thanks. Now after the Marquis saw himself disappointed of his expectation, and that all his plots and stratagems came to nothing, he suffer'd us to rest in peace, not expecting to have us till we should be reduced to the last morsel of bread; and we began to enter in∣to the month of March, when we were in the greatest necessity of all things; for of wine there had not been one drop in the whole City from the middle of February: We had aten all the Horses, Asses, Mules, Cats and Rats that were in the Town. Cats sold for three and four Crowns a piece, and a Rat for a Crown. And in all the whole City there was onely remaining four old Mares, so lean as nothing more, which turned the Mills, two that I had, the Controller la Moliere his, the Treasurer P Espine another, Sig∣nior Cornelio a little Bay pad-Nag, that was blind with age, and Misser Hieronimo Hispano a Turk of above twenty years old. These were all the Horses and Mares that were left in the City in this extremity, which was greater than I can represent it, and I do believe there is not in nature so dreadful a thing as Famine. We had from Rome some hopes sent us of succours, and that the King was sending away the Mareschal de Brissc to relieve us, which was the reason that we again lessened our bread to twelve ounces, and the Sol∣diers and Citizens of the Town to nine: whilst in the mean time by little and little we lost several Inhabitants and Soldiers, who fell down dead as they walked the streets, so that they died without sickness. At last the Physicians found it out that it was the Mal∣lows they fed upon, that being an herb that does relax the stomack, and obstructs digesti∣on. Now we had no other herbs all along the walls of the City, they having been all eaten before; neither could we come by these without sallying out to skirmish, and then all the women and children of the Town went out to gather them. But I saw I lost so many men in these skirmishes, that I would no more permit any one to saly out. Now to hear any more news of the Mareschal de Brissac was henceforward impossible, for the Trenches were brought up to the very Gates of the City,This memora∣ble sally of the Siennois was in the year 1526. which Trenches the Marquis had also redoubled for fear we should sally out upon him in despair, and give him Battail, as the Siennois in their antient wars had formerly done, as themselves report. In this condition we languished on till the 8th of April, that we had lost all manner of hopes of relief, and then it was that the Seigneury intreated me not to take it ill if they began to think of their presrvation. When seeing there was no other remedy, unless to eat one another? I could not deny them, cursing to the pit of hell all those who engage men of honor in places, and then leave them in the lurch. Yet did I not herein intend to speak of the King, my good Master, he lov'd me too well for that; but those who gave him ill counsels to the prejudice of his affairs, and I have ever observ'd more evil than good Counsellors about Princes.The people of Sienna begin to capitulate. They then sent out one of their people to the Marquis to entreat of him a safe conduct for two of their Senate, whom they would send to him, which he granted, and they began to capitulate. The Marquis himself did very much facilitate the Treaty, and they began to enter into great confidence of him, for he very well saw, that to cause the City to be sack'd and ruin'd would be no profit, neither to the Em∣peror, nor the Duke of Florence, and would only benefit the Soldier, and on the other side he fear'd left if the Siennois could obtain no good conditions, we should sally out upon him, a la desesperade, having already lost above the third part of his men, who were either dead through the length of the Siege, or run away, so that he had almost no Italians,The extremity of the Marquis. who were quarter'd at the Fort St. Mark; and the Marquis had remain'd for above a moneth with no more than six Ensigns for the Guard of his own person, all the rest being in the Trenches; neither could he ever relieve them with more than ten Ensigns, and those had only one night of intermission, and some such Guards there were that were not reliev'd in six days. To this condition was he reduc'd without, as well as we within; neither could he make any use of his horse, no more than Monsieur de Strozzy could of the Cavalry he had, by reason that there was no manner of thing upon the ground, to give the horses to at from Mntalsin to Sienna, and from Sienna to Florence. I will now give an account of my self after what manner I liv'd. I had no manner of advantage, no more than the meanest Soldier, and my bread weighed no more than twelve ounces, and of white bread there was never above seven or eight made, whereof three were brought to my Quarters, and the rest were saved for some Captain that was sick. Neither those of the City, nor we from the end of February to the 22th of April ever eat above once a day; neither did I ever hear so much as any one Soldier complain, and I can assure you the Remonstrances I often made to them serv'd to very good purpose; for if they would have gone over to the Enemies Camp, the Marquis would have created them very well; for the Enemy very much esteem'd our Italian and French Soldiers, and in the
skirmishes that had happened betwixt us had had very sufficient tryal of their valour. I had bought thirty hens and a Cock to get me eggs,The Sieur de Montluc's pro∣visions. which Signior Cornelio, the Count de Gayas, and I eat, for we all three constantly eat together; at noon in one place, and in the evening at another; but towards the end of March all these were eaten, the Cock and all. 'Twas pitty we had no more: and so I remain'd without lesh, and without eggs, and had nothing to eat but my little loaf, with a few pease boyl'd with a little Bacon and Mallows, and that but once a day only. The desire I had to acquire honor, and to put this bafflle upon the Emperor, so long to have held his Army in play, made me find this so sweet that it was no trouble to me to fast: and this pittiful supper with a bit of bread was a feast to me, when returning from some skirmish, I knew the Enemy to be well drub'd, or that I knew them to suffer under the same necessities we did. But to return to the Capitulation; the Marquis sent to the Duke of Florence, and Don Iuan Manricon, who was Embassador from the Emperor to the Pope, and resided at Florence by reason of the Siege; whereupon the said Duke sending a safe conduct, the Siennois also sent to the Pope (which was Pope Iulio,Pope Iulic. who died two or three days after) from whom they received a very scurvey answer, he reproaching them with their obstina∣cy, and commanding them to submit to the Duke of Florence his mercy without any con∣dition. He was a terrible Pope: but the Duke proceeded after a more modest and cour∣teous manner, as a Prince ought to do, who would gain the hearts of a people, and in∣deed he was one of the greatest Polititians of our times. It behooved him so to be to e∣stablish his Principality, in the time of two of the greatest and most ambitious Princes that ever were, who had both of them a great mind to get footing in Italy. But the Spa∣niard was more subtle than we, and this Duke manag'd his business very well;The wisdom of the Duke of Florence. his name was Cosmo, and I believe he is yet living. In the mean time Commissioners for eight daies together went, and came betwixt Florence and the Camp, and upon Monday night the Capitulation was brought to Sienna, and the morning before the Marquis had sent a Trumpet to me, entreating I would send two Gentlemen out to him in whom I might confide, he having something to say to them that he desired I should know, and that he was come to St. Lazare to that effect. I thereupon sent out to him Signior Cornelio, and Captain Charry, who being come to him, he there acquainted them with the terms of the Capitulation, which would that night be brought to the City, and that amongst other things there was one Article which exprest, that the Sieur de Montluc with his Italian and French Companies, and all the Officers of the King, should march out with Bag and Baggage, Colours flying, Drums beating, with match lighted, and Bullet in mouth: but that this Article would do me no good, forasmuch as we did not belong to the Sien∣nois, but to the King of France; and being we did not belong to them, they conse∣quently had no power to capitulate for us; that therefore I was my self to capitulate in the name of the King my Master, which if I thought fit to do,A Proposition of the Marquis de Marigano to the Sieur de Montluc. he assur'd me I should have what conditions soever I would demand, and that his service to the Em∣peror excepted, he would do as much for me as for the Cardinal his Brother: that he and I were two poor Gentlemen, who by our Arms were arrived to such degrees of honor, that the greatest both of France and Italy would be glad to have our places, telling them withal he would there stay to expect my answer. They found me at Porto Novo walking with Messer Hieronimo Espanos, where after I had received his Message, I bad them go back and tell him, that I very well knew he had read the Roman History,The Sieur de Montluc's An∣swer. wherein he might have taken notice, that in the times of the antient warlike Romans they had sent one of their Colonies to inhabit Gascony, near to the Pyrhenean Mountains, of which Province I was a Native, and that if he would not content himself, that the Siennois had comprized me in their Capitulation, I would at my coming out let him see, that I was descended from those warlike Romans, who would rather have lost a thousand lives, could they have had so many to lose, than an inch of their honor: that I had ra∣ther the Siennois should capitulate for me, than I for them, and that for my part the name of Montluc should never be found subscrib'd to a Capitulation. They then re∣turn'd to him, to whom having repeated my answer, he said to them in Italian. Che vol dir questo? mi pre che vol jocar a la desperata. Altre volte io rose due forteresse con ragione, ne per questo ne sui maj represo de l'Imperatre, & no resta s Majesty a servir si di me. Sig∣nior Cornelio then told him, that I was positive in this determination, and would rather put all to the hazard of the sword, than to the hazard of a Capitulation. Well then said he, recommend me to him, and tell him I will let him see that I am his friend, and that he may march out in all assurance upon the Capitulation of the Siennois, or after what manner he pleases himself; and so they return'd. Oh Camrades, you have here a fair exemple before you, when you shall find your
selves in such an affair, never to discover any fear, for nothing in the world so much artles an Enemy, as to see the Chief with whom he has to do to be undaunted in all extremities, and that he gives him to understand he will rather run the hazard of a Fight than a Capitulation; nothing so much puzzels him as that, besides the encourage∣ment it gives to your own people. I was as much afraid as another, seeing my self so desperately engag'd, and no news of any relief, neither of victuals nor men: but ask any one who is yet living, whether they ever saw me any more dejected than the first day I came into the City. And at the last of all, when we were reduc' to the extremest ne∣cessity of all things, I was more resolute to fight than before, which I believe conduced much to the obtaining of so good conditions both for the Siennois and for us, as we could have had, had we capitulated the first day the Enemy sat down before us. Late at night came the Capitulation, and upon Tuesday morning four of the Senate brought it to me, wherein I found an Article, that every one of what mean condition so∣ever should go out with Bag and Baggage, their Wives and Children, who had a mind to depart the City, except the Exiles and Rebels to the State of the Emperor, the King of England (which was King Phiip) and the Duke of Florence. I then very well under∣stood that this Article would fall heavy upon the poor Florentines who were with us in the City, and who had been banisht upon Monsieur de Strozzy's account. There were also Neapolitans, and Millanois; so that I there clearly saw above a hundred men thrown away, and their heads surrendred to the Scaffold, which made me desire the Senators to return, and that in an hour I would come to them to the Palace, and shew them the de∣it that was couched in their Capitulation, entreating them in the mean time speedily there to assemble all the principal members of the City, which they did, and I took a∣long with me Signior Cornelio, and Bartolomeo Cavalcano, who was ready to die for fear when he understood my proposition, for he was a Florentine; where being come I made to them this Remonstrance. Gentlemen,The Sieur de Montluc's Speech to the Senate upon the Capitula∣tion. I have seen your Capitulation, which tends rather to the cutting off of your heads, than to any indemnity for your Lives and Estates. You have there one Article, that every one generally shall enjoy the benefit of the Capitulation, their Lives and Estates saved, excepting such as are Rebels to the Emperor, the King of En∣gland, and the Duke of Florence. Now you know very well that the Emperor, has caused you all to be declared Rebels in his Imperial Chamber, as Subjects, of the Empire, for having rebelled against him. By which you see you are declared Subjects, and you say you are not Subjects, but only stand in recommendation to the Empire. The dispute is not yet determined, whether you are Subjects or recommended, and when the Ene∣my shall once be got within your walls, and that you are in their power, what Judges will you have to determine of the Question, except the Hangman, and with your heads, for it will certainly be by that way that they will go about to assert their title. Behold then you will all be put to death, your Estates confiscate, and your Wives and Children a prey to the Conqueror.Soldiers pass every where. As for me, and the Soldiers they will permit us safely to depart, for Soldiers pass in all places, and ever better cheap than other sorts of men. They know we have nothing to lose but our Arms, and that we are bound to obey our Prince; should they offer any outrage to us, we shall have our revenge in turn at one time or another, for men do sooner meet than mountains: But all the mischief will fall upon you, con∣sidering the hatred the Emperor and the Duke have conceiv'd against you. A Prince rarely pardons Subjects who have once rebelled against him; but if ever he can pick a hole in their coats, he will be sure to take hold of the occasion. Since then we have so long liv'd together, without ever having so much as one unkind word pass betwixt us, and that I have receiv'd so many honors at your hands, if you will take my advice, we will make the Marquis think of something he never thought of yet, that is we will sally out with our weapons in our hands to the fight, and give him battail, and we ought to believe, that God will be on our side, and assist us, considering the cruelty they would exercise upon you. For my own part, I freely offer you my life, and those of all my Captains and Soldiers to die with you, that as we have liv'd, so we may die together, rather than to see you so basely betray'd and sold to slaughter. Credete à me, à me dico he son vechio, & à ci sono passate molte cose inanti li occhi. Now I knew very well, that this exception did not point at the Siennois, but only at those I nam'd before, so that this was only a device of mine, to make the Siennois engage with us in the fight, for I had rather have put all to the hazard of the sword, than that any one of those who were within with us, and who upon my account had been obstinate in the
defence of the City should be lost. They took it however for current pay, and after I was departed from them,The Siennois resolve to fight. all of them resolv'd to fight it out to the last man. I then pre∣sently sent them word what they were to do, which was, that the Standard-bearer should command all their Powder to be refined, their Swords, Halberts and Pike-heads to be scowr'd and ground: that upon pain of Death, every one who was able to bear arms, should be ready in two days, and that the Priests and Religicux, who had taken arms for the defence of the Town at the Battery, should now take them again under the same Captains they did before; insomuch that I do believe that for two or three days so great a bustle in the City had never been seen. The two Deputies hereupon of the Duke of Florence and the Marquis, who had safe conduct into the City, return'd about three of the clock in the afternoon back to the Marquis, where they shew'd him this Article, which had put not only the whole City, but also the Soldiers, into despair of fair Quarter, tel∣ling him how we were all resolv'd and by what means they came to understand the hubub, and preparation that was making in the City to give him Battel, which was the reason that he sent all night to the Duke of Florence and Don Iuan Manricou, whom I since saw with the Queen of Spain at Bayonne, giving them an account how all things stood, and entreating them withal, that since he was now upon the point to have the Town surrendred to him, they would not for this one Article put him in danger of losing all; but consider, that he had to do with a great Captain, and an old Souldier, commending me more than I deserv'd: that as themselves very well knew, he had lost near upon the one half of his Army, and had a great many sick of those he had left, and that he had not twenty Horse, there being nothing upon the place to support them, nor any means by which to bring them any from other places; and that they would do well to weigh and consider of this affair, for as for his part, he must discharge himself upon them, if any thing fell our amiss. So soon then as the Duke of Florence and Don Iuan saw the Siennoi resolution, they dispatch'd to him le Cosignou the Duke's chief Secretary, with a Blank to put in whatever we would demand, for he stood upon thorns, till he was Master of the City. It was upon Wednes∣day morning that the Cousignou came to the Camp, when the said Marquis sent for the two Deputies,The Capitula∣tion again con∣cluded. who had been on Tuesday night return'd into the City, where they insert∣ed in the Articles, that all those who had been banish'd, and Rebels of the State of the Emperor, Empire and Duke of Florence, should go out in all security, as well as the rest, and in this posture we remain'd till Sunday morning the 22 of April, that we went out in the order following: Before any one of us stirr'd out of the Town,The manner of the Surrender of Sienna. I restor'd the Citadel and the Fort Camoglia into the hands of the Siennois, where they put an Ensign of the City into each, as I also made them to place an Ensign at every Gate of the City that stood open, which being done, I return'd to Porto Nov. The Marquis had planted all his Spanish foot all along the street that leads to S. Lazaro, on both sides the street, his Germans were drawn up in Battalia, a little on the right hand in a Camp, and at S. Lazaro was Signior Cabry his Nephew with fifty or threescore horse, which was all they could make (as I have said before) and three hundred Italian Harquebuzeers,The Surrender of Sienna was upon the second of April, 1555. which they had drawn out of the Forts of Camolia and S. Mark, and was the Convoy the Marquis had appointed to conduct us. Signior Cornelio then, and the Coant de Gayas, arm'd at all points, with their Pikes shoul∣dred went out side by side, with a Company of Harquebuzeers at their heels, after them went out two Captains at the head of the Pikes, amongst whom were a great Company of Corsles, and in the middle of the Pikes, the Ensigns display'd and advanc'd, and in the reer of them the rest of the Harquebuzeers, with two Captains in their reer. I had over∣night sent to the Marquis,The courtesie of the Marqui of Marignan. that he would be so civil to the ancient women and children, who were to go out with us, as to lend them forty or fifty of his carriage Mules: which he did, and which before I went out, I distributed amongst the Siennois, who put upon them the ancient women, and some children in their laps. All the rest were on foot, where there were above an hundred Virgins following their Fathers and Mothers, and women who carried cradles with Infants in them upon their heads, and you might have seen several men leading their daughter in one hand, and their wife in the other, and they were num∣bred to above eight hundred men, women and children. I had seen a sad paring at the turning out the useless mouths; but I saw as sad a one at the separation of those who went out with us, and who remain'd behind. In my life I never saw so sad a farwel; so that although our Soldiors had in their own persons suffer'd to the last extremes, yet did they infinitely regret this woful parting, and that they had not the power to defend the liberty of these people, and I more than all the rest, who could not without tears behold this misery and desolation of a people, who had manifested themselves so devout for the conservation of their liberty and honor. So soon as Signior Cornelio was gone out,
all the Italians follow'd,The French march out of Sienna. and the Citizens in the rear of the Italians. Then at the head of our French went out S. Auban and Lussan arm'd, with pikes upon their shoulders, and a Company of Harquebuzeers after them, two Captains at the head of the Pikes, with another company of Harquebuzeers led by Charry and Blacon, having each of them a Halbert in his hand, and the Ensigns in the middle of the Pikes, after the same manner the Italians had past before. After these I went out arm'd, and Messer Hieronimo Espanos side by side with me, for I was afraid they would have seiz'd upon him, he having been a principal Actor in the revolt of the City. He was mounted upon an old Turk, and I upon another miserably lean and haggled our, notwithstanding which I set a good face on the matter, and made the best meen I could. I left two Siennois Ensigns at the Gate, en∣treating them to clap to the Gate immediately after me, and not to open it till the Mar∣quis himself came. The said Marquis rid up and down, and Signior Chiapino Vitelli with him through all the files, to take care that no one meddled with the Siennois, for as to our Baggage, it was so little, as it made no number. The Spanish Camp-Masters then came to salute me, and all their Captains. The Camp-Masters alighted not, but all the Cap∣tains did, and came to embrace my knee, after which they again mounted on horseback, and accompanied me till we came to the Marquis and Signior Chiapino, which might be about 300 paces from the Gate,Discourse be∣twixt the Mar∣quis of Marig∣nano, and the Siur de Mont∣luc. where we embrac'd, and they plac'd me betwixt them. After this manner we pass'd on discoursing all the way of the siege, and the particularities had hap∣ned upon it, attributing much honor to us, the Marquis particularly saying, that he had great obligation to me, for that besides he had learn'd several stratagems of War, I was the cause be had been cur'd of his Gout; telling me the fear, that both he and the Emperor's Gentleman had been in, which did not pass without much laughter: Whereupon I told him, that he had put me into a much greater fright the night of the Scalado, and yet that I was not for all that cur'd of my eaver; adding moreover, that he had done very ill to come upon me, as the Iews did to take our Lord, for he brought along with him Lanthorns and Torches, which gave me a great advantage: to which he reply'd bowing his head (for he was a very courteous Gentleman) Signior, on altrovolte sero piu savis. I then told him, that had he continued his Battery, he would have had no very good bargain of us; for the Gascons were an obstinate people, but that they were lesh and bone as other men were, and must eat. With this, and other discourse of the same nature we entertain'd ourselves, till we were got a mile beyond S. Lazaro, and there the Marquis bad Signior Chipino Vitelli go to the head of our people, and speak to Signior Cabry, to take care there should be no disorder, and that if any one offer'd to take any thing from us, he should kill all such as should at∣tempt it, and that he should give the same command to the Captain of the three hun∣dred Harquebuzeers. So soon as Signior Chiapino was gone from us, the Marquis embracing me in his arms said these words, in as good French as I could have spoke my self. Adieu Monsieur de Montluc, I pray present my most humble service to the King, and assure him, that I am his most humble and affectionate servant, as much (my honour safe) as any Gen∣tleman in Italy. I then return'd him thanks for the good inclination he had towards the King, and the courtesies I had receiv'd at his hands, which I would proclaim in all places wherever I should come, and when it should ever lie in my power to do him service, would requit. He offer'd me the same, and so we fell to embrace again. He had then no more than four or five horse with him, they being all behind in the same order he had left them, and so he return'd back towards the City, and soon after Signior Chiapino Vitelli return'd, where we also embrac'd and parted. We then went to Arbierroute, a little Village upon the Tresse, or else the River it self is call'd Arbie, and there we found eighteen Asses loaden with bread, which the Marquis had sent thither to distribute amongst us upon the way; of which one part I gave to the Siennois,outtesie be∣twix the Soulders. another to the Italians, and the third to the French. To do which, as I pass'd through the Spaniards, I saw that the Soldiers had also purposely brought bread along with them to give to our people. I dare boldly say, and that by the testimony of those who were then with me, that this bread sav'd the lives of two hundred persons, and there are many who will affirm, that it sav'd the lives of four hundred, and yet could it not go so far, that there was not above fifty who dy'd that very day; for we had been from Wednes∣day till Sunday without eating any more than six ounces of Biscuit a day a man; and upon the Thursday of two horses I had, I kill'd one, that would now be worth 900 Crowns, he was then indeed very lean, which I divided amongst the Italian and French Companies, causing all the oyl to be taken out of the Lamps in the Churches, which I likewise divided amongst the Souldiers, who with Mallows and Nettles boil'd this flesh and oyl,Great famine in Sienna. and so sustein'd themselves till Sunday morning, when not a man amongst us at our going out, had eaten one bit of any thing in the world? The Marquis also caus'd
four Borachio's of wine to be brought for me, together with five or six loaves of white bread, and so soon as we came to Arbierroute, we halted, and under some Sallows that were by the River side, eat our bread. I gave two of my Bottles of Wine to the Sien∣nois, the other two we drank our selves, each one a little, and afterwards went on our way directly towards Montalsin, when so soon as we came to Boncovent, Signior Cabry made the foot Convoy to return: but till he saw Monsieur de Strozzy, who came out with a party of horse to meet us, would himself never leave us; and then he bade me far∣wel, taking me in his arms, as he did Signior Cornelio, the Count de Gayas,Signior Cabry his Characte and all our Captains, for he was a very worthy Gentleman, and a brave Soldier, as any they had in their Camp. So soon as we came up to Monsieur de Strozzy, we embrac'd, without be∣ing able either of us to utter one word; neither am I able to say which of us had his heart the most full of the remembrance of our fortunes. In this manner then, nothing but skin and bone, and more like Ghosts than men, we arriv'd at Montalsin, which was upon Sunday, and all Monday and Tuesday we were shut up with the Treasurers and Comp∣trollers, to examine and state our accompts, and to see what I had borrow'd to lend the Souldiers, where we found that the King was four months to us in arrear, and Monsiur de Strozzy gave me 500 Crowns of his own money to carry me into France. I dare swar he had not half so much more left; for Signior Cornelio and I had been constrain'd to borrow 400 Crowns to disengage his great Order, which he had pawn'd to a Jew at the beginning when he came to Sienna. I would afterwards have restor'd it to him, and name∣ly at Thionville, though he would never receive it, but laugh'd at me; and this was the end of the Siege. O Camrades, you who shall do me the honor to read my Book, will you not grant me what I have said before, that God did ever as much go along with my fortune, as with that of any other Captain of my time? You have observ'd the great adversities I sustein'd in this Siege, and the little helps I had, nothing being to be expected from without, his Ma∣jesty having his hands so full on eve side. You have heard that no art nor force was spar'd to reduce me, you have also seen the great famine I endur'd, the traverses the Mar∣quis perplext me withal, and the extremities to which I was at last reduc'd, which if you please maturely to consider,The good for∣tune of the Siur de Mont∣luc. you will find that I have been as much assisted by Almighty God, as any man that has born Arms these hundred years. I cannot lye in my Book if I would, there are too many witnesses alive for that. Do you not then see, that I spoke the truth, when I said before, that we are to employ all that God has given to men, be∣fore we give our selves for overcome? Pray consider, whether or no any thing was here to be omitted, or whether I ever omitted or forgot any thing in what condition soever I was, but put this poor City, and moreover the Kings honour and reputation in dispute through∣out the whole world. I never call it to mind, but it makes me sad to think what a folly I committed in exposing this City, together with his Majestities reputation, and all the rest of us, to the Enemies discretion, at the last morsel of bread. For the King would by no means have had me reduc'd to that, and let any one ask Monsiur la Chappelle, whom his Majesty exprefly dispatch'd away to me, to give me advice, that I should not suffer my self to be reduc'd to that extremity, as to come off to his dishonor. Princes are proud, and fight more for glory than for purchase; and I must needs say, that it was not the work of man, but of God, that we came off so good cheap, as we did. Two days before we came out of Sienna, the Senate gave me my discharge in Patent,The Declara∣tion of the Siennois in ho∣nor of the Sieur de Ment∣luc. signed with their broad Seal, acknowledging therein, that I would neither Capitulate for the City, nor for our selves: but that considering the extremity to which they were reduc'd, I would not hinder them from doing it, calling me to witness of the loyal∣ty and fidelity they had manifested to his Majesties service, wherein they had in nothing fail'd of the Oath they had made to him, and that I went out upon their Capitulation, and not they upon mine. Now where will you find in any History, that ever man went out of a place without capitulation, if he did not steal away by night, but not after the manner I went out. For every one will confess that I did not belong to the Siennois and that consequently they could not capitulate for me; as the Marquis told Signior Cor∣nelio, and Captain Charry. So it was, that by the good will of God, I came out after this manner, and the Patent is to be seen in the King's Treasury, as I shall say here∣after. I know very well (Gentlemen) that many of you will take delight in what I have to say to you, concrning the Government and Conservation of places, and that others will make little account of it, forasmuch as there are a sort of people so good natur'd, as to think they know all things of themselves, and nothing value the knowledge and ex∣perience of other men, as if God had sent them into the world like S. Iohn Baptist,
inspir'd from their Mothers wombs. Which is the reason we are not to wonder, that so many fall into mishaps; for their own arrogancy and self conceit, leads them by the hand till they come to a Precipice, from whence they tumble headlong from the top to the bottom, with so great a fall, that they are never able to rise again. Yet was this no∣thing, if the fall hurt no body but themselves; but the King and his people suffer also by it. Do not then disdain to learn, and although you may have great experience of your own, yet can it do you no great harm to hear and read the discourses of old Cap∣tains. When I was but five and twenty years old, I took more pleasure in hearing an old Soldier talk, than ever I did to sit and chat with the finest woman that ever I was in love with in my life; therefore I beseech you take a little notice of what I am going to say. When your Prince shall give you a place to keep, you are to consider three things; first the honor he does you in reposing so much confidence in your valour and wisdom, as amongst others to make choice of you, to entrust with a Command of that impor∣tance. Wherein the honor he does you, is no little one, forasmuch as he does not only honor you in your own person, but moreover sets a mark of reputation upon your whole race, by entrusting in your hands a Key of his Kingdom, or some City of very great im∣portance to him as this was, the Siege whereof I have related to you. This honor, I say, that he does you, draws so long a train after it, that your renown does not only spread it self through the whole Kingdom from whence you come, and the Countreys adjoyn∣ing to the place you defend, but moreover throughout the whole world. Every body is curious to enquire who does well or ill, and who is a good or bad Commander; nay, although we have no concern in the affair, yet are we evermore inquisitive after news, for such is the nature of man: by which means thorow all Forreign Nations your name will be for ever known, either to honour or infamy. For whatever is done, is committed to History, without which the greatest part of men of Honor, would not care for acquiring renown,The desire of eternizing a mans name. it costs so very dear. Never did any men ever purchase it upon harder terms than I; but the laudable desire we have to perpetuate our names, makes the pain seem easie to him who has a generous heart. Mehought all the time when I read Titus Livie, that I saw all the brave Scipio's, Cato's, and Caesar's alive, and when I was at Rome, and saw the Capitol, calling to mind the things I had heard (for I for my own part was ever a bad Reader) methought I ought to find those ancient Romans there. The Histo∣rians then, who omit nothing of any kind in their writings, will mark your name in white or black, with glory or with shame, according to your desert, as you see they have done by so many Captains who have gone before us. The second thing that you ought to set before your eyes, is to consider if you lose the place committed to you, first what a loss it will be to the King, it being part of his estate, and his house, there being no Garrison, that is not properly the Kings own house, be∣sides that the revenue is his, of which you deprive him in losing the place, enrich his Enemy, and augment his reputation, whilst you dishonor your own Master, who shall read in the Histories dedicated to Eternity, that in his Reign such a Town, such a Castle, such a Fortress was lost. You ought then to reflect upon the miseries you bring upon his poor Subjects, how many curses will they load you with, who shall be neighbours to the place you have lost; for they will certainly be destroy'd, and by your carelessness or co∣wardize ruin'd and undone. They will curse the hour that ever you was born, and especially the poor Inhabitants, who through your fault, must either change their King and Master, or taking their children upon their backs, be constrain'd to seek another ha∣bitation. O that the poor English who had above three hundred years been settled in the Town of Calice, have reason to curse the cowardize and treachery of him, who so in∣famously lost so strong a place! How can you ever have the confidence to look up, should you once fall into such a misfortune as this? Before you were honor'd and esteem'd, and every one rejoyc'd at your coming, praying to God to preserve and bless you; but should you once fall into a misfortune like this, instead of prayers and acclamations, you shall meet with affronts and injuries; for prayers, maledictions; and they will curse you to all the Devils in Hell. Instead of caressing, they will turn their backs upon you, every one will point at you, so that a hundred times a day, you will curse the hour that you were not kill'd upon a platform, or in a breach in the defence of your Garrison, rather than so shamefully to have given it up to your Enemy. And not only your Master, the Princes and Lords will look upon you with an eye of contempt, but the very women and children; nay, I will say more, your own Wife, though she make a shew of love,Women hate Cowards. will hate and despise you in her heart; for the nature of all women is such, that they hate all Poltrons, let them be never so proper men, or
never so handsomely dress'd, and love the bold and couragious, let them be never so slovenly or deform'd. They participate of your shame, and although being in your arms in bed, they may pretend to be glad of your return, they with in their hearts you had been smother'd, or carried away by a Canon shot: for as we conceive it to be the greatest disgrace to a man to have a Whore to his Wife, the women also think that the greatest shame can befal them is to have a Coward to their husband: and thus Monsieur le Gou∣vernor, you who have lost your place, you will be in a marvellous happy condition, when you shall be curss'd in your own bed. But what shall we say of your Children? people will not only reproach them, that they are the sons of a Cowardly father;Children de∣fam'd by the Father. but they will moreoever themselves see his name in Print, and the mischiefs of which his Cowardize has been the cause. For a Town is never lost, let it be never so considerable, that it does not draw a great deal of inconveni∣ence along with it. It brings so mighty an inconvenience upon your children, that to ex∣tinguish your ill repute, and to raise their own to some tollerable degree of esteem, they must hazard their lives upon all occasions, without either fear or wit, and few escape being kill'd, who by this means to wipe off the stain from their family, would sig∣nalize themselves. How many have I seen in my time, who by endeavouring to repair some notorious fault, have lost themselves and expos'd themselves to death upon the first occasion has presented it self, being asham'd to live. And though your children should escape these dangers, yet will the King be afraid (what great reputation soever they may have acquir'd) to trust a Town to their custody, left the Son should take after the Father, as it ordinarily comes to pass. Thus shall you not only ruine your selves, but your whole Family. To avoid and to break the neck of your ill fortune; and of all these mishaps, there is a good remedy, which I have learn'd my self, and am willing to each it you, if you know it not already. First you ought to consider all this that I have told you, and set on the one side the shame, and on the other the honor you will obtain, if you bravely defend your place, remaining victorious; or at the least having done all that a man of Honour could do, to come off Triumphant, and like a Conqueror, though you be overcome, as you see I did in this Siege. Imagine still that you see your Prince and Master be∣fore you, and what countenance you ought to hope for, if by your Cowardize you lose his place. And seeing nothing ever had a beginning, but that it had likewise an end, consider from the beginning what the end is like to be, and remember that your Master has not entrusted this place in your hands to deliver it up, but to defend it; that he has put you into it, not to live there only, but to dye there also bravely fighting, if occasion be. If you ask him at your going away to your Command, Sir, must I dye before I sur∣render the place you have given me in trust? he will tell you, that you are to fight to the last moment of your life; for being you are his Subject,A Saying of the Sieur de Iar∣nac to the King. your life is his. The Seigneur de Iarnac one day told the King, that it was the greatest craft and Policy, that ever Kings found out, to make their Subjects believe, that their lives were theirs, and that it was the greatest honor they could have to dye for their service: but that it was a great simplicity in us to believe it, and to keep such a clutter with this fine bed of honor. It is neverthe∣less true, that our lives and estates are the Kings, our souls belong to God, and our ho∣nour is our own, for over my honor the King has no power at all. To return to what I was saying before, if in accepting the charge committed to you, you have not this resolution within your selves, you would do a great deal better to make an excuse. There are ways enow to put it off, and there will be enow,A Captain must never fear death who will be glad to accept of what you refuse. If you accept it with a resolution to bring it to a handsome issue, do one thing, never think of dying. `Tis for a Coxcomb to fear death, till he see it within three inches of him, and yet cannot he forbear representing it to his ima∣gination, though it be a hundred Leagues off. On the contrary, meditate how to kill your Enemy; for if you once enter into an apprehension and fear of death, you may as∣suredly give your place for lost; for that is to take away your understanding and your judgement, which is the best piece in your harness. Tis to much purpose to be valiant, if this fail you at need; which if you intend to preserve, you must by no means enter in∣to this fear of dying; for fear is of it self, and by the fralty of our own nature oo apt to intrude upon us, without our needing to assist it with our own imagination. If then it present it self before you, you must reject it, and have sudden recourse to the intenti∣on of the King, and to what end he plac'd you there. Think of the shame and disho∣nor you are running into. Read often, or cause to be read to you, Books that speak of the honor of great Captains, principally those of our own times; as for example, Langey and another, who has writ in Italian (I cannot think of his name) who has writ to
well since King Charles the eight. I have often read him, and he is a very good Author. Would to God that all of us who bear arms would take up a custom to write the things we see and do; for I am of opinion it would be better done by our own hands (I mean as to feats of war) than by those letter'd men, for they too much disguise the truth, and this relishes of the Clerk. Read then these Books, and meditate with your selves, if I do like Antonio de Leva at Pavie,Captains that have well de∣fended places. the Sieur de Lude at Fontarabie, the Signeur de Bouillon at Peronne, the Signior de Sansac at Miranda, and Montluc at Sienna, what will they say of me? what honor shall I carry back to my own house? and on the contrary, if I surrender, what shame and infamy for me and mine? Then apply your selves to Almighty God, and beg of him that he will defend you from falling into these misfortunes, resigning up all things into his hands. After this assist your selves with all that he has put into the power of men, as you see I did in this Siege, and above all things be always diligent and vigilant, ever∣more mindful of your charge, if you do this (forgetting withal death and danger) you will find means to defend your place, though it were but a Dove-Coat; and though it should be lost, you having perform'd your duty, you must conclude it to be by the hand of God. We must however always trie; for I have seen a place lost that was never suspe∣cted to be in danger, and such a one sav'd as has been given over for gone. If you there die in your defence, you will neither dishonor your selves nor your posterity, but shall be laid in your grave with an immortal renown, which is all that a man of arms ought to desire. For a man that fears to die ought never to go to the wars,A man that fears dying must never go to wars. there being in the world so many other employments to which he may apply himself, especially in this Kingdom of France, where there are so many orders, what of Justice, and what of the Finances; too many indeed for the good of the King and of his Kingdom, such a brave and numerous youth living idle, who would be fit to bear arms. As I have entred sometimes into the Parliaments of Tholouze and Bordeaux, since my being the King's Lieutenant in Guienne, I have a hundred times wondred how it was possible so many young mn should eternally amuse themselves in aOr Hall, or Court of Ju∣stice, or Law. Palace, considering that the blood ordinarily boyls in young men; I believe it is nothing but custome, and the King could not do better, than to drive away these people, and to enure them to arms. But to return to you who have the Govern∣ment of places, and you who have a mind to put your selves into a Town to defend it, if you so much fear death, never go, though it be but a folly to fear it, for those that blow the fire at home in their own houses are no more exempt than the others, and I do not know what choice there is betwixt dying of a Stone in the kidneys, and being knocked o'th' head with a Musket bullet, though, if God would give me my choice, I should not be long in choosing. Above all things (Camrades) you must be sure to be evermore intent upon your Ene∣my, and have your Judgment Centinel to spy what he can do against you; and play two parts, saing to your self, If I was the Assailant, what would I do? on which side should I make my attaque? for you ought to believe that your opinion, and that of your Ene∣my do very often jump. Communicate then what you have thought of to such as you know to be of understanding, sometimes in common, that you may give no distaste to the rest; but most frequently in private. When you shall find your selves engaged with a people, where you are to piss small, and have not the ruling power, apply your selves to their humours, and bite your tongues rather than speak too much. Reduce them by sweetness and obligation, and above all things, when you are to suffer, your selves shew the way. For if you (Monsieur le Governor) will keep open house, and in the mean time cut others short of their bread, you will draw upon you the hatred of all your Captains and Soldiers, and it is but reasonable that you who have the greatest share of honor, should likewise have the greatest share of suffering. I will put you in mind of another thing,A Governor ought fre∣quently to shew himself to the people. which is, that when extraordinary want pres∣ses upon you, you seldom remain shut up in your Cabinet, but shew your selves to the Captains and Soldiers, and appear to the people with a chearful and assured countenance, Your single presence will redouble their courage. I have in my time known several of the King's Lieutenants, who have driven away the Gentlemen, by making them some∣times wait too long in their Halls, without vouchsasing to speak to them. A Gentleman will be civilly used, especially a Gascon, and in the mean time they pretend to be won∣derfully busie. I have known one once in my life (whom nevertheless, because he was Master of a great many very good qualities, I shall forbear to name, for no man is perfect) who two hours in a day would constantly lock himself up in his Closer, pretending to be busie about some dispatch of importance, but it was to read Orlando Furioso in Italian, as his own Secretary told us, which we took highly ill from him, we being in the mean time left to measure his Hall, or to take a survey of his Court. Do not use men of con∣dition
so. Your hours of vacancy and pleasure ought to be spent in walking upon the Ram∣pires, and visiting the Magazines, to see that nothing be wanting. If you happen to be in a place where you shall be reduced to great scarcity,Error of the Sicur de Mont∣luc. forget not to serve your selves with the means I used to rid my self of the Germans, and take ex∣emple by my Error; for I deferred it too long: but it was because I thought the Marquis would force me by the sword, and not by famine; but he was as subtle as I.Artifices of a Governor If you sus∣pect any treason, and cannot discover the bottom of it, cause some counterfeit information to be given you, and without naming the person, say you are inform'd that there is treason plotted against you, and that you are upon the point to discover it; pretend also to have some intelligence in your Enemies Camp, though you have none, for this will be a Countermine. I will say but this one word to you more, which is, that you set at once before your eyes the favour and displeasure of your Prince, for you have your choice. A King's inchgnation does not cool like that of another man. They seldom forgive a man that makes them lose any thing, for they would alwayes win. How was that brave Mon∣sieur de Lautrec received at his return from Millan, and yet God knows he was not in fault. He was wont to say, it was the greatest affliction of his whole life. Suffer then all sorts of extremities, and omit nothing that men of honor ought to do. I know very well that men must lose and win, and that no place is impregnable; but choose rather a hundred thousand times to die, if all other means fail, than to pronounce that infamous and hateful, I yield. Monsieur de Strozzy lent me a Galley to carry me back into France, and sent a Kins∣man of his, a young man of twenty years of age, and a Knight of Malta to Civita Vechia to make it ready,The Sieur de Montluc at Rome. and would that the Knight should himself conduct me to Marseilles. On Wednesday morning then I took post, and went to Rome, where I arriv'd about four of the clock in the afternoon, having sent the Captains Lussan, Blacon, and St. Auban to stay for me at Civita Vechia; Monsieur de Strozzy having given them leave for four months, the rest remain'd with the said Signeur. The Cardinal of Armagnac lodg'd me in his own Palace, and I was receiv'd with as much honor by all the Kings Ministers, as any Gentleman could be. They had already heard of my coming out of Sienna, the Marquis having sent word of it by an express Courrier to the Cardinal his Brother. I there found Monsieur le Cardinal of Guise, and the Duke of Ferrara, the Father of this that now is, being yet there since the creation of Pope Marcellinus. His Holiness asked the Cardinal of Guise if I was arriv'd, as he had been told, to which the Cardinal making answer, that I was, he entreated him to bring me to him, for he had a great desire to see me. The Cardinal found me at the Ambassadors Monsieur d'Avanson, where he told me that I must go to his Holiness, who had a desire to see me, and Monsieur d'Avanson lent me his own Coach. I found the Pope newly got up, and set in a Chair by his Bed side, so ill that he had much ado to speak: but nevertheless he entertained me with very great favour. I told him that I would not now trouble his Holiness with discourse, but that I hoped God would in two or three daies restore him to his health, and that then I would come and give him an account how all things had passed at Sienna. He then told me that he had already been informed of me, but that he should be glad to hear it again from my own mouth; adding these words, That I might say never any man, of what Nation soever, had ever had so much interest, love, and esteem among the Siennois as I. I then took my leave that I might not be a trouble to him, and returning back found the Cardinal de Guise still at the Ambassadors, to whom I said, that they might again go enter the Conclave to choose another Pope, for that this by to-morrow night would not be alive, and my words prov'd true; for the next day about Vespers he died,The death of Pope Marcel∣linus. and the day after I took leave of all my friends, and went to Civita Vchia, which was on Friday, and upon Saturday morning by break of day I went aboard. The pomps, pleasures, delights and curiosities of this City could not detein me a day longer, conceiving I might elsewhere be serviceable to the King my Master. One thing I must needs say, though it be in my own commen∣dation, that as I passed along the streets, and going to the Castle of St. Angelo, every one ran to the windows, and to their doors to see the man that had so long defended Sienna. Which only serv'd to enflame my courage the more to acquire more honor; and though I had scarce money to carry me home, I fancied my self as rich as the greatest man in France. About break of day we set sail, with as good a wind as we could desire, and in the close of the evening came to Capocorea, we there came to an Anchor, and two hours before day passed the straight betwixt Sardignia and Corsica, and about nine of the clock in the morning came to Bonificaio, where was Monsieur de la Molle. I had heard at Civita Ve∣chia, that Prince Auria was gone towards Piombino with three or four thousand Soldiers,
which he had embarked in two and fifty Galleys,Monsur de  before . and that he went to fight Monsieur de Termes, who was batring Calvy. This intelligence was the reason that I went to Bonificaio, to give notice of it to the said Sieur de la Mlle, who immediately thereupon sent away to the said Sieur de Termes, and so seasonably, that he was scarce risen in time to avoid being surpriz'd, and was constrain'd, as he himself told me since, to tumble three pieces of Ca∣non into the Sea, which he afterwards went to fish out again. I there did him a good turn, and a good piece of service for the King my Master. You who bear arms, and have a desire to serve your Princes well, have evermore an eye to every thing that concerns them, to give notice of every thing that you conceive conducing to their service. I have known some such good friends, as have rejoyced at the miscarriage of their Companions, thinking to augment their own glory by their disgrace: I never did so, nor would I do it to the greatest Enemy I had in the world. Of this I could produce great and notable exemples; but I pass them by to return to my business. The Baron de la Garde lay also in a Sea port near unto the place where Monsieur de Termes was, and had speedy intelligence, that prince Auria's Fleet was out at sea, but he knew not where, however suspecting the worst, he speed'y hoist sail, making directly for Marseilles, which was the cause of Mon∣sieur de Terms his safety; for as Prince Auria thought to have surpriz'd the Baron de la Garde in this Haven where he lay, he had intelligence that he was gone away not above five or six hours before, which made him to follow after, steering the same course (which was upon the same Saturday, that I had the good gale of wind) and pursued him as far as the Isles Dicrcs. The Baron without staying held on his course towards Marsilles, and it was well he did so, for had he tayed at the Islands he had been trussed, forasmuch as he had no more than fourteen or fifteen Gallies. I departed from Monsieur de la Molle up∣on Sunday about ten of the clock, and of all day could make no way, the wind being con∣trary: but about two hours before day the same wind we had upon Saturday before re∣turn'd, and we set forward, it being Monday morning. About break of day I asked the Knight, if they had no bigger sails, who told me, these were the largest they had, enquiring of me why I asked that question, and whether I had a mind to make more haste, to which I made answer that I had, whereupon he pre∣sently clapt a sail upon the Missen, and about break of day there fell a great mist, which continued till the Sun grew pretty high, that it began to disperse: the Watch then from the Main-top began to cry out a sail, a sail, and presently after a Galley, a Galley, at which the Knight told me,Two and fifty Galleys of Prince Auria. that they could be no other than either Prince Auria, or the Baron de la Garde.: When the mist suddenly clearing up we saw our selves in the middle of two and fifty Galleys, whereof fourteen that were separated from the rest of the Fleet stcered their course toward Sardignia, and we were between them. Every one in the Gal∣ley then began to despair; the Pilots would make for the Coasts of Barbary to escape; the Master was not of this opinion, but rather that we should make forwards by force of Os and Sails: St. Auban and the other Captains were in the greatest fright that possibly could be, saying, that being newly come out of so great an extremity as the Siege of Sienna, they were upon the point to be reduc'd to that misfortune, as to see themselves chain'd to the Oar, which rather than to undergo, they had far better die with their swords in their hands. What face soever I might set upon the matter, I was in no much better heart than they, and would have been glad to have been planting Cabages. On a sudden four of the fourteen began to turn their prows to fall upon us, whilst the others in the mean time stroke sayl to stay for them; and as the other had made all the sail they could to come upon us with all their Oars amain, the heads of their Galleys were just over against our Cook-room. Now the Knight all this while not speaking one word, whilst every body in the Galley was crying out in a miserable confusion, I said to him, O Knight, you seem to lose your self; you have been brd with one of the bravest men that ever went to Sea, which was the Prior of Capua; to which he made answer, No me perde, no me perde per Dio: mas io gardo la mie. The Enemies Gallies in the mean time came within a Harquebuz shot to enclose us, and then the Knight running from Poop to Prow, encouraged every one, making them to row amain, insomuch that when they thought to have hemm'd us in, we were got above fifty paces before them, and began to bestow upon them some Harquebuz shot. They pursued us about half a league; but by reason of our three sails, together with our fear that lent us wings, it seem'd as if our Galley flew before them, so that they presently gave us over, and tack'd about, and our Seamen plyed them with their courteous kind of language, every one striving who should pay them most with railing; and thus by the great diligence of our Seamen, we in despite of them escap'd. Towards night the wind began so to slacken, and change upon us, that we could not get to Marseilles till Tues∣day supper time, where we found the Count de Tande, the Countess, and the Baron de
la Garde at supper in the Garden of Monsieur Blancart, who were all astonish'd to see me, having made account that I was dead, and Sienna sack'd and burnt down to the ground; for they being in Corsica had heard news day by day from Romania, that I was at the last extremity without any hopes of composition; the Baron de la Garde had been confident in this belief all the while he was with Monsieur de Termes in Corsica, and also after he was come back to Marseilles, and that I would play a desperate game at my coming out, in case the Marquis would not give me such conditions as I would have. Others said that I had lost my understanding, and that God would punish me for my great temerity and folly. They were talking of me just as I entred into the Garden, but they would not let me tell them any thing till I had supp'd, for they had almost done. I had soon dispatch'd, for I was forbid to eat much after I had fasted so long, which I think was the death of very many after they came out; for nature must by little and little be com∣posed, and restor'd to her usual habit. I afterwards gave them an account from point to point of all that I had done, which they thought very strange. The Baron was very much astonish'd when I told him, that Prince Auria had pursued him as far as the Isles Dieres, giving God thanks that he had not yielded to the importunity of those he had with him, who would have perswaded him to cast Anchor at the Islands, and gave Mon∣sieur de Termes for lost, or at least all his Artillery: but I told him, that upon my intel∣ligence Monsicur de Molle had dispatch'd away to him in all diligence to give him no∣tice. The next day I dispatch'd away the Sieur de Lecussan to the King, to give his Ma∣jesty notice of my arrival, for the Count had told me,The King dis∣satisfied with the Sieur de Montluc. that the King was very much dis∣satisfied with me, for suffering my self to be reduc'd to the last morsel, by reason where∣of he could expect no other than the loss of me, and the ruine of the City, upon which depended all his reputation in Italy. See what hazards we run to serve these Princes! but there is no remedy, they are born to command, and we to serve and obey; and God knows if I had not cause to complain to be so abandon'd, and left a prey; but 'tis all one they think it yet too much honor for us to die in their Quarrels. The Baron mightily pressed me to send thither, and moreover made Lecussan promise him to ride night and day, which he did. I stayd with them until Friday morning, that I took post and came to St. Mathurin the 9th or the 10th of May, where I found the said Sieur de Lecussan, who staid there to tell me the great joy the King was in when he heard the whole story, his Majesty wondring at my fortune, and saying to every one, that he thought me the most fortunate man upon earth, after such and so long a Siege, and without hopes of relief, to come so honorably away, especially having to do not only with the Emperor, but also with the Duke of Florence, who desir'd to be reveng'd of the Siennois. He looked also up∣on the escape I had by Sea, out of the clutches of Prince Auria, for a singular good for∣tune. The next morning I was at the rising of Monsieur de Guise, who could never have his fill of embracing me, and led me to the Kings Bed-chamber, who was yet in Bed, but awake. At his entring into the Chamber he began to cry out aloud, leading me in by the hand, Sir, here is your lost man, and I then drew near to kiss his Majestie's hands, who embrac'd me with both his arms, holding my head to his bosom, almost as long as one might be saying a Pater noster, saying to me twice whilst he held me in this posture. O Monsieru de Montluc, you are infinitely welcome,The Siur de Montluc arrives at Cour. I never thought to have seen you more, to which I made answer, that God had preserv'd me to do his Majesty yet once in my life one good pece of service. He said he believ'd it, and was assur'd that I would not spare my life to do it; whereupon he again embrac'd me, and then start out of his bed. I then retired my self to the appartment the Vice-Chamberlain by his Majestie's order had ap∣pointed for me, as well satisfied with the gracious countenance of my Master, as if he had given me the noblest Present; for I have ever been proud,The Gacon proud. and 'tis natural for me to be so, being a Gascon. This alone had been sufficient to have made me have gone through impossibilities. The Cardinal of Lorrain, and the Constable were at this time at Ardres, treating a Peace betwixt the Emperor and the King. After, when his Majesty had din'd, about one of the clock he retir'd into the Gallery, Monsieur de Guise only being with him, where he was pleased to call for me, and so soon as I was enter'd Monsieur de Guise shut to the door.The Siur de Montluc makes a Narrative to the King of the Siege of Sien∣na. After which his Majesty would have me to give him an account at large of all the particularities of this Siege, from the first day I enter'd into Sienna, to the last, which made the story continue so long, that the Captains who were come along with me, and waited without upon the Terrals, told me, that they heard the clock strike five times whilst I was in the Gallery with the King. He was very much delighted with the order I took about the retrenchment of the bread, and the manner after which I did it, together with the Remonstrances I made to the Captains, and to the Senate. He was also mightily pleased with the resolution I had taken
to give the Marquis battail in the City, and above all things with the order I had drawn in reference to it, which was at that time much fresher in my memory than it is now, and was printed in Italy; and I remember the last time I return'd out of Tuscany the Duke of Vrbin told me at Pesero, that he had it by him, and had never in his life read any thing that pleased him so much as that. His Majesty would also that I should make a Narrative of it in writing, which I did, and whereof he distributed several Copies to divers Governors, and one I remember he caused to be sent to Mariambourg, where the Mares∣chal de Cosseé commanded, or else Monsieur de Fumel. He expressed a great sense of pity when he heard the business of turning out the useless mouths, and in conclusion was pleased to ask me two questions.A question of the King's to the Sieur de Montluc. The first was, how I could make the four Nations, mortal enemies to one another, agree so well together; for all of them in general, as he had been told, had behav'd themselves so exceedingly well to one another, without the least disorder, that they could not possibly have done it better: A thing that every one looked upon as a miracle, so much as the Emperor himself, wondring I could compose these people after this man∣ner (the Italians themselves, who came out of Italy reporting it to him) as an unheard of thing.His pleasant Answer. To which I made answer, that I had found it a very easie matter, and (being I saw he had a mind to hear it, and that I saw he took a delight in my Narration) I told him, that I went one Saturday into the Market, where in the sight of all the people I bought a Sack, and a little Cord to tye it with, together with a Fagot, all which having before them all laid upon my Shoulder, when I came to my Chamber I call'd for fire to light my Fagot, and after took the Sack, and there put into it all my ambition, all my avarice, my particular hatreds, my letchery, my gluttony, my sloth, my partiality, my envy, my particularities, and all my Gascon humours, and to be short, all that I conceiv'd might hinder me from considering every thing I was to do in order to his Majesties service; and told him moreover, that if all his Ministers to whom he entrusted the commands of men and places would do the same, his Majesties affais could not but prosper; for my mind was ever free and undisturbed with any thing that might hinder me from consider∣ing what I had to do, and bring about my design, which was never to go out of that place but with the last morsel in my mouth; and I will say moreover, that whoever shall strip themselves of the forementioned vices, and burn them, God will ever be assisting to them, who favouring our designs, we cannot fail to effect whatever we have a mind to undertake. For God ever goes along with such people, and on the contrary abandons those who do not serve their Masters after this manner, because they forfeit the Oath they have taken, having sworn loyally and faithfully to serve him, which no man can possibly do reteining these vices. His Majesty laughed at my discourse, commanding me to tell him one thing, and to tell him true, to which I made answer, that I would no more lye to him than I would to God Almighty.Another que∣stion of the King's to the Sieur de Mont∣luc. He then asked me whether Monsieur de Strozzy could not have reliev'd me if he would; for his Ministers at Rome had several times sent him word, that he was in a capacity to do it, and that it only stuck at him that I was not reliev'd? To which I answer'd, that his Majesty asked me a thing himself was better able to resolve than I. How can that be said he, seeing I have not been upon the place? Sir, said I, you Kings and Princes have so long ears, that you hear every thing that is done, though you be a hundred leagues off: notwithstanding I told him that his Majesty being engaged in Scotland, at Calice, at Mariambourg, and other neighbouring Castles; at Metz, and Piedmont, and in Corsica, he ought better to know than I, whether after having pro∣vided all things necessary for all these places, wherein his honor was engaged, he had been in a condition to send money to the said Sieur de Strozzy wherewith to raise a sufficient Army of horse and foot to fight so great forces as the Marquis had before Sienna;The Sieur de Montluc justi∣fies Monsieur de Strozzy to the King. which if his Majesty had not been able to do, how could he imagine Monsieur de Strozzy should re∣lieve me, who had not a man to make head against the Spaniards and Germans? That of Italians it was true, he might have had but too many: but that had been no equal match: that Monsieur de Strozzy was full of courage, and very affectionate to his service; but that no one could flye without wings; and that three several times he had run very great hazards for his service, of which I also gave him a particular account. His Majesty then told me, that he was satisfied with my answer, and that he believ'd Monsieur de Strozzy to be his servant, and too much a man of honor to be any way in fault; making me thereupon very many excuses, for that having been engaged in so many places at once, it had not been possible for him to send an Army into Italy to the said Sieur de Strozzy strong enough to raise the Siege, and to give the Marquis battail. Why then Sir, said I, you are neither to blame Monsieur de Strozzy, nor your self, both of you having done all that lay in your power, but this will reach you another time to look better to your affairs. This was a charity had been done the said Monsieur de Strozzy, who was as much con∣cern'd
as the King, and more about the loss of Sienna, for the htred he bore to the Duke of Florence. After we had ended our discourse, his Majesty went out to look the Queen, and Madam de Savoy that now is, to whom he repeated all that I had said to him, especial∣ly that about Monsieur de Strozzy, which the Queen was very glad of, and the next day did me the honor to give me thanks for the office of friendship I had done Monsieur de Strozzy, who was a concern of hers. I had no reason to do otherwise, for besides that I had lied, I had a particular honor for him, and it was just I should have so, forasmuch as he lov'd and esteem'd me more than any Gentleman that ever came out of Gascony. This was upon Monday and upon Tuesday, Madam de ValentinoisMadam de Va∣lentinois. told me, that she had never known any man return from an employment with whom the King was better satisfied than he was with me, and that he did highly commend me. Which whether or no she said to flatter me, I cannot say: but she better knew then any other, for she had very much gain'd the King's heart, and told me that I was very happy. As I was talking with her, the King came, and put me again upon some passages of my voyage. Now I had there the Patent and Declaration the Senate had given me under their broad Seal; wherein was declar'd, that I would never consent to the Surrender of Sienna, nor Capi∣tulate in the name of the King: but also that they call'd me to witness, whether they would ever hear of any Capitulation, till they were reduc'd to the utmost extremity, and the last morsel of bread. His Majesty took the Patent, and read it; after which he ask'd me, Why I would not Capitulate for my self and the Souldiers, telling me that he won∣dred the Marquis did not defeat me at my coming out. To which I made answer,The resolution of the Sieur de Montluc. That it was for two Reasons, whereof one was, that I had made a resolution never to surren∣der any place; but rather to dye, and that the name of Montluc should never be found to a Surrender or a Capitulation, having never put my self into a Town to deliver it up, but to defend it to the last moment of my life, as I had sent word to the Marquis by Signior Cornelio and Captain Charry. The other Reason why I would not Capitulate was, that in case either His Majesty, or any of his Successors, should hereafter reconquer Sienna, and that the Siennois should fortifie themselves with his protection, as they had done before, he might herein be left free to his own liberty and discretion. For they could not say, that his Lieutenant Montluc had consented to their Surrender, and that His Majesty ought not to quit his own interest; nor that of those who were to succeed him to the Crown of France. The chances of War, Sir, said I, are divers and variable. Millan and Naples have been the one twice, the other three times in our possession, and Sienna may be ours again. I have done nothing to prejudice your title, His Majesty lik'd my Reason so well, that he remain'd very well satisfied, commanding me to lay up the Patent amongst the Records of my Family, that it might be preserv'd for ever. Madam de Valentinois then put in, and said, that the Archives of a private Gentleman, was not so secure, as the Treasury of a King, and that if this Patent was of so great im∣portance, his Majestie might do well to cause it to be laid up in his. He then took it out of my hand, and gave it to one of his Gentlemen, or else to Madam de Valentinois to deliver it to Monsieur le Garde de Sceaux, who since was Cardinal of Sens, command∣ing him to lay it up in his Treasury, amongst the Evidences of the Crown. This cannot be above sixteen or seventeen years ago: So that if it would please the King his Son, who now reigns, to command Monsieur de Fizes, who was at that time Secretary to the Cardinal, to search for the Patent, I am confident it would be found. I would I had given 500 Crowns for a Duplicate of it, that I might have such a Record of my self, and insert it in my Book. For that will testifie that I came out of Sienna with Colours flying, Arms shoulder'd, and Drums beating, without any Capitulation at all. A thing not to be found in any History, that ever any man did the like. So that no one ought to think it strange, that I so much desire a Copy of that Patent; neithet ought the King so much to despise it, as to be out of hopes one day to make it useful to him, and His Majesty ought rather to be curious than I to have it sought out; for he is the most concern'd. The day following being Wednesday, Monsieur de Guise in the evening told me, that His Majesty was the next day resolv'd to give me the Order; which in those times was so noble a thing, and so much sought for, that the greatest Prince in France would not have been satisfied without it, and would rather the King should never confer any honor up∣on him, than deny him that; for it was then a mark of honor, that was not so profan'd as it is now adays. The next day then,The Sieur de Montluc made Knight of the Order. being Thursday in the morning, the King was pleas'd to honour me with it, and after dinner I begg'd leave of him, that I might go to Paris, to put my self into some tollerable Equipage, for that I was too torn and tat∣ter'd for a new Knight of the Order. He was pleas'd at the first word to grant me leave,
and before I went gave me an allowance of three thousand Francs in Pension out of the Exchequer, and three thousand Livers Revenue out of his Demeasn, wherein the County of Guar, where part of my own estate lies, was compriz'd, and Bregeyrac made up the rest. I two years enjoy'd the County, but not Bregeyrac, forasmuch as it was mortgag'd before. I very much desir'd to disengage it, because Monsieur de Valence my Brother had a Priory there, and had rather have settled himself in Perigort, than any other part of France. If I could have done it, I should very well have prevented the Roguery that has been hatch there since. His Majesty also gave me two thousand Crowns in ready money,Recompences given by the King to the Siur de Mont∣luc. bidding me moreover ask him any thing else that I wanted. I then asked him two Councellors places in the Parliament of Thoulouze, to help to raise my daughter's Portion, whom I married to Monsieur de Fontenilles, Monsieur de Valence having sent me instructions from Paris to ask that of the King, of which I should sooner raise money than of any other thing. His Majesty was pleased at the first word to give me this also, and with this money I married my said daughter, together with some little more that my wife had. His Majesty moreover promised me the first Company of Gens d' Arms that should become vacant. I had not the first, nor the second, but I had the third; for Kings promise so much, that it is not possible for them to keep their words with all. This vacancy hapned after my return from Montalsin, the second time his Majesty had sent me beyond the Mountains, and was the Company of Monsieur de la Guish. There were the benefits I receiv'd from the King at that time, which were no small ones, and in brief I had whatever I desir'd. I am sure since the death of this good Prince my Master I have a hundred times wish'd my own, considering the traverses have been given me, and the crosses I have had.The good na∣ture of King Henry the se∣cond. It had not been in the power of mankind to have done me wrong if he had liv'd, for he never forgot any services, let them be never so inconsidera∣ble; neither was it in the power of calumny to take away his good opinion from any one that did him good service. And on the contrary when any one fail'd in his duty, what good countenance soever he might shew them, out of complacency to such as would dis∣posess him of the ill opinion he had conceiv'd, it never came from his heart, as the Ma∣reschal de St. Andre' has often assur'd me, who told me his humour. He was very famili∣ar with him, and understood him very well. Five or six daies after, his Majesty came to Paris, where I ask'd leave of him to go home to my own house, to see my family, which he freely granted. I shall never conceal the benefits, and the honor my Masters have conferr'd upon me, that being only worthy, and becomming a mean and dirty nature, and an ungrateful heart. The End of the Third Book.
THE COMMENTARIES OF Messire Blaize de Montluc, MARESCHAL of FRANCE. The Fourth Book. I Had scarce been three weeks at my own house,The King's command to the Sieur de Montluc. when His Majesty dispatch'd a Courrier to me, commanding me forthwith to repair to him wherever he was, without reply, or staying for any other command: which I presently did, having scarce seen my house and my friends: But Glory is a notable spur. At my arrival His Majesty told me, that I must of necessity go into Piedmont to Monsieur de Brissac, who had sent to demand me to command the Foot, making account that to relieve S. Iago, where Monsieur de Bonnivet was shut up, he must be forc'd to come to a Battel. Two days after I had my dispatch, the King manifesting great tokens of Friendship to me, and to be very well satisfied with my service. I found Monsieur de Brissac at Turin very ill of the Gout; and the next day went to seek out Monsieur d' Aumale,Monsieur d' Aumale com∣mands the Ar∣my. who commanded the Army at S. Valant near Vlpian, which consisted of five thousand foot, a thousand men at Arms, and twelve hundred Light Horse. The King at my going away, gave me a Courser of his own, which was an exceeding good one, and which I ordered with my Train to follow after me, for I went post. The same day that I came to Monsieur d' Aumale, I would go to take a view of Vlpian, in order to a siege; for the Duke of Alva had made a fool of the work, and quitted S. Iago; and the laid Sieur d' Aumale lent me a little grey Nag. I went then in open day to discover the place, with in less then fifty paces of the wall; for I would let them see, that for having been lately with my Wife, I had forgot nothing of what I was wont to do. This discove∣ry was made in the sight of Monsieur d' Aumale, and several others: where at my re∣turn I gave him so good an account, that he found I had told him the truth of all. The next day he drew part of the Army toward the Castle, where the Enemy had cast up a great Platform, environed with a large ditch, with aA Tenaille is a kind of Fortification of the shape of a pair of Pincers. Tenaille that covered the Castle, and betwixt the Tenaille and the Castle, there was fourscore paces or more; in which space they had moreover cast up a Trench in the middle; to the end, that in case they should lose the head of this great Bastion and Tenaille, before they could get to the Castle, they might retire to this Trench. Monsieur d' Aumale had at this time for En∣gineers Duno and Balasergues, who began their Trenches above five hundred paces from the Town, where they found the earth so full of little slints, that a hundred men could not cast up twenty paces of Trench in a day, and the said Monsieur d' Aumale spent two days in this kind of work. I was very much discontented that they would not doThe Siege in Sep. 1555. as I would have them; but in the end Monsieur d' Aumale was resolved himself to see what I would counsel him to do, so that an hour after day-light, we went on that side by the corner of the Town on the left hand, and behind a little Chappel, which was within fifteen or twenty paces of the Counterscarp. He took no soul living with him
but me and Fequieres, who as I have been told, has since fac'd about to the House of Guise, though the said Seigneur shewed him as much favour and respect, as any Gen∣tleman about him. Monsieur d' Aumale and I went upon the Counterscarpe,Monsieur d' Aumale goes himself to dis∣cover. and Fe∣quieres went underneath, where we measured how much of the Counterscarpe we were to cut, to plant the Artillery upon the brink of the Ditch; and to discover also if the Enemies Harquebuzeers might not see into the Recoil of the Canon, and us also, should we lodge on the other side of the Counterscarp. We went upon it, and all along by the Ditches above sixscore paces, and whispering to one another, past by two of their Centinels, without being questioned by them: so that had we brought two Ladders with us, Monsieur d'Aumale would have tempted Fortune, to have seen what would have been the issue (for she often presents her self, when we least dream of any such matter) and when we came to the third Centinel, he call'd out and wak'd the rest, who as I believe were certainly asleep, which made the said Seigneur and me retire towards the little Chappel, much better accompanied at our return, than when we went, but it was with good round volleys of Harquebuze shot, so that we were constrained to run into the Chappel, the backside of which Fequieres recover'd. Now this Chappel was open to∣wards the Town, and that part to which the door had been hung, when it had one, was a square pillar of stone, about the thickness of a man that was not very gross,The danger of Monsieur d' Aumale and the Siur de Mont∣luc. and the Harquebuze shot put us in such haste, that Monsieur  Aumale was forc'd on a sudden to clap behind this pillar bolt upright, and I behind him, for all the Chappel besides was open. In my life I never heard so great Harquebuze shots; I know not whether it was not our fear, that made them seem so, but I am sure there was good cause to be afraid, for the Bullets almost continually slapt against the pillar with which Monsieur d' Aumale shelter'd himself: He serv'd me for a sield, and I held my head and my body close to him. They kept us there above a long half hour besieg'd, and it is most certain they had heard us; for vvhen vve vvere enter'd into the Chappel, vve heard them in Spanish cry out, Iuro a Dios ellos son en la Capilia, io los è entendidos. Monsieur d' Aumale has often since talkt to me of the frights we were in; for I do verily believe that above a hundred Harquebuzeers came to take aim at us, they also threw wisps of flaming straw into the ditch, that they might aim the better. We were in a fine case, said Monsieur ' Aumale, should they sally out upon us. Sir, said I, those of the house of Lorrain were ne∣ver so unhappy as to be taken skulking: neither will the rule of War permit them to sally out, without knowing what we are: We have here a good Buckler of Barcellona: All this while the bullets clatter'd against the stones, and it was convenient for us to tweak in our buttocks. Fequieres play'd here one very senseless trick; for not knowing where we were, he whistled to call to us, which I believe was the reason they shot so very long. In the mean time the Alarm run quite thorow the Town, and in the end they grew as weary of shooting, as we were of being shot at, and so we walk'd out and found Fe∣quieres behind the Chappel, who had made a cunninger choice of his retreat then we, and there Monsieur d' Aumale concluded the night following to bring the Artillery to the edge of the grass, and all our Ensigns. And there I got the victory of the En∣gineers, who said, that all our men would be kill'd there, and that we should be forc'd to quit the Canon; and hereupon by good fortune arriv'd Monsieur de Caillac. In the morning Monsieur d' Aumale in my presence told him all we had seen over night, and sent Fequieres along with him, to go to discover behind the Chappel: for the same night the said Seigneur had appointed two Ensigns, that lay a great way from the Chappel, to go and immediately to encamp themselves just behind it. The besieg'd committed there a great incongruity, for they ought not to have contented themselves with laying the Chappel open only, but they ought moreover to have raz'd it to the ground. Mon∣sieur de Caillac at his return was of our opinion; whereupon Monsieur d' Aumale per∣mitted Monsieur de Caillac and me to go and carry along with us the Pioneers to cut the Counterscarpe, ordering Duno and Balasergues to bring the Canon after, and caus'd a Gabionnade also to be made in the Meadow, some forty or fifty paces from the Coun∣terscarp, wherein to lodge the powder: so that by break of day we had cut the Coun∣terscarpe, and the Artillery was planted in Battery so near, that the very mussel of the Canon hung over the Graff. Beginning to batter, Monsieur de Bonnivee went to and fro in the very face of the Bastion, betwixt the Battery and the place where Monsieur d' Au∣male was, and the Mareschal de Cosse did the same. Two nights before we had cast up the Trenches at the head of the Bastion, which cover'd the Castle to approach to the Ditch, the Baron de Chipi, who was Camp-Master, put his Soldiers into Camisado, and threw himself headlong into the Ditch pel-mel amongst them,Chipi Camp-Master. and gain'd two Cazamatts that flank'd the Ditch, killing those that were within them, for they could not retire:
and at the same instant Monsieur d' Aumale commanded the Engineers to mine at the head of the Bastion, which they did, and made three. Monsieur de Cossé then ran to the Ba∣stion to see if the Mines were ready, and so return'd to Monsieur d' Aumale to the Bat∣tery we were making. Hitherto I could make no mention of Monsieur d' Anguin,Three Princes at this Siege. the Prince of Condé his Brother, and Monsieur de Nemours, they being only there for their pleasure, and without any command, being come post from Court, upon the report of a Battail speedily to be fought; no one elieving that the Duke of Alve would have return'd without striking a blow: However they were never absent from the work, and at the As∣sault went on together, and Monsieur de Bonnivt with them. There came along with them several other Lords, and amongst others Monsieur de Ventadour, de Lude, de ' Ausun, de Malicorne, and de la Chastaigneray. Now two of the Mines wrought a very great effect; for they overturn'd almost all the top of the Bastion into the ditch, and in the cloud of dus that was raised, the Baron de Chipy, and the Captain with him upon the ruine came to blows with fourscore or a hundred Spaniards (that were entred but four or five dayes before, but not without the loss of a great many of their men at their entry) and two or three hundred more, all choice men, and cull'd out of all the Spanish Compa∣nies; and there dd there above fourscore; and our people moreover won from them the Trench they had st up in the space betwixt the Bastion and the Castle, for they would have retir'd to their Trench, and ours followed so close, that they entred with them. They then attempted full speed to recover the Castle, but he who commanded within it would not let down the draw-bridge, so that there all the rest were dispatch'd. This was the success of the Bastion, which was bravely carried. There was there slain Ceasar de Na∣ples, a Nephew of the Duke of Alva, and among the Prisoners Signior Sigismundo de Gon∣zaga, and Captain Lazaro, Lieutenant of the Duke of Alva's Guards, with several o∣thers, whose names I have fogot. I must now return to the breach, which to speak the truth was reasonable enough. It was assauled at the same time with the Bastion, as it ought to be, where though all these Princes and Lords behav'd themselves with very great bravery, mounting the breach themselves to encourage the Soldiers, yet did they within gallantly deend it, and sent us back again very well beaten. Here was slain the Count de Creance, and several others bore him company; yet knowing what had been done on the other side it comforted us a little, and gave every one hope that we should bring about our design. Being mounted upon the Platform of the Bulwark which was left en∣tire, I sent Duno to tell Monsieur d' Aumale that he must lodge three or four pieces of Canon upon this Platform, to thunder the Enemy in the Town; which accordingly was presently done, so that in the morning they all began to play. Here there is wanting several particularites of this Siege writ by Monsieur de Montluc, as appears by the sixth Book. This so much astonish'd those within, that they began to lay their hands upon their hearts, and to parly. In the end the Capitulation was concluded; and also for the Castle, against which (to save the Governor's honor) we made fifty Canon shot. In the mean time news was brought that Monsieur de Termes was coming in the quality of the Kings Lieu∣tenant, which gave great occasion of discourse, and several reasons were by several men given for this change. The next day about noon came a Secretary of the Mareschal de Brissac call'd Verbin, with letters to all the Princes, wherein he excus'd himself, assuring them that this command of Monsieur de Termes did not proceed from him: And the said Verbin told me from the Mareschal, that he earnestly entreated me to speak to all the Princes, that they might not entertain that opinion of him; which I did, though per∣haps I had not that credit with them that several others had: but I know not how it came to pass, I have ever had more than I could hope for. Now you shall hear what was made of one word onely that I said to this Verbin, The thing I said to him was this, that Monsieur de Gonnort, de Gourdon, and I conceiv'd the Mareschal might do well to write to the King, that his Majesty would please for a few dayes to defer the coming of Monsieur de Termes, being that perhaps these Princes would make a difficulty of obeying a Gentleman (the said Sieur de Termes having as yet no other title) which might perhaps cause them to leave the Army, a thing they could not do without drawing so many people along with them, as might be prejudicial to his service.The Sieur de  Monluc's ad∣vice msinter∣preted. This was every tittle of what I said to him: but this honest man went, and told the Mareschal, that I had flatly told him, that I would not obey Monsieur de Termes, which God knows was the furthest end of my thought; for I had formery obeyed him, and was not now so high in the instep as to play the Prince. He
was ever a very great friend both to me and to all my Brothers, and has as great an esteem for me, if not greater, than any Gentleman of Guienne, and we have ever liv'd together at this rate. This past after this manner, and we marched straight to Montcalvo, expecting the ar∣rival of Monsieur de Termes, who came to the Siege, and behav'd himself with great mo∣desty: for he was very discreet, and would never take upon him to command. We laid Siege to the Castle (for the Town was carried at the first, neither indeed was it strong) and batter'd by the base of a Bastion on the right hand the Gate: but it was impossible to do any good by making a breach there, forasmuch as we must have storm'd it with Ladders, so that our people having made an attempt were repuls'd. dis∣covered. I went then in the night to discover the Ditch, and went so far as under the very Draw-bridge, which was close under the Wall, to see if there were not a Flancker that defended the Gate, and found that there was one below, which played all along the Ditch: the Enemy threw down fire∣works upon me, and there hurt me a Serjeant of the Company of Monsieur de Lieux my Brother; and yet we were no more than three that entred into the Ditch. At my return I consulted with Monsieur de Caillac to place two pieces of Canon upon the Counterscarp, just overagainst the Gate, to the end that we might shoor directly against the beams to which the chains were fastned, that the daw-bridge might fall down, after which we should soon beat down the Gate on the inside. We told all this to Monsieur d' Aumale, who gave us leave to do as we thought fit. The night following we lodg'd the Gabions, and three pieces of Canon, which was done by one of the clock at night. All the Princes came to see our work, and Monsieur d' Anguien taking me about the middle said to me, You have formerly been my Soldier, I will now be yours. Sir, said I, you are very welcome, neither ought a Prince disdain to play the Pioneer in time of need; here is work for you. Monsieur de Cossé came presently after, whom I took by the hand, and led him to see all that we had done, when after these Princes and Lords had seen all, they retir'd themselves to repose till day, and I remain'd upon the place. In the morning when the Captain of the Castle saw himself cooped up after this manner, he began to found a Par∣ley, and surrendred upon free quarter,Moncalvo sur∣rendred. with bag and baggage, and liberty to draw away a little piece of Artillery to save his honor. The Capitulation being signed, he presently march'd, and went straight to Pont d' Asteure, where their Camp-Master Don Arbro lay, who gave him no leisure to enter any hose to give an account of his fortunes but immediatelyThe Govenor hang'd. hang'd him up, as he deserv'd; for at least he ought to have endur'd an assault, which if he had, upon my word he had found us enough to do. You who put your selves into places, beware never so soon to enter into fear, and though your enemy may have playd his game very well, and that you have reason to suspect your own condition to be dangerous enough; yet if there be never so little possibility of de∣fending your selves, rouse up your spirits, and do the best you can, entrench your selves within, and consider that your enemy is more afraid to attaque you, than you are to de∣fend your selves; for it must be a very ill place indeed, if you have not some means to withstand an Assault, seeing you durst hold out a Battery. Do not think to save your honors by carrying away a Flag, or some small piece of Artillery, as this Captain did: for all this is of very little moment, and he who lies before you will easily grant such trifles as these, provided he has his end, and you the loss and shame. Do but think what for∣row and repentance this poor Captain, who so easily surrendred himself, had upon the Gallows, and if then he would not rather have chosen to have died in the Breach. When you have done all that men of honor can do, there is then no remedy, you must sub∣mit. The taking of this place was of very great importance,The impor∣tance of Mon∣calvo. for Montcalvo bridled and kept in awe, not onely le pont d' Asture, but also all the places upon the River Pau, and in the plain of the Marquisate of Montferrant, and moreover very much assur'd Cazal. The Army staid there seven or eight daies, during which time news was brought to the Princes, and to Monsieur d' Aumale, that the King was something dissatisfied at the disobedience I made mention of before. I also was put into the fine story, some honest man having done me that good office,The Sieur de Montluc tra∣duc'd to the King. as to affirm that I was the Incendiary, and the greatest Muti∣neer of all, which (how false soever) was so far believ'd, that the Constable sent me a let∣ter, wherein he writ, that the King had commanded him to send me word, that I should forthwith retire to my own house, and that he would not I should any more intermeddle in this expedition. This did not much astonish me, for I knew the King would do me the honor to hear my justification: but the Maeschal de Brissac was however so kind as to send his Brother Monsieur de Cossé to Court, by whom he assur'd his Majesty of the con∣trary to what he had been inform'd against me; with which the King was satisfied, and
acquitted me at my arrival: (for this occasion'd me a Journey to Court) where his Maje∣sty received me with as much favour as ever,A caution for such as have the privilege to talk with their Princes. particularly enforming himself from me of the affairs of Piedmont, and especially about the Princes in our Army, with whom he was not very well satisfied: but I had a care of prating too much, for as much as I was sure either the Constable, or Madam de Valentinois would have known it, and so from hand to hand it would have been carried about, that Montluc had been the Author. O that a man that lives amongst the great ones had need to be discreet, and to carry his cup even! These tale-carriers have never any good meaning with them: they would have done as much by Monsieur de Strozzy at my return out of Italy, and it was well for me that I spoke discreetly of him; for both the Queen and he took it very kindly at my hands: if you know any thing of importance to your Masters safety, or his service, you are obliged in fidelity and duty to give him notice of it; but to go and tatle to him say∣ing, Sir, such a one does not do well, such a one goes negligently about his business, such a one does this and that, you very well deserve to have your throat cut: for great per∣sons are not to be talk'd of at that rate; and he that told the King I was the occasion of the disorder in the Army, was no better than a Rascal, for there was no such thing: but it is no wonder people should make such stories of me who am but a poor Gentleman, when they dare to slander Princes and others the greatest Nobility of the Nation. These are ordi∣nary things at Curt, and 'tis there a kind of trade; forasmuch as the depression of one is the advancement of another▪ they play at thrust out the harlot, where the weakest go to the walls. There is no remedy, a man must run through this inconvenience, for a good heart cannot stay at home, and he that will warm himself, must either approach the fire, or the Sun. Our Sun is the King that illuminates and warms us with his raies wheresoever we are; if any one step in before you, you must arm your selves with patience,The Duke of Guise his Mot∣to. and the Duke of Guise his Motto Chacun a son tour. After I had staid some time at Court I took leave of his Majesty, and retir'd home to my own house, where I remained five or six moneths in repose, and when I was busie a∣bout ordering the affairs of my Family (which I never had leisure to look into,) his Ma∣jesty dispatched away a Courrier to command me to come post away to him, writing to me to send away my Train straight to Marseilles, without giving me the least intimation whither he intended to send me. I forthwith obeyed his command, for I was never resty, and being come to Court, I there found two Gentlemen of Sienna,The Siennois send again to the King for Monsieur de Montluc to command them. who were come in the behalf of their whole Country, to beseech his Majesty to send me to command them, making great complaints of Monsieur de Soubize; not that he any way tyrannized over them, or did them any injury, but by reason he had lost some places belonging to their State, though I believe Monsieur de Soubize had done all that in him lay, but no one takes any loss whatever in good part, and all the world judges of things by the event. At my arrival the King told me that I must return to Montalsin to be his Lieutenant General there. I contested a great while not to go,Monsieur de Soubizade. not that the command was not highly honorable: but I was afraid I should embark without Biscuit, and to speak the truth, whoever would do his business well, must not go so far from home; for a man is never remembred at that distance. If any thing presents it self for your advancement, you are sure never to hear of it: but for the acquiring honor and renown 's often better to be further off, than near at hand. Your fame shall more encrease, and you will be more honored and esteemed by Strangers than your own Countrey-men. On the other side I had more mind to be em∣ployed in the Wars of France near to his Majesties person: but no excuses would be allow∣ed, neither indeed could I heartily deny my good Master. The Siennois so soon as they saw that I was come, were again importunate with his Majesty to send me away, speak∣ing much more in my commendation than I could any way deserve: without further de∣lay then I departed, and took my way to Marseilles, where I found seven Ensigns of foot the King was sending away to Rome under the command of Monsieur de la Molle, in which Regiment my eldest Son Marc Antoine had a Company, and Captain Charry ano∣ther. The Baron de la Garde embarked us, and landed us at Civita Vechia, where I im∣mediately took post and went to Rome. Now Cardinal Caraffa being come into France to entreat the King, that if there should be occasion at Rome for the Popes service I might make some stay there, his Majesty com∣manded me so to do, and I found the Cardinal already come to Rome before me, where I was very welcome to the Mareschal de Strozzy, to the said Cardinal and the Duke de Palli∣ano his Brother, by whom I was the next morning carried to kiss the Popes feet, who made exceeding much of me, asking of me several particularities concerning France. The Duke of Alva had his Camp already within twenty miles of Rome,The Duke de Alva against the Pope. and the said Cardinal had made a Levy of three thousand Swiss, who were already come thither. I was ever of
opinion that we should march out into the Field, ten miles from the City, and there to encampour selves, till such time as the Duke of Alva should approach the walls of the City, ever fearing that would happen that did fall out, though Signior Cornelio Vrsino, who govern'd the affairs of war for the Pope, would never hearken to my advice; but be∣gan to design Fortifications within the City near to the wall, where I had a Post assign'd me. Above three weeks past, the Duke of Alva never approaching nearer than five or six miles, during which time the Romans every night gave the Alarm amongst themselves. so that nothing was to be seen, but people running some towards St. Peters, others to the Pa∣laces of the Cardinals who were of the Spanish Faction, and in my life I never saw so great disorder.The pople of Rome nothing . This People are not very walike; they are also composed of sundry Nations, I think they are not of the Race of the Caesars, Cato's, Scipio's, and other brave Romans, there are too many delights and luxuries amongst them to produce many men of war. Now the Cardinals of Armagna and du Bellay, de Lansac, and de Avanson, were of o∣pinion, that if I made a speech to the Captains who commanded in the City, to acquaint them with the order I had observ'd at Sienna, they would take it better from me than from any other, both they and all the City remembring the reputation I had acquir'd at that Siege, and the Mareschal de Strozzy and Cardinal Caraffa being also of the same opi∣nion, they caused all the chief men of the City, their Captains, Lieutenants, and Ensigns to assemble in the base Court of Monsieur d'Avanson, who was then Ambassador there, and there in the presence of the said persons I made them the following Oration in Italian. Monsieur de Lansac is yet living, who so soon as I had done, told me, that he could never have believ'd that a Gascon could have made so good an Italian. Gentlemen,The Sieur de Montluc's Ha∣rangue to the Romans. since the time that the Duke of Alva is approached something near unto your City, it appears to us French that you have conceiv'd some new apprehension, and without any great cause, insomuch that upon the least Alarm you enter into an extraordi∣nary fear and astonishment; so that should the Enemy approach your walls whilst you are in this confusion, they might enter at pleasure without any great opposition; forasmuch as when you ought to keep silence in your City, especially in the night, and that you ought rather to run to your walls, than to shuffle your selves into the strange disorder you do; you on the contrary run some to S. Peter, others to the Churches, and others to the Palaces of the Spanish Cardinals, with the greatest confusion in the world. This must of necessity proceed from one of two causes, either from want of courage, or from a defect in your conduct, in that you do not strictly command such order as your people ought to observe both by day and by night in a time of danger. If you do it for want of courage, it is then a sign you have not well consider'd what people your ene∣mies are: and what can they be other than men as you are? do not we bear the same arms they do, and are they not as good as theirs are? are not they as vulnerable and as subject to die by our blows as we are by theirs? Is not the Pope's quarrel holy and just, and better than theirs? This ought to make us hope that God is on our side. And what part or portion has the King of Spain in Rome, what right or title to any of the Pope's Territories, or to your habitations, that God should assist him more than us? What is become of the valour of those ancient Romans, who have left you the great re∣nown they acquir'd in their dayes? What other Nation does now inhabit Rome, that may have depriv'd you of the courage left you by those, from whom you pretend to be from all antiquity lineally descended? Oh Gentlemen, how infiitely do you wrong the reputation of your famous Ancestors in discovering your selves to be afraid of people who are no other than men as you are? And you do your enemies the greatest kind∣ness imaginable, in giving them occasion to boast, that they are terrible to those who formerly made all the Nations of the world to tremble at their arms. If this fear proceed from the evil order you have hitherto established, there is nothing so far amiss, that in one day may not easily be remedied, for by entring into present consultation from whence this default proceeds, the business is done: and so you shall manifest to all the world, that it is not want of bravery, but of good discipline; and your people shall recover heart, seeing themselves secur'd by the good orders you shall give. Do not think it strange if I declare that I am asham'd of what I see in your City, when ha∣ving been formerly in Sienna commanding a People besieged by the Marquis of Marig∣nano,Praise of the Sinnois. with forces double to what the Duke of Alva has, I can say to the great honor of the Siennois, that in all that time I never observed so much as any one Citizen afraid. Happy are those Siennois who have manifested themselves to be extracted from, and the true legitimate Sons of your ancient Fathers, who founded these walls and theirs also, as they have themselves assured me, and do also bear the same arms you do. And
although their City be lost, their valour and renown is not for all that buried nor ob∣scur'd, but sit to give every one hopes that it may one day be recover'd by their valour and virtue: whereas if you behave your selves no better hereafter than hitherto I have seen you do, I cannot forbear to tell you, that I would sooner undertake to defend Si∣enna, with the women of that City only to fight under my command, than to defend Rome with the best Romans you have. Pardon me (I beseech you) if I tell you the truth▪ for I do it not for any advantage I expect should accrue either to the King my Master or to my self; but for your own good, and to prevent the total ruine of your City, which if it shall be assaulted by your enemies, will be miserably sack'd, and worse handled, then it was in the dayes of Monsieur de Bourbon. You may be confident, Gentlemen, that could I take any pleasure in your ruine, I should not now make you this remonstrance in the presence of these honorable persons: but being sorry, as your servant (you being good friends and confederates of the King my Master) and desiring to die with you for your conservation, I am constrain'd to be thus plain, and to say this to you I have done; these Gentlemen the Kings Ministers having also assur'd me, that you would take it better from me, than any other, for the esteem you have of me since the Siege of Sienna. I beseech you therefore take my advice, and if in any thing I may be assisting to you, upon the least summons I will immediately attend you in your counsel. 'Tis possible the remembrance of the Sack of your City by the Seigneur de Bourbon may have put you into some apprehension; but you are to consider that you were then surpriz'd; but you have now your weapons in your hands. Doubt nothing, fear not your enemies, but divide your City, and appoint every one his place to repair unto upon occasion, to the end that your own confusion do not deprive us of the means to relieve you, if the enemy present himself to the assault: dispossess your Citizens of their fear, if they be afraid, that there may be no confusion, and for the rest trouble not your selves; for knowing the good order you have taken, you shall soon see your enemies forc'd to retire. They all return'd me very many thanks, and so departed, as∣suring us that they were going to give such orders, that the accidents which had hapned before should never be again, earnestly intreating me to come the next morning to their Councel, and that there they would shew me the order they were going to take, to receive thereupon my opinion and advice. Which was accordingly done, and we altogether provided so well for their affairs, that there was no more mention of fear, nor sign of disorder. I went to the heads of the people, and shewed them what they were to do, whom I found chearful enough in the business: yet this great multitude is composed of divers humors, but a man may reduce them all to one, when they see it is for their own good and safety. In short, all things were very much better, which the Pope also took exceeding well at my hands. Now a few dayes after the Duke of Alva remov'd his Camp,The Duke of Alva retires. and took his way to∣wards Tivoly twelve miles distant from Rome. I know not whether because he under∣stood the City stood better upon its Guard than before, and that the order of things was changed there, or that his intention was not to approach any nearer to the City. And be∣ing that in Tivoly was Signior Francisco Vrsino with five Italian Ensignes, and that the Town was not strong, the Mareschal, the Cardinal Caraffa, and the Duke de Palliano were afraid that the Duke of Alva was gone to take Tivoly, and cut all those in pieces within it, which was the reason that they entreated me to march all night to go fetch off the said Signior Francisco, giving me the two Troops of light horse of the Popes Guards, two Troops of horse of the Duke de Paliano, commanded by the Captains, Bartolomeo and Ambrosio, and four hundred Harquebuzeers under the command of my Son Marc Antony,Marc Antony, eldest Son to Sieur de Montluc. and Captain Charry. Cardinal Caraffa had assur'd me upon his honor, that the Enemy could not pass the Tiber, and that I might make my retreat at pleasure, having evermore the Tiber betwixt the Enemy and me. By Sun-rise I was at Tivoly with the Horse, and the Foot arriv'd two hours after, where I found that Signior Francisco had heard no manner of news of the enemies, and after I had told him, I was in no small doubt what would be∣come of us; for I very well knew before I set out from Rome, that the Duke of Alva had taken the way of Tivoly, and now perfectly understood, that he came privately to surprize Signior Francisco, forasmuch as he had had no intelligence of his motion. I therefore eating only a snap or two, causing the horses to be baited, and the foot to have a little refresh∣ment, ordered Signior Francisco to cause the Drums to beat, that we might presently dis∣lodge, and put our selves into the field, entreating him to lend me a Troop or two of his people who were acquainted with the Countrey, for that my self would go play the Scout, whilst every one was making himself ready to depart: and it was well for me I did so; for Signior Francisco having sent out two of his men to discover, they return'd as we sate
at dinner, and had brought word that there was no news of any Enemy in all the Coun∣trey; but I would not trust to that, and therefore went with my two Troopers, when so soon as I was out of Tivoly upon a ridge of a hill, I plac'd my self under a Tree, for it began to be very hot, when presently all along a little Copse, I perceived a great number of horse maching straight down to the Tiber, and others in a valley, who came directly towards me, and in the midst of a plain on this side the little Copse, I saw something which I could not discern what it should be; I then presently sent word to Signior Francisco, that I had discover'd the Camp, and that he should in all diligence get his men out of the Town,The Sieur de Monluc ftch∣s off Signior Francisco  from Tivoly, and march them away on the other side of the Tiber. The Sol∣dier whom I had sent to carry him this intelligence was scarce got into the City, when be∣hold eighteen or twenty Spanish Ensigns, who were laid down in the Plain, got up, and put themselves upon their march. I then gallopped away my self, where I found, that as yet not so much as one man was got out of the City, and hasted the Italian Ensigns with all diligence to march away, causing the gate of the City to be shut, and there I played a very cunning trick, for I carried the keys along with me, thinking the enemy could not of a long time break down the gaes; for the Tiber passed through the middle of the Town, where there is a Bridge, and very fair and good Mills in the City it self, which I had caused to be begun to be broken from my first arrival; but that work could not be finisht.The Sieur de Montluc's diligence. I left Captain Charry at the Gate, and my Son Marc Antony at the Bridge to sustain him, and I went and came running to and fro to hasten the Italians to march, when so soon as they were all out of the Gate I went to draw off Captain Charry, and we began to break the Bridge, which was of wood, and immediately the Enemy was in the City. I placed Haquebuzeers all along in the houses that looked into the street, the Soldiers using extraordinary diligence to break the Bridge, after which I marched directly to the Gate. I had placed the Cavalry before the Italians, and we were inevitably to pass through the streight of the Rocks, where we could only pass one by one. Till we came to the going out of the Gate we had the Enemy continually upon us, and it is no more than fifty paces from the Gate to that straight; so that seeing they could not themselves get to us, but one by one, they gave us over, and returned to risle the City. Their Italian foot came after the Spaniards, and thought to have entred the City to have had their share of the spoil, but the Spaniards would never let them in, but held them in talk at the Gate whilst they were busie at their plunder. So soon as we came to the Pein I made my Son and Captain Charry with the four hundred Harquebuzeers turn on the right hand along the ridge of a Hill, about a thousand paces distant from us, and the two Companies of the Duke de Paliano, telling them the mysterie, that in case the Enemy should pass the Tiler, they should still make forwards along the ridg towards Rome, and take no care for me. And indeed we had as good have lost all the Ensigns Monsieur de la Mole had, as these four hundred Harquebuzeers, for they were the very lower of all the Companies. I was not got half a mile into the Plain, when behold all the Cavalry upon the banks of the Tiber, and their Germans, who began to pass, and particularly some horse by the Mill, where they could onely pass one by one. I then gave all for lost, for I was to retire twelve miles before the whole Army, and made no question but that the Cavalry would carry over a great many of Foot behind them: but if I lost the one, I would not lose the other.The Retrea. Now Signior Francisco marched still at a good round rate, at about a Harquebuz shot distance from the Tiber, and the others along the ridg over against us. When fifty or threescore of the Enemies Horse came up to us, I then took one of the Cap∣tains of the Guard with his Cornet, whilst the other still march'd on in the rear of the Foot, causing them to mend their pace, and faced about upon the Enemy; who thereon made a halt; and so soon as I made a shew as if I would charge them, turn'd their backs to retreat, though I cannot imagine why, and I turn'd about to pursue my way. After that they never offer'd to come towards me, though more of their own people came continu∣ally up to them, but it was only three or four at a time: so that seeing me a good way advanc'd, they turn'd back again and fell to taking Cattle that were grazing in the fields. Now you must know what my deliberation was, by which you may see whether I had a mind to lose my self with these people, or to escape with our own. The Duke de Palliano had given me a grey Turk, that flew upon the ground, and was an extraordinary fleet one; my design therefore was to engage the Enemy with this Troop, and in case I should see no possibility of saving that party,The Sieur de Montluc's de∣sign. I would then retire to our own people, who were go∣ing directly to a Castle that held for the Pope, and in which there was a Garrison, where I made account to secure most of the horse, it being not above five miles to that Castle. Two dayes after a Trumper told us that the Duke of Alva would never permit SigniorAscanio de la Corne. Ascanio de la Corne to pass the Tiber, forasmuch as he had not one Harquebuzeer, but Ger∣mans,
all the Spanish and Italian Foot being at Tivoly. And thus I retreated straight to Rome, sending to our people to come to us, and we rallyed at the Bridg nearest to Rome, over which we passed, it being three hours within night when we came to Rome. This is the fortune I had in this Retrea. When ever (Captains my Companions) you shall be in any place where you are the least in doubt, never trust to the report of others: for it is evermore the custom at your first coming for every one to caress you, and to entreat you to repose your self: but do not do it; examine the place where you are, and discover it very well. One of the greatest Captains the Emperor ever had (which was Signior Pscaro) for trusting to the report ofSignior Pes∣caro. others at his arrival in a City of Italy, was taken; yet he had no less than four thou∣sand men with him, which was a great dishonor to so great a Captain: though he laid the fault to another, as himself told me. Had I done so, Signior Francisco had made me suffer a great disgrace, and perhaps to have lost my life. Two nights after the said Signiors gave me two Companies of Italians to conduct them to the Duke de Somma at Balistra, which stands by the Sea-side, six or seven miles be∣hind Marino. I marched all night, having with me the two Companies of the Duke of Palisano; and when I came there, gave order that our Hore should be baited, and ready in an hour and a half to return. The Duke de Somma would by all means have com∣pelled me to stay that night, but he could by no means perswade me to it; for I well imagain'd, that the Duke of Alva was not without spies at Rome, considering there were so many Spaniards, and others of the King of Spains Faction in the City; and therefore having eaten a bit or two, put my self upon my way, which coming and going was five or six and forty miles, and arrived three hours within night at Rome. It was well for me I did so; for two hours before day there came six hundred horse, and five hunded Har∣quebuzeers on horseback to Mariano, where they heard news that I was return'd. This was another good fortune that befel me, wherein there was no need that I should have left my understanding at home. And I will now tell you of another that befel me six dayes after, though it is onely to make such laugh as shall vouchsafe to read this Book, and the story of my life. Five or six dayes after this rencounter, the Duke of Alva's Camp lying still at Tivoly, The Baron de la Garde sent word from Civita Vechia to the Mareschal de Strozzy, that if he would send him four hundred Harquebuzeers, he would embark them in his Galleys, and land them at Neptuno, a very strong place upon the Margent of the Sea, which flows into the ditches of it, and that there they might burn the Boats the Duke of Alva had brought thither wherewith to make a Bridg at Ostia,Marc Anthony and Captain Chrry at Civita Vechia. to pass over to this side of the Tiber, as he afterwards did. The Mareschal therefore leaving this affair wholly to my direction, I sent thither my Son Marc Anthony, and Captain Charry with the four hundred Har∣quebuzeers, who went in emulation of one another, and so soon as they came to Civita Vechia the Baron took them aboard, and accordingly went to land them at the said Neptuno: but they could not possibly burn the Boats, forasmuch as they had moved them into the Ditch, which was defended by the Fortress. Now (as the affairs of War depend upon od accidents) it fell out that the same day they arrived at Neptuno, where they stayd two dayes. I went in the Evening to walk without the Gate that leads towards Marino, where I met a man that came from thence, and ask'd him what he was; to which he made answer that he was a Beadsman belonging to the Hospital of Marino. I discover'd by his tongue that he was no Italian, which he also confest to me, telling me that he was a Frenchman, but so poor that he was reduc'd to the Hospital of Marino. I then asked him who was at Marino, to which he answer'd,Marc Antoni de Colonna. that that very morning before he came away, Signior Marc Antonio de Colonna arriv'd with his Company of fifty men at Arms, having nothing with him more, neither Horse nor Foot; (for the Companies of Gens d' Arms of Italy have no Archers belonging to them, as ours have.) Marino belongs to this Marc Antonio, whom I had heard of at Rome, where he had been decipher'd to me for a young Lord of twenty o two and twenty years of age, full of mettel, and rich to the value of fourscore thousand Crowns yearly revenue. Paliano was also his, which the Pope had taken from him, and given to his Nephew, who thereupon was called the Duke of Paliano, though he did not long enjoy that title, the other recovering it again not long after. Bing parted from my Hospitaller,A pleasant hope of the Sieur de Mont∣luc. it entred into my fancy that I might easily take this Roman Lord prisoner, and that if I could snap him I should be made for ever, for I should have at least fourscore thousand Crowns for his Ransome, which would not be thought unreasonable, being no more than one years Revenue of his Estate. I walked then contriving with my self, that Monsieur de la Molle should go along with me with
three hundred Harquebuzeers only, whom I would leave in the md-way at a Tower where were certain Sheds for the shelter of Cattle (for I had taken notice of the way go∣ing and coming from Balistra) and that I would take Captain Ambrosio Lieutenant to one of the Companies of the Duke de Paliano, with five and twenty of the best and fleetest horse of his whole Company: that I would moreover borrow of Signior Aurelio regosaAurlio Frgo∣sa his Lieutenant, and his Corne, with five and thirty Launces only of the best, and the best mounted he had. That I would leave Captain Ambrosio with the five and thirty Laun∣ces about a Harquebuz sht from Monsieur de la Molle, on that side towards Marino, and with those of Signior Aurelio would go place my self in Ambush under the Vines a little on the left hand the great high-way near unto Marino; which having done, I I would then send six Launces to give the Alarm a little before day to the City; upon which I made account that Signior Marc Antonio being young, and full of mettle, would not fail to sally out, but would precisely sally by break of day, when my six Launcers would draw him into our Ambuscado, with whom we would also run away in his sight, would make him pursue me a main seeing a Colours, which he would be eager to take for the greater honor of his victory. Having thus contriv'd the bsinss with my self, I accounted him as sure my prisoner as if I had already had him in my hands, and thereupon returning into the City, spoke to Signior Aurelio, who lent me his Lieutenant and his Cornet, with the five and thirty Launces,Captain Alexis is a Grecian. I spoke to Monsieur de la Molle, and to Captain Ambrosio, and the Lieutenant of Signior Aurelio was called Captain Alexis. We appointed to meet in the beginning of the night at the Gate of the City: but I would discover nothing of my design either to the Mareschal, or to any of those I took along with me, till first we were got into the fields, and then I took aside Monsieur de la Molle, and the Captains Ambrosio and Alexis, and acquainted them with the Enterprize, which they all three approved of, wherein we were one as wise as another. So that we thought the time long till we was there, they making the business wonderful easie, all of them affirming that they knew him, and were confident he would not fail to sally. Thus then we set forwards, each Company apart, and mne alwaies the foremost, till we came to the Tower, where I left Monsieur de la Molle, and further behind a little Chappel Captain Ambrosio. Now so soon as Captain Alexis and I were come to the edge of the Vines near Marino, he would needs have his Ensigne to be one of the six that were to give the Alarm, and delivered the Colours to another: For which use I lent him a Gentleman of mine, and we clapt our selves down in a Marish (where in Winter there was alwaies water, but in Summer none at all) there being no other place where we could conceal our selves; and s the six marched up di∣rectly to the Gate of the City. Presently the day began to appear, when hearing no∣thing of Alam, I began to think that either Signior Marc Antonio would not be tempted out of his Quarters, or else that he was gone back. Now on the right hand of us there was a great valley,The Sieur de ontluc disco∣vers the Ene∣my. and I was got up to a little emi∣nence, where was the ruines of some house or Chappel, and began to discern on the hill on the further side of the valley, three or four horsemen, who one while mov'd, and another while stood still. I shew'd them to Captain Alexis, who was lower then I, and who thereupon sent out two Launces all along by the Vines, upon the edge of the descent of the valley. I had not as yet cast my eye into the valley, forasmuch as the day but just began to break; but look'd always towards the mountain where these three or four horse appear'd, about fifty paces distant from us: but when I turn'd my eye that way, I there saw three great parties of horse, in the first whereof there might be a hundred or more, in the second two or three hundred, and in the third seven or eight hundred horse. Now you are to understand upon what account these came to be here, which was thus. As the Baron de la Garde landed our people at Neptuno, those of the Town dis∣patched away two Horsemen post to the Duke of Alva at Tivoly, who thereupon imme∣diately sent away Signior de la Corne with twelve hundred Horse, and twelve Ensigns of Foot, who marched all night, and an hour before day arrived at this Valley▪ where they had made a halt till Signior Antonio could make himself ready, to whom he had sent five and twenty Launces to make him mount to horse, who coming to the Gate of the City, they there met with our six Soldies (the day then but just beginning to break) where de∣manding of one another who they were for,The Sieur de Montluc's A∣vant Coureurs put to flight. they charged ours in such manner that they were constrained to return back towards us, and to fly towards the road that leads from Balistra to Rome, where the Enemy pursued them over the Roman Plain even to Rome it self, and there gave the Alarm to the Mareschal and the whole City, who thereupon con∣cluded that it was not possible but that I must be taken, and all those lost who were with me. Now so soon as Captain Alexis had called in his two Horsemen, we began our
treat by the same way we came, when behold the hundred horse in our Rear, the party of two or three hunded after those,The Retreat of Monsieu de Montluc. and the seven r eight hundred in the rear of them, who followed us at a good round trot, the Ensigns of Foot making all the haste after they could; in which order they pursued us seven miles, till we came to Captain Ambrosio, with their Launces coninually couch'd upon our horse cruppers. I was upon the Grey Turk the Duke of Palino had given me, one of the fletest horses I ever came on the back of, and the best leaper of a ditch: so that sometimes I leapt out of the way into the fields on the right hand, and sometimes on the left; and when we fled along the road, Cap∣tain Alexis and I were evemore in the Rear, and he hat carried the Cornet in the Van; I still all the way encouraging the Soldiers, and bidding them to fear nothing, now on the one hand, and then on the other, when the furthest that ever we were before the Enemy was not above three or four Launces length. Now so soon as we drew near to Captain Am∣brosio he came out from behind the Chappel, seeing which I cried out to our people volse volte, who thereupon immediately fac'd about, and I gave them a sudden charge, beating them back to the other Body, who having seen our Ambuscado had halted to discover what it might be, the two Bodies closing together,The Error of the Sieur de Monluc. and making a shew as if they meant to charge us. I then saw that I had played the fool egregiously, in having given this charge, when as God would have it, Monsieur de la Molle presented himself upon the road with his Har∣quebuzeers, which made the Enemy to step short, and forbear to charge me. Captain Alexis then said to me, Quelli primi checi sequitano, sono graci, per che l ò intesi à lorogridi. Me ne vo a vedere, si potero fermar li, per tratener mi con essi loro, which he did, demand∣ing to speak with them upon their word, whilst I in the mean time made Monsieur de la Molle march off his Foot, recovering a little descent; o that the Enemy could no more see what we did: when I order'd them to make towards the pillars of an Aqueduct, by which the Romans in former times conveyed their water to Rome, commanding the Horse to keep still in their Rear, at a good round trot, and all them to march as fst as they could. I then return'd to Signior Alexis, having fist coold my horses mouth in a ditch by the Tower, whom I found after as fresh as he was but new taken out of the S able. Now so soon as the two Troops were clos'd up together, and had made a halt, the great party behind did the same, and the Foot likewise halted, Captain Alexis still talking with them. I could all this while from the place where I stood see our people, when so soon as I saw them got near to the Aqueducts, I call'd to Captain Alexis, sayg to him Retiriamo si, Capitano, retiriamo si, upon which the Enemy asked him who it was that commanded in chief, whereupon naming me they began to exclaim, sayng, that in eight or nine days time they had three times faild of taking me, which was at the retreat of Tivoly, at my return from Balistra, and now; which made Captain Alexis retiring laugh at them; when seeing him turn his horse to go away, several of them call'd out to me A dio Signior di Montluco a dio, and I also cried to them a dio a dio, who thereupon faced abot, and went directly to Marino, where they heard news that the Baron de la Garde had reimbark'd our people, and was gone to Civita Vechia. Signior Ascanio sent me back three Launcers I had lost by the way, but not their horses; for as their horses stumbled they fell down, when I leaping into the way with my Turk, stroke them upon the buttocks with the flat of my sword, and made them close up to the Party. He sent them back by a Trumpet of his, who made us laugh, when speaking of his Master, he said, that had he known I had been of the Party, he would have accompanied me to the Gates of Rome to have taken me prisoner: but never by the way asked his Prisoners who commanded them till after we were got off. And the Trumpet moreover had told me, that had I been taken, I had not needed to fear that any one would have offer'd me the least injury or offence; for I should have been as much made on, and used with as much honor and respect, as in our own Camp. Neither indeed can it be said, that ever any Prisoner went out of my hands, or any place where I had to do, discontented, or dissatisfied with my behaviour to him, and it is a great baseness to flea men to the bones, when they are persons of honor, and bear arms; especially in a War betwixt Prince and Prince, which is rather out of sport than unkindness to one another. After this manner I made my retreat to Rome, where after I had put off my Arms, I went to seek out the Mareschal, the Cardinal de Caraffa, and the Duke de Paliano, whom I found in a house of the Town altogether, being newly return'd from the Palace of St. Peters, who all of them fell upon me, saying, that it seem'd as if I had a mind to lose my self out of wantonness, and that had they known of my design, they would have stopt my journey. They would then needs know the occasion of my Enterprise, which I recouned to them from point to point, telling them that all the way as I went, I accounted Marc Antonio as sure my prisoner as I was alive, and had already set his ransome at fourscore thou∣sand
Crowns, which had not been unreasonable, being no more than one years revenue of his Estate, of which fourty thousand I intended to give to Monsieur de la Moe, the Captains and Soldiers, and the other fourty thousand I meant to keep to my self, to purchase me an Estate in France somewhere near to the King, for Gascony was too remote from Court, and that I already fancied I had a house near Paris, of which I was so confi∣dently perswaded, that it would not out of my head of all night. At which account of my project they all burst out a laughing to that excess, that I think they never laugh'd so much at one time in their lives, to think that I had made my self so sure of my prize, the ransome, and purchasing of Lands and Castles in the Isle of France; whereupon the Marschal, who when he has a mind to rally alwayes spoke Italian, said to me with a very good grace, Signior quando che vi anderemo visitar, fareti voi à noi altri tre bonn chiro nei castelli que volete comprare a presso parigi? they were merry at my ex∣pence. They were at this time busie about sending a dispatch to the King, and sent Monsieur de Porrieres of Provence to his Majesty, who had his share of laughing, and all the rest that were with them. And as there are a sort of people, who are prone to do more hurt than good, some honest man sent news by the way of the Bank of Lions, that I had lost all the Pope Cavalry in the Roman Plain, and was my self run away no body knew whither, nor could any one hear what was become of me. I do believe these men are hir'd and suborn'd to disperse ill news, only to discourage those of our party. This was writ by the Post from Lions to the Constable, and by him told the King, who was very much trou∣bled at the news: and Monsieur de Porrieres being to pass through the Grisons Countrey, could not arrive so soon at Court, but that the news was got thither four dayes before him, insomuch that whereas the Mareschal and the rest had laughed at my folly,A false report spread at Court of the Sieur de Mont∣lucs defeat. the King was very much offended with me, saying that it was the most ridiculous and senseless piece of folly that ever was committed by man; adding moreover that I had hitherto been for∣tunate, but that now I had lost my fortune, and my reputation, which he was very sorry for; especially that such a disgrace should befall me at the Gates of Rome. This news was not kept so secret at Court, but that it was presently carried into Gascony, where I leave you to judg how I was dissected by them that did not love me: for one must be a God to have no Enemies, nor emulators, or else must take upon him to meddle with nothing but his Garden or his Orchard: But so soon as Monsieur de Porrieres arriv'd the King sent for him into his Cabinet, where after he had read his letters of Credence, and his o∣ther dispatches, finding therein no syllable of this affair, and Monsieur de Porrieres ma∣king no mention of it neither, his Majesty said to him, And what Monsieur de Porrieres, is Montluc heard of yet? he has made a pretty piece of work on't. To which he made an∣swer, that he had left me at Rome; whereupon the King proceeded and said, that he knew that I had lost all the Popes Cavalry, and was my self run away. Monsieur de Porrieres was very much astonish'd at this news, and replied, that if this had hapned after his departure, it might be so, and yet he had been no more than nine dayes in coming. His Majesty then made them look how long it was since this news came, which they did, and found it to be four dayes, at which the King said he thought it was only a lye, and Banker's news, enquiring of Monsieur de Porrieres what piece of folly it was I had com∣mitted, who thereupon made answer (as he has himself told me since;) Sir I will tell you,Monsieu de Porrieres gives the King an account of the Sieur de Mont∣luc's Enter∣prize. and I make no doubt but your Majesty will laugh at it at much as we did. after which he related to him the whole story, and what I had said at my return to the Mareschal de Strozzy, Cardinal Caraffa, and the Duke of Paliano, at which I do assure you I have been told his Majesty laughed very heartily, and more than he had been seen to do of a great while before, as also did the Constable, and all the rest that were present, insomuch that I was told the King above eight dayes after, seeing Monsieur de Porrieres, said to him, Well Porrieres, has Montluc purchased those places about Paris? and never call'd the story to mind but he laughed. And as to what I say in my Book, that for these hundred years never any man was more fortunate in War than I have been, I pray examine and see if you will not acknowledge me to be so in these three occasions, which in eight or nine dayes time befell me, one after another (besides several others you will meet with in this life of mine) to have escaped without loss, three such dangers, which were no little ones. A few dayes after the Duke of Alva understood that Monsieur de Guise was coming into Italy to succour the Pope, which made him to retire his Camp a little nearer to the sea, and afterwards he came and sate down before Ostia. The Mareschal then march'd out of Rome with some Ensigns of Italians, two of Germans, and five or six of French; but the Pope would by all means that he should leave him for his defence, my Son Marc Anthony
and Captain Charry, with their Companies. The Mareschal went then and encamp'd on this side the Tyer, over against Ostia, where he entrench'd himself. The Duke of Alva before his arrival had made his bridge, and erected a Fort above Ostia, on the same side where the Mareschal was encamp'd. I then sent to him to know if he would have me come to him with five or six Italian and French Ensigns, but he would not permit me so to do, for fear left the enterprize of Montalsin might not as yet be fully sifted to the bottom. And because the said Mareschal, with those Italian and French Compa∣nies he had with him, had not been able to discover the Enemies Fort, to see if there was water in the ditch or no, he was in the greatest perplexity imaginable (for the Duke of Alva was departed from Ostia,Monsieur de Strozy at Ostia and retir'd towards the Kingdom of Naples, having left only four Italian Ensigns in the Fort, and as mny in Ostia) and therefore had caus'd Artillery to come from Rome to batter the said Fort, and had sent to intreat the Pope, that my Son and Captain Charry might come to him; which the Pope also grant∣ed to my great misfortune, and the ruine of my poor Son, who so soon as he and Cap∣tain Charry came before the Mareschal, he complain'd to them, that he had not been able to discover the Fort. The next night it being m Sons turn to mount the Guard, he de∣termin'd with himself to effect that wherein  had fal'd, and communicated his de∣sign to Captain Charry and the Baron de Begnac,Marc Anthony de Montluc dis∣covers the fort. who was also at that time upon the Guard. He fail'd not accordingly to execute his resolution, for the next day seeing the Enemies sally out, according to their custom, to fetch in Bavins, he follow'd them, and without fear of the Harquebuze shot, pusued them fighting to the very ditch of the Fort; where he discovered as exactly, and with as much judgement as he had been an old Captain: but in his return, a cursed shot hit him in the Body,His hurt before Ostia. notwithstanding which he went upon his own feet to the said Mareschals quarters, saying, that before he dyed, he would give an account of what he had seen. The said Mareschal so soon as he arriv'd at his Tent, laid him upon his own bed, where the poor Boy almost expiring, told him what he had seen, assuring hm that the ditch was dry, whatever he might have been told to the contrary;His death. presently after which he gave up the Ghost. The Mareschal the next day sent his body to the Cardinal of Armagnac, and the Sieur de Lansac to Rome, who enterr'd him as honorably s he had been the Son of a great Prince.His honor at Rome. The Pope, the Cardinals, and all the people of Rome exprest great sorrow for his death. Had God been pleased to have preserv'd him to me, I had made him a great Souldier; for be∣sides that he was very stout, I ever observ'd in him a discretion above his age. Nature had done him a little wrong, for he was but little, but strong and well knit, and as to the rest, elquent and desirous to learn. If the Mareschal de Cosse be yet living Marc Anthony serv'd under him at Mariamburg,His prais, and he if he pleases can testifie, should any one contradict what I write, whether I lye or no; and though it does not very well become Fathers to commend their own children, yet being he is dead, and so many witnesses of the truth of what I deliver, I shall, I conceive, appear excuseable and worthy to be pardon'd. Now to execute the command the King had given me in Tuscany, I ask'd leave of the Pope to go to Montalsin, who after great importunity, would permit me but for fifteen days only, making me leave my great horses, and all my baggage behind, which Mon∣sieur de Strozzy was fain to send out after me, saying they were his own, and by his own servants. The Cardinal of Armagnac also sent me out my Sumpter Mules, cover'd with his own Sumpter-cloths, pretending to send them to the house of another Cardinal, where he us'd to stay sometimes twelve or fifteen days together; by which means I got all my things out of Rome. During the time of my stay in those parts, his Holiness did me the honor evidently to manifest to all the world, that he reposd a great confidence in me, and had my person in particular esteem. Upon my coming to Montalsin, Monsieur do Soubize departed and went to Rome, I found Montalsin in a manner besieg'd; for at S. Crico there lay some Germans; at the great Inn two Harquebuze shot above Montalsin was another quarter of the Enemy, and at a Palace three Harquebuze shot on the left hand, likewise another, as also in an∣other towards Grossette, within a mile of Montalsin another. All which were found seiz'd by the enemy at the time when the True came; so that the King was possest of nothing on that side, as far as the very gate of Sienna, which I think was the principal cause that the Siennois had Monsieur de Sobize in so little esteem.The Siennois dissatisfied wih Monsieur de Soubize. It is much ado to please all the world, and though a man does all that in him lies, yet if all things do not succeed as people would have them, he does nothing: but I for my part shall neither ac∣cuse nor excuse him at all. The Truce which had been agreed upon for ten years between the King and the Emperor, yet continued: The affairs of these two Princes being so per∣plex'd
and confus'd, that it had not been possible to conclude a peace, which was the rea∣son that all Treaties of accommodation ended in a Truce only: but I had heard that Monsieur de Guise had taken his leave of the King, and was coming for Italy, which made me think, that although the succours he brought along with him, were design'd for the Pope, yet that the Truce would nevertheless by that means be broken on the King's part, and therefore laid a design to go give a Scalado to the Germans at S. Cricou, a little Town four miles from Montalsin, intending from thence to go and surprize all the other foremention'd places. I know not whether or not the Germans had any in∣telligence of my design, or whether they were not commanded away from thence, but so soon as I was got out of the City two hours within night, a Gentleman of Sienna, who had his house in Cricou, and whom I had sent thither, came and brought me word that they were gone away in the beginning of the night. I sent then to enquire news of those at the Inn and the Palace, and found that all were march'd away at the same time, by which means we had liberty to go out a little more at large, as far as Altesse, a pretty strong Castle about three miles from Montalsin, and near unto the road of Sienna. I went then to Grssette, where Colonel Chramond, who was Governor there, Lorded it over all that Countrey, as it had been his own, not acknowledging the Siennois at all: At which they were very much incenst, and there we agreed that the Inhabitants should acknowledge the Seigneury, and not him who was not to take upon him any Authority in that Countrey, that the King would not pretend to for himself: And thus in a few days all things were chang'd to the great satisfaction of those of Sienna. Cardinal Burgos commanded in Sienna for the King of Spain,Cardinal Bur∣gos Lieutenant for the King of Spain in Sienna. and had a design upon Montalsin, which he thought easily to carry, that ought to have been put in execution the same week that I came: but hearing that I was come, deferr'd it for a few days, to see if nothing was discover'd: when seeing nothing was come to light, he sent for Captain Montillou a Spaniard, and Governor of Pont-Hercole to execute the design, when I having at the same time sent out some horse to forrage, they met with him, and took him, a Se∣cretary of Cardinal de Burgos, and four servants, and brought them to me. They would very ain have excus'd themselves, pretending to be taken contrary to the Truce, which as yet had not openly been broken;The Sicur de Montluc disco∣vers Cardinal Burgos his de∣sign upon Mon∣tasin. but I caus'd a servant of his secretly to be put upon the Rack, who confess'd, that he thought Cardinal Burgos had sent for his Master to put in executi∣on a design he had upon Montalsin. We could not discover what it should be, but so soon as it was known at Sienna that Captain Mantillou was taken, it began to disclose it self, and so far, that a Gentleman of Sienna sent his servant to me, to give me notice of the place by which they intended to give an assault; who came to the gate of the City, but would not come in, only he desired to speak with me. I then went out to him, taking Messer Hieronimo Espanos along with me, where he told us all, and that there were some French Soldiers of the Garrison of the plot, and that if we search'd well in the houses nearest that place, we might peradventure find the Ladders. We gave the fel∣low ten Crowns, and so he returned. Messer Hieronimo Espanos then and I went secretly to view the place, and as I remember we took Monsieur de Bssoonpierre along with us, and observ'd that part of the wall to be very low, but that there was a Turret wherein were continually two Centinels, who being of the Conspiracy, the taking of the place was easie, and more than easie. Messer Hieronimo then, who was at that time of the Magistracy, pre∣sently appointed two men to search the houses nearest to the place, who staid not three hours before he brought us above a horse-load of Ladders of ropes, the best and the fineliest made of any I had ever seen. In the house where these were found, no body had liv'd of a great while; but we knew very well, that people commonly went in and out, and fur∣ther we could not discover. I then took order with the Serjeant Major, that he should every night set four Centinels in the Turret, which also were continually to be chosen by lot. I do think, that would they have made an attempt by day, they might have done their business, and much better by day, than by night, being that from the great Palace, which was not above three Harquebuz shot from the Town, they might come all along thorough a little Valley, shaded with Copse, close up to the very wall. About a month after A Siennois call'd Phebus Turk,Phebus Turk. came and addrest himself to me, desiring that he might tell me something in private, whom I sent for into my Wardrobe. I had nothing but a Dagger by my side, and when he came in, I perceiv'd him arm'd with a Coat of Mail; in my life I never saw so fierce a countenance of a man, so that I was once about to call some body in to me: When he still telling me, that no one should hear his business but my self, I took heart at last, thinking my self strong enough to grap∣ple with him, should he attempt any thing against me. Where he told me, that the Car∣dinal of Burgos had often sought to him to be assisting in an Enterprize he had upon Mon∣talsin,
which at his importunity he had at last consented unto, and that he had been himself twice to speak with him in disguise; having with him three Soldiers, who were also of the Plot, which he was to name to him a day before the said execution, which also he was to execute before Don Arbro de Cenda should arive who was coming to Sienna to com∣mand the Souldiery, and that if I would, he would order the business so, as to put them all three into my hands. In conclusion, we agreed it should be within four days, and that he should that very night return to Sienna to conclude the business with the Cardinal de Burgos,Preparition and counter∣mine of the Sieur de Mont∣luc. which being concluded betwixt us, I put him out of the Town over the wall, for the Gates were already shut, and in the morning dispatch'd away a Messenger to Co∣lonel Charemond at Grossette, that he should come the next day to Pagamegura, half way betwixt Grossette and Montalsin; and the same day that I sent away to the Colonel, I call'd in the Captains who were at Chuze, Montizel, and the Hospitallet by Piance, whom I swore upon the Crucifix to discover nothing of the Enterprize, and so sent them back to make themselves ready against I should send for them: I then sent away my light horse to la Rocque de Baldoc under pretence of keeping Garrison there, and the next day went to meet the Colonel at Pagamegura, with whom I concluded that he should have four hundred Harquebus in readiness. My design was, that as the enemy should give the Scalado, Colonel Charemond should come behind them, and the Garrisons of Chuze and Montizal should step betwixt them and the Palace, and my Company also; and so soon as they should be repulsed I was to sally out upon them with four hundred men from the City. At my return from Pagamegura I found the said Phebus return'd, but he said not a word to me of all night, which gave me a little suspicion of him. In the morning he came to tell me, that the Cardinal would not put the business in execution yet a few days,Phebus Turk taken prisoner. and so drave me off from day to day, till in the end I was advised to take him pri∣soner, and to compel him to discover the truth, he being no other than a crafty Rgue, sent purposely to betray me: which I accordingly did, and clapt him into a close Dun∣geon of the Castle, where by misfortune he found some piece of wood, or iron. Now be∣cause he was a Siennois, I was willing to try if the Siennois themselves could win him by fair means to tell the truth, which made me deferre puting him to the question; but in the mean time with this piece of iron he broke through the wall, and fled away to Sienna; by reason of which accident I could do nothing considerable in this Enterprize. He was too cunning for me. I have nevertheless this obligation to him, that he has taught me in an affair of this importance, never to spare a Prisoner again, but to squeez out the sudden truth: for without doubt this fellow was a Traytor, After my arrival at Montalsin I procur'd Signior Marioul de Santa Fiore to return into his Majesties ser∣vice,Marioul de Santa Fiore re∣turns into his Majesties ser∣vice. together with the Prior his Brother, who thorough some disobliga∣tion had withdrawn themselves from his dependance; We had been very intimate friends ever after the skimish at Sienna, so tha in the end I made shift to overcome him, and they went to Court, where the King receiv'd them with great demonstration of favour and esteem. His Majesty gave him a Troop of light horse, and the Prior a Pension, who both of them afterwards were continually with me. At this time Don Arbro de enda con∣triv'd an Enterprize to come and take Piance, a little Town near unto Montizel, which I had caused to be repair'd after the best manner I could, and there lodg'd a Company of Italians. I therefore gave to Signior Marioul my own Company, and those he had gathered together of his own, together with part of that of the Count de Petillano, and sent him to Piance to fetch off the Italian Company I had left there, and to carry them to Montizel, where was Captain Bartolomeo de Pezero. Some few dayes before Don Arbro came out of Sienna, Captain Serres,Captain Serres who was Lieu∣tenant to my Company of Light-horse, and my Kinsman, had fought Captain Carillou Governor of Bonconvent in the fight of Montalsin, who had with him ten men at arms of the Marquis of Piscara's Company, and the Ensign of the Company had eight Launces of a Company of light Horse, and eight Harquebuzeers on horseback, who were come to vapour before Montalsin, below in the Plain towards the Inn, not thinking there had been any Cavalry in Montalsin, for I had taken my Company along with me to Grossete, and had sent Captain Serres with eighteen Launces to scoure the field on the left hand towards Si∣enna, where they met and fought about Chuze, so that mine had the better. At his re∣turn Captain Serres went to repose himself a day or two at Montalsin. afterwards to come and find me out at Grossette, and to conduct me back to Montalsin. Captain Serres then seeing himself thus brav'd by the Enemy, sallied out with his eighteen Launces, two Gentlemen of Sienna arm'd with Coas of Mail, and two foot Soldiers that followed him: When so soon as Captain Carillon saw the Launceers he would have retir'd, Captain Serres always following in his Rear, when as Captain Carillou would pass a narrow Rivo∣le,
Captain Serres charg'd him with might and main, and so close that he took them all, saving one Captain, who had his Company in Bonconvent. These Harquebuzeers on horse∣back belong'd to him, and he receiv'd a shot from one of the two Harquebuzeers that went out with Captain Serres quite thorough the Body; but he got over the Rivolet, and ano∣ther with him, who conveyed him to Bonconvent, where he died at the very gate of the Town, and ll the rest I kept prisoners at Montalsin. Don Arbro marched directly to Piance with three pieces of Canon,Don Arbo de Ceda's Enter∣prize upn Piance. and two Culverins, which made me suspect that he did not carry so much Artillery with him for Piance, it being not so strong as to require Canon; and so soon as Signior Marioul understood that he was within three mile of Piance he went out with all the horse to meet him, command∣ing the Captain who was there before in the mean time to draw out his Foot, and to make with all speed to Montizel, which was no more but two miles from thence. In the mean time to hold the Enemy in play, he skirmish'd so briskly, and engag'd so far that he could not afterwards dsingage himself, but was charg'd by three Troops of their horse at once with so great fury, that twelve or fourteen light horse of my Company were there taken, of which Captain Gurgues who belong'd to the Mareschal de Strozzy was one, and of those of the Count de Ptillano, and Signior Marioul as many, or more. After this brush, getting off the rest, and coming to halt before Piance, he found that the Captain had not as yet got so much as one man out of Town, but the Enemy still press'd upon him, and there again were some more Launces broken, whilst the Captain in the Town was drawing out his men, till in the end he was again charg'd with all their horse, and con∣strain'd to retire to Montizel. Captain Serres, and the Baron de Clermon my Nephew▪ who carried my Cornet, escap'd to the little Hospital. The foot Captain lost the third part of his Company of those who had been slow in getting out, and he with his Ensign and the remainder of his men escap'd and made head at the pass of a little River, by that means giving Captain Bartolomeo time to come in to relieve him; (for it was within sight of Montizel) as also Signior Marioul who was yet retreating before the Enemies Horse. This a man gets by skirmishing at the head of an Army (as I have said before) and by re∣treating by day in the face of an Enemy stronger than himself. Don Arbro having staid three dayes at Piance, he parted thence in the beginning of the night, and with torches took his way thorough a valley that leads towards La Rocque de Baldoc. Signior Marioul was gone post to Rome to fetch some Launceers that had been promis'd him to repair his Company, but the Prior was with me the night that Don Arbro departed. The Prior and I had been abroad on horseback to take the Air without the Gates of Montalsin, when night coming on we turn'd about to go home, discoursing by the way what Don Arbro intended to do with this great Artillery: upon which dis∣course it presently came into my head, that it was to go assault La Rocque de Baldoc, in which place there was a Florentine Captain, Monsieur de Soubize had placed Governor there, whom I had in some suspicion, forasmuch as the Gentlemen of Sienna who were with me, had told me that they had heard he had sent twice to Florence. So soon there∣fore as we came near to the Gates of Montalsin, I commanded two light-horse of my Company to go and scout all along upon the Hills betwixt Piance and la Rocque, and not to stir from thence till break of day, unless they should discover the Enemy upon motion. Now some dayes before this,Monsieur de Guise in Italy. Monsieur de Guise, who was come to Rome, and was already march'd towards the Kingdom of Naples, had sent to call avvay Charemon vvth his Com∣pany at the request of the Siennois, vvho could not agree vvith him, and had sent me Monsieur de la Molle Captain Charry, and three or four other Companies in his room, as also he had sent for some of mine; and had given the Government of Grossette to Mon∣sieur de la Molle. I was scarce laid down in my bed, when my two light horse return'd telling me that Don Arbro was marching by Torch-light along the Valley I spoke of before towards la Rocque: whereupon I immediately acquainted the Prior with the news, and presently got to horse with all the Cavalry we could make, commanding Captain Andre Casteaux, Nephew to the Cardinal of Tournon, to march his Company without Baggage in all haste after me, and that he should march through the woods, to which end I gave him two Gentlemen of Sienna to be his Guides. In the mean time, and an hour before day I arriv'd at la Rocque de Baldoc, and by break of day came Andre Casteaux with his Com∣pany, who was scarcely entred in, when the Avenues were all seiz'd by the Enemy, and the Guides taken, who had led me the way, as they were upon their return, together with the Quartermaster of my Company, from whom the Enemy learn't that I had put my self into it. I then dispatcht away two Pesants through the woods to la Grossette, by whom I writ to Monsieur de la Molle, that he should with all possible speed go, and put himself into Montalsin, and that he should there command as the Kings Lietenant; for
that I was shut up in la Rocque, and resolv'd to defend the place. Don Arbro quar∣ter'd his Camp at Avignon over against la Rocque; and there staid three dayes debating with himself whether he should attaque me, or no: but in the end he resolv'd to re∣tire, knowing with whom he had to do, and saying, Iuro a Dios, a quel Capitan tiene alguns Diabolos en su poder, o ai algun tradudor tras nos otros & si lo pedo saber yo tengo de cortar li los brassos, y los piernos: this was his care, but my mind was evermore at work, and day and night meditating what I should do if I were in my Enemies place: he has the same understanding that you have, and stratagems as well as you; so that medita∣ting of what he meditates, you shall often jump, and by that means counterplot to what he his plotting against you: whereas if you stay expecting what he will do, you shall very often be surpriz'd. You ought therefore to be in a perpetual jealousie of your Ene∣mies designs, and still guessing at what he intends to do, whether to attaque this place, or that part: if I were in his stead I would do this thing or that, and often consult your Captains; for it may fall out, that he of whom perhaps you have the least opinion, may often give you the best advice. But in the end Don Arbro return'd, and went to quarter his Army at Altesse, which is no more than three miles from Montalsin, where seeing his design I return'd to my own Quarters, and sent Monsieur de la Molle back to Grossette. Don Arbro put three Companies into Piance, two of Italians, and a third half Spanish, and half Italian, for the Governor he had left there was a Spaniard, and Signior Bartolo∣meo de Lestpha, Nephew to Signior Chiapino Vitelli, who had one of the best and the strongest Companies in all Italy, kept all the prisoners, to the number of betwixt fifty and threescore in the Palace. After a few days he retreated with his Army to Sienna, all his Enterprizes vanishing into smoak. The Marquis of Pescaara's Ensign went too and fro, and took great pains in labouring the deliverance of their people in exchange of ours; upon which Treaty Don Arbro sent me a Jear,A rant of Don Arbro de Cenda. saying, No sera dico, que yo rendra un Frances, que yo no tenga tres Espagnoles y per estas barbas yo harre l'os mios: & ellos non hauran los suos. Cardinal Burgos was by no means pleased with this manner of pro∣ceeding, and would have been glad that all the prisoners might have been set at liberty both on the one side and the other; for I had the Captains Montillou and Carillou, Gover∣nors of Pont-Hercole and Bonconvent, and above twenty others, twelve of which were na∣tural Spaniards, besides the two Governors. I took the husing answers Don Arbro sent me in very high disdain, and to mend the matter had almost every day news brought me that he almost starv'd his Prisoners to death, whilst I on the contrary treated his exceedingly well. In this indignation I resolv'd upon an Enterprize, which was to go and give a Sca∣lado to Piance:The King of Spain gives Si∣enna to the Duke of Flo∣rence. for I had been advertiz'd that the King of Spain had given Sienna to the Duke of Florence, together with the other places he held in Tuscany, and that the said Duke was sending three Companies of Foot, and a Troop of Horse to Piance. I very well foresaw, that after he had once taken possession there, we could not possibly recover it without breaking with the Duke of Florence, which I would by no means do, that the Duke of Guise might not be necessitated to weaken his Camp to relieve me; and more∣over I had ever been upon very good terms with the Duke of Florence, without creating any thing of a Quarrel. In affairs of this tickle nature we must go warily and discreetly to work; for a little thing will serve to break the Alliance of Princes, which once bro∣ken is not so easily piec'd again, and several rash young people have by their indiscretion set their Princes together by the ears contrary to their own desire. Captain Fastin de Peyrouse, who had been in Piance, had told me that there was a hole in the wall on that side toward Montalsin, by which the filth of the Town was evacuated, and that in this place, where there were two walls, the outer wall was above the reach of a Ladder, and that within some fourteen or fifteen staves high; and that so soon as one should be past thorough the hole, which must be upon his belly, and in the dirt, he should find himself betwixt these two walls. Upon this information I had caus'd a Ladder to be made of the height requir'd for the inner wall, but it was so very weak and slender, that it might pass thorough this hole, that a man could very uneasily support himself upon it. In this part of the wall there was a Bastion at the corner of the Town, that Don Arbro had caus'd to be perfected, which was of a sufficient height,An Enterprize of the Sieur de Montluc. and betwixt the hole and the Bastion was a gate the enemy had wall'd up with brick and clay only, not caring to make it of better matter, forasmuch as they had cast up a Rampier of earth within. I order'd that Captain Blacon with his own Company, and another of Italians that I had caus'd to come from Grossette, and the Baron de Clermont my Nephew with my Com∣pany, and about twenty Launces of that of the Count de Petillano, together with thirty or forty Gentlemen of Sienna, should go put themselves betwixt Piance and Monte-Pul∣siano
to fight the Duke of Florence his people, who came to take possession of the Town. I had also caus'd three hundred men to come from Chusi, that the Duke of Somme had sent me, who was return'd from the Duke of Guise his Camp, upon some words that had past betwixt Cardinal Carassa and him, and those were to storm by a corner of the Town on that side by which they came; Captain Bartolomeo de 'Pesero, was to fall on by the Gate, that on his side look'd towards Montizel, which the Enemy kept open for their going in and out, and to which they were to set fire, if they could, and I with the Laddes was to assault the Bastion, the ditches of which were not yet made. The top of the Gate, that was wall'd up, flanck'd the Bastion, and I had with me the two Companies of Abanson and Andre Casteaux, that is to say, the half of each, for the rest I had left at Montalsin, and the half of that of Captain Lussn, who lying at Castetlotie, and by that means having the furthest to march, had so heaed himself with his diligence, that he fell so extreamly sick by the way, as constrain'd him to stay at the little Hospital, but he sent me his Son,The death of Captain Lussan. who was his Lieutenant, and five or six days after dyed of that sickness: he sent me also the half of Captain Charry's Company, whom to his great grief I had left behind me in Mentalsin, I having no body also to leave there, Signior Ma∣riul being gone to Rome, and the Prior his Brother upon some business of his own to their own house. To be short, I might have on my side four hundred men in all, three hundred that came from Chusi, and an hundred men that Captain Bartolomeo had, which was all the Forces I had at this assault. We had altogether concluded, that the Duke of Somma's Italians should be of the party, who also himself very much desir'd to be there: But I would not send for him, forasmuch as Chusi, of which he was Governor, was a place of very great importance, and should I chance to be kill'd, I would not that the Garrisons should be left without some good Chief to provide for their defence, till Monsieur de Guise could send some sufficient person to command the Countrey. We must provide for all adventures, as well in case we be beaten, as if we overcome, by which means in going to execute an Enterprize, we shall do nothing unadvisedly, and for which we may reasonably be condemn'd. We had appointed to be every one of us two hours be∣fore day at the place where he was to fall on, where those of the Duke of Somma and Captain Bartolomeo were to fall on first, to the end they might divert the Enemies Forces from that side by which I was to attaque the place, that side I was to undertake, being by much the strongest, by reason of the Bastion, and the Flankers over the Gate, the wall where the hole was, making a part of the corner. I gave the charge of carrying the Lad∣der to the Gentlemen of my Train, who were paid by the King, entreating them to en∣ter the hole, those were Captain Trappe, who is now with the Admiral, Ausillons Ne∣phews to my late Wife, Captain Cossel, who now carries my Ensign, Captain la Motte, Castet, Sagret, Captain Bidonnet, Captain Bourg, who is yet living, and has a foot Company, and two or three others, and after them twenty Italians that Captain Fautin de Peyrouse (the same who had been broken at the going out of Piance) had brought with him, all chosen men, who were to mount the Ladder, after mine should be gotten up. The said Captain, and another of his own Company were first to pass thorough the hole, and draw in the Ladder, because they knevv the place, vvhich none of my people did. I arriv'd then vvithin a quarter of a mile of the Tovvn, vvhere I made a halt, vvhilst the Baron de Clermont and Blacon march'd forvvards, and vvent to plant themselves about a mile from the Tovvn, upon a road that leads tovvards Monte-Pulsiano; and vvhen I had staid about an hour, vvithout longer expecting vvhen the Italians should begin, as I had given order they should,Those of Pi∣ance have in∣telligence of the Sieur de Montluc's de∣sign. knovving the day began to approach: I sent one of my Guides to discover after the most secret manner he could, and my Valet de Cambre, vvho is yet living, vvent up vvithin tvventy paces of the Bastion, and heard no noise in the Tovvn, no more than if there had been no body vvithin it, saving that they heard a lit∣tle Dog bark. They knevv of my coming over night, and so vvith their matches ready cock'd, in great silence expected my assault. I could not, it should seem, march out so secretly, though I had caus'd the gates to be shut up three hours before, but that some ho∣nest man or another had got out and carried them intelligence of my design. Novv, so soon as the Guide and my Valet de Cambre vvere come back, and had told me that they could hear no noise at all, I vvould my self go vvith them once again, vvhen being come vvithin fifteen or sixteen paces of the Bastion, I perceiv'd a man vvithin five or six paces of us, who went creeping along, and retir'd tovvards the Bastion, and I believe entred by the said Bastion, vvhere vve now heard them talk, and thought they spoke Dutch, but they vvere Albanis, for Signior Bartolomeo Lestaffa had of them in his Company, and the said Signior had taken upon him the defence of the Bastion. Seeing then that the
day would presently break upon us,The Sieur de Montluc goes to discover Piance and having lost all hopes of our Italians (who though they were come as I understood after, yet the Duke de Somma had given the com∣mand of them to some one, who had no mind to dye the first, or else (as being the Kings Lieutenant) would give me the honor to begin; but this Rascal did not do it our of re∣spect) Captain Bartolomeo also expecting when the one or the other should begin the Game, I was by these delays constrain'd my self first to fall on, and although I knew both by this Centinel Perdu, and the great silence in the Town, that the Enemy had me in the wind, yet having taken the pains to come so far, I was resolv'd to try my for∣tune. The Italian and French Gentlemen above nam'd took the Ladder, and we took the other Ladders to storm the Bastion, which I caus'd to be carried by the Captains, Lieu∣tenants, Serjeants, Corporals and Lance-passades, and in this manner march'd up direct∣ly to the Bastion, where, at our first approach they gave us a great Volley of Harquebuz shot; but we desisted not for all that to rear our Ladders,An order of the Sieur de Mont∣luc. and I had made an Order, that all the Commissaries both of War and Provisions, Treasurers and Comptrollers, should ever∣more be provided of great horses and arms (for these people have always money) which I always took with me under my own Cornet to Troop up and make a shew, to deceive the Enemy. Monsieur de Guise had sent Monsieur Malassise (who is now Lord of Roissi) to be chief Treasurer. I gave this man a Turkish horse, if I had now such a one, I would not take for him five hundred Crowns, a courtesie that he very scurvily repaid, and as ill return'd my friendship, for he brought me into disgrace with the Duke of Guise, as he does now with the Queen, as much as in him lies, as I am inform'd from Court; and I have my self also perceiv'd it, and wish God would do me the favour, as to put her Majesty in mind, how much I am her Servant, and have formerly been where occasions have presented themselves, which have perhaps been greater than ever Queen was involv'd in, that her Majesty might take notice, she ought not lightly to give credit to my Ene∣mies to my prejudice, especially such as never have done, nor never will do, so many and faithful services as I have done. But I shall have patience in God, having my con∣science clean, both as to that and all other affairs concerning the service of the King and his Crown. I had at this time discover'd nothing of the practises of the said Sieur de Ma∣lassise, who prevail'd so far, that Monsieur de Guise call'd me to his own person, and gave my command to Monsieur de la Molle, for he had an opinion that they two toge∣ther could manage affairs better, and more to their own advantage than I. I shall not here set down the Reasons, forasmuch as it might be said, I did it in revenge of the ill will he bears me, and consequently that I bear him, being a little impatient of injury as I am, and who would willingly bear in my device, if I had not one already, what one of the House of Candale gave for his Motto Qui m'aimera, ie l'aimerai. But there are many worthy persons yet living who very well know the occasion, which if they please to tell it, the story will not be much to his advantage. But to leave this discourse (not much caring whether he wish me well or ill;) I left him with Captain Charry, though the Captain had been very importunate to go along: but I made account that he being in the Town, if I happened to die, would be much as∣sisting to the Citizens in encouraging them, whilst in expectation of him the Duke of Guise should send, for he was man of understanding, and very eloquent to perswade. To return then to my Treasurers and Commissaries, I made them gallop round about the Town (they being fitter to put people in fear, than to do any execution) by this means to divert the Inhabitants from one place to another. We gave the Scalado then almost all at once, and our men were three times beaten off, and our Ladders all broken saving one or two. Now I must tell you to what use serv'd the taking of this hole. All of them entred into it one after another, and so soon as they had set the Ladder to the lower wall to enter the Town, my Gentlmen all mounted, and from the top of the wall leapt down upon a Dunghil into the Town; when so soon as Captain Faustin and his twenty men saw ours got in, they would follow after in all haste, in doing which they so overcharg'd the Ladder that it broke. These inconsiderate ardours oftentimes occasion the miscarriage of brave Enterprizes. The hole was within four or five paces of the gate that was walled up, and the Enemy over it minded nothing but shoot∣ing at our people, who were storming the Bastion, and having their backs towards the hole, knew nothing of our people being entred in. The Italians tried to piece the Lad∣der with girdles, but it would not be, wherefore they were constrain'd to creep out at the same hole by which they had entred,The French repuls'd. and Captain Faustino came to tell me the mis∣fortue of my people, which put me to my wits end, seeing that in attempting to reco∣ver those who were already prisoners, I had been so unfortunate as to lose all the Gentle∣men
I had, and was resolv'd to play a desperate Game. It was already broad day, and the Sun began to rise, all our people being beaten off, and sculking behind certain walls that were there, when at the same time Captain Bartolomeo sent me word that they were all beaten off on his side also. I then leapt from my horse to the ground, for I was not yet alighted, and call'd all the Captains together (Avanson Son to Monsieur d' Avanson, who was Ambassador at Rome excepted, who was hurt in the hand with a Harquebuz shot) where I began to remonstrate to them, that I was come to no other end, but to take the Town or to lose my life, and that if they would follow me, I would lead them the way: but withal that I was resolv'd to turn back upon those who should be resty, and would kill every man that did not behave himself as he ought to do upon so brave an occasion.The Sieur de Montluc's Speech to his men. Let us go on then friends, said I, follow your Captain, and you shall see we will acquire honor. Which having said, with my sword in my hand, and a Page with my Hal∣bet close by me, I went directly up to the Gate. I had twelve Swiss of my Guard that follow'd me, and also did all the rest, where I observ'd, as I had done at other times be∣fore, what the example of a Leader can do when he goes on in the head of his men, and leads them the way.A Captain can do much by his example. I presently put my self under the Gate, where three or four men might stand unseen from the Flanks of the Bastion, whilst the Enemy who were over the Gate plyed our people with a tempest of shot and stone. The Swiss in the mean time with their Halberts did their endeavour against this Wall of Brick. I had my sword in my left hand, and my dagger in my right, with which I broke and cut the bricks, when having made a hole wide enough to put in my arm, I gave my sword and dagger to the Captain of my Swiss, and thrust both my arms into it. The Wall was the thickness of one brick only, and there was but very little clay, for it was in a manner a dry Wall: when having found the inner rim of the Wall, and thethickness of it, I pull'd the Wall towards me with such force, that all the upper part fell upon me, and cover'd me all over, insomuch that the Captain of my Guard was fain to draw me out from under the bricks and the rubbish, which he did, and again set me upon my feet; after which with our Halberts we presently beat it totally down to the ground. The Enemy had not finisht the Terrass they had cast up behind this Gate, of which there wanted about two foot to the top of the Arch, and there I had two Swiss kill'd, and the Captain wounded with a Harquebuz shot in his thigh, and fourteen or fifteen Soldiers slain or wounded. I a∣gain made the Ensignes by the two Ladders renew the Assault to the Bastion,The Bastion assaulted. but for all that they ceased not to shoot from the Flancks of the Bastion. Now from the Bastion to the Gate where I fought, it was no more than thirty paces only: I then call'd out to the Soldiers, to go fetch me the Ladders that had been broken against the Bastion, telling them that the shortest were the best; for the height of the Terrass was not above two yards; I think hardly so much; and so soon as the Ladders were brought I clapt them side to side, and put a Harquebuzeer upon the one Ladder, and my self upon the other, and three one in the heels of another, after the first Soldier, and two of my Swiss after those three. I then spoke to him who was foremost, and went up first, that he should presently get up, and discharge his Harquebuz amongst them within, which he accord∣ingly did, and as he fir'd I took him by the breeches, and pusht him in, making him take a leap he never intended, for our two Ladders toucht; and then I began to cry out to those who were upon the other Ladder, and to push them forwards, saying, leap Soldi∣ers, and I will leap in after you; which said I pusht that fellow in, another after him, and the other after him; and when they were all tumbled in, he that could first rise clapt hand to his sword, my two Swiss leapt in after; seeing which I leapt down on our own side,The Town ta∣ken. and again began to cry fall on Captains, fall on, the Town's our own, our men are in; whereupon they one after another threw themselves headlong into the place. Those Gentle∣men of mine who were entred by the hole had been perceiv'd at break of day, and being charg'd by the Enemy had recover'd a house, the door of which they stoutly defended; which did me a great deal of good, part of those who defended the Gate being run thither, not thinking it possible I should enter there; and so soon as the Enemies who assaulted the Gentlemen heard the cry of France, France, behind them, they forsook the Gentle∣men, and would have return'd to the Gate; when the Gentlmen sallying out after them, and hearing the same cry of France, France, they knew our people were entred the Town, so that by fortune they were engag'd betwixt our two parties, and there all ut to pieces. Now immediately upon the killing of these, an Ensign of theirs who was in the place came running directly towards the Gate, but my Gentlemen being joyned with those that entred last, the said Ensign found whom to talk withal, and they handled him as they had done the rest. At the same time that our people entred, I cried out to them, that they should assault the Bastion on the inside within the Town, which they did; but they
there found a very great resistance, by reason that the greatest part of the Company of Gens∣d'arms was there, who fought it to a miracle. Now (as the courages of men encrease when they see themselves in hopes of victory) to forget nothing of that they ought to do in well and furiously assaulting; having encour∣raged my people, I left the Gate, and ran to the Ensigns who were upon the Ladders of the Bastion, crying out to them, that all our men were got in, and that therefore they should throw themselves headlong into the Bastion, which they did, without meeting the opposition they expected, forasmuch as our men held them so short, that they were not able to answer us both within and without▪ and so soon as I saw our Ensigns got in, I remounted to horse, and with the Commissaries and Treasurers rode all along by the walls, where all those that leapt over the walls to escape away I caused to be slain. Now to return to our first Prisoners, our people followed their execution, till they came to the place where they found Signior Bartolomeo de Lesteffa, with the remainder of his Company, who made no great defence, for already our people ran all along the streets of the Town, and even along the very Walls of it. The Italians came to enter by the Wall, that was not too high, and helped one another up; Captain Bartolomeo de Pezero had also set fire to the Gate, as he had promised to do, but was there hurt with a Har∣quebuz shot through the buttocks, and could not possibly enter there, by reason of the furious fire that flam'd in the said Gate. They had placed eighteen or twenty Spaniards for the Guard of the Pisoners that were in the Palace, fifty or threeore in number, and had tied them two and two together, as they told me after, who so soon as ever they heard the Cry of France, France, in the great place adjoyning to the Palace,The Prisoners free themselves they began to justle one another, particularly Captain Gourgues, who was the first that got his arms at liberty, when being all freed from their bonds, they flew upon their Guard with such fury, that what with their own weapons, and what with stones, they kill'd the greatest part of them upon the place, and the remainder kept prisoners, and brought them out with them. And this was the fortunate and unexpected deliverance of our Prisoners. It now remains to know what succeeded upon the command I had given to the Baron de Cleremont, and Captain Blacon. The Duke of Florence his Companies both of horse and foot had set out of Montepulsiano, and were coming towards Piance, it being no more than three miles from the one to the other, when being in the midway, and hearing such Volleys of Harquebuz shot, they sent out six horse before to see what the matter was. Of these, three fell into our Ambuscado, and were taken, the other three got away, and made their people return faster than they came: so that the Baron could▪ not possibly come to fight them. In the foremention'd action of the taking of Piance, Signior Bar∣tolomeo Lestepha his Lieutenant and Ensign were all taken, and the Governor who was a Spaniard also, but his Ensign was slain. Captain Pistoye (so called for being a Native of Pistoye) his Lieutenant and Ensign were likewise taken, together with the Lieutenant and Ensign of an Italian Captain, call'd Aldetto Placito, a Siennois, who two dayes be∣fore was gone out to solicit for their pay before they departed the Town. This was the success of the Scalado of Piance, which hapned upon St. Peters Eve, an action highly reputed throughout all Italy. All the Captains and Soldiers, as well Ita∣lians as French, said I had taken the Town my self alone, and not they, and that had I not done as I did, and had they not seen me so couragious and resolute, they would ne∣ver more have come near the Walls, having been three times so smartly repuls'd. Had it been Gods will that those the Duke of Florence sent from Montepulsiano to Piance had set out but an hour sooner, they had not heard our Harquebuz shot by the way, and had fallen into the Baron de Cleremont, and Captain Blacon's Ambuscado, who lay so ready and well planted for them, that they would easily have been defeated and cut to pieces; for they no sooner heard the report of the three horse that escaped, but that they immediately all faced about, and in disorder sled away towards Montepulsiano. I left in Piance to com∣mand there Captain Faustino, vvho had been there before, and had yet fifty or threescore of his Company left, which Captain Bartolomeo Pezero had ever kept for him, and more∣over now lent him his Lieutenant with a hundred Soldiers of his own Company: and about noon as I vvas about to mount to horse to return to Montalsin, and sending every one avvay to his ovvn Garrison, the Captains vvith their Lieutenants and Ensigns brought me a hundred or sixscore horses of service, vvhich had been taken in this action, besides Pad-nags and Mule, entreating me to take of them vvhat I pleased for my ovvn use; and amongst others Captain Trape entreated me to accept of a Courser of Naples, the most beautiful and the best horse in all Italy, though I accepted none of all those they offer'd me, but that of Captain Trape only, vvhich Monsieur de Guise aftervvards sent to entreat of me, and I gave him to him.
I came back to Montalsin vvith no more than the three half Companies I had takenThe Sieur de Montluc's re∣turn to Mon∣talsin. thence vvith me, after vvhich I order'd to march all the Captains vve had taken priso∣ners, and some fevv Soldiers vvho vvere prisoners also, for there vvere not many sav'd: Next after the Prisoners I march'd my self, and all my Captains vvith their Colours flying, and behind me the Gentlmen of my Train carried the horse Cornet, and the three En∣signs vve had taken: and in the rear of all the foot marched the Baron de Cleremont vvith my Troop, and the Gentleman of Sienna all on horseback in the rear of all. I do believe there was not a man nor a vvoman left in the vvhole City, for they vvere all come out to see me enter, excepting the Captain of the people, the Council, and Magistracy, to vvhom I had sent a Gentlemen before to entreat them not to stir from the Palace, at vvhich I vvent and alighted, and entred in arm'd as I vvas, vvith the foresaid Ensigns vve had taken carried before me, where first in few words I gave them an account of the means I had used to bring about so hazardous an Enterprize, and after what manner the Town had been taken, not without observing by their looks, that they had so great a performance in high admiration: After which I exhorted them to continue the fidelity they had pro∣mised to the King my Master, and not to abandon the hopes of recovering their liberty and Capital City, God having manifested to them by so great and so happy a victory, that he would neither forsake them, nor any who fought in their Quarrel. And to shew them that I bore arms in order to their service only, and for the recovery of their Countrey, I presented the horse-Corner, and the three Ensigns I had taken; which having received with the greatest acknowledgements, and the highest applause that could to man be at∣tributed, they upon the instant caused to be set up in the great Hall of the Palace display'd, a thing that did no whit lesson the reputation I had acquir'd either with them at Rome or elsewhere, where the report of this Enterprise and execution was divulg'd and sprea abroa. After this no occasion presented it self worth speaking of saving two,The Siege of Chuzy. of which this was one. Don Arbro went to besiege Chuzy, which Captain Moretto Calabras, who was at Mon∣tepescayo, had by practice surpriz'd from the Enemy. The said Don Arbro had thirty En∣signs of foot before it, three pieces of Canon, and six hundred horse. I departed then a little after noon from Montalsin with five Ensigns of foot, and about forescore or a hun∣dred horse, and by break of day came to Montepescayo, where I caused little sacks to be made to carry powder in, to the number of twenty, which all of them might contain a∣bout three hundred pound of powder. From Montepescayo to Chuzy it is six miles. Their Artillery was not yet arriv'd, but it came the same morning that I came away, and about noon I departed from Montepescayo, and went to encamp my self just over against the Enemies Camp, at the distance of a quarter of a mile, and about as far from the Town, for they were already encamped before it, and never so much as once sent to discover me. The place was worth nothing, for we had not had time to fortifie it, and in the beginning of the night I took the Lieutenant of Captain Avanson, call'd St. Genies, with thirty Pikes and thirty Harquebuzeers, which I meant to venture to try if there might be any means to preserve it; and being that there was a little Rivolet not above three paces broad betwixt them and me, I sent the said St. Genies and Captain Charry with a hundred Har∣quebuzeers to accompany him, whilst I with the Horse and a hundred Harquebuzeers went to give them an Alarm in their Camp. St. Genies got in with the powder, and all the Soldiers, four or five Pikes excepted, and all night long I kept them in Alarm to make them think that I would repose my self in the morning: when having discover'd me they would come to fight me, considering I had no more Forces but five foot Ensigns only; wherein I deceiv'd them, for without taking any rest at all, and without sound of Trumpet or beat of Drum I began to retreat through the Woods, and to take my way directly for Mon∣talsin, marchingtwelve miles without stop or stay; and then upon the banks of a small Ri∣ver I made a halt, where all both horse and foot baited upon some provision I had caus∣ed to be brought upon Asses; where neverthless I did not stay above an hour and a half, but went on straight to Montalsin. Now the same day that I departed from Chuzy, a∣bout noon they had planted their Artillery without being able nevertheless to make a breach till the next morning. The same day that I departed from Chuzy I arriv'd in the Evening at Montalsin, which was thirty miles, and after I came home made them to work all night to make ready a Canon, and a great Culverin we had, with which about nine of the clock the next morn∣ing I went to batter Altesse a strong Castle betwixt Bonconvent and Montalsin. I bate'd it by the Gate where it had been the least fortified, and in the Evening they surrender up∣on Quarter only,Altesse taken▪ there being threescore men in it. The next morning I went to take three or four Castles thereabouts, which were not strong, but only supported themselves under
favour of the Foress of Altesse. Of all this day the Artillery never stirr'd from Altesse, but however I took the Castles. After this I was advised to go and batter Bnconvent, whereupon I went to view it, and caused Gabions speedily to be made before it, making shew as if I intended a Siege; though it was only to divert Don Arbro from making any further attempts, fearing lest after he had taken Chuzy (which I made no question but he would do) he might go and sit down before Montepescaillo, where Captain Mo∣retto was, and two or three other places, which only subsisted under the protection of Montepescaillo; and the same day that I made a shew of besieging Bonconvent, I sent Signior Marioul de Santa Fiere, Captain Serres my Lieutenant, and the Baron de Clere∣mont my Ensign to scour the field as far as the walls of Sienna, where they had the for∣tune to meet with a foot Company that was going from Sienna to put themselves into two Castles hard by those I had taken,The Sienn defeated. which they cut all in pieces, excepting the Captain, the Lieutenant, and the Ensign, who being all mounted got away. All this was perform'd in three dayes, reckoning from the day that I departed from before Chuzy. The Alarm of this defeat was so great at Sienna, that Cardinal Burgos sent in all haste to Don Arbro to leave all and return to Sienna, for that he greatly feared the Siennois would revolt and receive me into Sienna, considering the violent affection they had for me in the City. So that hd those of Chuzy been able to hold out a day longer he had given them over, but the second day having made a very great Breach, for the wall was a very weak one, and there being but few men within it, they were forc'd to surrender. The Lieutenant of Captain Moretto Calabres was in it with part of the Company of the said Moretto, and about five and fifty that entred with St. Genies only, so that there was not above a hundred men in all. The next day after Signior Marioul had defeated this foot Company, all the Captains who were with me were of opinion that I should go and batter Bonconvent; but I said to them these words. You know Gentlmen that since yesterday two of clock in the after∣noon we have not heard the Artillery play at Chuzy, which we heard plainly from Altesse, by which you may conclude, either that they are surrendred, or taken by force. If they be sur∣rendred Don Arbro will not stay an hour there, to try if he can snap us in the field, for there is no qustion to be made, but that he has receiv'd the Alarm of the foot Company you defeated yesterday by Sienna; and that thereupon Cardinal Burgos has sent to him to come back to save the rest of the Castles which are nearest to Sienna (for as I took the other Castles I immediately dismantled and pulled them down, (as I also did by Altesse.) Let us therefore consider things a little; if our people be surrendred the Camp will not tarry above two hours before Chuzy: if they be taken by assault, the Town is so poor that the Soldiers would need but this last night only to sack it, and will be this morning two hours before day upon their march, which though it be thirty miles off, yet will the Artillery be here before noon: for Don Ar∣bro knows very well, that I have not a hundred horse in all I can make, nor above six hun∣dred men in these five Ensigns, wherefore the reason of War requires you should do as I say. Let me intreat you therefore that we presently fall to drawing off our Canon, and our foot, and if things do not fall out as I have said, let me bear the blame. Captain Moretto's Lieu∣tenant, and St. Genies had what conditions they desir'd, for the haste Don Arbro was in to return; for they march'd out with Bag and Baggage, and Ensign they had none. I then set fire to the remainder of Altesse that could not so suddenly be pulled down, and left Captain Serres with twenty horse upon a little eminence by Altesse, from whence they might discover as far as a Wood, which was Don Arbro's way to return; and when I was got within a mile of Montalsin Captain Serres sent two Troopers full speed to tell me, that he began to discover their Cavaly coming out of the Wood; whereupon I left the foot Captains with ropes, and the strength of the Soldiers to help the Oxen away with the Artillery, and Signior Marioul and I with the horse return'd back to Captain Serres. But so soon as we came to Captain Serres, we from another little hill dis∣cover'd the Body of their Cavalry already in the Plain, which I suppose had halted to stay for another Troop that was coming out of the Wood. I left Signior Marioul there to sustein Captain Serres, and sent to Captain Serres by no means to engage him∣self in a charge, nor suffer the Enemy to come near him, but begin by little and little to retire; and having left the same order with Signior Marioul,A handsome Retreat. I gallopped back to the Artillery, which I found within a quarter of a mile of the Ascent, and hastned it all I could; when so soon as I had got it to the foot of the Hill, I saw Signior Ma∣rioul coming at a good round trot, and Captain Serres following the same pace after. I made them still lug the Artillery up the hill, and could not get it within fifty paces of the Gate of the City, but that I was constrain'd to take out the Oxen, and hurry them into the Town, placing all our Infantry along the Vines, and upon the Wall, and draw the horse (they being of no further use) into the Town, which I had no sooner done but
the Enemy came up to the very foor of the hill. Thus I sav'd all, and lost nothing by well computing the time they had to come from Chuzy to be upon us, and thorough the great dligence wherewith I made my retreat. Take notice then Captains, and remember when you shall be in place where you are to reie before an Enemy stronger than your selves, to compute the time wherein he may come to fight you, and be diligent in your retreat, whether by day or by night, by which means you shall very hardly be surpriz'd. Take all things at the worst, and imagine your Enemy to be as diligent to surprize you, as you are to prevent being surpriz'd. The rea∣son of war requir'd that I should do as I did, and men must evermore be at watch when they are near an Enemy, so that if he be three hours march distant from you double your speed, and if it be possible do that in two hours which he may do in three: by which means having the start, without an infamous flight, you shall leave him nothing but the empty Nest. I but (a man may object and say) perhaps he will never come near me at all, and in the mean time I retreat without seeing an Enemy: but let me tell you, if you stay for that, you will be defeated and lost, especially if you have Canon to draw off with you, which you cannot abandon but with dishonor. I perform'd another pice of diligence to relieve Monsieur de la Montjoye, a Kinsman of mine,Tallamou relie∣ved by the Sieur de Mont∣luc. whom I had put into Tallamon. The King of Spains Galleys were departed from Cajetta to surprize this place, and came to an Anchr before Mount Argentan, whom so soon as Monsieur de la Montjoye had discover'd by break of day in the morning, he dis∣patch'd a man post away to me to give me notice, who made so good haste, that he came to Montalsin by four of clock in the afternoon, though it be no less than five and thirty miles. Without staying an hour therefore after I heard the news, I departed with four hundred Harquebuzeers, and my own Troop of horse, marching all night without stop or stay, until I came to a Village within three miles of Grossette, which was seven and twenty miles, and I came thither by Sun rise, where I made the Soldiers eat something, and bait their horses, whilst I gallopped away to Grossette, where I heard that the Enemy were all about Tallamon, which made me suddenly to cause three hundred Harquebuzeers of those of the Garrison of Grossette to pass a River half a mile from thence, upon Asses and Horses; so that by that time my own men whom I had left baiting were come to the River, the three hundred men were pass'd over, and upon their march▪ I then sent two Troopers to the said Sieur de Montjoye, to bid him stand firm, for that I was there to relieve him, though he could scarce believe the news, not thinking it possible I could be there so soon, but that some body had sent him such word only to put him in heart. The Enemy had landed three or four hundred men, and two Gallies came and plyed him with a great number of Canon shot, the thunder of which I no sooner heard, but that I advanc'd with my Horse, and the three hundred Foot, that were already got over, and lest Captain Charry to pass over those that I had brought from Montalsin; when, so soon as the Enemy saw so long a Train of men, and that I advanc'd with the three hundred Foot and the Horse, they all cast themselves into the water; so easily were they perswa∣ded out of their fury. It was excessively hot, and many of them were in the water to the armpits: I had made account to have fought them, let them be what number they would, for I was very sure they had no Horse: but I found that part of the Gallies were reimbarking the Soldiers about Tallamon, and at the old Port, so that before I could get to them they were all aboard, and put out to sea toward Mount-Argentan, where the rest of the Gallies lay. I believe they thought that Monsieur de Montjoye would surrender upon the Canon shot they playd from the Gallies, but he was too brave a Gentleman to be so easily frighted as they imagin'd. He was since slain in the late troubles at Aubeterre under Monsieur de Causeus, who can give testimony of hisvalour. Captains (my Camrades) you ought not to think it strange that I have never been defeat∣ed, nor surpriz'd where I have commanded in chief, as you shall never be, if you carry your selves with the same vigilance and diligence that throughout my whole life I have ever done. I perhaps have made my Soldiers do that never any one made men do before; for I ever had my tongue at command to remonstrate to them (when I have been in place where diligence was requir'd) their own honor, and the service of the King; and also that by diligence only we were to save our own lives. 'Tis that both adds wings to their feet, and inspires them with resolution when the one or the other is necessary. Which remonstrances of mine never fail'd of their effect; and when a long march was to be perform'd, I caus'd bread and wine to be carried along wherewith to refresh them; for it you will have your Soldiers make a long march, and take nothing wherewith to refresh them, humane bodies are not made of iron, you must either leave them by the way, or at least when you shall come to fight they will be so weak, that they will be able to do
you very little service, but taking provisions along with you to refresh them, together with remonstrances, you shall not only make them go, but run also, if you desire them; so that a man must never think to excuse himself upon the Soldier, for no man in Chri∣stendom has had more experience of it than my self, and I never saw any defect on their side, but alwayes in the Officers: for a good and prudent Captain will make good and discreet Soldiers; amongst a great many good men ten or a dozen Poltrons and Cowards will grow hardy, and become valiant; but a cowardly, imprudent and improvident Captain loses and spoils all. This in gross was all that was done whilst I stayd at Montalsin. Now Monsieur de Guise having been enform'd that I was like to have been surpriz'd at Altesse,Monsieur de Guise is angry with the Sieur de Montluc. he writ me a very angry letter, wherein he told me, that it seem'd I had a mind to lose my self, the Country, and all, to go out after this manner upon every occasion into the field, and that if I should chance to be defeated the whole Country would be lost, he being already so weak in men, that he should not be able upon any disaster to relieve it; that this way of proceeding was commendable enough in a private Captain, but not in a Kings Lieutenant, who ought not to expose his own person but upon very great occa∣sion. To which I writ in answer,He excuses himself. that I had been necessitated to do as I did, or other∣wise Don Arbro would foot by foot deprive me of the whole Country, that on the other side he might assure himself I should rise so early, and use such diligence, that I would look well enough to my self for being at any time surpriz'd, and that therefore he should not take any thought concerning me; for although Don Arbro had evermore thirty En∣signs in the field, and I but five or six to answer him withall, I would nevertheless so well look to his water, that I would well enough prevent him from bringing about his de∣signs. After this I reir'd my self to the Abby of St. Salvadour, fifteen or sixteen miles from Montalsin towards Rome. About a mile distant from the Roman Way there is a little wall'd Town, and an Abby of Augustins, which was founded by King Charles the Little at his return from Naples; for he made some abode at this place. All the Church is co∣ver'd with Flower-de-Luces, and the foundation recorded in Parchment; the Religious of this place are very holy men. Being there I receiv'd a letter from the Cardinal of Ferrara,News of the loss of the Bar∣tail of St. Quentin. (who was at this time at Ferrara) wherein he writ me the sad news of the Constables being defeated at St. Quentin, and that it was more than necessary I should now more than ever intend his Ma∣jesties affairs, and that if God did not assist the King, all was gone in France, all the Forces his Majesty had being lost at this defeat. Immediately upon this Letter I return'd back to Montalsin, for fear lest the Siennois hearing the news, should be totally dismayd, where, by remonstrances and perswasions I comforted them the best I could, and after∣wards tried to comfort my self. I had need so to do, for I gave the Kingdom for lost, and it was only sav'd by the good pleasure of God, and nothing else, God miraculously blinding the King of Spain and the Duke of Savoy's understandings, so as not to pursue their victory directly to Paris: for they had men enow to have left at the Siege of St. Quentin against the Admiral, and to have followed their victory too; or after they had taken St. Quentin they had as much time as ever, and yet knew not how to do that any simple Captain would have done.Discourse upon this defeat. So that we must all acknowledge it to be the bounty of Almighty God, who loves our King, and would not suffer his Kingdom to be de∣stroyed. However I did not to the Siennois make the matter altogether so bad as it was, but told them that the Letters I had from France, assur'd me the loss was but small, and that the King was setting an Army on foot, which he would command in his own person. Monsieur de Guise being at Rome, by reason the King had call'd him home to his suc∣cour, sent for me to come to him, which I did post; where being come, he there de∣manded of me what it would be necessary for him to leave me wherewith to maintain what we had in Tuscany; to which I made answer that I had need of that which it was not in his power to give me; for he had no money to leave me, nor-many men, that would not be more serviceable in France than in Tuscany: but that nevertheless I would do as God should direct me, in whom I repos'd a confidence, that he would no more forsake me now, than hitherto he had done; and that I humbly begg'd of him to make all the haste he possibly could into France; for if God did not preserve the Kingdom men could do very little towards it, all the Forces of the Nation being defeated and lost. The Mareschal de Strozzy, who was present, very much approv'd of my answer, and as high∣ly commended me, forasmuch as others would have demanded men and money, of both which I had in truth very great need: but France was of greater concern to the King than Tuscany,The Sieur de Montluc's re∣quest to the Duke of Guise. where I would try to draw money from the Countrey, and with war make war. Onely I besought Monsieur de Guise humbly to entrea the King to recall me into
France, to help to defend the Kingdom; for I had nothing to lose in Tuscany; where∣upon he promised me to deal so effectually with the King, that his Majesty should send for me, but upon this condition, that so soon as I should be return'd into France, I should promise forthwith to repair to him. He had not given credit to all the false re∣ports had been made of me, he knew me too well, and ever lov'd me so long as he liv'd. I engag'd my word to him, that I would do so, and so he went to embark himself at Civita Vechia, and carried back his Forces entire into France, wherein he manifested himself to be a great and prudent Captain. As for me I return'd back to Montalsin. Before my licence came to return for France, at the request of Captain Carbayrac, that Monsieur de Guise had sent Governor to Grossette (for he had taken out Monsieur de la Molle with seven or eight foot Companies he had, and sent him to Ferrara, and had sent me Monsieur de Giury with thirteen Ensigns of Foot in his stead, wherein I lost no∣thing by the change) I went in all haste to Grossette, to see to a disorder was faln out there; which was, that all the Ammunition of Corn that I had laid in there (which was suffi∣cient for above a year) was so embezzel'd, that there was not above a hundred Sacks in all to be found. There was a Commissary, whose name was Louberiac, who laid the blame of this business upon Monsieur de la Molle; whereupon I sent post after Monsieur de la Molle, to acquaint him with what this fellow had deposed against him; and Monsieur de la Molle on the contrary charg'd the fault upon the said Louberiac. I lay that night in a pair of damp sheets, and it was in Winter, not having at that time brought my field-bed along with me,The Sieur de Montluc falls sick. because I would let my Mules rest in order to my Jurney into France, by which means I got a continued fever, that in ten dayes depriv'd me of all knowledge even of my own servants. Without which sickness I had taken an order with Louberiac for ever robbing the Kings Ammunitions again, as I did another at Sienna who had done the same. So soon as I began a little to recover my senses, and to know people, my dismission came, his Majesty writing to me withal, that I should go to Ferrara there to remain some time with the Duke to advise him in his affairs, he being at that time engag'd in a War. The great joy of this dismission put me into so much heart,The Sieur de Montluc has leave to return into France. that four dayes after I departed, causing my self to be carried in a Chair by six men to Montizel, where Cap∣tain Bartolomeo de Pezero was, and where I stayd three dayes in expectation of a Litter, which Signior Marioul de Santa Fiore was to send me. In which I departed thence, not being able for all that to travel above five or six miles a day, and came to Pezero, where I found the Duke of Vrbin, who sent out five or six Gentlmen to meet me, to conduct me to lodge in his Castle: to which returning my very humble thanks, I sent the Duke an excuse, that I begg'd his pardon, for I was of necessity to alight at Captain Bartolomeo de Pezero's house, who had writ to his Mother to receive me, and where I was consequently expected. I then went thither, where I found his Mother to be an extraordinary civil person, and as well esteem'd in the City as any Gentlewoman whatever. So soon as ever I alighted they immediately put me to bed, for I was so worn, that I was nothing but skin and bone, and continually dying for cold, what Furrs soever they could put up∣on me. The Duke did me the honor presently to come see me, and seeing me so ill, compell'd me to stay four dayes there, not suffering me to spend a penny, but caused me every day to be serv'd with two dishes from his own Table, after which I fancied my self so much better, that I sent back the Litter. The Duke at parting would needs make me accep a horse out of his Race, one of the most beautiful Coursers that I almost ever saw, and the strongest for his height, and would have a little Friezland horse of mine, strong for his stature, and very handsome; and so they set me upon a little pad Nagg that Monsieur de Giury gave me at my departure from Montalsin (where he commanded till the arrival of Don Francisco d' Est, whom the King made his Lieutenant General as I had been) and after that manner I crawl'd on to Ferrara,He comes to Ferrara. where I was as welcome, and as well receiv'd both by the Duke, Dutchess, and the Cardinals, as I had been their own Brother, the Duke lodging me in his own Palace, and causing me to be serv'd from his own Kitchin equal to his own person. Four or five dayes after my arrival I had a great desire to go see the Cardinal de Tour∣non,He goes to Venice. and Monsieur de Dax at Venice, which Sieur de Dax was Embassador there, and there I stayed four days with them, very much troubled that I had not health to see all the City of Venice (for I was yet so ill, that I had much ado to go to the Arcenal) af∣ter which I return'd back to Ferrara. Now that all the parties are dead I shall do no harm to any one, in discovering that the Cardinal of Manta manifested himself to be a great friend to the Duke of Ferrara, for he gave him notice, that his Brother Don Fer∣rand had a design to besiege Versel, that he caused six pieces of Ordnance to be taken out
of Alexandria, with which he was march'd directly to Cremona, with great store of Powder and Buller, assuring him that this preparation was for Versel, which intelligence he dispatch'd away to him by two several Messengers, one upon the heels of another. I was also advertiz'd from Cremona,The Siege of Versel designd▪ that Don Ferrand was there making ready more Ca∣non, and had prst fourscore great Merchants Boats that trafficked upon the Pan, upon which Versel is situate, as also Cremony; that part of the Spanish Companies, which were toward Piedmont, began to march directly to Cremona, and that he was raising new Ita∣lian Companies about Millan. The Duke of Ferrara having receiv'd all these advertise∣ments, was very much troubled, the place being as yet in no very good posture of defence; for there was not so much as any one Bulwark cover'd, and the Courtines very low, as al∣so the Spurrs, being but half terrassed, nor yet half fill'd, and all the Flancks open. The Duke sent the Prince his Son, who lay with his Army at Reges, word of all this, bidding him withall forhwith to send Signior Cornelin Bentivoglio to put himself into it: where∣upon the Prince sent him word back, that if Signior Cornlio was taken away from him, he should not know what to do with the Army, the said Signior alwayes commanding in his absence. and he having no ease but by him, and therefore humbly entreated he would please to make choice of some other. The Duke then immediately sent away to Monsieur de la Molle, who was with the Prince in his Camp, entreating that he would go to defend the place: but Monsieur de la Molle return'd answer back, that the King had given him no order to shut himself up in any place, but only to perform his office in the field: and therefore desir'd to be excus'd. The Duke was exceedingly troubled, (as also was the Cardinal his Brother that now is) that they had not a man in so great an exigency, whom they could entrust with the defence of this place. I now began to gather a little strength, and these dispatches to and again were carried so privately, that I knew nothing of all this, till in the end a Gentleman of the Dukes, (whom he had commanded to be continually about me, to see that I waned nothing) discover'd it all to me one night very late,The anxiety of the Duke of Ferrara. and told me moreover, that the Duke had al∣most given over the place for lost, forasmuch as he who was Governor in it was no Soldier, nor had ever born arms in any action of consequence: but that he was nevertheless a very, honest man; so that the Duke did not in the least suspect his fidelity, but only his want of experience, and which was worst of all, there was no one in a time of so great need, who would make an offer of his person, to put himself into the place. Having heard this story, I all night consulted with my health about this affair; for as for inclination I had but too much, and in the morning finding my self indifferently lusty, I thereupon went immediately to wait upon the Duke, whom I found abed, for he alwayes rose very late. He had given order to his people, that at what time soever I came to his Chamber door, although he was in bed, they should let me in; wherefore I no sooner knockt, but that one of the Gentlemen of his Chamber presenty open'd the door, where I found the Duke in Bed, and two Secretaries writing upon a little Table by his Bed-side. So soon as I had given him the good morrow, I gave him an account of what had been told me over night, but withal naming the Gentleman. Whereupon he repeated to me the same things I had heard before, together with the great trouble he was in, but would not mention the Car∣dinal of Mantua to me, from whom he had the most certain intelligence untill my return, when so soon as he had made an end, I spoke to him after this manner. Sir,The Sieur de Montluc offers himself to the Duke of Ferra∣ra. dare you conide in me for the defence of your place, to which he made answer, in you Monsieur de Montluc? yes certainly, and sooner than any man in Italy; then Sir, said I, get up, and write presently to the Prince your Son, to give me a French Company that I shall choose, and some horse to convoy me to the Town, and write to Signior Pietro Gentilis, that he keep a good correspondence with me for the defence of the City, and that you have not sent me to de∣prive him of his Government, but because I have more experience in those affairs than he has, and that he shall presently execute whatever I shall direct. Upon this the Duke thrust out his arms, and clasping me fast about the neck, held my face close to his bosom, bidding one of his Gentlmen run for the Cardinal his Brother, who lay in his own Palace, a great distance from the Castle. The Gentleman made all the haste he could, telling the Car∣dinal what he had heard, who immediately came to us, and so soon as he came into the room, taking me in his arms, said to me these words. O Monsieur de Montluc how infi∣nitely is ur whole Family oblig'd to your generosity for this noble offer. After which they im∣mediately fell to dispatching their letters, whilst I went to make my self ready to be gone, for the business requir'd haste, Versel being so situated, that an Army being ever set down before it, it is impossible to get in, provided they have two or three boats only upon the River. I wen that night to lie at Final,He goes to the relief of Versel▪ the next day I din'd at Modena, and arriv'd in the evening at Reges, where the Prince with his Army lay, who gave me the Baron
d' Aurade, (the same who was after slain at Monsieur de Nemours his Chamber window at Vienna) with his Company and a Troop of Horse for my Convoy. In this equipage at one of the clock in the afternoon we arriv'd at Versel, where there was one Company of Swiss, five of Italians, and now that of the Baron d' Aurade, who was glad to go a∣long with me, and made the seventh. The Duke of Parma from the time of his being reconcil'd to the King of Spain, had call'd back his two Companies of Light-horse, which had been with us at Rome, commanded by the Captain Bartolomieo, and Ambrosio, and seven or eight dayes before this Captain Ambrosio had been taken, and brought prisoner into the Castle of Versel, where I found him just going away, the Prince having exchang'd him for another. He was amaz'd to see me there, and I told him, that not long agoe we had worn the white Cross together, but that I now saw him with a red one; to which he made answer, quae besognava far le commandamento del so padrone, and ask'd me what busi∣ness I had there: In answer to which I merrily told him, that I was come thither to serve them in the quality of Mareschal de Camp, where I would provide them Quarters to lodge their Army in at their ease: But Captain Pietro Gentilis told and assur'd him, that I was come to defend the place, who thereupon said, O questi non sono baye donque a la fede che, io portero cative nove al mio padrone, and so bad me farewell. Now the Duke of Parma at this same time held another place of the Duke of Ferra∣ra's besieg'd belonging to Reges.The defects of Versel. For five or six miles round about Versel I found nei∣ther Hay nor Straw, nor any other thing for the horses to eat, neither was there any meat at all, and within few utensils to work withal, nor wine, but a little they had for the Swiss, and very little either meal, or corn to make meal of: A defect that I believe more tempted Don Ferrand to besiege it, than any other thing. Methought I was once more got into Sienna, where I was in the greatest necessity of all things; and in the morn∣ing the Troop of Horse would needs be gone, their horses not having any one bit of any thing of all that night to eat. Now there were three great Bourgs upon the Road to∣wards Parma (which as I remember they told me appertain'd to the Sieur de St. Surin, whom I have seen in a round Bonnet at Court) half a mile distant the one from the o∣ther, and two miles from Versel, where there lay some Italian Soldiers in Garrison, to hinder those of Versel from drawing any relief from thence. I therefore sallied out with the Swiss Company, that of the Baron d' Aurade, and three hundred Italian Harquebu∣zeers, ordering Signior Pietro Gentili's to command all the men, women, and children to follow after me, together with all the horse in the Town, and a great number of Ropes and Sacks, and so marched directly to the first Village. The Enemy who were quarter'd there, upon my coming presently abandon'd the Bourg, and retir'd to the next, and I still follow'd after, till at last they forsook them all, and retir'd in all haste towards Par∣ma.Versel victual∣led by the Inhabitants themselves. I had given order that upon pain of death no one should touch any thing but pro∣visions, and left the Baron d' Aurade with the Troop of Horse at the furthermost Village towards Parma, the Italian Harquebuzeers at the second, and the Swiss at the third near∣est to Versel, giving them all in charge to suffer nothing to pass, but victual only, whilst I rid up and down from Bourg to Bourg to hasten them in their work; for I never ex∣pected to go off without fighting. The Bourgs were none of them all enclosed, and there was great plenty of provisions, insomuch that some made five or six journeys to carry victual into Versel, so that in the end there was not one who did not come to seek for pro∣vision, and the wines we embark'd upon Boats, and convey'd them by a little River there was (I think an Arm of the Po) landing them about half a mile from Versel, the River coming no nearer to the Town. This work continued from Sun-rise to Sun-set, so that I dare be bold to say there was but a very little provision, of all sorts put together, left in all the Villages, the men and women whereof were very much astonisht at this proceed∣ing, but I promised them satisfaction; and so the day past, wherein so much provision both for men and horses was conveyed into the Town, that for three months we could not possibly want, and then the Captain of the horse was content to stay with me a few days longer. The next day Signior Pietro Gentilis sallied out with all the men, women, and children of eight years old and upwards, and went to fall upon a Copse about half a mile from Versel,The diligence of the Inhabi∣tants of Versel. to cause Bavins to be made and brought before the Town. The Inhabi∣tants were by no means unwilling to go, and he also took the Swiss, and almost all the Italian foot along with him, whilst I with the Baron d' Aurade, and the Troop of horse went along to guard him, where they plyed their work as well at the Copse, as they had done at the Villages the day before, and came to throw down their Bavins within a Har∣quebuz shot of the Town; neither till the night took us up did we ever cease, and for two dayes after did the same, insomuch that I am confident there were above threescore thousand Bavins made in three dayes, which afterwards we went with Colours flying to
fetch home,The Sieur de Montluc carries a Basket at the Fortifications. and bestowed them in the Town, filling the Church, and several vacant places in the Walls, and then fell to fortifying, none being excepted from the work, Sig∣nior Pietro and I carrying Baskets to give example to the rest. I can say nothing but very well of that Gentleman, for I perceived in him no want either of courage or industry, but only of a little experience, which is not to be acquir'd without being employed, which he had never been; and how can one judge of a man until he be tried? 'Tis possible if he had been attaqu'd he would have acquitted himself very well: though men who have never seen a Siege are apt to be astonisht when they hear such a rattle about their cars, and if a Governor be once daunted, all is lost. So soon as we had got our Bavins into the Town I resolv'd upon another Enterprise, wich was to go and sweep away the pro∣visions of two Villages near Grastalda, which belongs to Don Ferrand, in which there were two Companies of Germans, and one of Italians. To this end I sent the Captain of the Horse, and all the Gentlemen who were with me, to ride up to Grastalda, and with them all along by a Hedge the Baron d'Aurade to second them, whilst I with the Swiss, and four hundred Italians was busie loading away the victuals. They sent then twelve horse up to the very Gates of Grastalda, and the rest were plac'd in Ambush in a little Wood hard by. Whereupon the German Captains, and a great many people with them sallied out, and pursued out Avant Coureurs. Our Ambuscado discover'd it self too soon, otherwise all the Captains had been taken; but we pursued them up to the very gates, where fourty or threescore Germans were slain (for the Baron d'Aurade was got in amongst them (the Ambuscado's both of foot and horse being planted close by one another) and a German Ensign with twenty or four and twenty Germans taken pri∣soners; and so we return'd home with the provisions we had loaded, and the next day I dismissed the Horse to return back to the Prince, who I was afraid would be displeas∣ed that they staid so long, though the men themselves were very willing to have staid longer with me, which if they had I should often have engag'd them with the Enemy; for I have ever taken care that my Soldiers, whether horse or foot, should not grow resty for want of employment, and stronger or weaker, have ever set them together by the ars with the Enemy, to see what they could do. 'Tis true a man ought to go discreetly to work not to lose them, but on the other side, he that stands over much upon caution, saying I will not throw away my men, or I will not do this or that to endanger the loss of my Company, shall in the end find, that he has perform'd no great matters. A man must both give and take. The Duke of Parma lay still before the foremention'd place, which he batter'd, and in the mean time I did my business; Captain Balferniere and another French Company were in it' who behaved themselves so well, that they for ten or twelve dayes held the Enemy in play.Don Ferrand in suspence what to do. Don Ferrand who was at Cremona having intelligence of the victual and Bavins we had put into Versel, and of the great diligence we used in all our affairs, began to cool in his design: for (as I have said before) I had made head against him at Cassal, and he knew very well what order and diligence I had observ'd in my Fortifica∣tions there: he also remembred how I had serv'd him at Benne, and at St. Damian, all which together made him imagine he should not asily carry this place, and therefore he withdrew his Ammunitions and Artillery, which were upon the banks of Po ready to be shipt aboard, and dismist the Boats he had prest whereon to embark the Canon, and the Foot; for the Duke of Parma's Camp was to have joyned with him before Versel. And although it be in my own commendation, yet shall I not forbear to tell you, that the Duke of Ferrara said in publick, and gave me that glory, that my presence had diverted the Enemies designs, who would not attempt the Enterprise, knowing (as I said be∣fore) what I could do for the defence of a place. 'Tis a great deal to acquire such a re∣putation, as to make a man's self fear'd and esteem'd by his Enemy. The said Don Ferrand was an old wary Soldier, and would not attempt a place where I had broken ground; and also if he had, having wherewithal to eat I should have baffled him. About this time the Duke of Florence procur'd the Duke of Ferrara's peace with the King of Spain,The Duke of Ferrara a good Frenchman. but it was with the knowledge and consent of the King, otherwise the said Duke would not have done it to have sav'd his Dukedom, he was so good a French∣man; and when the peace came, which was five and twenty dayes after I entred into Versel, I took my leave of the Prince, and return'd to Ferrara, where it is not to be asked if I was welcome to the Duke, the Dutchess, and the Cardinal; for I do not think they ever caressed any man of what condition soever he was, or could be, more than they did me; and when he died I might well say, as I now do, I lost one of the best friends I had in the world: and when I departed from Ferrara to go to Versel, the Duke exa∣min'd a Secret ray of mine what store of money I had, and he telling him I had not a∣bove
two hundred Crowns,The Duke of Ferrara pre∣sents the Sieur de Montluc. he sent five hundred Crowns to my said Secretary, who had the ordering of my expence; and when three dayes after my return I took my leave of him, the Dutchess and the Cardinal, the said Duke seeing me have a great many Gentle∣men of Quality in my Train, and knowing I could not have money enough to defray my Journey, he sent me five hundred more. And thus I return'd rich from my Com∣mand in Tuscany. This money carried me to Lyons, where I found two thousand and four hundred Francks, which the King had caused to be paid for two years Salary of my place of Gentleman of the Chamber, and that Martineau had there deposited for me in the hands of Cathelin Iean the Post-master,The Sieur de Montluc ar∣rives at Court. which brought me to Paris. Immediately upon my coming to Paris I went to kiss his Majesties hand, he being then at Cressy, where I was as well receiv'd by his Majesty as at my return from Sienna, and he was very well satisfied with what I had done for the Duke of Ferrara. Monsieur de Guise, who had not seen me before, embrac't me three or four times in the presence of the King himself, and his Majesty commanded the said Monsieur de Guise to cause a thousand Crowns to be given me, wherewith to return and to sojourn some time at Paris, which he presently did. And thus was my return out of Italy into France; the last time that I was in those parts, and the services I did there, wherein I cannot lie; there being so many yet living who can bear testimony of what I have deliver'd. By this (Captains) you may see, and take notice what a thing reputation is, which also having once acquir'd, you ought rather to die than to lose; neither must you do like men of the world, who so soon as they have got a little repute are content with it, and think that what ever they shall do afterwards, the world will still repute them valiant. Do not fancy any such thing; for by performing from time to time still more and braver things, young men rise to greatness, have fire in their pates, and fight like Devils; who when they shall see you do nothing worth taking notice of, will be apt to say that the world has bestowed the title of valiant upon you without desert, will set less value upon you, use you with less respect, and behind your back talk of you at their pleasure, and with good reason; for if you will not still continue to do well, and still attempt new and greater things, it were much safer for your honor to retire home to your own house, with the reputation you have already got, than by still following arms to lose it again, and to be scouting at distance when others are laying about them. If you desire to mount to the highest step of the stairs of honor, do not stop in the mid-vvay, but step by step strive to get up to the top vvithout imagining that your renovvn vvill continue the same as vvhen it vvas obtein'd at first. You deceive your selves, some nevv commer vvill carry avvay the prize, if you do not look vvell about you, and strive to do still better and better. The same day that I vvent from Cressy back to Paris, Monsieur de Guise departed also to go to Metz to execute the Enterprize of Thionville.The Duke of Guise created Lieutenant General of France. The King from the time of his return out of Italy had made choice of him for his Lieutenant General throughout his vvhole Kingdom, so that before my coming I found that he had taken the Tovvn of Calice, and sent back the English to the other side of the Sea, together vvith Guines, and that he vvas novv upon the Siege of Thionville. Tvvo dayes had not past before the King sent for me to come to him to Cressy, vvithout giving me notice vvhat it vvas about, and I heard that the next morning after I departed from thence the King had caused Mon∣sieur d' Andelot to be arrested about some ansvver he had made him concerning Religi∣on. So soon as I vvas come the King sent for me into his Chamber,Andelot ar∣rested. vvhere he had vvith him the Cardinal of Lorrain, and tvvo or three others (vvhom I have forgor, but I think the King of Navarre, and Monsieur de Montpensier vvere there) and there the King told me that I must go to Metz to the Duke of Guise, there to command the Foot, of which Monsieur d' Andelot vvas Colonel. I most humbly besought his Majesty not to make me to intermeddle vvith another mans Command, vvhich rather than I vvould do, I vvould go serve his Majesty under the Duke of Guise in the quality of a private Soldier, or else vvould command his Pioneers, rather than take upon me this employment. The King then told me, that Monsieur de Guise so soon as he had heard of Andelots imprisonment, had himself sent to demand me to exercise the said command. Seeing then I could get no∣thing by excuses, I told his Majesty that I was not yet cur'd of a Dyssentery my disease had left me, and that this was a command which requir'd health and disposition of body to perform it; which were neither of them in me; whereupon his Majesty told me,What an opinion King enry had of the Sieur de Montlu. that he should think this Command better discharg'd by me in a Litter, than by another in perfect health, and that he did not give it me to exercise for another, but that he intended I should have it for ever; to which I made answer, that I gave his Majesty most humble thanks for the honor he design'd me herein, and made it my most humble request, that
he would not be displeased, if I could not accept it. Whereupon his Majesty said to me these words, Let me entreat you to accept it for my sake, and with that the Cardinal re∣prov'd me, saying, You dispute it too long with his Majesty, 'tis too much contested with your Master, to which I replyed, that I did not dispute it out of any disaffection to his Majesties service, nor that I was unwilling to serve under the Duke of Guise, I having upon my first coming to Paris laid out money to buy me some Tents, and other Equipage, in order to my attendance upon him, having engag'd my self before at Rome so to do; but only upon the account of my incapacity in that posture of health wherein I then was. His Majesty then told me, that there was no more to be said, and that I must go; after which I had no more to say. And I fancy the King of Navarre, and Monsieur de Mont∣pensier both fell upon me to perswade me to accept of this Command, forasmuch as I re∣member the King said to me, there is no more excuse, for you see all the world is against you, and thereupon commanded the Cardinal to order me another thousand Crowns to∣wards my Equipage, which he presently did. I then return'd to Paris, where I stayd but two dayes to provide my self of such things as I wanted, and so went away to the Duke of Guise to Metz.The Sieur de Montluc Colo∣nel of the In∣fantry. I found him just mounting to horse to go to discover Thion∣ville, but he would not suffer me to go along with him, by reason of my long Journey, and to speak the truth I was not very well; and the same night he return'd, and told me, that if God would permit us to take that place, there was honor to be got. He was alwaies wont when dispos'd to be merry to call me, his heart, and smiling, then said to me, Courage my heart, I hope we shall carry it. And in the morning we departed, for he had all his tackle ready. I must needs say one thing with truth, and without flattery, that he was one of the most diligent Generals that I had serv'd of eighteen, under whom I had the honor to bear arms for his Majesties service; and yet he had one fault, which was, that he would write almost every thing with his own hand, and would not trust to any Se∣cretary he had. I will not say this was ill done, but it rendred him a little slow, and affairs of war require so prompt a diligence, that a quarter of an hours delay sometimes endangers the success of the greatest Enterprize. One day I came from the Trenches to demand of him four German Ensigns to reinforce our Guards, for we began to approach very near to the Town; and because the Artillery from the walls had forced him from his first Quarter, he was lodg'd in a little low house, which had one little Chamber only, the window whereof was just over the door: I there met with Monsieur de Bourdillon, who was since Mareschal of France, whom I asked where the Duke was; he told me he was writing; the Devil, said I, take all these writings for me, it seems he has a mind to save his Secretaries a labour, 'tis pitty he was not a Clerk of the Parliament of Paris, for he would have got more money than du Tillot, and all the rest of them put together. Monsieur Bourdion was ready to die with laughing, because he knew (which I dream't not on) that the Duke heard every word I said, and therefore egg'd me on still to descant more upon this Clerk: when presently Monsieur de Guise came out laughing, and said, How now my heart, what do you think I should have made a good Clerk? but in my life I was never so out of countenance, and was furiously angry with Monsieur de Bourdillon, for having made me talk at that rate, though the Duke laught at it only, and gave me Count Roc∣quendolf with four Ensigns.The laudable qualities of the Duke of Guise. But to return to what I was saying of his diligence, there was not any one who did not acknowledge him for one of the most vigilant and diligent Generals of our times, and withal a man of so great judgment in deliberation, that he having deliver'd his opinion and advice, a better was not to be expected. As to the rest, a Prince so discreet, affable, and familiar, that there was not a man in his Army, who would not cheerfully run all hazards for the least word of his mouth; so great a dexte∣rity he had in gaining hearts. Onely his dispatches took up a little too much of his time, I think because he durst not trust his Secretaries, a sort of men that do us a great deal of mischief, and 'tis very rare to find out one that is faithful. He besieg'd the Town then on that side beyond the River, the River being between, which he caus'd to be sounded,The Siege of Thionville. to try if it was not very deep, by five or six Soldiers that I brought with me: we were not above five or six with him, of which number were Monsieur de Bourdillon, and Monsieur de Cire; and we found that some of the Soldiers had water up to the Codpiece, and others to the Girdle. I then told him, that in case this was the weakest side, he ought not to deferre making his Battery; for I doubted not to make the Soldiers pass over to the assault, and that I my self would lead them the way. The night following we planted Gabions upon the bank of the River, and in the morning by break of day the Arllery began to thunder against the Tower, which was open'd on the left hand towards a Ravelin that flanckt the said Tower, as also was a little Turrer betwixt the great Tower and the Ravelin. This was all that could be done
at that place. The Enemy planted ten or twelve great pieces of Canon, just over against our Artillery;A Counter Battery. and about eleven of the clock in the morning began to make a Counter-battery, with which before two a clock in the afternoon they had beaten all our Gabions to pieces, excepting one, and the half of another, behind which ten or a dozen of us that were there squat with our bellies close to the ground; for all the Soldiers and Pio∣neers were constrain'd to quit the post, and to go throw themselves behind another Trench above sixscore paces behind us; so that durst the Enemy have ventur'd over the water, they might have taken our Artillery, and at great ase have thrown them into the River: for the Soldiers that were retired to the other Trench could not have come up to relieve us, but at the mercy of their Canon, and smaller shot, forasmuch as the River was not above threescore and ten paces over, and ran within four foot of the Wall. Monsieur le Mar∣quis d' Elloeuf, with fourteen or fifteen Gentlemen of the Dukes Train, never forsook me of all the while, and so we lay till dark night, that we planted new Gabions, and double the number, but it was all to no purpose, for we could do no good with our Battery a∣gainst the Wall, forasmuch as they had cast up great Terrasses within, so broad that two or thee Coaches might have gone upon them abreast both in that place, and elsewhere quite round the Town; in my life I never saw a Fortress better fortified than that was. Mon∣sieur de Guise then call'd a Council, where every one was of opinion that he should draw off his Artillery from that place, and lodge all our Infantry and Germans on the other side the River, and there to begin his Trenches as near as he could to the Wall. This be∣ing resolv'd upon, the said Duke caused a Bridg in extreme diligence to be presently made, and we passed the River over it, though the plancks were not as yet nail'd, and encampt in a Village about five or six hundred paces distant from the City, situate upon a Plain, and so open,A furious coun∣ter-battery. that a bird could not stir without being seen, and there they plyed us with their Canon till they had not left a house standing in the whole Village, insomuch that we were constrain'd to secure our selves in the Cellars under ground. I had pitch'd my Pavillions very cunningly betwixt two Walls, but they beat down both Walls and Pavil∣lions; in my life I never saw a more furious Counter-battery. The night following the Mareschal de Strozzy past the River with Monsieur de Guise, and we began to cast up our Trenches along this Plain, where we lay seven or eight dayes before we could approach within two hundred paces of the City, by reason the nights were short, and by day they did so thunder the Trenches, that there was no working but by night. The Mareschal never stirr'd from us, unless he went sometimes to his Tents, (which yet remain'd on the other side of the water) to shift his clothes,The Trenches. and that not above once in three dayes. He gave me leave to make the Trenches according to my own fancy, for we had at first begun them a little two narrow through the wisdom of an Engineer. At every twenty paces I made a back corner, or return, winding sometimes to the left hand, and sometimes to the right, which I made so large that there was room for twelve or fifteen Soldiers with their Har∣quebuzes and Halberts; and this I did to the end, that should the Enemy gain the head of the Trench, and should leap into it, those in the back corner might fight them, they being much more Masters of the Trench than they who were in the straight line, an invention that both the Mareschal and the Duke did very well approve of. Monsieur de Guise then told me, that I must send to discover what effect our Artillery had wrought against the Tower, and that I must do it by valiant persons. In order whereunto I took with me Captain Sarlabous,Thionville dis∣cover'd. the younger Millac, St. Estephe, Cipiere, and Captain Montluc my Son, and went. So soon as we came near unto the Tower we were to pass over certain little Bridges the Enemy had made, by which to pass over the Marish to the Tower; and being come to the Tower we found a Pallisado of posts as thick as a man's thigh, that from the Tower went seven or eight paces into the River, and we were to go all along by the Pallisado in water to the end of it, and afterwards on the other side of the Pallisado to return to the Tower. We had made two Soldiers bring two Pikes along with us; I for my part did not go into the water, but all the rest past the Pallisado after this manner, and one after another view'd the breach that had been made in the Tower, and they put a Soldier into it by a Pike, and found that within the Tower there was water up to the arm-pits, and being the River made a great noise at this place by reason of the Pallisado, their Centinels never heard us, though the Tower was no more than four paces distant from the Wall of the Town. This being done we return'd,The Duke de Guise not sa∣tisfied with the discovery made by the Sieur de Monluc. and went to give Monsieur de Guise an account of what we had seen, who would not give cre∣dit to our discovery, but told me he was certain there was no Pallisado, and that people who came lately from thence had assur'd him to the contrary; and that therefore the night following we must discover it better. I was vext to the blood at this answer: but said no more to him but only this, that I conceiv'd the testimony of those Captains was
sufficient, but seeing he was not satisfied with it, let some body in the name of God discover it better, to which he made-answer, that he did not mean I should go my self, neither said I, do I intend it. The Mareschal knew very well that I was angry, and said to the Sieur Adrian Baillon, and to Count Thophile, I know Montluc is angry by his answer to the Duke of Guise, and you shall see if he do not go this night to discover after a terrible manner, for I know the complexion of the man. This night Monsieur de Guise detein'd the Mareschal with him in his Quarters, and so soon as it was night I took four hundred Pikes, Corslets all, and four hundred Har∣quebuzeers, and went to lay the Corslets upon their bellies upon the ground within a hun∣dred paces of the Gate of the City, and I with the four hundred Harquebuzeers marched directly to the Pallisad. The Captains themselves who had discover'd before,Another dico∣very of th Breach. vvere as angry at the answer Monsieur de Guise had given them, as I, and themselves first passed the Pallisado. Now I believe the Enemy had in the morning perceiv'd that people had past by the end of the Pallisado, for we there found a Court of Guard of twenty or five and twenty men, of which the most part were kill'd, and the rest escap'd into the Ram∣pire, where our people pursued and entred after them; but the door of the Ravelin that went into the Town was so narrow, that one man only could pass at a time, which was the reason that our men stopt short, for the Enemy defended the door. Nevertheless they made shift to dismount, and tumble a Bastard from the Ravelin on our side down to the ground, and being that by the Tower our Artillery from the other side of the water had beaten down part of the Wall, so that it was pretty low; we with some Pikes that came along with us, came to dispute it with them, where the fight continued for above a long hour. Monsieur de Guise, who saw all from the other side of the River, was stark mad at what he saw, but the Marshal who was with him laught with Sieur Adrian, and the Count de Theophile saying, did I not tell you he would make one? I had made the Sol∣diers to carry five or six hatchets along with them, with which during the time of the fight, I caused all the Pallisado to be cut, and pulled up, so that we needed no more to wade the water at our return. Captain St. Estephe was there slain with the Ensign of Cipierre,St▪ Estephe slain. and another Ensign (but they had not their Colours with them, for I had brought none) together with ten or twelve Soldiers kill'd, and wounded. Captain Sarlabous is yet living, and several others who can witness, that had we taken with us five or six Lad∣ders seven or eight foot high only, we had entred the place, for they kept very ill guard on that side, and in that place, relying upon the Guard they had left without, so that it was a long time before they came to the defence of this Post, whilst in the mean time five or six of our Soldiers helping one another mounted upon the Wall; so that had we had Ladders to reach from the top of the breach in the Wall up to the Terrass, I think fortune would have smil'd upon us, for they say she favours the bold. In the morning I sent Captain Sarlabous to give the Duke an account of what we had seen, for I would not go my self, being certain he was very angry. The Mareschal was still with him, who laughing said, would you have a Breach better discover'd than by giving an assault? This was a Gascon trick you was not aware of. The thing that most troubled the Duke of Guise was, that word would be sent to the King, that we had given an Assault, and were repuls'd, otherwise he had not cared so much. His incredulity and my despite were the loss of a great many good men. When we had brought up our Trench within fifty paces of the Tower, one morning by break of day the Mareschal would retire to his Tent to shift himself, and I also would do the same. Now as our approaches came nearer to the Town, I still made my back returns a little longer, to the end that two of them might receive a whole Company. I had evemore an opinion that the Enemy would make a Sally upon us, but it would never sink into the Mareschal's head, for he would always say, Would you have them such mad men as to make a Sally to lose their Soldiers, never any men of sense did such a ridiculous thing; to which I made answer, why should they not sally? for in the first place they are able from the walls to secure their mens retreat, on the other side they are in the Town twelve Ensigns of Foot, four hundred Spaniards choice men pick out of all the Spanish Companies, and a good Chief to head them, which is Joanne Gaye∣tano, a man they esteem above all the Captains they have, and a hundred Horse besides, and the Town would be sufficiently defended with half the forces they are within. I could not for all this make him understand it. I know not why, for the reason of war I am sure was on my side. This very morning I had plac'd Captain Lago the elder, and his Company in two of the long back returns on the right hand, whom I caus'd to enter before day, that the Enemy might not perceive them, so that it was, as a man may say, a kind of Ambuscado. The Captains who mounted the Guard, had in charge, that in case the Enemy should make a
salley, and attaque the head of the Trenches, they should put themselves into the Field and run to charge them in the Flank, and those at the head of the Trench had likewise order, that in case they should attaque the returns, they should likewise leap out of the Trench to assault them in their flank also. We had every night four German Ensigns quarter'd there where we began our Trench, to assist us in time of need, but what Regi∣ment it was that was that night upon the Guard, I cannot remember, and before the Mareschal and I were got to the end of the Trenches, it began to be fair broad day. The Mareschal trifled the time a little talking with a German Captain, and also to stay for a horse, which I had sent for to lend him to pass over the bridge to his Tents, being at a stone Cross close by the village, the horse I had lent him came, when, as my footman was alighting,A Sally of the besieged. on a sudden we heard a mighty noise, and saw the Enemy fighting with our men at the head of the Trench, and leaping headlong into the Trenches, and had it not been for those back returns, had doubtless gain'd them from us. With them there sallied out also fifty or threescore horse. Captain Lago did there approve himself to be a valiant and a prudent man, for he cried to his Lieutenant in the return behind him, to run with his Pikes charg'd full drive upon the horse, whilst he himself ran upon the Enemies Flanck, who were disputing the head of the Trenches. Seeing this, I mounted upon the horse, whilst the Mareschal remain'd at the Cross, spectator of the whole action, nor ever staid till I came up to our own men who were at it pell-mell with the Enemy; who so soon as Lago came up to them would have retir'd,They are re∣pulsed. when our people leapt out of the Trenches, and flew upon them, and so we pursued them wounding and killing up to the very Tower on the right hand. I then presently sent back the horse to the Mareschal, who found Monsieur de Guise, and all the Gentlemen that were quartered near him on horseback coming to relieve us: but he told them there was no need, for that he had seen all the fight, and the victory was ours. As we retir'd from the pursuit, all the remain∣der of their Harquebuzeers were upon the Walls, and fir'd so round upon our retreat, that it seem'd as if it had been only a Volley in complement to us. I was alone on horseback in the middle of our men, and therefore let any one judge whether God did not by mi∣racle preserve me in such a showre of Harquebuz shot, considering what a fair mark they had of me. The Captains cried out to me to gallop off, though I would never leave them, but came along with them to the edge of the Trenches, where I alighted, and presently de∣liverd the horse to my Lacquey to carry him to the Mareschal as I said before, and with the rest threw my self into the Trenches, where I found a Captain and a Lieutenant of ours left dead upon the place: I do not remember their names (for they were French, and I was but lately come to command in the Army) with twelve or fourteen, what of theirs and ours dead in the Trenches. And yet notwithstanding the brave Volley they gave us from the Walls, we had not above ten men hurt; and thus their sally did not so much endammage us by a great deal, as it did themselves. You may here Captains take a good example concerning Trenches, and the order I took for the sally the Enemy might make, with the advantage we had by it. For never dis∣pute it, the Defendants have need of men, and therefore will be loath to attempt to force your Trenches: 'tis true if you sleep in them you will be surpriz'd. Take notice also when you make your Trenches, to make them high and sloping, and that they have back returns, or corners capable of lodging men; for they are as Forts to repel an Enemy. There was now no more talk of Monsieur de Guise his being angry with me, the Mareschal and he holding no other discourse all dinner time, but of the fight, and principally of the pro∣vidence and circumspection wherewith I had proceeded, saying, that it would be a hard thing ever to surprize me. And also in truth I walk'd whilst others slept, without fearing either heat or cold. I was inur'd to hardship, which all young Gentlemen who will ad∣vance themselves by arms, ought to study betimes, and learn to suffer, that when they shall wax old, it may not be altogether intollerable; but old age being once wholly come, Goodnight Godson. Within two or three nights after we brought up our Trench to the foot of the great Tower, whereupon Monsieur de Guise brought his Miners to try if the Tower was to be min'd, and therefore fell to piercing the Wall within two or three foot of the ground, when so soon as the Enemy heard what we were about, they began to make Casemats within the Tower, so that their Casemats answer'd to our Hole. We were three nights about piercing the Wall; and at the same time that our Miners were picking without the Enemy were picking within at their loop-holes. Every night Monsieur de Guise sent us four Gentlemen to help us to watch, and I remember that one night Monsieur de Mont∣pezat, and Monsieur de Randan came to lie there. So soon as the hole was almost thorough, Monsieur de Guise caused a Canon to be brought me to help to pierce the Wall, for he
knew very well that the picking we heard was about Casmas, and that so soon as ever the wall should be pierc'd through, they would shoot at us from them. The day be∣fore the Canon was brought, the Maeschal de Strozzy was gone to his Tents on the other side the water to refeh himself, and to shift both his shirt and his clothes, for we were all dirt. Monsieur de Guise from the time that the Miners began to work at the Wall, caus'd a great many Pioneers to come, and to begin a Traverse of Earth and Bavins close adjoyn∣ing, to the Tower, making them to leave a little path, at which they wrought so hard, that as the hole was pierced, the Travese was also brought to perfection. The Enemy had laid a great number of planks upon the Tower in manner of a Trench, and the night be∣fore we gave the assault, going up by the little path of the Traverse, and with the help of some Ladder, we took away the planks of their Trench from the top of the Tower, which did us more harm than good; for when the planks were taken away, the great Platform hich was close by the Tower, there being only five or six paces betwixt them, so soon as any of us popt up a head, discover'd us. Now as I have already said the Mareschal was only gone to shift himself,Monsieur de Guise  detai the Marshal de  all night in his Quarters. but Mon∣sieur de Guise made him stay supper with him, and with great importunity kept him all that night, to his great misfortune: for Monsieur de Guise detain'd him the next morn∣ng, to see whee they should plant four Culverines on that side where they were to play nto the Enemies defences▪ when we should the next day give the assault. The Mareschal several times begg'd of him o give him leave to return, telling him, that should any bu∣siness befal e that night, he should be extreamly troubled if he should not be there. At last the said Mareschal, to his great grief, was constrained to stay, and so much contrary to his mind, that so soon as he was retir'd into his Tent, he ask'd the Sieur Adrian Bailon and Count Theophile, if they had the word to pass thorough the Germans: for as for our people he did not care, and could pass well enough without. They told him they had none, whereupon he said to them these words, It runs in my head, that Monsieur de Montluc will this night have smething to do, and that the Enmy will come to attaque him ovr the Counterscrp of the Ditch of the Town, which should i so fall out, it would trouble me the longest day I have to live, that I was not there. To which they made answer, that he ought not to Fancy any such thing, for that I had plac'd a Court of Guard of four hundred men within twenty paces of the Gate of the City, which they must of necessity fight withal, before they could come to me. To which he reply'd, I know not what it is, but I am strangely possess'd with an opinion, that some misfortune will happen this night. They endeavou'd all they could to put this con∣ceit out of his head; for the Sieur Adrian had no mind to repass the River, and go to all night at the Tower, he having been lately very sick, and not yet perfectly recover'd; for had they told him, as they afterwards told me, that he might have past thorough the German Guards well enough without the word, being as well known to all the German Officers, as to those of our own Nation, he would have gone, what promise soever he had made to the Duke of Guise to the contrary; but when the hour is come, I think God will have it so▪ that death shall follow, and 'tis to no purpose for a man to fly, or to hide himself. He moreover said to them these words, Monsieur de Montluc is not yet well known to the King and Queen, although the King loves him vry well; but if I escape from this siege, I will mke both the King and the Queen understand his worth, and the next day when he was dead, the Sieur Adrian and Count heophile told me, that I had lost the best Friend I had in the world, which I easily believ'd, and do still believe it, and might well say, that having lost the Duke of Ferrara and him, I had lost the two best friends I had in Italy and in France.The Marescha de Strozzy slin. He was kill'd the next day, as he was looking and consulting with Monsieur de Guise where to place the four Culverines. Before din∣ner he had been looking long, but Monsieur de Guise would needs return again in the af∣ternoon to consider of it better, having Monsieur de Salcde with them. He was slain by a Musquet shot from a little Bulwark, that was at a Corner of the Town, pointing along by the River toward Metz. Thus when a mans hour is once come, he cannot avoid it. This poor Lord had past thorough above six thousand Canon, and above fifty thou∣sand Harquebuz shot, which could not all kill him, and yet this accursed Musquet shot could do it, at the distance of above five hundred paces, Monsieur de Guise being close by him. The King there lost a good servant, and as valiant a man dyed, as any was in France. Two hours after, Monsieur de Guise came to the Tower, but gave express charge that no one should speak a word of his death, when seeing the Sieur Adrian and Count Theophile, I ask'd them where he was, to which they made answer, that the last night he had not been very well, but that to night he would come to me; but perceiving
Monsieur de Guise to be sad, and all those who were with him very grave, my heart mis∣gave me, that something was amiss, when Monsieur de Guise being return'd, and having left Monsieur de Bourdillon with me in the Mareschal's stead, I earnestly entreated him to tell me what was become of Mnsiur de Strozzy; who made answer, Why, I will tell you, and also if you know it not to day, you will know it to morrow, and thereupon gave me the relation of his death, and how Monsieur de Guise had forbid them to tell me, fear∣ing my grief would hinder me the next day from performing my duty in the fight. To which I reply'd, That it was true, no man under Heaven was more afflicted for his death than I was, yet that I would endeavour to forget him for that night, and the day following; but it should be to lament him ever after whilst I had an hour to breath: Count Theophile and the Sieur Adrian stay'd with me all this night, during which we past together our lamenta∣tions, and by break of day began to play our Canon at the Hole. Monsiur de Guise had caus'd an Engine of planks above a foot thick to be made, to put before the Canon so soon as it had fi'd, to the end that the Enemy from their Loop-holes might not kill our Canoner.Engin of planks to de∣fend the Ca∣nonrs. At the foot of this Engine there were two little wheels for it to move upon, and it was drawn with a little cord, which so cover'd the mussel of the Canon, that no Harquebuz shot could pierce it. After this manner we made twenty shot at this Hole, which we broke thorough, and made so wide, that a man might easily pass thorough; but the Canon could do no hurt to their Casemats, forasmuch as they were a little on the right hand, and no man could approach the Hole, without being kill'd or wounded. Monsieur de Guise then sent me order, that I should try to lodge three or four hundred men betwixt the Tower and the Ravelin, and that he would to that purpose send me Ga∣bions and Pioneers. He had caus'd Manelets to be made, to place from the great Tower to the River, which might be some seven or eight paces, and from thence our Harque∣buzeers shot at those who appear'd upon the Courtine; our Ensigns planting themselves all along by the wall, from the Tower to the Raveline. Those upon the Platform saw all along by the Courtine, and ours who were by this Raveline on that side by the Hole, fi'd at them, whilst I made them shoot from behind the Mantelets. Monsieur de Nevers the Father of these three daughters now living, was come thither, and stood by our Tra∣verse that was at the foot of the Great Tower, and Monsieur de Guise was on the other side of the River, by the Artillery. Poton Seneschal of Agenois commanded one of the four Culverines, who made very brave shots, and did us great service, for he play'd con∣tinually upon the top of the Courtine and the Platform, at those who shew'd themselves to shoot at our people below, and this continued four or five hours at least. Monsieur de Guise then sent to me by Monsieur de Cipierre to try if we could by any means place the Gabions he had sent me, betwixt the wall and the Hole, but all those who presented themselves to plant the Gabions, were either kill'd or hurt. I then bethought my self to put a hundred or sixscore Pioneers into the water, under the bank of the River, to cast up a Trench all along by the water side towards the Ravaline. Monsieur de Cipierre saw the great difficulty and impossibility there was in executing the Dukes command, and found Captain Bordeziere dead, and his Ensign wounded who dyed after. You could have seen nothing but wounded men carrying off to be drest, and the Mantelets shat∣er'd all to pieces with stones, so that we lay all open shooting at one another as one shoots at a mark. I had order'd our affairs pertty well; for I had plac'd most of the Harquebuzeers by hundreds, so that as one hundred had spent all their powder, another hundred came to supply their rooms, and still all the danger and mischief fell where I was; for as well the Culverines that plaid from the other side of the River, as those men of ours that shot openly, and without shelter, kept the Enemy in such aw, that not one durst pop up his head to shoot at our people who were under the wall below, but plaid continually upon us, who were almost in a level right over against them. Mon∣sieur de Bourdillon then at the bidding of Monsieur de Nevers, came and caught me by the arms behind, and hal'd me above six paces backwards, saying, What will you do an, in the name of God, what do you intend to do, do you not see, that if you be kill'd, all this labour's lost, and that the Souldiers will be discouraged? to which, disengaging my self from him, I reply'd, and do you no also see, that if I be not with the Souldiers, they will abandon this post,The resolution of the Sieur de Montluc. and the Enemy will kill all those that are under the wall? for then they will stand up at their case, and shoot plum down upon them. Monsieur de Nevers then call'd to me also from the other side of the hole, to make me retire, which nevertheless I would not do, but said to Monsieur de Bourdillon these words, What God will do with me this day is already determin'd, I cannot avoid it, and if this place be appointed for my grave, it is in vain to shun my destiny, and so, without saying any more to him, return'd back to the place from whence he had drawn me, when on a sudden I bethought my
self of an Enterprize, bidding Captain Volumat to take six Harquebuzeers, and two Hal∣berts, and go place himself behind a Canton of the Wall, that remain'd of the Tower when it was beaten down, and there trie if suddenly leaping out from behind this Wall, he could not throw himself headlong upon the Casemats, a design grounded upon my belief that they could not be cover'd with any thing but plancks, for they made them after the same manner that we ma le the Hole, or else that they were totally open. But be it how it would, I intreated him without dispute to throw himself upon them, assuring him, that I would go make another Captain fall on by the path of the Traverse, which lead up to the top of the Tower, and that both of them at the same time should throw themselves headlong upon the Casemates. I then call'd to me a French Captain (I do not remember his name) and said to him in the presence of Monsieur de Nevers and Mon∣sieur de Bourdillon, the same things I had said to Captain Volumat, and that so soon as ever he should be up, without pawsing upon the matter, he should throw himself upon the Casemats, desiring Monsieur de Nevers, and Monsieur de Bourdillon to encourage the Sol∣diers to follow this Captain, whilst I went to Captain Volumat to do the same. But so soon as ever this poor Captain thrust up his head, he was kill'd by those of the great Plat∣form, and another after him, so that they fell dead betwixt the legs of Monsieur de Ne∣vers, and Monsieur de Bourdillon. I then cried out to Captain Volumat, being some fif∣teen paces from one another, that the Captain who fell on by the Traverse was already upon the top of the Tower (to beget in him an emulation, which ordinarily sharpens the noblest courages) whereupon the said Captain Volumat start up, for before he was kneel'd down behind the Canton, and ran up to the brink of the Wall. Now there was another Wall betwixt the Casemats and the Corner of the Tower; so that although he should leap into the first only, he was never the nearer; yet so it was, that this very thing was cause of the winning of the place, for the Casemat was all open and very low; so that so soon as ever they saw Captain Volumat upon the top, making shew as if he would leap in betwixt the two Walls, they acquitted the Casemats, and fled away along by the Curtain of the Wall and the Terrass, betwixt which and the Wall five or six men might march a∣breast, and then a Soldier of Captain Volumats at two leaps was with me, telling me in great haste that the Enemy had abandon'd the Casemat. Whereupon I immediately ran up to the side of the hole, and taking the Soldier by the arm cried to him,The Enemy quit the Case∣mat. leap in, Sol∣dier, leap in, and I will give thee twenty Crowns: but he told me satly he would not do it, for that he should certainly be kill'd, and thereupon struggled with all the force he had to get away from me. My Son Captain Montluc, and those Captains I nam'd be∣fore, who alwayes us'd to bear me company, were behind me, at Whom I began to swear and curse, that they did not help me to truss this Gallant, when immediately we thrust him in with his head forwards, and made him bold in spite of his teeth, and seeing they shot no more from the Casemats we put in two Harquebuzeers more, partly with their consent, and partly by force, first taking from them their Flasks and their Matches, for there was water within up to the armpits, and immediately after Captain Montluc leapt in, then the Captains Cossil, la Motte, Caste, Segrat, and the Ausillions, having all Tar∣gets, took the leap to save my Son,Gascon Cap∣tains. and three or four Harquebuzeers after them, when so soon as I saw they were nine or ten, I cried out to them, Courage Camrades, now shw your selves true Gascon Soldiers, and fall upon the Casemats, which they did, whilst the Ene∣my upon the Terrass threw stones at their own people, to make them return to the Case∣mats, and as Captain Montluc came to the door of the said Casemats he met with the Enemy, who would have re-entred into it, but a Harquebuzeer of ours kill'd the Chief of them, who was arm'd with a Mail cover'd over with green velvet, a gilt Morion upon his head, and a damaskt Halbert in his hand. Two others were also kill'd by hand, and then our people leapt into the Casemat, and call'd out to me thorough the hole, Suc∣cours, succours, we are in the Casemat: Monsieur de Nevers, then and Monsieur de Bour∣dillon help'd me in all haste to put more Soldiers in: we took their slasks and their fire, and so soon s they were in the water,Honor done by Monsieur de Nevers to the Sieur de Mont∣luc. they took them again in their hands, and past over throwing themselves into the Casemats, and ever after that time Monsieur de Nevers call'd me his Captain so long as he liv'd, saying he had there serv'd under me in the quality of a private Soldier. We had there two Captains of the Garrison of Metz called le Baron d' Anglure, and Valon-Ville, who at my request had obtein'd leave of Monsieur de Guise to be at the As∣sault, with five and twenty Harquebuzeers each, whom I had all this while kept under the Traverse, so that as yet they had not spent one shot. I call'd them, and they were with me at a leap, and threw themselves into the hole, and their Soldiers followed after, when as fast as they entred I made them run to the door of the Casemat, and to
enter into it. The door was little and very low, and the Enemy durst not deliver their shot plum down, because our men who were all along by the Wall would see them as soon as they put up their heads, as also would those who were there where I had been: but they tumbled down a great quantity of stones, for all which our people desisted not from going in and out of the Casemat as occasion requir'd; and as the Soldiers of the Baron d' Anglure and Valon-Ville entred the Casemat, I made those come out who had gain'd it before, the place not being capable to contain above forty or fifty persons. Now as God would have it,Division a∣mongst the Defendants. and to our great good fortune, the Defendants could not agree amongst themselves about the defence of the Casemats; for the Spaniards who were in the Town would keep them, but the Flemings would not suffer it, and the Governor would that some of his own Company should defend them; for which he lay a long time in prison, and the King of Spain would have put him to death, the Spaniards accusing him that he had put in corrupted people purposely to lose the place. The Governor de∣fended himself, saying, that he had seen Ioanne Gayetano and his Spaniards behave them∣selves so ill, that he durst not trust them with the defence of the Casemat, and so they accused one another; all which we knew from the Constable, and the Mareschal de St. Andre at their return out of prison,Severity of the Spaniards. who left this Governor still a prisoner. I have in my time observ'd the Spaniards to be severe punishers of those vvho by covvardise or trea∣chery have lost or surrendred places, and it vvere vvell and prudently done, if all Princes vvould punish such as commit so important offences, at least by degradation from arms, vvhich is vvorse than death: but then they ought to be censur'd vvithout prejudice or passion; for I have knovvn a man accused by another vvho could not himself have done better. But to return to our Siege, Monsieur de Guise being vvith the Culverins, and making them continually to shoot at the Enemies defences, perceiv'd that the Soldiers of the Trenches run straight up to the Tower (which were the two Captains, Anglure and Valon-Ville that I had call'd up to me) and Luneburg (Colonel of a Regiment of Germans, who was at the farthest end of the Trench, to whom I had sent to send me a hundred of his Harquebuzeers in all haste, for ours had spent all their powder) came also running him∣self with the hundred Harquebuzeers, and a hundred Pikes to me to the Tower; whom Monsieur de Guise seeing to run after this manner, and seeing the others that were by the Tower run to the hole, he cried out (as they told me afterwards) O good God the Tower is taken, do you not see how every one runs to the place? which having said he immediately mounted a bay Curtal he had ready by him, and ran full speed to pass the Bridg, gallop∣ing all the way till he came to the Trenches. So soon as I saw that Anglure and Valen-Ville were in the Tower,The great Tower taken. I spoke to a Gentleman that stood by, and said run to Mon∣sieur de Guise, and carry him news that the Tower is taken, and that now I think he will take Thionville, which till now I did never believe. The Gentleman ran as fast as he could, and met him just as he was entring the Trenches, where he said to him, Sir, Monsieur de Montlu sends you word that the Tower is taken, who still galloping on made answer, I have seen all my friend, I have seen all, and some fifty or threescore paces from the Tower alighted, and leaving his horse came running to us on foot; when so soon as he came, I began to smile upon him, and said, O Sir I now think you will take Thionville. Mas bous hazets trop bon marcat de nostre pet, & de bost monseigne; whereupon he threw his arms about my neck, and said, I now see, my heart, that the old Proverb is true, That a good horse will never tire. Now Lunebourg was already got in, and fifteen or sixteen Germans, and the rest were entring in file, when Monsieur de Guise also put himself into it, and by the little door entred the Casemat, and so soon as he was in call'd to me through a loop∣hole, that I should put him some Pioneers into the Tower to beat down the Casemats, and that I should see that no more Soldiers entred, they being already so many, that they began to be crowded. I then put Pioneers into the Tower, who presently fell to breaking the Wall of the Casemat, when the Germans seeing the rascals lazy at their work, them∣selves took the picks, and fell to cutting the Wall, Monsieur de Guise then sent out Lune∣bourg to look that no more entred into the Tower, telling him, that he would see that they should ply their work in the Casemats, as they also did, and so well, that in less than half an hour all the Casemats was overturned into the water that was in the Tower, the ruines whereof drank it all up, and then we had room enough, and every one entred that would, and then Monsieur de Guise came out, as he also made the Germans to do, and to return to their Post; and then I drew off Captain Sarlabous and all his Companions, who was along by the Courtin, and under the Ravelin, and put them into the Tren∣hes. Now so soon as the Enemy saw the Tower lost, they shot no more so smartly as before,
and we very well perceiv'd them to be down in the mouth. The English Mners the Duke of Guise had, had never stirr'd from me of all this while, and Monsieur de Guise be∣fore he came out of the Tower had consulted with them whereabouts to begin the Mines, and sound that it was under the geat Platform, marking the places where they were to be made, and so went back with Monsieur de Guise, who said to me, My heart, I will gallop home to my Quarters to send the King word of the taking of the Tower, and ssure your self Monsiur de Montluc, I will not conceal from him the brave service you have per∣form'd at this Siege; I will send the Miners back to you at night, and I pray appoint some Gentlemen to be continually with them, that by them they may send you word what they want; and so he went away to dispatch a Courrier to the King; for these great ones think the time long if news do not sly.The Prophe∣cies of Nosre∣damus. His Majesty had the day before made them read the Prophe∣cies of Nostredamus, and found for the next day Good news for the King; people may say that these are fopperies, and idle things, but I have seen many of his predictions come to pass. The Tower was taken betwixt four and five a clock in the afternoon, and we had disputed it from ten of the clock in the morning, so that we made account the Fight lasted betwixt six and seven hours. This fight, and that of the Fort Camoglia at Sienna were the longest, and the most dangerous wherein Battail or no Battail I have ever been; for upon my word it was very hot, and many were left dead upon the place. In the begin∣ning of the night the Miners came, and I my self went with them to see them begin; of all night long I never slept, because seeing them ply their work so well, I vvould not that any thing should be vvanting, but immediately be brought them, that they might not lose a quarter of an hour for vvant of materials; so that by break of day they had perfected tvvo Mines, and charg'd them vvith povvder ready to be sprung, and the third they made account vvould be perfected by ten of the clock; vvherein my presence serv'd not a little to the advancement of the vvork, neither indeed had I any more mind to sleep than to dance. Monsieur de Nevers, and Monsieur de Bourdillon vvere gone back over night vvith Monsieur de Guise, and return'd the next day by Sun-rise, and at eight of the clock the said Sieur de Nevers caused his dinner to be brought, vvhen as vve vvere eating upon three Drum-heads, upon vvhich his people had laid the Cloth, sitting upon three others, vve had scarce drank each of us a draught of vvine vvhen the Centinels came to tell me, that a Trumpet from a Canton of the Tovvn sounded a Parley; vvhereupon I start up, and delivering the Drum I sate upon to his Master,The Defen∣dants ask to Parley. bad him go ansvver the Parley. The Drum presently return'd, and brought me vvord, that the Tumpet entreated me, knovving I commandd there to send vvord to Monsieur de Guise, that they desir'd to parley, vvhich so soon as Monsieur de Nevers and Monsieur de Bourdillon heard, they gave over eating, and mounting to horse galloped away to the Dukes Quarters, to carry him the news. The Duke then sent away a Trumpet of his own, by whom they sent word, that if Monsieur de Guise would please to send four Gentlemen to parley, they would deliver him four others in hostage. Whereupon the Duke sent thither Monsieur de la Brosse, Monsieur de Bourdillon, or else Monsieur de Tavannes, Esclabolle, and another, but whom I have forgot. They capitulated to march out with what money they could carry about them,The Surrender of Thionville▪ and not to lie, I remember nothing of the other Articles; as indeed I never used much to trouble my self with these scrible scrawls, having enough to do to provide that no body might be unseasonably slain during the time of the Treaty, as it oft falls out. But the next day they marched out, and I dare boldly say, that of four parts three were wound∣ed, and almost all in the head, which was done when they stood up to shoot at us there, where I had planted my Harquebuzeers; for they could not shoot at those who were under the Wall, but they must discover themselves from the girdle upwards, and all their harm came from those of ours who were under the Ravelin, and those that I commanded where we shot point-blank. The same night that the Capitulation was sign'd, Monsieur de Guise dispatched away Monsieur de la Fresne, who before he went came to take his leave of me on horseback, asking me if I would command him any service to the King, to which  made answer, that he himself had seen how all things had past, and that I had so much confidence in Monsieur de Guise,Honor done to the Sieur de Montluc by the Duke of Guise. that he would not conceal my service from the King, who thereupon told me, tht he had express charge to give his Majesty a particular re∣lation of the fight, and that amongst other things, the Duke had commanded him to tell the King, that three men had been the cause of the taking of Thionville, of which I was one, and that his Majesty ought to acknowledg my service. And I perceiv'd afterwards that he had done me right to  King, for he brought me back letters from his Majesty full of very obliging expressions, of which one among the rest was, that he would never forget the service I had done him. I shall not I hope deprive other men of their due honor, rela∣ting what I did my self, I believe the Hstorians who write of none but Princes and
great persons will speak enough, and pass over in silence those of a more moderate sta∣ture. Behold then the City of Thionville taken. Notwithstanding that, some who had no very great kindness for the Duke of Guise, had pasted a Libell at the Gates of the Palace, and upon the Corners of the streets of Paris, that he should not find that at Thionville he had done at Calce,The Duke of Guise envy'd. where there were none but rascally people to oppose him, it went in Rhyme, though I remember nothing of it; but it must be contriv'd by the envy some unworthy people bare to this brave and valiant Prince, for the honorable command the King had conferr'd upon him, which I have nothing to do to treat of, neither do I in∣tend to trouble my self with such trumpery. Envy has ever reign'd upon the earth, be∣fore we were born, and will do after we are dead and gone, unless God would please to mold us anew. There were some who were ready to burst for spite that Monsieur de Guise had so good success; for there are some, and too many of such a vertuous disposition, that they had rather see the ruine of their King and Countrey, than behold the Triumph not only of their Enemy, but of their Friend and Companion, and if any disgrace befal him (for men are not Gods) they laugh, rejoyce, and make an Elephant of a Gnat. Let us leave such to swell with their own poysonous envy till they burst. In the mean time Thionville was ours with a great deal of honor. The night before the Enemy march'd away, Monsieur de Guise put Monsieur de Vielle-Ville into the City, who re∣fus'd to enter, unless I went along with him, because he should not, he said, be master of the Souldiers, but they would enter by force over the walls: I therefore took two or three hundred Souldiers, and three Captains, and went in with him, he having his own Company of Gens d' armes, where we were fain to play the Centinels all night, to watch that the Souldiers did not climb over the walls, and never slept one wink. I wonder at what we read in the Roman Histories, of those who before the day of a pitcht Battel, slept as profoundly, as it had been the day of their wedding. I have never, I confess been so indifferent and inapprehensive: but on the contrary, have past three days and nights without sleeping, or so much as having any great inclination to it. The next day I advis'd Monsieur de Guise to remove his Camp from thence, for otherwise it had been impossible to govern the Souldiers, and to speak the truth, they very well deserv'd to have had the sack of the Town given them, for it is to discourage Souldiers, not to give them some reward, and the least thing they gain from the Enemy gives them better contene than four pays. But Monsieur de Guise would by no means permit it, saying, that the Town must be preserv'd for his Majesties Service, being that thorough the Vicinity of this City to Germany, he might at all times draw what forces he pleas'd from thence; and that moreover, Iohn William Duke of Saxony, being to pass that way, the provisions must be preserv'd, and so sent away the Army to encamp about half a mile from thence, and Monsieur de Veille-Ville, with three or four Ensigns of Foot, and his own Company of Gens d' armes was left Governor there. Here (Captains my Companions) you have an example, if you please to take notice of it, by which you may see of what use promptitude is; this place being won by the great haste I made, immediately upon Captain Volumat's Souldiers telling me, that the Enemy had quitted the Casemats; I had not patience to put in above nine or ten men, but imme∣diately I put in my Son the first, and after him the Gentlemen that had follow'd me at the siege of Sienna, and at Montalsin, and it stood me upon to make haste, and to make them go speedily to the fight; for had I stay'd till there had been as many in the Tower, as in appearance were necessary for such a service, the Enemy had re-entred into it, and been suddenly re-inforc'd, so that it had been impossible ever to have taken it. I have been at many Sieges, but never without some hopes of taking the place, excepting at this; for having discover'd and consider'd all that was to be done for the taking of it, I found my self as far off, as Heaven is from Earth, and in plain truth the glory of it is due to Monsieur de Guise alone, who was so obstinately bent upon it, that the fight lasted six or seven hours,The honor of this Victory due to the Duke of Guise. and I do verily believe, that without the continual solicitation I had al∣most every moment from him, we had all retir'd, knowing that we might to as much pur∣pose have invaded Heaven; and we ought to believe, that through his good fortune, and the assistance of God who would have it so, this siege was brought to a good issue, and not by the power of men; being certain▪ that there was more Canon shot fir'd from with∣in, than we spent from without. When (Camrades) then you see an opportunity, hasten the execution, and never give your Enemy leisure to recollect himself, take that advice from me. I have three qualities that are not common to all, one whereof is, to be good at numbring of men, wherein I never met with any Serjeant Major or other that surpass'd me, and provided the Enemy
was not divided part sloping, and part in plain, let the Body be never so great, I could number them to fifty men, at the distance of almost a mile. The second is, to know by an Enemies behaviour, whether or no they be in fear, either by their motion, their order, or their manner of firing, a thing from which you may derive very great advan∣tages: So soon as ever I perceiv'd my Enemy never so little in doubt, I concluded him presently for lost. And the third, a readiness I always had to fight them in their ap∣prehension, whether stronger or weaker; for if you know not how to make an advan∣tage of your enemies fear, you can never hope to derive any from your own, and I have ever had Alexanders device in my head, though I never wore it any where else, which is, Defer not till to morrow what thou canst do to day; and am of opinion; that next to the Divine assistance, all the successes I have had, have proceeded from these three things. If you have not the judgement, seeing your opportunity, to press and solicite your men, and without further deliberation, to fall roundly to your work, you will never perform any thing of moment, either for your selves, or for him you serve: Fear not in a peril∣lous leap to hazard the life of a Souldier. (There is no remedy, some must be sacrific'd to the Publick, the world would otherwise be over peopled) provided it be in a place from whence he cannot retire, as I did to the Souldiers I thrust into the Casemats, for then they take courage, seeing themselves lost, and make a virtue of necessity. Had I re∣tir'd then when Monsieur de Bourdillon pull'd me back by the arms, I think our enterprize had been deferr'd till another time. I have seen such as are glad when they are com∣pell'd after that manner to retire, especially in a place of danger, and yet will keep a great clutter at other times. I know those men by their looks, Camrades, Friends, after having said your in manus, never think of any thing more, but of doing well; if your hour be come, 'tis to much purpose to hide your heads, since you must once dye, 'tis best to dye like men of honor, and to leave a good name behind you. I lost, by the relation of the Captains, above five hundred Souldiers, kill'd and hurt, and caus'd all the wounded men to be carried to Metz,Monsieur de Vielle-Ville Mareschal of France. to which place Monsieur de Vielle-Ville (who at this time is Mareschal of France) sent to recommend them, for he was the Kings Lieutenant there, causing money to be distributed amongst them out of the Re∣venue of the Hospital the Admiral founded there, which has been the preservation of a great many wounded Souldiers, and also an encouragement to others to venture more boldly in fight, hoping that in case they should be hurt, they are sure to have a relief of money out of the Hospital for their cure.Advice to th King. And truly Sir, both you and the other great Princes of the world, ought to make it one of your chiefest concerns to establish a Re∣venue for your poor maim'd and wounded Souldiers, as well for their present cure, as their future support, and that some pensions may be set apart for them. Can you do less for them, who expose and offer up their lives for you; this hope makes them more willing to hazard their persons. And doubtless your own souls will one day an∣swer for all, for they will be no more piviledg'd than ours; nay, you will have a great deal more to answer for than we, for you make us do all the ills we commit, to satisfi and execute your passions, and if God be not merciful both to you, and to us, we are in a sad condition. For the honor of God then, Sir, provide for your poor Souldiers, that lose their arms and legs in your service; it is not you that gave them their limbs, but God, and can you then do less than maintain them, when they are lam'd in your ser∣vice. Do you think that God will not hear the Maledictions they curse us withal, who have made them miserable all their lives? I have heard the Grand Signior has a very good order, as to that particular, and accordingly he is the best serv'd of any Pince in the world. Three days after the taking of Thionville, the Army march'd directly to Arlon, a lit∣tle Town, but a very near one for its circuit. 'Tis a great fault in a General to lie still after the taking of a place, as I have known them often do. This both encourages your Enemy, and gives your own men opportunity to steal away; whereas their honor will oblige them to stay, when they see themselves employ'd: I mean, if the Army be not totally broken or ruin'd, for then necessity compels you so to do: but otherwise to repose after a Conquest, and to lose never so little time, is very prejudicial to his Majesties ser∣vice. I with our foot quarter'd round about the Town, Monsieur de Guise lay a quarter of a League behind, and told me he was almost moap'd for want of sleep; for that since the beginning of the siege of Thionville till now, he had not had so much sleep in all, as he was wont to have in one night at other times (and I had had less than he) entreating me to make the approaches that night, that he would send me the Commissaries of the Artillery with four pieces of Canon, to consult where they should be planted, and that he would give the sack of this Town to the Souldiers, in recompence of that of
Thionville: Which having said, he re'd himself into a little thatch'd huse, where he was to lie. There was in the Town a hundred and fifty Germans,The Forces in Arlon. and four hundred Walloons, the Germans kept one Gate, and the Walloons another; when (so soon as I had placed the Centinels, and the Courts of Guard very near to one another (because it was said that some succours would enter in that night) they within set a very good face on the matter, which made us think that they lookt for some relief) I began to make the Esplanade by the Gardens of the Town, to bring up the Artillery, resolving to make my Battery a little on the left hand the Gate, to assist my self at the assault with the Ladders of a little Breach they had made themselves, thorough which to carry up earth to the Terrass they were making in that place; which to do they had made steps in the very earth it self, both at the descent into the Graffe, and likewise in the ascent on the other side up to the Terrass. I came up close to the Ditch of the Town, and to another little Ditch there was near un∣to the way, which I caused to be discover'd by a Soldier; and I had three or four Cap∣tains with me in this little Ditch. The Soldier found the steps, by which he went down, and afterwards mounted three or four of those that went up to the Terrass, and there stayd without being perceiv'd: when having stayed a while he return'd to me, and told me, that there was no Centinel upon the Terrass; so that he thought if we should throw our selves desperately upon the Terrass we should carry the Town. Hearing this, I caused a Court of Guard (that was much stronger than the rest, it being design'd to guard the Artillery) to come up to me,Arlon disco∣ver'd. making the Soldiers to creep on their hands and knees, and to put themselves into the Ditch. I then made the Soldier return to the Ditch, with three or four Harquebuzeers, and two Captains with Targets, of which Monsieur de Goas was one. The night was so very dark, that a man could not see a step from him, and this Soldier was a Fleming. He goes down into the Ditch, the Captains after him, and the three or four Harquebuzeers after them; and so soon as they were in the Ditch they plant∣ed themselves on that side of it towards the Town, and as near as they could to the steps. The Enemy hearing the noise began to cry who goes there? and the Soldier answer'd them in their own language, a friend, a friend; they then demanded of him what he was, to which he made answer, that he was a Fleming, and that being their Countryman, he very much lamented their ruine, for that all the Artillery Monsieur de Guise had would be planted in battery by morning, and that they were not to trust to the Germans who were with them in the Town, for they were assur'd to have no harm, nor the least offence from our people, they having already made them that promise by a German Soldier, who stole out in the close of the evening to speak with us; so that all the slaughter would fall upon them if they did not surrender, which also would be too late after the Canon had once playd. Upon this they sent immediately to the Germans Quarters, and found that a Soldier of ours who spake Dutch was talking to them; so that so soon as their Messenger return'd, this Souldier heard them all in a hurly-burly within, and began to ask them, if they would make him drink, to which they answered they would, and bad him come up boldl upon their word and faith. I heard every word, for I was not above six paces from the brin of the Graffe, and made the other two Captains go one after another into it, and three or four Serjeants with Halberts after them. The Soldier then mounted the steps till he came to the edge of the Terrass, where he again spoke to them, saying that Monsieur de Guise had made fair War with those of Thionville, and would do the same by them, still amu∣sing them with fair speeches, and they fetcht him some drink. Monsieur de Goas was just behind the Soldier, and three Harquebuzeers one after another (for they could mount but one by one) in heels of him whom this first Soldier so shaded with his body, that they could not see down the steps. The other Captain followed in the rear of the three Harquebuzeers, and the Serjeants after him, insomuch that all the steps were full from the top to the bottom; which when Monsieur de Goas saw, he pusht the Soldier that was before him upon the Terrass, and the other Captain the other three Harquebuzeers, and and then the Soldier began to cry goot Krich, which is to say, good Quarter, good Quarter, the Harquebuzeers gave fire,Arlon surpri∣zed. and the Captains threw themselves upon the Counterscarp, and every body after them, and these poor people fled to their Quarters, the Soldiers chasing them thorough the streets. I then leapt into the Ditch with the rest of my men, mounting the Souldiers as fast as I could one after another. The Germans who saw them∣selves surpriz'd behind, at the request of the Soldier that spoke Dutch very courteously open'd a Postern, and gave themselves up to the discretion of the Soldiers, wherein our men did an act worthy the highest commendation, and by which they shewed them∣selves to be old Soldiers, for there was not four men kill'd in the whole Town: but on the contrary they themselves led our people to the houses where the best booty was to be had: And thus the Town was taken.
Monsieur de Guise who had given order that no one should disturb him, but let him that night sleep his fill, knew nothing of all this till break of day, that asking if the Ar∣tillery had begun to play, they told him the Town was already taken, from abou mid∣night, and the Artillery return'd back to its place, which made him make the Sgn of the Cross, saying this is quick work, when presently making himself ready,Arlon burnt. and mounting to horse he came up to us. Now by misfotune the fire hd taken in two or three houses by reason of some powder that was found in them, which in removing thence accidentally took fire, and burnt four or five Solders, so that the Town being almst fll of flax ready drest for spinning, and the wind being very high, no so good means could be us'd, but that above half the Town was redn'd to ashes, by reason where of the Soldiers did not get so much as otherwise they had done. The next day Monsieur de Guise marched away with all his Army, and never staid till he came to Pierre pnt, where himself and all the Gentlemen of his Train lodg'd in the Town, which was very large, whilst  encampt without on boh sides the River; and there it was that the Swiss came to us,The Duke of Saxony. and Iohn William Dke of Saxony, who brought a great and very brave Troop of Reirs along with him, and, if I mistake not, a Regiment of Germans also. The King himself likewise came, and lay t Marches, a house belong∣ing to the Cardinal of Lorrain, which altogether made up the greatest and the bravest Army that I thnk ever King of France had; for when the King would see them all drawn into Battalia, they took up above a leage and a half in length, and when the Van began to march to go back to the Rar, and to return back to the Front took up three hours time. Two hours before day Messiurs de Bourdillon and de Taannes, Mareschaux de Camp, came to the place assign'd for the Rendezvouz, where as we came they still drew us up, and before all the Army was in Battalia it was above eight hours, and was excessively hot; Monsieur de Guise came himself by break of day, and helped to put the Army into Bat∣talia. I with my French Foot was placed betwixt the Swiss and a Battalion of Germans, where as Monsieur de Guise past by the head of our Battalion, he said, Would to God we had some good fellow here with a bottle of wine, and a crust of bread, that I might drink a glass or two, for I shall not have time to go dine at Pierre-point, and be back again before the King comes;The Sieur de Montluc in∣vites Monsieur de Guise to dinner. whereupon I said to him, Sir will you please to dine with me at my Tents? (which was not above a Harquebuz shot off) I will give you very good French and Gascon wine, and a whole Covy of Partridges; ys my heart, said he, but they will be Garlick and Onions; to which I made answer, that they should neither be the one, nor the other, but that I would give him as good a dinner as if he was in his own Quarters, and wine as cool as he could desire, and moreover Gascon wine, and admirable good water. Are you in earnest my heart, said he? yes upon my faith am I, said I, why then, said he, I would willingly come, ut I cannot leave the Duke of Saxony; why Sir, said I, in the name of God bring the Duke of Saxony, and who you please: I but, said he, the Duke will not come without his Captains; why, said I, ring his Captains too, I have elly-timber for you all. Now I had overnight promised Messieurs de Bourdillon and de Tabannes to treat them at dinner, after they had drawn the Army up in Battalia; but they could not come, by reason that part of the Cavalry, who were quarter'd a great way off, were not yet come up; and on the other side, I had one of the best Providores in the Army. Monsieur de Guise then went to find out the Duke of Saxony and his Captains, and I sent in all haste to my Stew∣ard to get all things ready. My people had made a Cellar in the earth, where the wine and the water was as cool as ice; and by good fortune I had got a great many Partridges, Quirles, Turkies, Leverets, and all that could be defid, wherewith to make a noble Feast, with bak'd-meats and Tarts: for I knew that Messieurs de Bourdillon and de Ta∣vannes would not come alone, and I had a mind to entertain them very well, they being both of them very good friends of mine. They were so well treated that Monsieur de Guise asking the Duke of Saxony by his Interpreter, what he thought of the French Colo∣nel, and whether or no he had not treated them well, and given them good wine? the Duke made answer, that if the King himself had treated them, he could not have done it better, nor have given them better, nor co ler wine. The Duke of Saxony's Captains spared it not, but drank freely to our French Captains, that I had brought along with me, nei∣ther though Messieurs de Bourdillon and de Tavannes had also come had I been surpriz'd, for next to the Duke of Guise his own Table, there was not one in the whole Army longer, or better urnisht than mine. A way that I have alwayes used in what command soever I had been, being willing thereby to honor the Employments I have had from my Masters, to encrease my expence; and have alwaes observ'd such as have liv'd after this manner to be in greater reputation, and better followed than others; for such a Gentleman may be,
and of a good family, that sometimes knows not where to dine, and knowing where a good Table is kept, will be glad to be there, who if he follow you at your Table, will follow you any where else, if he have never so little good blood or breeding in him. But to re∣turn to my Guests, so soon as they rose from Table Monsieur de Guise asked me, what Laundress I had that kept my Table-linnen so white, to which I made answer, that they were two men I had that did it; believe me, said he, you are serv'd like a Prince; and thereupon entertain'd the Duke of Saxony upon that subject, speaking better things of me than I deserv'd; whereupon I took occasion to tell him, that he would do well to per∣swade the King to give me money to buy silver Vessel, that another time, when he and the Duke of Saxony would do me the honor to come eat in my Pavillions, I might serve them ac∣cording to their quality. Monsieur de Guise told the Duke of Saxony what I said, who made answer, that he would tell the King; when being about to mount to horse to return to the Camp, word was brought that the King was upon his way from Marches, and coming to the Camp; whereupon they two went out to meet him, and we return'd every one to his place, all of us I assure you very well drunk, and our pates full. About a quarter of a league from the Battalions they met the King, where his Majesty asked them, if they had din'd, to which Monsieur de Guise made answer, that they had, and as well as they had done of a year before: why, said his majesty (seeing them come from wards the Battalions) you did not dine at Pierre-pont, no sir, said Monsieur de Guise, neither can your Majesty guess where we din'd, nor by whom so well entertain'd; I pray by whom said the King; Marry Sir, replyed Monsieur de Guise, by Montluc; I believe then, said the King, he feasted you with his own Countrey diet, Garlick and Onions, and Wine as warm as milk: whereupon Monsieur de Guise up and told him how I had entertain'd them, when the King asking the Duke of Saxony by his Interpreter if it were true, the Duke made answer, that if his Majesty himself had treated them,The Duke of Saxony entreats silver vessel of the King for the Sieur de Monluc. they could not have had better meat, nor cooler wine; and that since I was so good a fellow, his Majesty might do well to give me money to buy Plate, nothing having been wanting but that, and that Monsieur de Guise and he had both promised me to make that request to his Majesty in my behalf; which the King pro∣mised them to do, and that since I was so honorable in my expence, he would give me means to do it, more than hitherto he had ever done. Though this passage be not much to the purpose, yet I thought fit to insert it here, to the end every one may know, that Avarice had never so great a dominion over me, as to hinder me from honoring the Employments I have had from my Kings and Masters; and I would advise you, fellow Captains, who command over a great many men, to do the same, and never to suffer avarice to be predominant over you; the little you spend will procure you several and considerable advantages. A Captains handsome Table invites worthy men, especially that of a Lieutenant of the King, to which the Nobility and Gentry repair,Every one avoids an ava∣ricious Cap∣tain. either for want of commodious Quarter, or sometimes perhaps upon the account of other inconveniences, where if the said Lieutenant be miserable and narrow soul'd, they will look upon him as a man unworthy to be follow'd. I never did so, but on the contrary alwayes spent more than I had, and have found that it has done me more good than harm: yet was not this my only way of spending; but I had a trick of giving Hor∣ses and Arms also, and oftentimes to men that were better able than my self. If the King or the Prince you serve under know you to be of this humour, he ought also to be open-handed to you, knowing you to be of a liberal nature, and that you reserve nothing to your self. Now, as I was standing at the head of our Battalion, and every one of our Captains in his place, the Prince of Ioinville, who is now Duke of Guise, came up to me, together with the Son of Monsieur d' Aumale, both little boyes, and delicately handsome, having their Governors and three or four Gentlemen attending on them. They were mounted upon two little Pad Nags, to whom I said, Go to, little Princes, alight from your horses; for I have been bred up in the family from whence you are descended,The Sieur de Montluc puts the first arms into the hands of the Prince of Ioinville, and the Son of the Duke of Aumale. which is the house of Lorrain, where I was a Page, and I will be the first who shall lay a Pike upon your shoulders. Upon which their Governors presently alighting, caused them also to alight: they had little Taffata Ribbons over their shoulders, which I took off, laying each of them a Pike upon his neck, and saying to them, I hope God will give you the grace to resemble your Ancestors, and that I shall bring you good fortune, for being the first that has laid arms up∣on your shoulders. They have hitherto been favourable to me, and God make you as vali∣ant as you are handsome,His speech to them. and the Sons of brave and generous Fathers: And so I made them march side by side at the head of, and before the Battalions, and return againto the same place. Their Governors and all the Captains were so ravisht to see these pretty Chil∣dren march so gracefully as they did, that there was not one who did not look upon that
action as a happy presage: But I fail'd in one, which was that of Monsieur d' Aumale, for he dy'd presently after▪ and yet as I have been told, this little Prince was as sound within as any child could possibly be: but I think Physicians kill Princes, with keeping too much clutter about them in their sickness; they are men as we are, and yet they will have them to have something particular from others. Monsieur de Guise is yet living, and I hope will accomplish the good fortune we that day wish'd him. The beginning is good and hopeful, I hope the end will crown it; that so since God has been pleas'd to take one he may remain sole Heir to that happiness, that at that time we joyntly wish'd to his Cousin and to him. I have ever conceiv'd great hopes, from the little knowledge I have had of this young Prince, neither was there ever Poltron of that brave Race, which is rarely seen in a numerous Family. In brief, our Army was a very brave one, and the King was very much pleas'd with the sight of it. A few days after, his Majesty was advertis'd, that the King of Spain had taken the Field, and was marching his Army in all diligence towards the borders, which made his Majesty doubt, that he was going to surprize either Corbie or Dourlans, or else Amiens, never a one of which having above two Foot Companies in Garison. The night that this news was brought, they did nothing but dispute upon the means to relieve these places, but concluded it impossible in the end, considering that the King of Spain was so far ad∣vanc'd. Monsieur de Guise upon this occasion, staid that night at Marches, and sent back Messieurs de Bourdillon and de Tavannes to Pierre-pont. It was my constant custom to go every day to give Monsieur de Guise the good morrow, and thence to return back to my Tent, not stirring of all day after from my command, neither did I use to spend much time in Courtship. That has never been my Trade, for which both the King, the Duke of Guise, and all the Princes of the Army, lik'd me the better, and were pleas'd to say, that no disorder could happen on our side. The next morning I went to give the good morrow to Monsieur de Guise, believing that he had return'd overnight to Pierre-pont, but at my entring into the Town, I met Messieurs de Bourdillon, and de Tavannes, and d' Estree on horseback going out, and ask'd them whither they were going; to which they made answer, that they were returning to the Council at Marches, being that over night they had not been able to resolve upon the means to relieve Corbie, for the King of Spain was marching in all diligence that way, and that Monieur de Guise had staid all night at Marches. I then ask'd him how far it might be from thence to Corbie, and I think they told me thirty Leagues or more: Whereupon I said to them, I pray gallop away full speed, and tell the King, that it is not now a time to insist upon Councils and Consultations, and that perhaps whilst he is in debate what to do, the Enemy is upon his march: but that he must suddenly resolve, and that if he please, I will take seven Ensigns, and march night and day to put my self into it: and tell him that no grass shall grow under my feet, but that I will make such haste, that I will be there before the King of Spain, or any part of his Army. And tell Monsieur de Guise, that I will only ask him five and twenty Mules laden with bread, for I will carry along four Wagons of wine of the Merchants Vo∣lunteers of our Regiments, to make our Souldiers eat and drink upon their march, without en∣tring into either Town or Village, and that therefore he give present order to Monsieur de Serres, speedily to send me the Mules loaden with bread. In the mean time I will run to the Regiment, to choose out the seven Ensigns, so that at your return you shall find me ready to depart; but you must make very great haste, and the King must suddenly resolve, for if they do not immediately conclude, without further delay, I will not undertake it. Monsieur de Bourdillon then began to say that the King would think it a matter of great difficulty, that the relief could be there so soon as the King of Spain; at which I flew out into a rage, and said swearing, I see very well, that when you come there, you will spend all the day in disputes: but in despite of disputes and consultations, let the King but leave it to me, and I will relieve it, or break my heart for haste. Monsieur d' Estree then said, Let us go, let us go, the King cannot but like of it, and so they spur'd away directly to Marches, and I streight to my own Regiment. So soon as I came thither, I suddenly made choice of my seven Ensigns, bidding them presently to take some repast, and tel∣ling them, that without baggage they must immediately depart to perform a good piece of Service. I gave them not half an hour to eat in, but drew them out presently into the Field, one part of the Harquebuzeers before, and another in the rear of the Pikes. I then took four Wagons loaden with wine, of those that had the best Horses, which I plac'd in the head of the Captains, commanding the Waggoners to take two or three sacks of Oats, and to throw them upon the Punchions, and a little hay: Which being done, I ran to my own Tents, which were behind the Regiment, and fell to eat, taking the Captains of the seven Ensigns to dinner with me.
Messieurs de Tavannes, de Bourdillon and d' Estree made so good haste, that they found the King but newly risen out of his Bed, where they presently propos'd the business to him: Whereupon the King would have call'd all the Council, at which Monsieur d' Estree began to curse and swear, as he told me afterwards (and he is as good at it as I) saying, Sir, Montluc told us true, when he said you would still delay time in debates and consulta∣tions, whether it be to be done or no, whereas if your Majesty had resolv'd last night, the re∣lief had by this time been ten Leagues upon their way; and he says moreover, that if he have not what he demands immediately sent him, he will not stand to his word, for the Spaniards shall not triumph over him. Monsieur de Guise then prosecuted the affair with great ve∣hemency and vigour, and Messieurs de Bourdillon and de Tavannes did the same, when upon the instant, without further deliberation, it was concluded, and Monsieur de Guise sent to Monsieur de Serres immediately to send the five and twenty Mules loaden with bread. The King then sent me word by Monsieur de Broilly (a Gentleman belonging to the Duke of Guise) that he had approv'd of my opinion, saving that he could not consent I should go, because he had no other person to command the Regiments, in case he should be put to the necessity of a Battel (for no body knew whether or no the King of Spain was not coming with a resolution to present it, he making a shew of attempting great mat∣ters) but that he was going to make choice of one to lead the succours, and that I should make all things ready in the mean time. The said Broilly return'd in all haste to the King, to tell his Majesty that he had seen the seven Ensigns drawn out into the Field ready to march,Captain Bruil leads the suc∣cours to Corbie. and that I staid for nothing but the Bread; and at the same time that Broilly was return'd towards the King, the Mules arriv'd, and by the way he met with Captain Brueil Governor of Rue, and Brother in Law to Salcede, who told him that the King had made choice of him to conduct the relief to Corbie. Captain Brueil staid to eat four or five bits only, whilst waiting for two servants he had sent for, who presently came, and so they began to march. I accompanied them above a long League on their way, still talking to him and the rest of the Captains, representing to them, that God had given them a fair opportunity, which also they ought to have purchas'd at the price of half their estates, wherein to manifest to the King the affection they bore to his service, and also to give a testimony of their own valour, in the sight, as it were, of the King himself, who would be ready to relieve them, and to fight a Battel rather than suffer them to be lost. I found by their answers that they went with great chearfulness, which made me leave them, to go through the files of the Souldiers, and to remonstrate to them, that it was their own faults, if they did not signalize themselves for ever, that the King so long as he liv'd would acknowledge their service, and that I had done them a great honor in choosing out them from the rest of the Regiment, entreating them not deceive the good opinion I had of them, and that I would deliver to the King the names of those who should best acquit themselves of their duty, in obeying what should be impos'd upon them, after which I made them all lift up their hands and swear, that they would march day and night: which being done, I return'd to the van to embrace Captain Brueil, and the rest of the Captains and Lieutenants, promising them immediately to go to the King, and to acquaint his Majesty with the election I had made of their persons above all others of the Regiment, for this service, and so left both Officers and Souldiers chearful, and very well resolv'd upon this long march, saying to them at parting, Remember Fellow Souldiers, the diligences you have formerly seen me make in both Piedmont, and in Italy (for many of them had serv'd under me in those expeditions) and believe that upon your diligence now depend both your lives and honors. Now being I am not of that Countrey, nor was ever there, but at this time, I am not able to make any judgement of their diligence: but the King and all those who were acquainted with the Countrey, said, that never Foot before per∣form'd such a prodigious march; neither did they ever enter into either Town or Vil∣lage, but when by day they met with a little River, they made a halt, and refresh'd them∣selves two hours at most, taking a little nap and away again, but march'd continually all night. They were out but two nights, and arriv'd by Sun-rise within a quarter of a League of Corbie, where they met a Gentleman who was riding post to the King, to give him notice that the King of Spain's Camp was just coming before the Town; and who moreover told them, they must run full speed if they intended to get in, for that the Cavalry already began to arrive. They then began to mend their pace, the Gentleman returning back with them almost to the Town, that he might be able to give the King an account that they were entred; when so soon as they came within two or three hundred paces of the walls, the Enemies Cavalry began to appear, and our men run full carreer to throw themselves before the gate, and upon the edges of the Graft where they made head. The Enemy kill'd seven or eight Souldiers in the rear, who were not able
to keep pace with the rest, and so all our people got safe into the City, without losing any of their Mules or Waggos, for they had made an end of all their bread and wine four Leagues from thence, and had sent them back. I had also given them one of my six Chests, that I had conv'd to carry powder in, which was drawn by three horses, and that arriv'd at the Gates as soon as the Souldiers. There are yet living several Princes and Lords, who were then of the Kings Council, that can bear witness whether I speak the truth or no, especially Messieurs de Tavannes and d' Estree, who carried my deliberation to the King. When ever (Camrades) the King or his Lieutenant shall put you upon a design, that requires extraordinary diligence for the relieving of a place, you ought not to lose so much as a quarter of an hour, and you had much better work your body and your legs to the utmost of what you are able to perform, and enter into the place with safety, than walk∣ing at your case to be kill'd, and not to enter into it; wherein your selves will be the cause of your own death, and the loss of the place; and where you might by your dligence gain a brave reputation, you will by loytering at your ease, finish your life and your together: and never excuse your selves upon the Souldiers, nor make the Enterprize seem difficult unto them, but always easie; and above all things be sure to carry provision along with you, especially bread and wine, wherewith to refresh them by the way (for as I have said before, humane bodies are not made of iron) always speaking chearfully to them by the way, and encouraging them to go on, representing to them the great honor they will acquire to themselves, and the signal service they shall perform for the King, and doubt not, but (proceeding after that manner) men will go as far and farther than horses. I advise you to nothing that I have not often done my self,Foot will  a longer mach than horse. and caus'd to be done, as you will find in the reading my Book; for after horses are once tir'd, you shall not make them budge a step with all the spurs you have; but men are supported by their courage, and re∣quire not so much time for refreshing, they eat as they go, and chear one another upon their march. It will therefore (Fellow Captains) stick only at you; do then as I have often done; forsake your horses, and fairly on foot at the head of your men, shew them that you will undergo the same labour they do, by which means you will make them do any thing you will, and your example will enflame the courages, and redouble the Forces of the most tir'd and overspent of all the Company. Two or three days after the King mov'd with all his Army directly towards Amiens, and in his first or second days march, arriv'd the Gentleman from the Governor of Corbie, who found his Majesty marching his Army in the field, where he brought him news, that Captain Brueil was entred safe into Corbie, which was a great satisfaction both to his said Majesty,News brough to the King of the relief of Corbie. and the whole Army, to know that this place was secured; whereupon his Ma∣jesty, merrily said to Monsieur de Guise, Who shall be the first to tell Montluc this news? for I for my part will not be he; Nor I neither, said Monsieur de Guise, for so soon as he shall hear it, he will so crow, there will be no dealing with him: which they said, because they had all of them been of opinion, that it was impossible for foot to perform so long a a journey. The next day his Majesty was advertised, that the King of Spain had made a halt a little League from Corbie, and made no shew of having any intention to besiege that place; which made the King think, that by reason of the succours it had receiv'd, he would make no attempt against it, and thereupon it presently came into his head, that he would march directly to Amiens, which having no more than one or two foot Com∣panies in Garrison,The Marqui de Villars. he immediately sent away the Marquis de Villars, who is yet living, with three hundred men at arms, to go in extreme diligence, and put himself into it, commanding me to send away other seven Ensigns to follow after him, with all the haste they possibly could make; which I accordingly did, and gave the charge of con∣ducting them to Captain Forces, who is yet living, and being the Captains and Souldiers had all heard what commendations both the King and all the Army had given Captain Brueil for the haste he had made in going to relieve Corbie, they would do the same, and arriv'd as soon as the said Marquis at Amiens; for nothing so much excites men of our Trade, as glory, and the desire to do as well, or better, than another. Two or three days before this his Majesty had sent three Companies also into Dourlans, and so with all great ease provided for the safety of these three important places. So soon as the King was come to Amiens, the King of Spain's Army also arriv'd and encamp'd within a League,Treaty of peac betwixt France and Spain con∣cluded. the River betwixt them, and there the Treaty of peace was set on foot, of which the Constable and the Mareschal de S. Andre had made the first overtures, during the time of their imprisonment in Spain; in order to which I think there was a truce from the beginning, because nothing of action past on either side, at least that I remember: for I fell very sick of a double Tertian Ague, which I got not by
excess of revelling and dancing, but by passing the nights without sleep, sometimes in the cold, sometimes in the heat, always in action, and never at rest. It was well for me that God gave me an able body, and a strong constitution; for I have put this carcass of mine as much to the proof as any Souldier whatsoever of my time.The mischiefs that ensu'd up∣on this peace. After all the going to and again, that lasted for above two months, the peace was in the end concluded, to the great misfortune principally of the King, and generally of the whole Kingdom. This peace being cause of the surrender of all the Countreys conquer'd, and the Conquests made both by King Francis and Henry, which were not so inconsiderable, but that they were computed to be as much as a third part of the Kingdom of France; and I have read in a Book writ in Spanish, that upon this accomodation, the King deliver'd up an hun∣dred fourscore and eighteen Fortresses wherein he kept Garison, by which I leave any one to judge how many more were in dependance, and under the obedience of these. All we who bear Arms may affirm with truth,The praises of King Henry the second. that God had given us the best King for Soul∣diers that ever Reign'd in this Kingdom; and as for his people, they were so affectionate to him, that not one of them ever repin'd to lay out his substance to assist him in the carrying on of so many Wars, as he had continually upon his hands. I shall not con∣demn those who were the Authors of this peace, for every one must needs believe they did t to good intent, and that had they foreseen the mischiefs that ensu'd upon it, they would never have put a hand to the work: for they were so good servants of the Kings, and lov'd him so well, as they had good and just reason to do, that they would rather have dy'd in Captivity than have done it; which I say, because the Constable and the Mareschal de S. Andre were the first movers and promoters of it, who themselves have seen the death of the King, and themselves shar'd in the mishaps that have since befallen this miserable Kingdom, wherein they both dyed with their swords in their hands, who otherwise might yet perhaps have been alive, by which any one may conclude, that they did not make this peace, foreseeing the mischiefs it has since produc'd, which rightly to comprehend, let us consider the happiness wherewith God was pleas'd to bless this King∣dom, in giving it o brave and magnanimous a King, his Kingdom rich, and his people so affectionately obedient, that they would deny him nothing to assist him in his Conquests, together with so many great and brave Captains, most of which had been yet alive, had they not devour'd one another in these late civil Wars. Oh had this good King but liv'd or this unlucky peace never been made, he would have sent the Lutherans packing into Germany with a vengeance. As to the rest, our good Master had four Sons, all Princes of great hope and singular expectation, and such, as from whom his Majesty in his de∣clining years, might expect the repose, and comfort of his old Age, and consider them , proper instruments for the execution of his high and generous designs. The other Kings his neighbours could not boast of this, for the King of Spain had one Son only, of which never any one conceiv'd any great hopes, and he prov'd accordingly; the Kingdom of England was in the Government of a Woman, the Kingdom of Scotland neighbour to , stood for us, and was ours, France having a Dolphin King; by all which any one may judge, that had not this unlucky peace been concluded, the Father or his Sons had sway'd all Europe. Piedmont, the Nursery of brave men had been ours, by which we had a door into Italy, and perhaps a good step into it, and we had seen all things turn'd topsie urvy: Then those who have so brav'd and harassed this Kingdom, durst not have shew'd their heads, have stirr'd, nor so much as projected or thought of what they have executed since. But 'tis done and past, without any possible remedy, and nothing remains to us but sorrow and affliction, for the loss of so good, and so valiant a King, and to me of so gracious and liberal a Master, with the mishaps that have since befallen this miserable Kingdom, well may we call it so, in comparison of what it was before, when we stil'd it the most great and opulent Kingdom in Arms, good Captains, the obedience of the people, and in riches, that was in the whole world. After this unhappy and unfortunate peace the King retir'd himself to Beauvais, but Monsieur de Guise still remain'd in the Camp to dismiss the Army. Before his Majesties departure, I surrendred up the Commission he had made me to accept by force: Neither ought it to appear strange, that I disputed it so long, before I would take that employ∣ment upon me; for I doubted well that would befal me, which afterwards did, which was to incur the perpetual disgrace of the House of Montmorency more than that of Cha∣stillon, Monsieur de Montluc not much belov'd by the House of Montmoren∣cy. which was more nearly concern'd in the affair than the other. But there is no remedy, a man cannot live in this world, without contracting some Enemies, unless he were a God. I accompanied Monsieur de Guise as far as Beauvais, and from thence re∣tir'd to Paris, he having first promis'd to obtain me leave to go into Gascony, and more∣over to cause money to be given me to defray my journey thither; for he knew very well
I had not one peny. Both which I am confident he would have perform'd: but so soon as he came to Beauvais,The Duke of Guise decli∣ning in the Kings favour▪ he found a new face of affairs, others having slept in betwixt him and home, and undermined him in his credit with the King. Thus goes the world, but it was a very sudden change, and much wondred at by those who had follow'd him in the Conquests he had made, he having repair'd all the disasters of others, and mani∣fested to the King of Spain, that neither the loss of the Battel of S. Quintine, nor that of Graveline, had reduc'd the King to such a condition, but that he had yet one or two Armies stronger than those, having as to the rest, taken almost impregnable places. But let them deal it out. These are things that very often fall out in the Courts of Princes, and I wonder not that I have had my share, since far greater than I, have run the same fortune, and will do for the time to come. Now the King of Navarre had been driving on some enterprize or another in Bisay,The King of Navarre car∣ries the Siur de Montluc into Guiene. which in the end prov'd double, and entreated the King to give me leave to go along with him, for that he was resolv'd to execute it in his own person, having an opinion that Monsieur de Bry had fail'd through his own default; and so I went along with him without any other advantages from Court, than bare promises only, and the good will of the King my Master: but he was divered from his liberalities both to me and to others, who deserv'd it as well, and perhaps better than I. We went then to Bayonne, where we found that he who was entrusted to carry on this affair, and whose name was Gamure, plaid double, and intended to have caused the King of Navarre himself to be taken; where∣upon he sent back Monsieur de Duras with the Legionnaries, and also the Bearnois he had caus'd to advance thither in order to his design. I had brought with me three force and five Gentlemen all arm'd, and bravely mounted, who were come thither for the love they bore to me, and being return'd home to my own house, within a very few days after came the gift the King had been pleas'd to give me of the Company of Gens d' armes, be∣come vacant by the death of Monsieur de la Guiche, wherein his Majesty had no little to do, to be as good as his word, and to disengage himself from the several Traverses and obstacles my Enemies strew'd in his way, to hinder me from having that command; ne∣vertheless the King carried it against them all, more by anger than otherwise, he being in the end constrained to tell them, that he had made me a promise of the first vacancy, and would be as good as his word; and that therefore no man was to speak a word more to the con∣trary. I made my first muster at Beaumont de Loumaigne, one la Peyrie being Muster-Master. At this time those unhappyOf the Sister and Daughter of Henry the second. Marriages were solemniz'd, and those unfortunate Tri∣umphs and Tiltings held at Court. The joy whereof was very short, and lasted but a very little space, the death of the King ensuing upon it, running against that accursed Montgomery, who I would to God had never been born, for his whole life was nothing but mischief, and he made as miserable an end. Being one day at Nerac, the King of Nvarre shew'd me a Letter that Monsieur de Guise had writ him, wherein he gave him notice of the days of Tilting, in which the King himself was to be in person, his Majesty with the Dukes de Guise, de Ferrara, and de Nemours, being Challengers. I shall never forget a word I said to the King of Navarre, which also I had often heard spoken before, That when a man thinks himself to be out of his affairs, and dreams of no∣thing, but how to pass his time well, 'tis then that the greatest misfortunes befal him, and that I fear'd the issue of this Tilting. It was now but just three days, reckoning by the date of the Letter to the Tilting, and the next day I return'd home to my own house, and the very night before the day of the Tilting,The Sieur de Montluc's dream. as I was in my first sleep, I dream'd, that I saw the King sitting in a chair, with his face cover'd all over with drops of blood, and methought it was just as they paint Jesus Christ, when the Jews put the Crown of Thorns upon his head, and that he held his hands joyn'd together, I look'd methought earnestly upon him, and could discover no hurt he had, but only drops of blood trick∣ling down his face. I heard methought some say, he is dead, and others, he is not dead yet, and saw the Physicians and Chirurgeons go in and out of the Chamber; and I do believe my dream continued a great while, for when I awak'd, I found a thing I could have never believ'd, which is, that a man can cry in his sleep; for I found my face all blubber'd with tears, and my eyes still springing new, and was fain to let them take their course, for I could not give over weeping of a long time after. My wife, who was then living, said all she could to comfort me, but all in vain, for I could never per∣swade my self any other but that he was dead. Many who are yet living are able to te∣stifie, that this is no fain'd story, for I told it them so soon as ever I awak'd. Four days af∣ter a Courrier came to Nerac, who brought Letters to the King of Navarre from the Constable, wherein he writ him word of the King's being wounded, and of the little hopes
there was of his life, whereupon the King of Navarre sent a servant of his to me, to ac∣quaint me with the disaster, and to desire me to come presently away to him. The Mes∣senger came away in the close of the evening, and was presently with me, it being no more than four leagues from Nrac to my house, where he found me just going to Bed. I im∣mediately took horse, and went to take a Neighbour of mine in my way, call'd Monsieur de Beraud along with me, and so we went together at a good round rate to Nerac. The Gentleman is yet living, and can witness that I told, and foretold him all the miseries, or very near, that we have since seen happen in France, and said as much to the King of Na∣varre,Henry the se∣cond kill'd by Montgomery. with whom I staid but two hours at Nerac, and return'd to entertain my sorrows in my own house. Eight days had not past before the King of Navarre sent me word of the Kings death; by which I got no hing, having never since met with any thing but croses and misfortunes, as I had been the causer of it, and that God would punish me for the offence; I am sure I had little reason to be so, for since his death, I have a hundred times wish'd my own, and it evermore an in my head, that I should never after meet with any thing but misfortune,The Sieur de Montluc un∣fortunate af∣ter the death of King Henry. as indeed I have never had any thing else. For I have since been suspected to have intelligence with the King of Navarre, and the Prince of Conde, whereas God Almighy knows, I was never of their Council, nor privy to any of their designs, as I have sufficiently manifested in the pinch of affairs. 'Tis very true, that I have often heard thee two Princes complain of the ill usage they receiv'd, but when everthey fell upon that discourse,The King of Navarre and his Brother discontented. I ever wav'd it all I could. God by his good grace has assisted me to demon∣strate to all the world, that I never had intelligence but with the King and the Queen, and with those who have faithfully and loyally serv'd them, and have found that those who had receiv'd the deepest impressions of this ill opinion of me, have been, and at this da are, the best Parons and Friends I ever had, or yet have. There are, who know very well what I said to the Prince of Conde, at the fine Conference held at Poissy, when he attempted to draw me over to his party.Jealousies of the Sieur de Montluc. After the first troubles the Queen of Navarre went to Rousillon, where she carried to their Majesties a whole sack full of informations against me, that spoke of nothing but Treasons, and Intelligences that I had with the King of Spain, to deliver up Guienne into his hands, Rapes of Wives and Virgins, Depredations, Imposi∣tions, and Thefts from the Kings Treasure: Nevertheless, their Majesties being come to Tholouse, and into Guienne, they found neither man nor woman of one Religion or the other, that ever open'd their mouths against me, and found Guienne so abounding in all sorts of provisions, that the whole Court wonder'd at it, considering that at the same time in Languedoc, the whole Countrey was ready to dye of famine; and the Chancellor him∣self said, that having for three days sojourned in that Province, in all those three days time his Clerk of his Kitchin could furnish him with no more than one Pullet only, which he spoke openly at Table, at an entertainment he made for some Presidents and Councellors; upon which the first President took occasion to say, that notwithstanding he would find Guienne to abound with all sorts of provisions. Yes answer'd the Chancellor, but how comes it to be so, for some have possest the King and Queen, that they would find nothing to eat in Guienne, and that Monsieur de Montluc had ruin'd the whole Countrey: whereupon all those who were at the Table attested the contrary, and that he should find the Countrey very well govern'd, as he did, by his own confession; the Queen also who fear'd she should want provision at Bayonne, saw there with her own eyes, that they were fain to throw the flesh into the streets,The Seneschal of Quercy ac∣cuses the Sieur de Montluc. and yet before their coming, la Graviere Seneschal of Query, re∣turning from Court, call'd at my house at Stillac, where he made himself so drunk with the good wine I gave him, that he dream'd in the night I had told him, that I would de∣liver up Guienne to the King of Spain, that the Cardinal of Armagnac, Messieurs de Terride, de Negrepelice and several others were of the plot, and that if he would be one, I would make him the greatest man of his Race, and so went with his night-cap to tell this fine story to Monsieur de Marchastel, who immediately dispatch'd away Rappin to Court, to carry this news to the King, where it was believ'd for some days; for the Queen sent du Plessis to me post, to bid me fear nothing, for that nothing was believ'd: but I had had notice of it before, though I made no great matter of it, having so great a confidence in the Queen, that she would not lightly be induc'd to believe any such thing. Du Plessis (who was of the Bed-Chamber to the King) found me at Agen dancing (for we must make merry some∣times) in the Company of fifteen or twenty Gentlewomen, who were come to see Madam de Caupenne my Daughter in Law,Slanderes in the Courts of Princes. who had never been in this Countrey before. And thus my Treason was found to be true. We demanded satisfaction of their Majesties, but could never obtain any, and that's it, that nourishes so many Tale-Carriers and Slanderers in the Kingdom, for they are never punish'd, no more than false witnesses in the Courts of Parliament. But I hope God will one day make them all known to the
King, and make him cut off so many heads, that he will cleanse the Kingdom of this Vermine. Though all things that have been forg'd against me have been prov'd utterly false, and without any colour of truth, my actions as well of the past as present time, having clear∣ly manifested the contrary, yet could I not nevertheless so purge my self, but that the Queen believ'd something, or at least retain'd some jealousie of me, and I have sufficient∣ly felt it, though I believe however it was only to hinder the King from giving me any re∣compence for the services I have perform'd for his Majesty and his Crown, which what they have been she very well knows; and knows very well also, that I am no Spaniard, nor have any practices either out of the Kingdom, or within it, but what point at his Majesties service. She had no such opinion of me, when sitting upon a chest betwixt the Cardinals of Bourbon and of Guise, she entertain'd me at Tholouse with tears in her eyes. Her Majesty may call it to mind if she please, for though she have a great many mat∣ters to trouble her head withal, she has a very good memory. It was she her self who told me, that having received news of the loss of the Battail of Dreaux (for some brave Cavalier had run away at the beginning, and carried this lying report) she entred into con∣sultation with her self, what she was best to do, and in the end took a resolution, if cer∣tain news should be brought of this defeat, to steal away with a small Train, with the King and the Monsieur, and try to recover Guienne by the way of Auvergne, both out of the confidence she repos'd me (and indeed Guienne was clear and entire) as also because the King and she might there at great ease, have call'd in succours from other places. God be prais'd there Majesties came not thither, but this will appear better hereafter. In the mean time, her Majesty may please to take notice, that hitherto I have not much importun'd her with demands, neither have they much troubled themselves with finding out something to give me, having refus'd me the County of Gaure (which is not worth above twelve hun∣dred Livers a year) after the first troubles. Every one knows what services I did the King, and particularly in the conservation of Guienne, not that I complain of his Majesty, for both his Father and he have confer'd more honor and advantages upon me than I deserve, neither did I ever hope for any recompence for the services I had done, or could do, after I was answer'd by a person who is yet living, when some friends spoke in my behalf, that I was already too great in Guienne. Which I do confess I was, not in Riches, but in the friendship of oll the three Estates of the Province, both for the loyalty and fidelity they knew I had ever born to the service of the King and his Crown, as also for having ever∣more endeavour'd to ease the Country of Garisons, and all other Subsides, when I had the power to do it. And I hope at the return of the Commissioners who are now come in∣to these parts, the truth will appear. I have not corrupted them, for I would not so much as see them, let them do their worst; and as to my estate, it is now fifty years that I have serv'd in command, having been three times the Kings Lieutenant, thrice Camp-Master, Governor of places, and Captain both of Horse and Foot, and yet with all these employ∣ments, I could never do more than purchase three Farms, and redeem a Mill that ancient∣ly belong'd to my house,The Sieur de Montluc well belov'd in Gui∣enne. all which amount to no more than betwixt fourteen and fifteen thousand Francks, which is all the wealth and purchases that I have ever made; and all the Estate that I now possess could not be farm'd out to above four thousand, five hundred Francks a year. I should have been glad that any one could have reproach'd me, that I was too great, for the great riches the King had given me, and not for having had nothing, but remaining poor as I am. God be praised for all, in that he has made me an honest man, and ever maintain'd me in an integrity fit to walk with my face erect amongst men. I fear no man upon earth, I have done nothing unworthy a man of honor, and a loyal Subject; neither have I ever serv'd my Prince in a Vizor, or with dissimulation, for my words and my actions have evermore gone hand in hand; neither had I ever any intelli∣gence or friendship with the Enemies of my King and Master, and whoever is mangy, let him scratch a Gods name, for I neither itch within nor without, having always kept my nails so short, that I had never any use of them: for which I praise God, and most hum∣bly thank him, who has hitherto guided my life so as to preserve it from any manner of reproach, and hope he will do me the grace, that as hitherto he has gone along with my fortune in arms, he will also accompany my renown to my grave, so that after my death, my Relations and Friends shall not be asham'd to have been my Kinsmen or my Compa∣nions, and I doubt not but with this fair Robe of Fidelity and Loyalty to signalize my self, in despite of those who have ever been envious of my success, and emulous of my honor. So it is, that had King Henry my good Master liv'd, these misfortunes had never befaln me, nor which is worse, the Kingdom: But I shall leave this discourse, growing perhaps into too much passion for the death and loss of the best King that France ever had, or shall ever have▪
I shall not meddle with the Factions and Rebellions that have discovered themselves since the death of Francis the second, though I could say something of them, as having liv'd in that time, and been an eye witness of many things: for I pretend not to be an Histo∣rian, nor to write in the method of a History, but only to give the world an account, that I did not bear arms for nothing;Why the Sieur de Montluc has written. as also that my Companions and Friends may take ex∣ample by my actions, of which there are many that may be useful to them, when they shall be engaged upon the like occasions; and moreover, that by reason of my writing, my memory may not so soon perish: Which is all that men who live in the world, bearing arms like men of Honor, and without reproach, ought to desire; for all the rest is nothing. I do believe, that so long as the world shall endure, men will talk of those brave and va∣liant Captains, Messieurs de Lautrec, de Bayard, de Fox, de Brissac, de Strozzy, de Guise, and several others, who have flourish'd since King Francis the first came to the Crown, amongst whose better names that of Montluc may perhaps have some place: And since God has depriv'd me of my Sons, who all dyed in the service of the Kings my Masters, the young Montluc's who are descended from them, shall endeavour to exceed their Grandsire. I will therefore write nothing of the Reign of Francis the second, nor of the Factions at Court; neither were they other than Sedtions and Rebellions, of which I know several particuars, as having been very intimate with the King of Navarre and the Prince of Conde: but as I have already said, I leave those affairs to the Historians, to finish the rest of my own life; wherein I shall proceed to give an account of the fights in which I have been engag'd du∣ring these Civil Wars, and wherein I have been constrained, contrary to my own nature, to use not only severity, but even sometimes to be cruel. The End of the Fourth Book.
THE COMMENTARIES OF Messire Blaize de Montluc, MARESCHAL of FRANCE. The Fifth Book. KIng Francis being dead at Orleans,The death of Francis the se∣cond. where I then was, I went to wait upon the Queen Mother, who although she was very ill, ne∣vertheless did me the honor to command, that they should per∣mit me to enter into her Chamber. I had taken notice of the practices were set on foot▪ which did by no means please me, and especially those of the Estates then sitting, by which I saw we should not long continue in peace, and that was it, which made me resolve to retire from Court, that I might not be hook'd in, either by one Faction or another; especially considering that I had been made guilty that way before (contrary to all truth, as God be my help) which was the reason, that taking leave of her Majesty, and not thinking it fit to trouble her with much discourse in her indisposition,The Sieur de Montluc's words to the Qeen Mo∣ther. I said to her these words, Madam, I am going into Gascony, with a dtermination to do you most humble and faithful service all the days of my life, which I most humbly beseech your Majesty to believe, and if any thing fall out considerable enough to engage you to call your servants about you, I promise you, and give you my faith, I will never take other side than that of your Majesties, and my Lords your Children; but for that will be on horseback so soon as ever your Majesty shall please to command me. The very night of the same day on which King Francis dy'd, I had given her the same assurance, for which she now did me the honor to return me thanks, when Madam de Cursol, who stood at her beds head, said to her, Madam, you ought not to let him go, your Majesty having no servants more faithful than those of the Family of Montluc. To which I made an∣swer, Madam, you shall never be without Montluc's, for you have three yet remaining, which are my two Brothers and my Son, who with my self will dye at your feet, for your Majesties service. For which her Majesty return'd me many thanks. She who had a grea deal of understanding, and who has given very ample testimony of it to the world, saw very well, that having so many affairs upon her hands, during the minority of her children, she should have use for all the servants she had, and may her self remember what she said to me, wherein if I have fail'd to execute her commands, it was because I did not understand them. And so I took my leave of her Majesty; Madam de Cursol follow'd me to the middle of the room, where she took her leave of me, and Madam de Courton did the same, and thus I return'd to my own house. Some months after my return home,Audacious speeches of the Hugonot M∣nisters. I had news brought me from all sides, of the strange language, and most audacious speeches the Ministers of the new faith impudently utter'd, even against the Royal Authority. I was moreover told▪ that they impos'd taxes upon the people, made Captains, and listed Souldiers, keeping their Assemblies in the Houses of se∣veral Lords of the Country, who were of this new Religion; which was the first begin∣ning and cause of all those Mischiefs and Massacres they have since exercs'd upon one an∣other.
I saw the evil daily to encrease, but saw no one who appear'd on the King's be∣half to oppose it. I heard also that the greatest part of the Officers of the Treasury were of this Religion (the nature of man being greedy of Novelty) and the worst of all, and from whence proceeded all the mischief, was, that those of the long Robe, the men of Justice in the Parliaments and Senechalseys, and other Judges, abandoned the ancient Re∣ligion, and that of the King,The miserable estate of Gui∣enne. to embrace the new one. I met also with strange names of Surveians, Deacons, Consistories, Sinods and Colloquies, having never before breakfasted of such viands. I heard that the Surveillans had Bulls pizzls by them called Iohanots, with which they misus'd, and very cruelly beat the poor Peasants, if they went not to their Conventicles; the people being so totally abandoned by ustice, that if any one went to complain, they receiv'd nothing but injury instead of redrss, and not a Serjeant that durst attempt to execute any thing in the behalf of the Catholicks, but for the Hugonots only (for so they were call'd, though I know not why) the rst  the Judges and Officers who were Catholicks being so over-aw'd, that they durst not have mmanded so much as an In∣formation to be made for fear of their lives. All these things gether were presages to me of what I have since seen come to pass, and returning from another house of mine to that of Stillac, I found the Town of La Plume besieg'd by three or four hundred men. I had my Son Captain Montluc with me, whom I sent with all sorts of fair language (for I had no more than ten or twelve horse in my company) to try to perswade them to desist. Wherein he prevail'd so far, that he overcame the Brimonts, the principal heads of this Enterprize (which was undertaken to rescue two prisoners of their Religion, that the Magistrates of La Plume had for some disorders committed.) My son having promised them, that if they would retire, I would cause them to be deliver'd; they took his word, and drew off from before the Town. The next day accordingly I went to speak with the Officers of the said City, to whom having remonstrated, that for these two Prisoners they ought not to suffer a sedition to be set on foot, they brought them out to me, and let them go. Monsieur de Burie,The Sieur de Burie the Kngs Lieutenant in Guinne. who at this time in the absence of the King of Navarre commanded in Guienne, was at Bourdeaux, where he had as much work cutting out for him, as in any other part of the Province; but I did not hear that he made any great stir, and I believe he was very much astonisht: for my part I had command of nothing but my own Com∣pany, nevertheless I would once take upon me to meddle at the request of the Court Pre∣sidial, and the Consuls of Agen, about the concern of a Minister the Magistrates had com∣mitted to prison, which set the whole City in commotion one against another; whereup∣on the Consuls came to entreat me to come to Agen, for that otherwise the Inhabitants would cut one anothers throats. Which I accordingly did, where, upon my coming, the Hugonots were of themselves possest with so great a terror,The Hugonots dread the name of Montluc. that some of them hid them∣selves in Cellars, and others leapt over the walls; not that I gave them any occasion so to do, for I had as yet done them no harm; neither did I do any more now, but only take the Minister out of a House to deliver him into the hands of Justice; but these people have ever fear'd my name in Guienne, as they have that of Monsieur de Guise in France. But how little soever the thing I did was, the King of Navarre took it so highly ill at my hands, that he mortally haed me for it, and writ to the King that I had dispossest him of his Lieutenancy, entreating to know if his Majesty had given me authority so to do, whilst in the mean time he meditated his revenge at what price soever. This hapned in the time when King Francis was yet living: for in those times these new people began their innovations. Monsieur de Guise sent me word by my Son Captain Montluc, that I should use all the means I could to restore my self to his favour, for although the King was satisfied with what I had done, he could not nevertheless make any shew of it, it being requisite for him to proceed after this manner. This letter might very well have been the cause of my ruine, for without this private advice from Monsieur de Guise, I had never reconciled my self to the King of Navarre, as having much rather have chosen to have stood upon my Guard, and in my own defence, than to have any tampering with the King of Navarre in any thing but what should be by his Majesties command; but I conceiv'd I could not erre in following the advice of Monsieur de Guise; for he absolutely govern'd all things at Court. But to return to my first subject, having heard and seen all these affairs and novelties which still much more disclosed themselves after my return, and after the death of the King (for they now explain'd themselves in down-right Terms) than before; I delibera∣ted to return to Court, no more to stir from the Queen and her Children, but to die at their feet in opposition to all such as should present themselves against them, according to the promise I had made to the Queen, and put my self upon my way in order to this re∣resolution.
The Court was then at St. German en l' Aye. I staid but two dayes at Paris, and at my coming to St. Germains, found not one person of the House of Guise, nor any other, but the Queen, the King of Navarre, the Prince of Condé, and the Cardinal of Ferrara, where I was very well receiv'd by her Maiesty, and by them all. The Queen and the King of Navarre drawing me apat, enquir'd of me how affairs stood in Guienne; to which I made answer, that they were not yet very ill, but that I fear'd they would every day grow worse and worse, telling them withall the reasons why I conceiv'd that it would not be long before they would break into open arms.The Hugonots rse in Guienne. I staid there but five dayes, in which time news came that the Hugonots were risen at Marmanda, and had kill'd all the Religious of the Order of St. Francis, and burnt their Monastery: immediately came other news of the Massacre the Catholics had made of the Hugonots at Cahors, with that of Grenade near unto Tholouze.Monsieur de Fumel but∣cher'd by his own Tenants. After that came news of the death of Monsieur de Fumel, barbarously massacred by his own Tenants who were Hugonots; which troubled the Queen more than all the rest, and then it was that her Majesty saw, that what I had pre∣phecied to her, that they would not long abstain from arms, was very true. They were six dayes before they could resolve at which end to begin to extinguish this fire. The King of Navarre would that the Queen should write to Monsieur de Burie to take order in those affairs; but the Queen said, that if none but he put their hands to the work, there would be no great matters done, by which she implied some jealousie of him; and I know what he said to me, A little thing will serve to render us suspected. I perceiv'd also that the King of Navarre was not so kind to me as formerly; which I believe proceeded from my own behaviour, I being not so observant to him as at other times, and never stir∣ring from the Queen.The Sieur de Montlucs large Commission. In the end they resolved to send me into Guienne with a Commissi∣on to raise Horse and Foot, and to fall upon all such as should appear in arms. I defended my self the best I could from this Employment, knowing very well that it was not a work done, but a work that was only about to begin, and such as requir'd a great Master to exe∣cute it as it ought to be; and therefore remain'd at this bout constant not to take it upon me. The next morning the Queen and the King of Navarre sent for me, and the Queen had in the interval commanded Monsieur de Vlence my brother to perswade me to accept of this Commission; so that when I came before them, after several Remonstrances they made me, I was costrain'd to accept of it, provided that Monsieur de Burie might be joyn'd in the Commission, for I would have him have his part of the Cake. But the Queen would by no means hear of it, alledging but too many reasons (Princes may say what they please) till in the end I was forc'd to tell her Majesty plainly, that in case he was not comprehended in the Commission, he being the Kings Lieutenant as he was, would underhand strew so many Traverses and difculties in my way, that I should never effect any thing to purpose; which at last they allow'd to be a sufficient reason, and let it pass according to my own desire.Monsieur de Cursol in Lan∣guedoc. The same Commission they gave me for Guienne, they also gave Monsieur de Cursol for the Province of Languedoc, giving us both in charge, that which of us soever should first have dispatch'd our own business, should go help his fellow, if he should stand in need. Monsieur de Cursol was no more of this new Religion than I, and without all doubt afterward turn'd to it more out of some discontent, than for any de∣votion, for he was no great Divine, no more than I was: but I have known many turn to this Religion out of spie, who have afterwards very much repented. We both of us together took our leaves of the Queen and the King of Navarre, and went to Paris, and Monsieur de Valence with us. I demanded two Counsellors of that part of France to sit upon life and death (fearing that those of the Country would do no good, being that some of them would encline to the Catholicks, and others to the Hugonots) and had given me two of the damnedst Rogues in the whole Kingdom, one whereof was Compain a Coun∣sellor of the great Council, and the other Gerard Lieutenant to the Prvost d' Hostel, who have since gain'd no better a reputation, than they had before. I repented me that I had demanded them; but I thought I did well in it, and so I came into Gascony in all di∣ligence. I found Monsieur de Burie at Bourdeaux, where I deliver'd him the Patent, and where all the City was divided against one another, and the Parliament also, because the Hugo∣nots would that they might preach openly in the City, alledging that by the Confe∣rence at Poisey it was permitted them so to do; and the Catholicks affirm'd the countrary▪ so that Monsieur de Burie and I had for a whole day together enough to do to keep them from falling together by the ears; and thereupon agreed to raise some men, and that so soon as our Commissioners should be come, we would march directly to Fumel, our Pa∣rent expressing that we should begin thero. Now the power of raising Forces, and of commanding them was in me, wherefore we concluded together to raise two hundred
Harquebuzeers, and a hundredLight-horse. Argoulets, the command of which I gave to the younger Tilladet, the same who is now Lord of Sainctorens. I had scarce been four or five days in my house Estillac,Barrelle a Mi∣nister attempts to corrupt the Sieur de Mont∣luc. when a Minister call'd la Bar∣relle came to me in the behalf of their Churches, telling me, that the Churches were exceed∣ing glad of my coming, and the Authority the Queen had given me, being now assur'd to obtain Justice against those that had Massacred their Brethren. To which I made answer, that he might be confident all such as should appear in fault, should be certainly punish'd▪ He then told me, that he had in Commission from the Churches to make me a handsome present, and such a one as therewith I should have reason to be well satisfied. I told him, that there was no need of any presents to me, forasmuch as my integrity would oblige me to do my duty, and that for all the presents in the world, I was never to be made to do any thing contrary to it. He then told me, that the Catholicks had declar'd, they would never endure to have Justice executed upon them, and that therefore he had in Commis∣sion from all the Churches, to present me with four thousand foot in good equipage, and paid. This word began to put me into fury, and made me angerly demand of him, what men, and of what Nation must those Four thousand Foot be? to which he made answer, of this very Country,The offers of the Churches. and of the Churches; whereupon I ask'd him, if he had power to present the Kings Subjects, and to put men into the Field, without the command of the King, or the Queen, who was at this time Regent of the Kingdom, and so declar'd by the Estates held at Orleans. O you cnfounded Rogues, said I, I see very well what you aim at, it is to set divisions in the Kingdom, and 'tis you Ministers that are the Authors of this godly work, under colour of the Gospel; and thereupon tell to swearing, and seizing him by the collar, said these words, I know not Rascal, what should hinder me, that I do not my self hang thee at this window, for I have with my own hands, strangled twenty honester men than thou. Who then trembling, said to me, Sir I beseech you let me go to Monsieur de Burie, for I have order from the Churches to go speak with him, and be not offended with me, who only come to deliver a message, neither do we do it for any other end, but only to defend our selves. Whereupon I bade him go and be hang'd to all the Devils in Hell, both he, and all the rest of his fellow Ministers, and so he departed from me, as sufficiently frighted as ever he was in his life. This action got me a very ill repute amongst the Mi∣nisters, for it was no less than high Treason to touch one of them. Nevertheless a few days after came another Minister call'd Boenormant, alias la Perre, sent in the behalf of their Churches (as he said) to entreat me to accept the present and offer that Barelle had made me, saying, that it was not for the intention imagin'd, and that without costing the King so much as aA farthing English, or the fourth part of a peny, a Liard containing three Deniers, whereof twelve go to a penny. Liard, I might render equal Justice both to the one party and the other. At this I was almost ready to ose all manner of patience, and with great vehemency reproach'd him with the levying of money, and the listing of men, but he deny'd it all. Whereupon I said to him, But what if I prove to you, that no longer since than yesterday, you listed men at la Plume, what will you say? To which he made answer, That if it was so, it was more than he knew. Now he had a Souldier with him, tha had formerly been in my Company in Piedmont, call'd Antragues, which made me turn to him, saying, Will you Captain Antragues deny, that you yesterday listed men at la Plume? To which, seeing himself caught, he made answer, That indeed the Church of Nerac had made him their Captain.The Churches make Captains. Whereupon I began to say, What the Devil Churches are those that make Captains? and fell to reproach him with the good usage ad respect I had shew'd him when he was in my Company; forbidding them ever again to come to me with the like Errand, which if they did, I should not have the patience to forbear laying hands upon them; and so they departed. They afterwards began to rise at Agen,The Sedition of Agen. and to make themselves Masters of the Town, in which were the Seigneurs de Memi and Castet-Segrat, and the Senschal of Agenois; Poton was also there, who did all that in him lay to pacifie affairs, and came to me, entreating me to go to Agen, and that all obedience should be paid me there; there came a Minister also along with him, who would engage his honor to me in the business, but I did not take that for good Security. The Seneschal proceeded with integrity, and I believe it would have cost him his life as well as me mine, had I gone thither, for he would have defended me the best he could; and it came so near it, that at their importunity, I pro∣mis'd to be there the next morning. But the Sieurs de la Lande and de Nort in the mean time dispatch'd away a Messenger in private to me,A plot upon the Sieur de Mont∣luc's life. to give me warning not to come, if I had any care of my life, for if I did, I was a dead man; which made me send them word, that I would not pass over the River, but if they would come to a House at the Ferry, I was content to give them the meeting there. When they saw they could not inveigle me into their power, they consented to come to the place appointed, whither I accordingly went to
meet them with five and twenty Souldiers, whom I order'd not to stir from the water side, and there we din'd together. After dinner we fell to debate what was best to be done▪ where I told them, that in the first place, and before we proceeded to any further parti∣culars, they were to content themselves with the Church, that Monsieur de Burie had al∣low'd them for their meetings, which was a Parish Church, and that they must quit the Jacobins, and permit the Religious to re-enter, to perform their offices there; that they must lay down their arms, and receive the one half of the King of Navarres Company into their City for a Garison, and the other half should remain at Condom. I could ne∣ver perswade them to condescend to this; wherefore taking the Seneschal of Agen aside, I said to him, Do you not evidently see, that they aim at a subversion, and to make them∣selves Masters of Cities? I would not advise you to stay with these people; for you will be necessitated, either to let them do what they will, or resolve to have your throat cut, we have a fair example in Monsieur de Fumel: consider with your self what is best for to you do, and so farewel: and so without any more words, I abruptly left them, and return'd to Stil∣lac, where at my coming home I found a Farmer of mine of Puch de Gontaut call'd Labat, who came to tell me in the behalf of their Churches, that I was too Cholerick, and had not pa∣tience rightly to nderstand what the Ministers Barrelle and Boenormont had to say to me, and to present me withal, which was, that the Churches made me a tender of Thirty thou∣sand Crowns, provided I would not take arms against them, but let them alone, without de∣siring nevertheless that I should alter my Religion,Practices to debauch the Sieur de Mont∣luc. and that within fifteen days at the fur¦thest, they would bring me the money to my own house. In answer to which I told him, That were it not for the love I bore him, and also that he was my Tenant, I would handle him after another manner, than I had done Barrelle and Boenormont, and clap a dagger in his bosom, that he knew very well I had the knack on't, and therefore henceforward let neither he, nor any other be so impudent as to make any such Proposals to me, for I would infallibly be the death of them if they did. Whereupon very sufficiently frighted, he immediately left me to return to Nerac, to carry back my answer to his Church. Eight days had not past after this,Captain Se∣dat treas with the Sieur de Montluc. before Captain Sendat came again to tempt me with much greater offers than before; for he made me an offer of forty thousand Crowns, he himself having made them a promise to be of their party, provided I did not take arms against them; for which they also gave him Two thousand Crowns. We talk'd a pretty while of the business, and when he saw he could no other way prevail with me to take their money, he prest and advis'd me, to take it, and lend the money to the King, wherewith to make war against them. To which I made answer, That I very well perceiv'd he did not understand what it was to bring the reputation of an honest man in dispute: For in the first place, said I, they will not give me this money, without first making me take an Oath not to bear arms against them, which engagement they will have in writing to shew to their Churches, to make them part with their money;Considerations of the Sieur de Montluc upon the Proposals of Captain Sendat. and besides, it is impossible but that this must come to light, for fire can never be so cover'd and conceal'd, but that some smoak will issue out. The Queen will wonder that I sit still in my own house and do nothing, she will solicite me to take arms, which if I then refuse to do, will you not, that both she and all the world believe I have taken money, and am a brib'd corrupted fellow? On the other side, should I give this money to the King, his Council must needs take notice, that I have taken an Oath not to bear arms, and yet they know, that upon my receiving the Order, I have sworn to do it, and to defend his Person and his rown against all the world. How then can you imagine, that either the Queen now, or the King when he grows up, can look upon me as an honest man, when I have taken two Oaths expresly contrary to one another? Some will say, that I took the money at first upon the account of infidelity; but that afterwards repenting, I would pal∣liate my Knavery, by giving it to the King. Others will say, that the Queen ought no more to rpose any trust in me, having taken two Oaths positively contrary to one another, and that since I made no conscience of cheating the Hugonots with an Oath, I would make as little to de∣ceive the King. Thus shall my honor be brought in question, and, I with just reason, sen∣tenc'd for evr incapable of any place amongst honest men, and such as are good and loyal Sub∣jects to their Prince. What will then become of me, and what a Monster of men shall I be, when I have lost the honor I have fought for all my life, and parted with my blood to obtain? I will not only say,The Sieur de Montluc with∣draws Captai Sendat from th Hugonots▪ that the Gentlemen of France will avoid my conversation, but even the basest of the people also will be asham'd of my company. See then Captain Sendat what a fine condition I should be in, should I follow your advice: In return of which, I will give you better; I pray frequent these people no more, you have ever been brought up and born arms with the Montluc's, let me entreat you to take them up now for the service of the King, and do not go over to that ridiculous Religion. Our Forefathers were honester men than they, and I cannot believe that the Holy Ghost is amongst a people who rise in rebellion against
their King: Here is a hopeful beginning. He promis'd to follow my counsel, and so departed. By my behaviour in this affair, I sufficiently manifested to all the world, that Avarice could never make me abandon my honor, nor my conscience to falsifie the Oath I have in the presence of God made to the King loyally, and faithfully to serve him, and to de∣fend his Person and his Crown, and yet some have not been asham'd to accuse me of polling from the Kings Treasury, and of imposing taxes upon the Country to enrich my self. God and the truth are on my side, and the testimony of the Estates of Guienne, who will make it known to all those, who have made all these false reports of me to their Majesties, that I have never done any such thing. But letting this alone, I will return to the Justice Monsieur de Burie and I did with our vertuous Commissioners Compain and Gerard, who remain'd a long time without appearing in any place, or it being so much as known where they were. Which made me solicite Monsieur de Burie to let us speedily fall to our busi∣ness, and that since our Commissioners did not come, we would make use of the Counsel∣lors of Agen. Yet still we linger'd away the time in delays, whilst I had intelligence daily brought me, that the Hugonots continued their damnable Conspiracies. There was at this time a Lieutenant of the Tribunal of Condom, call'd du Franc, a very honest man, and a good servant of the Kings, who was once half in mind to have gone over to this new Religion (for he was not the Son of a good Mother, that was not one of them) this man was one day call'd to a Council, in which there were some persons of very great quality, and where he heard an accursed and execrable Proposition, which being once propos'd, he durst not when it came to his turn to deliver his opinion, say  than the rest had done, fear∣ing should he contradict it, they would put him  lest he should discover their Council, and was therefore constrain'd to go thorou  as the rest had done. I shall not say where this Council was kept, much less name th  who were present at it, for the Council and the Proposition signifie nothing now, and there were some in the Com∣pany, who are since become very honest men. He sent to  that he might have some private conference with me, betwixt Sampy and Cond, and appointed an hour. I took no more company with me, but one Footman only, and he another, for so we had agreed, and we met in a meadow that lay under the Huse of Monsieur de Sainctorens, where he told me all that had been said in the Council, and what had there been concluded, which was such a Conspiracy, as (so God shall help me) made my hair stand an end, to hear it. After he had ended his story, he made me the Remonstrance of an honest man, telling me that now an occasion presented it self,Du Franc dis∣covers the Hu∣gonots Conspi∣racy. wherein I might acquire honor to my self, and those who should descend from me for ever, which was with a couragious and mag∣nanimous heart to take arms, and to expose my life to all dangers, for the safeguard of those poor children who were the sons of so good a King, and as yet in no better an age to defend themselves, that if they were in their cradles, and that God would assist me, seeing me take arms to protect the innocent, and those who were no way able to defend themselves. To this, this good man added so many, and so powerful Remonstrances, that (as I shall be sav'd) the tears came into my eyes, entreating me withal, not to discover him, for if I should,A design of the Hugonots to kill Monsieur de Montluc. he was a dead man. He told me further, that as to what concern'd my self, they had consulted about me, and determin'd to surprize me in one place or another, and that if they could get me into their hands, they would deal worse by me, than they had done by Monsieur de Fumel. Nothing of all their Conspiracies was conceal'd from the said Lieutenant, because they thought him sure of their side, so dexterously did he be∣have himself amongst them; but he afterwards shew'd them the contrary, several times ex∣posing his life in the City of Condom, with his Sword in his hand, in defence of the Kings Authority: But however it came to pass, he was afterward either by poyson, or some other violent means, dispatch'd out of the world for this very business. I thought he had never discover'd himself but to me only, but I found that he had told the same thing to Monsieur de Gondrin, who was a very intimate friend of his, and to Monsieur de Maillac, Receiver of Guienne, for they were both as it were Brothers. For my part, I never open'd my lips concerning it to any one living, but to the Queen at Tholouze, by the chimney of her Cham∣ber, at which her Majesty was very much astonish'd, as she had very good reason to be, for more horried and Diabolical designs were never heard of, and yet very great persons were of the Conspiracy. Having heard all these abominable designs,The Sieur de Montlu's de∣sign. I retir'd to my own house at Sampoy; where I concluded with my self to lay aside all manner of fear, resolving to sell my skin as dea as I could, as knowing very well, that if I once fell into their hands, and was left to their mercy, the greatest piece of my body would be no bigger than my little finger. More∣over, determining to execute all the cruelty I could, and especially against those who spoke
against the Royal Majesty; for I saw very well, that gentle ways would never reclaim those canker'd and inveerate Rascals. Monsieur de Burie departed from Bourdeaux, send∣ing me word of the day he intended to be at Clairac, that we might there together re∣solve where we ought to begin our Circuit. He sent me also Letters the Commissioners had writ to him, wherein they appointed us to come to Cahors, there to begin against the Catholicks; in answer to which I writ to him back again, that he should well consider the Patent, and that there he wuld find the Queen had commanded us to go and begin at Fumel. The Letters of these two honorable Gentlemen, were of so audacious and im∣pudent a stile, as that by them they gave us to understand, that they were the principal Commissioners, and that we had no authority, saving to justifie their proceedings, and to be assisting in the execution of their Decrees. Now there was a Village two Leagues from Estillac, call'd S. Mezard, the greatest part whereof belong'd to the Sieur de Rouillac a Gentleman of eight or ten thousand Livers a year. Four or five days before I came thither, the Hugonots his Tenants were risen up against him, because he offer'd to hinder them from breaking open the Church, and taking away the Chalices, and kept him four and twenty hours besieg'd in his own house; so that had it not been for a Brother of his call'd Monsieur de S. Aignan, and some other Gentle∣men his neighbours, who came in to his relief, they had certainly cut his throat, as also those of Ostfort would have done to the Sieurs de Cuq, and de la Montjoye, so that already there began to be open War against the Gentry.The Sieur d Montluc's Lc∣quais. I privately got two Hangmen (which they have since call'd my Lacquais, because they were very often at my heels) and sent to Monsieur de Fontenilles, my Son in Law (who carried my Cornet, and was at Beaumont de Lomange, where he lay in Garison) that he should come away upon Thursday in the beginning of the night, and by break of day be at the said S. Mezard, there to seize of those persons whose names I had sent him in writing, and whereof the principal was Ne∣phew to the Advocate of the King and Queen of Navarre at Lectoure, call'd Verdry. Now the said Advocate was he that fomented all the Sedition, and I had private word sent me, that he would come that very Thursday to S. Mezard, for he had some state there. I was resolv'd to begin with this fellows head, forasmuch as having advertiz'd the King of Navarre at Court, that the said Verdery▪ and other of his Officers at Lectoure, were the principal Incendiaries of Rebellion, and having writ as much to the Queen, of the Kings Officers, she had writ back that I should begin with those people first, and the King of Navarre had writ in his Letter, that if I hang'd the Kings Officers on the lower branches of a Tree, I should hang his on the uppermost of all. But Verdery came not, which was well for him, for if he had I had branch'd him. Monsieur de Fontenilles per∣form'd a very long march, and came by break of day to S. Mzard, where at his first coming he took the Nephew of Verdery, and two others, and a Deacon, the rest escap'd away, there being not any one who knew the Houses, for there was not so much as any one man at arms, or Archer who had any knowledge of the place. A Gentleman, call'd Monsieur de Corde, who liv'd at the said place, had sent me word, that when in the pre∣sence of the Consuls he had remonstrated to them that they did ill, and that the King would be highly displeas'd with their doings, they made answer,Insolence of the Hugonots▪ What King? We are the Kings, he that you speak of is a little turdy Roylet, we'll whip his breech, and set him to a trade, to teach him to get his living as others do. Neither was it only there that they talk'd at this precious rate, but it was common discourse in every place. I was ready to burst with in∣dignation at it, and saw very well, that all this Language tended to what had been told me by Lieutenant du Franc, which in sum, was to make another King. I had agreed with Monsieur de Sainctorens, that he should also take me five or six of Astfort, and espe∣cially one Captain Morallet the chief Ringleader of them all, and that if he could take him, and those I nam'd to him, he should with good words bring them to me to S. Mazard, the same day that I perform'd the execution, which was upon a Friday, which neverthe∣less that day he could not do, but he snap'd them the Sunday following, and brought them Prisoners to Villeneue. So soon as I came to S. Mazard, Monsieur de Fontenilles presented the three Prisoners and the Deacon, all bound, in the Church-yard, in which there was yet remaining the foot of a Cross of stone they had broken, that might be about some too foot high. I presently call'd Monsieur de Corde and the Consuls, bidding them upon pain of death to deliver truly, what words they heard these fellows speak against the King. The Consuls were afraid, and durst say nothing; whereupon I told the said Sieur de Corde, that it belong'd to him to speak first, and therefore bid him speak; upon which he maintain'd to their faces, that they had spoke the forementioned words, and then the Consuls told the truth, and justified the same the Sieur de Corde had done. I had my two Hangmen behind me very well equip'd with their tackle, and especially with a very sharp
Ax, when flying in gra fury upon ths Verdere, I took him by the ollar, saying to him, O thou confounded Rogue! durst thou dfile thy wicked tongue against the Majesty of thy King and Soveraign? To which he reply'd, Ah Sir, have mercy upon a poor sinner. At which more enrag'd than before, I said to him, Thou ungracious Rascal, wouldst thou have me to have mercy upon thee, who hadst no revrence nor respect for thy King, and with that push'd him rudely to the ground, so that his neck fell exactly upon the piece of the Cross,A suddain exe∣cution of Mon∣sieur de Mont∣luc's. crying to the Hangman, Strike Villain, which he did, and so nimbly, that my word and the blow were the one as soon as the other, which fetch'd off his head, and more∣over above another half foot of the Cross. The other two I caus'd to be hang'd upon an Elm that was close by, and being the Deacon was but eighteen years old, I would not put him to death, as also that he might carry the news to his Brethren; but caus'd him ne∣vertheless to be so well whip'd by the Hangman, that, as I was told, he dyed within ten or twelve days after. This was the first execution I did at my coming from my own house without sentence or writing; for in such matters, I have heard, men must begin with execution, and if every one that had the charge of Provinces had done the same, they had put out the fire, that has since consum'd all▪ However, this serv'd to stop the mouths of several seditious persons, who durst no more speak of the King, but with respect, but in great privacy, and with greater circumspection carried on their practices and de∣signs. The next day I parted from Estillac, and went to find out Monsieur de Burie at Clairac, and there we fell to debate of the place where we should begin our business, whether a Fumel, or at Cahors; I found him won to go to the Commissioners to Cahors, who were come thither, and had begun to try the Catholicks, without vouchsafing to lend an ear to any thing whatever to the contrary. I then call'd for the Patent, where I shew'd him, that it was the Queens intention we should begin at Fumel, which he knew not how to contradict, shewing him moreover, that by virtue of that Patent, we were the true Commis∣sioners, and that Gerard and Campain were oblig'd to come to us, and not we to go to them; lling him, that on the other side, I had been advertiz'd since my departure from Court, that they were two of the greatest Hugonots in all the Kingdom of France, and that we ought to have an eye to them, and to our own reputations, that the world might not cast a blur upon us, declaring us Hugonots; for as for my own part, I would not be randed with that mark: And to speak the truth, when I came to Bourdeaux, I thought I dis∣cover'd both by his carriage, and also by other advertisements had been given me, that Monsieur de Burie enclin'd a little to that Religion. Upon Monday we went to Villeneufue, where Monsieur de Sanctorens with his Troop of Light Horse, and two hundred Harquebuzeers came to meet us, bringing me along with him Captain Mora'let, and other four, with two others that some Gentleman had taken at S. Liurade, all which upon Tuesday, without holding them longer in suspence, I caus'd to be hang'd, which strook a great fear into the whole party, saying, What! he puts us to death without tryal! Now their opinion was, that in case they should be appre∣hended, they must be proceeded against by witnesses, and that then there would not be one who durst give evidence against them, for fear of their throats, and also that there was no Judicature great nor small, but would have some of their own Religion amongst them, who would set nothing down in writing, but what should be to their advantage, and in order to their justification, Thus was Justice slubber'd over, without any punishment inflicted upon them; and when they had murther'd any one, or broke Churches, these wicked Officers (for so they may justly be called) would immediately present themselves to take cognizance of the fact,Justice corrup∣ted. when the Informations being perfected, the Catholicks were evermore found to be the beginners of the brawl (the beaten must bear the blame) and that they themselves had broken the Churches by night, that it might be said the Hugonots had done it. I do not think it is to be found in History, that ever such Rogueries, Cheats and Machinations were invented or practiced in any Kingdom of the world; and had the Queen delay'd sending me with this Commission but three months only, all the people had been constrain'd to turn to this Religion, or have lost their lives, for every one was so terrified with the severity that by the Judges was exercis'd upon the Catholicks, that there was no other way left them, but either to abandon their habitations, to lose their lives, or to turn to that party. The Ministers publickly preach'd, that if they would come over to their Religion, they should neither pay duty to the Gentry, nor taxes to the King, but what should be appointed by them; others preach'd, that Kings could have no power, but what stood with the liking and consent of the people; and others, that the Gentry were no better men than they, and in effect, when the Gentlemens Bailiffs went to demand rent of the Tenants, they made answer, that they must shew them in the Bible, whe∣ther
they ought to pay or no, and that if their Predecessors had been Slaves and Cox∣combs they would be none. This insolence grew so high, that some of the Gentry began so far to give way to its fury, as to enter into Composition with their Tenants, entreating them to let them live in safety in their houses, and to enjoy their own Demeasns, and as to Rents and Chiefs they would not ask thm for any. No one was so bold as to dare to go out a hunting, for they came and kill'd their Hounds and Greyhounds in the field before their faces, and no one durst say wrong they did, for fear of their lives; but if any one meddled with any of them, all their Churches were presently made acquainted with it, and wihin four or five hours, you had been dispatch'd out of the world, or enforc'd to hide your self in some of the Confederates houses, or in Tholoz, there being no safety in any other place; and this was the miserable condition to which Guienne was reduc'd.The miserable Estae of G∣enne. The particularities whereof I am necessiated to insist upon, to let you see, whether or no the King had not reason to honor me with that Glorious Title of Conservator of Guienne, and whether it was not necessary to fall to work in good earnest; for had I proceeded with Mildness and Moderation, as Monsieur de Burie did, we had been lst. He promis'd them great mat∣ters, but I perform'd nothing, knowing very well, that it was only to deceive us, and by degrees to get places into their hands: To be short, these Upstart Christians would give us the Law, and there was not a little Minister amongst them, who did not Lord it as if he had been a Bishop; and these were the hopeful beginnings of this fine Religion, and the manner after which she instructed men to live. At our departure from the said Villenefve, we went to Fumel, where we found that Madam de Fumel, with Monsieur de Cançon her Brother, and some other Gentlemen of the Family, had put themselves into the field, upon the news of our being come thither, and had taken five and twenty or thirty of those who had massacred the Sieur de Fumel. Mon∣sieur de Burie then sent to the Commissioners to come, and to fall in hand with their Com∣mission, who sent him word laly they would not, but that we must come to them; and I had intelligence sent me by a friend, that they had said, that since I proceeded to execution without Form or Indictment, they would make bold to bring me my self to my tryal, after they had done with the rest, by which I saw that I was to try with them a better or a worse; for otherwise we should fall into the greatest misfortune that we could possibly fall into, and if we did not uphold our Authority, and keep the people in aw of us, without suffering them to be in fear of these Commissioners, all would go on the side of the new Religion. Neither did I fail to represent this danger to Monsieur de Burie; but I found by his answers, that he was either in fear of doing amiss or (as I said before) that he a little enclin'd to that side; but his end has clear'd that point to us. See∣ing therefore that we could not have our own Commissioners, we sent for Counsellors from the Tribunal of Agen, who presently fell to trying these people, whom they found so guilty,The Assassi∣nates of Mon∣sieur de Fumel. executed. that they confest themselves to have been Actors in the Massacre of their Lord; for they were all his own Tenants, who had begun the business, and sent to call in their neighbouring Churches to assist them in the performance of this Religious exploit, butcher∣ing this poor Gentleman with an infinite number of wounds, and being but half dead, laid him against a cushion upon his bed, and shot at Buts against his heart, pillaging and sacking his house, and all that he had; these good people crying out when they had done, Let the Gospel live: For which to be short, in one day, what upon Gibbet, and what upon the wheel, thirty or forty of them were sent out of this world, I cannot tell whither. From thence we went to Cahors, where we found these venerable Lords, who had be∣gun, and were already a good way advanc't in their process against the Catholicks, and kept in prison Monsieur de Viole Canon and Arch-deacon of Cahors, and Chancellor of the University, a Gentleman of a Family of seven or eight thousand Livres a year belong∣ing to Messieurs de Terride,Viole Cann of Cahors prison∣er. de Negrepelice, and other Gentlemen of the Country. The Sieur de Caumont ds Mirandes had married his Sister into this Family, and was there so∣liciting for the said de Viole, his Brother-in-law with his Children, and Nephews of the said de Viole, and Madam de Bugua, Sister to the said de Viole. Monsieur d' Aussun was come thither also, as being Kinsman to his Wife, and the whole City was full of Gentry to solicit in the behalf of the said Sieur de Viole. Our reverend Commissioners had order'd their business so well, that they had call'd in to their assistance nine Judges, six whereof were Hugonots, and the other three they had so terrified with their power and authority, that they pretended to have it in their Commission, that none of them was to dare to con∣tradict what the others said, and especially Judge Mage, being a timerous person durst not pronounce a syllable but what the rest would have him say. They there condemn'd
fourteen or fifteen men, of which not above three had any hand in the Massacre; but in revenge of the execution we had done at Fumel,ustice done at Cahors. they would put to death as many as they could justly or unjustly, and caus'd them to be executed in the Market-place of the City; at which both the Magistrates and the Clergy entred into so violent an apprehension, that they gave themselves all for lost, seeing them to put Monsieur de Viole, and several others upon their Tryal, who were none of them present at the Massacre. All the Ladies were con∣tinually following after me, seeing they could obtain no satisfactory answer from Monsieur de Burie; and Monsieur de Caumont that now is, came to speak to Monsieur de Burie, I think rather to take an occasion to quarrel me than for any thing else, because I had said that he suffer'd a Minister in the open Pulpit to speak against the person of the King and his Roy∣al authority at Clairac, of which he was Abbot, and he question'd me about it in the o∣pen Hall before Monsieur de Burie; whereupon I told him, that I had said so, and that he stood so much obliged to the King for the benefits he had receiv'd,A dispute be∣twixt the Sieur de Montluc and the Sieur de Camont. that he ought not to have endured it▪ to which he replied, that the said Minister had not preach'd before him, and that although he had, it was not to me to whom he was to give an accunt; at which I had thought to have lown upon him with my dagger in my hand, and he clapt hand to his sword, whn in an instant fifteen or twenty Gentlemen of mine leapt upon him, and there was enough to do to save him from being kill'd. Monsieur de Burie took my part in a very high manner, and rattled him to some purpose, insomuch that some friends of his thrust him out of the Hall to save him, for every one had his sword drawn, and he had not a paty sufficient to make it an equal match against the friends I had present there; and this was the occasion of the hatred they say he bears me, for before we were very good friends; but 'tis the least of my care. But to return to our Justice, the Countess of Arein who was at Assier, sent me a Letter by one of her Gentlemen call'd la Brun, wherein she entreated me to see Justice duly perorm'd; to which I writ her answer back, that I would by no means obstruct it, where I saw there was reasonable and just cause, and that Monsieur de Burie, and I were there for no other end.An offe made to the Sieut de Mntluc. The next day he return'd to me again, and in pri∣vate entreated me, that I would further the execution of the Commissioners Sen∣tence, and that in return of so good an office, I should not fail of Ten thousand Francs. He made me this offer in the presence of a Merchant that sold pistolers, which he himself chose out for me, telling me, that he was privy to the affair, and would im∣mediately disburse the sum. I told him, He did me a very great pleasure, but that I would leave them in his hands, being to go to Monsieur de Burie to supper, whose lodging was hard by. By the way as I went, I began to consider with my self from whence these Ten thousand Francs should come; but could not possibly imagine, though I was satisfi∣ed there must be malice and knavery in the case. After supper, when it grew late, I re∣tir'd to my Lodging at the Archdeacon Redouls house, where by the way I met Madam de Longua, and Madam de Viole hard by the house, who passionately weeping, said to me these words, O Sir, Monsieur de Viole is going to be put to death, if you do not stand his friend, for sentence is past upon him, and this night there is order given to strangle him in prison, and in the morning to present him dead upon the Scaffold. All the forementioned Lords and Gentlemen had sent away post to the King about this business, but the Messen∣ger had return'd too late, if I had not been. I dismist them with the best comfort I could, telling them that I would take care to prevent execution; to which end I appoint∣ed certain Gens-d' armes of my own Company to ride the Patrouille before the prison, and before the Commissioners Lodgings, and never put off my cloths my self of all that night. It was very late before the Archdeacon Redoul came home, vvhen so soon as I heard he vvas come into his chamber,Monsieu de Viole and others con∣demn'd to dye. I sent for him, to talk vvith him about the business. He had been privately enquiring after the affairs of Monsieur de Viole, and the other Pri∣soners, who vvere all people of good quality, and brought this account, that they vvere all condemn'd to dye, and that for fear of scandal, and that no commotion might arise, they were to be dispatch'd secretly in prison by torch-light, and that by their Process and Judgement, they had divided the City into three distinct Corporations, to wit, the Church into one, the Magistracy into another, and the third Estate into the last; all which three distinct bodies, were senenc'd to a fine of Sixscore thousand Francks: whereupon it presently came into my head, that the Ten thousand Francs of which la Brun had made me a tender, was certainly to come from hence; and the said Archdeacon wept, saying, that the City of Cahors was ruin'd for ever, and that though all the goods of the City move∣able and immoveable should be sold, they could not make up that sum: Whereupon I advised him not to afflict himself, but leave it to me, for that out of the love I bore to Monsieur de Viole and the rest, I would keep so good watch, that I would trap them
before they could do their execution, and as to the fines you speak of, said I, it is not the Kings intention that your City should be destroy'd, for it is his, and assure your self he will rmit them. Alas Sir, said he, if the fines went into the Kings purse, we should have some hope that his Majesty would not see us destroy'd; but he is not to have one peny of them. Why who then, said I? 'Tis the Count Rhinegrave, said he, who lent the King Fifty thousand Francs upon the County, and we have had a tryal with the said Count about the fines of Tholouze, where he has cast us, it being prov'd, that he had as good title to the fines and amerciments, as to any other prt of the Revenue, and that is the reason why we have no other remedy, but to abandon the City, to go live in some other place, and leave him all we have.  which, I was ready to run mad, to think that these two Rogues should uine one of the Kings Cities, for one particular man. I past over the whole night in great anger and impatience, and in the morning Monsieur de Burie sent for me to hear the judgement of the Process; but by the way, I thought to prevent them from pronouncing sentence, which being once pronounc'd, there was no possible way to save the City, but that the Count Rhinegrave would have had the Fines, who though he was stranger, yet he was one the King had very often occasion to use. In this heat I came to Monsieur de Burie's chamber, where I found them all already set, and the bags upon the Table. They perceiv'd very well by my countenance, what I had in my stomach, but I said nothing, but took a little stool, and plac'd my self at the end of the Table, for they had taken up all the room round about it, and there the said Campain in a Learned Oration, began to lay open the offence that had beeen committed in this City, enlarging himself upon the hainousness of the Fact, and remonstrating to us, how many women and children had lost their husbands and their fathers in this bloody Massacre, and that the King and Queen had sent us thither to do this Justice, which was equitable and right (his Harangue lasted for half an hour at least) and that those offenders they had already put to death, would signifie nothing, if they did not also execute the principal Authors of this Sedition, which would serve for an example to the whole Kingdom of France, concluding that therefore they would read the sentence befoe us, to have it afterwards executed in prison, entreating us to lend our assistance in the seeing it accordingly perform'd, and thereupon began to draw the Sentence out of the Bag. I look'd upon Monsieur de Burie, to see if he would speak, for it was for him to speak before me, but seeing he suffered him to proceed with∣out interruption, and the other beginning to open the Sentence to read it, I said to him, Hold Monsieur de Campain, proceed no further, till you have first answer'd what I have to demand of you. To which he made answer, That after he had read the Sentence, he would answer my questions, but that he would first read that, before he did any thing else. Whereupon I said to Monsieur de Bury (rapping out a great Oath) Sir, at the first word that comes out of his mouth, I will kill him, if he do not first satisfie me in such things as I shall in your presence demand of him. At which Monsieur de Burie said to him, Monsieur de Campain, you must hear what he has to say to you, for perhaps he may have heard some∣thing, that I know not of, and then I perceiv'd my Gentleman to turn pale, and upon my word he had good reason. I then ask'd him, Whose is the City of Cahors? To which he answered, It is the Kings. And whose is the Iudicature? said I. The Kings, said he. And whose is the Church? said I. To which he made answer, That he could not tell. Whereupon I said to him, Do you deny that the Church is not the Kings as well as the rest? To which he made answer, That he did not concern himself about it. I then said to him, Have you divided the City into three Corporations, that is to say, the Church, the Iudica∣ture, and the City separate by it self, aud impos'd fines severally upon them all? To which he made answer, That I should give ear to the Sentence, and that would inform me, whether he had or no. Whereupon I began to thou him, saying, Thou shalt here de∣clare before Monsieur de Bury and me, what I demand of thee, or I will hang thee with my own hands, for I have hang'd twenty honester men than thy self, or those who have assist∣ed at thy Sentence; and thereupon start up from my stool, at which Monsieuer de Burie said; Speak Monsieur de Campain, and say if you have done it or no. Yes Sir, answered he, I have: Whereupon I said, O thou damned confounded Villain, Traytor to thy King, thou wilt ruine a City belonging to the King, for the profit of one particular man; were it not for the respect I bear to Monsieur de Burie, who is here the Kings Lieutenant, I would hang both thee and thy Companions at the windows of this chamber; saying to Monsieur de Burie, Sir, for Gods sake let me kill these accursed Rogues, that are Traytors to their King for anothers prfit and their own; and thereupon drew my sword half way, and had they let me alone, I had order'd them for ever making more Sentences or Arrests; but Mon∣sieur de Bury leap'd to me, and caught hold of my arm, entreating me not to do it, whilst in the mean time they recovered the door, and fled away in so great a fright, that
they leap'd the stars, without staying to count the steps. I would fa have followed af∣ter to have kill'd them, but Monsieur de Burie, and Monsieur de Curre his Nephew held me so fast, that I could not beak from them, the rage wherein I was not permitting me to be master of my self: It ought not then to appear strange, if I call them so often Rogues in my Relatio. This being done, Monsieur de Burie, Monsieur de Courre and I went into a Garden, where the said Sieur de Bury told me, That besides that I had preserv'd this  from total ruine, I had sav'd his honor also, for the King and the Queen, and all the world, would infallibly have concluded, that he had taken money, whereas he protested that he knew not one syllable of all this, and then it was that I told him which way I came to discover it, and do realy believe there was no intelligence on Monsieur de Burie's side. I din'd with him, and do think he did not eat four bits, and all that day ob∣serv'd him to be melancholy and displeas'd, sending word to all the Commissioners not to proceed any futher in any thing whatsoever, till the King should first be enform'd of all that had past. I also sent to Judge Mage and the rest to forbid them, that they should not be assisting in any thing should be done by Campain and Gerard upon for∣feiure of their lives. They came in the evening one after another, I mean the Judges Assistants, to excuse themselves to Monsieur de Burie, confessing to him, that they had not foreseen the ruine this Sentence would have inevitably have brought upon the City, which would also have been the undoing both of them and their posterity: but they durst never speak a word to me, nor so much as come where I was. Monsieur de Burie told me all, but whatsoever the matter was, not one of them durst come in my sight; which if they had, upon my conscience I think I should have strangled one or another of them. About five or six days after came the Courrier that the Relations and Friends of Monsieur de Viole had sent to the King, who brought an Injunction to the Commissioners, not to proceed any further in any manner whatsoever against the said Sieur de Viole, nor concerning this Sedition, commanding them to set the said Sieur de Viole,The deliver∣ance of the Sieur de Viole. and the other Prisoners at libe∣ty, upon Bail to appear when and so often as they should be summoned so to do. It is not to be wondred at if the City of Cahors have a kindness for me, as indeed they have, to such a degree, that by the respect they pay me, and the entertainments they caress me withal, it seems, as if the King himself, or some of his Brothers were come into their City. This was the second time that they attempted to corrupt me with money, but it shall never be ound in History, that I ever had a hand in any such dirty practices; neither do I fear any person living, not only in Guienne, but in Italy, where I have had great and honorable mployments, and where I might have got Two hundred thousand Francs at least, would I have done as others did, who had no fault found with them for it, and have had more thanks for their labour than I have. But I can say, and say truly, that I never return'd from any of my Employments, that I was not necessitated to bor∣row money to carry me to my own house, and have ever been willing to beggar my self, and to suffer all sorts of inconvenience, only to spare the Kings purse, and not to enrich my self: Neither was I alone the sufferer, but moreover all those who were under my Command; as for example, the Treasurer Brancher, the Comptroller la Molliers, and others, who return'd as very Rogues as I. And if at any time any City has presented me during these troubles, it was only to maintain the great expence I must of necessity be at to entertain the Gentlemen and people of the Countrey, and was done openly, and not in private. This was the end of the strange proceedings at Cahors. Now Monsieur de Brurie having himself seen, that these two brave Commissioners did not go franckly to work, and that their only drift was to execute Justice upon the Catholics only, and not upon the Hugonots also, he sent in all haste to Bourdeaux, for Messieur d' Alesm the elder, and Ferron, Counsellors in the Court of Parliament, and men that very well understood their business, that he might joyn them to these Commissioners of ours for a Counter-poise to ballance their wicked inclinations, and so we went streight to Ville-Franche de Rouergue, when hearing by the way, that the Hugonots from all parts, drew togeher in great numbers. Monsieur de Burie sent for the Companies of the Ma∣reschal de Termes, of Messieurs de Randan, de la Vauguyon, and de Iarnac, for before we had no more than our own two Companies; and found at Ville-Franche▪ Monsieur the the Cardinal of Armagnac, who staid there expecting our coming, to complain of the Churches had been violated and defac'd in his Jurisdiction, and particularly at Ville-Franche, a member of his Bishoprick of Rhodes; when so soon as he saw us draw near, the Consuls seiz'd of four or five of the principal of the Seditious, whom we found Pri∣soners. The next day after our arrival came the above named Sieurs d' Alesme, and de Frron, of whom our Commissioners would by no means allow, saying, they had not the
Kings Patents, though in the end we over-rul'd them whether they would or no. Mon∣sieur de Burie had intreated me to do them no ham at our departure from Caehors, for they desir'd nothing more than to be gone; and at last they began to try these four or five that the Cardinal of Armgnac had caused to be taken: but it was impossible to perswade Campain and Gerrd to consent to their execution, notwithstanding that an infinite num∣ber of Rapines and Violations, besides those of Churches, was by the testimony of the most eminent pesons of the City, evidently prov'd against them. They continued eight or ten days in this dspute, evermore concluding that they ought to be releast, and although Monsieur de Ferron's Wife and Family were of that Religion, he nevertheless affirm'd with Monsieur d' Alesme, that they ought to dye. The Cardinal of Armagnac and all the Officers were despair, to see that Justice was not executed, expecting nothing but all sorts of violence so soon as our backs should be turn'd, if some example were not made. In the end Mssiurs d' Alesme and de Frron came to my Lodging, to tell me, that it was not to be hop'd, that these people would ever execute Justice upon those of their own Re∣ligion, and that therefore seeing no good was to be done with such men, they were resolv'd to return home. I then entreated them not to leave us; to which Monsieur d' Alesme made answer, Will yu then do an act worthy your integrity and courage, and cause them to e hang'd t the windows of the Town house where they are Prisoners, by which means you will put the business out of dispute, and without that there is no hope that Iustice shall be done. Are you both of you of this opinion, said I. They answered me they were. Enough was said, I call'd to me Monsieur de Sainctorens's Serjeant, saying to him in their presence, Go fetch me the Goaler hither; which he did, to whom I said, Deliver thy Prisoners to this man; and you Serjeant, take my two Hangmen, and go hang them presently at the windows of the Town-hall. Whereupon he immediately departed, and in less than a quarter of an hour, we saw them hang'd at the windows. The Commissioners were furiously enrag'd at this action, and endeavour'd to make Monsieur de Burie disapprove of it, which the next day I reproach'd them with, telling them in the presence of the said Sieur de Burie, that Mon∣sieur de Burie and I should agree well enough, in despite of all their endeavours to divide us; And I doubt not, said I, but to make you hang your selves, before the game be done, and that we go out of this Commission. There is a rumour that the Prince of Conde has takn arms and possest himself of the City of Orleans, which if it prove true, hope for no other, but that I will be as good as my word. It was not two hours before Rance, the King of Navarres Secretary arriv'd, and brought news to Monsieur de Burie, that the Prince of Conde was in arms, and had seiz'd of Orleans, telling wonders of the prodigious Forces the said Prince had with him, in comparison of those of the King, and that the King of of Navarre, the Constable, Monsieur de Guise, and the Mareschal de S. Andre were toge∣ther, who could not all raise so much as one man, with a thousand other flm-flam stories. Whereupon the said Sieur de Burie expresly forbad him to speak a word to any one else, telling him it would be as much as his life was worth, should I come to hear the least whisper of it: He sent also privately to the Commissioners to get away before the news should be publish'd, for otherwise it would not be in his power to save them from being put to death; and he was in the right, for I would infallibly have done their business. They needed not to be bid twice, but immediately sneak'd away in great secrecy, so that I know nothing of their departure till the next day, and search'd very diligently for Mon∣sieur Rance, who had he fallen into my hands, I think I should have taught him to carry news. Upon this untoward news, we were of opinion to go directly to Montauban,Agen and Mon∣taban revolt. and put our selves into the Town, before it revolted, for we understood that the City of Agen was revolted, and had seiz'd upon their Catholick Officers, Consuls and Canons, and ac∣cordingly that night went to S. Anthony, thinking the next day to enter into Montauban, but before we were got half way, we heard that the Town was revolted, which made us turn directly towards Ville Neufue d' Agenois, and found that all was revolted. We then came to a Village call'd Gallapian, near unto Port S. Marie, and found that Port S. Marie was also revolted, for those people had laid their design long before hand, and had carried their business very close. And there we concluded, that Monsieur de Burie with the four Companies of Gens d' armes, should go put himself into Bourdeaux, and that I with that of the King of Navarre, which was at Condom, that of the Mareschal de Termes, and my own, should pass over the Garonne towards Gascony, and keep my self in the open Champain towards Tholouze and Beaumont de Lomange, which being resolv'd upon betwixt us, and we just ready to depart, there arriv'd Captain St. Geme, who brought me Letters from the King, the contents wheeof were these.
Monsieur de Montluc, I Entreat you,The King's Leter to the Sieur de Mont∣luc. if ever you desire to do me a signal piece of service, that immediately, and in all diligence you come away to me with the Mareschal de Termes his Company, and your own, and six Companies of Foot, for which I send you Commissions, with blanks for the Captains names, for you better know who deserve to be preferr'd to these Commonds then I; therefore leaving all things, I entreat you to come away, for we must save the body of the Tree, which being preserv'd, the branches will every day recover, &c. These were the contents of my Letter, and that of Monsieur de Burie, made mention of what his Majesty had written to me, telling him withal, that he was to take the best order he could in Guienne; for his Majesty knew nothing as yet of its revolt. Mon∣sieur de Burie then took his way directly to Thoneins, where he found Msseurs de Cau∣mont and de Duras (which said Sieur de Caumont had been importun'd by their Chuches to be their Head,The Sieur de Caumont efu∣ses to be head of the Hugo∣nots. but he would never be perswaded to it, no more would Monsieur de Duras, though in the end he was constrain'd to take it upon him, at the perswasion of a person of greater Quality than himself) both which Gentlemen  themselves with great civility and respect, and demanded nothing of him, for they still try'd to win him by obligation; but he was an honest man. He went then straight to Bourdeaux, and the mischief on 't was, that he sent away all his four Companies towards Xintonge, so that he remain'd naked, and alone in Bourdeaux, saving for five and twenty Harqubuzeers of his Guard: And the same day that we parted, I came to Quarter at the house of Mon∣sieur de Beaumont near unto Agen, and in the neighbouring Villages, where I dispos'd of the six Commissions the King hd sent me, namely, to Captain Charry two, to Captain Ba∣zordan other two, one to my Nephew the Baron of Clermont, and the other to Captain Arne. The Sieurs de Canon de Montferran,The Catholick Gentry detein the Sieur de Montluc. and all the Catholick Gentry of Agenois were come in to me, and began to murmure amongst one another in the Hall, that if I left them, they were all lost, and their wives, children and houses ruin'd and destroy'd. For Lectoure, another strong place, was also revolted, by which means the Gentry of Gascony had no place to retire unto for safety, but were enforc'd to fly to me; so that they concluded among themselves, that in case I should resolve to go away to the King, as his Majesty had commanded, and offer to leave them without a Head, that they must be fain to detain me in the nature of a Prisoner, and not suffer me to depart. In the Evening I assembled all these Gentlemen together, where I remonstrated to them, that it would be necessary I should send away in all diligence to the King, to acquaint his Majesty with the revolt of all Guienne, Tholouze, and Bourdeaux excepted, which also if they were not suddenly reliev'd, would be in great danger to be lost, as well as the rest. Which they all approving, I immediately dispatch'd away Captain Cossil, to give the King and Queen an account of all that had past; which I had no sooner done, but that Monsieur du Masles (who dyed lately at Limoges, and at that time carried the Ma∣rescal de Termes his Cornet) told me before all the Company, that I had done very well to take this resolution, for otherwise they had determin'd amongst themselves to detain me by force. In the morning we past the River at two or three Ferries, with danger enough, for Leyrac was revolted, as also was the whole Country of Bazadois, la Reolle excepted, and all as far as the very Gates of Tholouze, excepting Avillar and Condom, where Cap∣tain Arne lay with the King of Navarres Company, which also before his coming thither had twice revolted; but the Lieutenant General du Franc, whom I have spoke of before, had taken Arms to defend the Kings Authority, and got the upperhand, nevereheless in the end he would not have been able to have kept it, without the said Company that I sent into it. I quarter'd my own Company at la Sauvetat de Gaure, and Monsieur de Terride had his round about his house, in his own Territories, for Beaumont was also revolted. Monsieur de Gondrin and I conferr'd together at my house at Sampoy en Gaure, to which place I had assign'd him to come, where we concluded to reconcile all the Catholick Gentlemen, that we might be united together, and being the Seigneurs de Fermarcn and de Terride, though both of one Family, had an aversion for one an∣other, we agreed to make them friends; to which end we assig'nd them to come to Fau∣dous, The Union of the Catholicks. where there was a great company of Gentlemen, and where at last we made them per∣fect good friends. Captain Charry departed in all haste to go put himself into Pymirol,
because I had intelligence, that the Enemy had quied it, and taken away the Artillery that was there to carry co Agen. The said Captain Charry went to pass the River at la Magistere, and by break of day was in the City, for the good people immediately open'd him the Gates, and there was but ten Souldiers in the Castle, who presently yielded, and every one of the other Captains went forthwith about their business to raise their Com∣panies, when so soon as we had din'd, there arriv'd a Horseman who was come post from Cahors (having rid all night, and hir'd a fresh horse at la Magistre, where he was told that I was at Faudouas) bringing me a Letter from Monsieur de la Rocque des Ars near unto Cahrs, a Kinsman of mine; which Letter is to be found enroll'd in the Register of the Parliament of Tholouze, and whereof these are the Contents. SIR, TO day about noon at this place, and by great journeys, is arriv'd a Gentleman from Court, who having enquir'd at the Inn, if there was any one that knew you, the Host told him that I was in the Town, and was related to you; whereupon he sent the said Host im∣mediately for me, and so soon as I came to the house, he bad the Host go in. I then offer'd to embrace him, but he made me a sign not to touch him; when he and I being left alone, he told me that he was of the County of Foix, and belonging to the King of Navarre, and that at Oleans a Physician had dyed i bed by him of the Plague, with which he was yet infected, bid∣ing me immediately go fetch pen, ink and paper; which I having accordingly done, he made me in the street to write this enclosed Letter, entreating me to send it post away to you. The said enclosed Letter was thus, SIR, REturning from Court, I past by Orleans, where I left the Prince of Conde, who is gathering great Forces together, and has already rais'd a great number of men. There is aCapitouls of Tholouze are 12 principal Magistrates, whereof the first is to be  Gentleman of that Province, the rest Law∣yers, or rich Merchants. Capitoul of Tholouze, who is coming by long journeys after me, and I think this night will pass by this place; who has engag'd to the said Prince by the eighteenth of this month (which was May) to put the City of Tholouze into his hands. The said Capitoul discover'd himself to me, of which I thought fit to give you speedy notice, that if possible, you may prevent his design. For the Reasons that Monsieur de la Rocque will write you word of, I would not subscribe this Letter, but have caus'd it to be sign'd by him. These were the contents of the two Letters, which having read, I took aside the fore∣mentioned Gentleman,The Sieur de Montluc re∣ceives intelli∣gence of the Enterprize of Tholouze. to whom having communicated the said Letters, I immediately sent them by an express Messenger post to the first President Mansencal, and writ upon the instant three dispatches to the three Captains Bazordan, the Baron de Clermont, and Arne, wherein I sent them word to labour day and night to get the foot Companies I had given them Commissions for to gather, and approach as near as they could to Tholouze, Monsieur de Terride return'd in all diligence to make ready his Gens d'armes, and the Sieurs de Gondrin, and de Fimarcon return'd in all haste to gather together the Gentlemen of the Country. Now the Messenger could not get to Tholouze till it was three hours with∣in night, so that the President was gone to bed, by which means he could not deliver his Letters till the next morning,The error of the President Tholouze. which was the twelfth of May. And there the President committed an Error, forasmuch as in the morning he assembled all the Chambers, and there in the presence of them all caus'd the Letters to be publickly read: and I committed another, having been so wise, as not to give him caution to communicate them but to few: which was the cause that those of their Society who were of the new Religion, and also of the plot, at their return from the Palace, gave notice to all the rest of the Conspirators, that they must make haste to seize the Town house, and the Artillery, and not to deferre it till the eighteenth day of the said Month: For I had also writ in my Letter, that I was sending away in all diligence to Captain Bazordan, and the Baron de Clermont, that in raising their Companies, they should approach continually nearer and nearer towards the said City of Tholouze, which eight days before was enter'd into great suspicion, those of the Town seeing every day strangers that no body knew, enter into the City; and the said Letters unluckily came just in the nick of this jealousie. I had (not as yet knowing any thing of all this) sent away my own Company to Montjoye, near unto la Plume, and
the very next day, which was the eighteenth, being return'd to Sampoy, I receiv'd two Lers together, one from Monsieur de Terride, with two others of Advertisements en∣clos'd, in one of which was, Sir, Four Ensigns of foot are arriv'd at Montauban, who come fromwards the Sevennes, and entred about break of day, having march'd all night; and in the other was, That a black Ensign had past over the Bridge de Buza, on the other side of Tholouze, wearing a white Scarf, and held the way towards Montauban. Monsieur de Terride sending me word, that I might take both these Advertisements for certain. At the same instant I received another Letter from the Vicar of Auch, and the Consuls of the said City, wherein they entreated me to come in all diligence to Auch, or that otherwise they would cut one another to pieces. I writ in the open street for haste four lines to Monsieur de Terride, entreating him to make his Company ready, and to get together the most men he possibly could, which having done, I mounted to horse, having Monsieur de Fontenilles with me, and went in all haste directly to Auch, though I was neither the Kings Lieu∣tenant, nor had any power to command, but all I did was out of the particular affection, and good will I bore to his Majesties service, being assur'd that doing well, all would be well interpreted by those of the Kings party, and as for the rest I did not much care, having evermore rather have them for enemies than friends. Coming to Sezan a league from Sampoy, there came a man to me from Tholouze, sent by Monsieur le President Mansencal to tell me, that he had received my Letters, entreat∣ing me to come and succour the said City,Tholouze seiz'd by the Hugo∣not. for the Hugonots had possest themselves of the Magazine, and the Artilleri that was in it. I alighted at the Towns end under an Elm, and there writ back to the President, that he should with all speed give notice to the fore∣mentioed Captains, that they might put themslves into Tholouze, and that I would go send away the Mareschal de Termes his Company which was at Passam near unto Auch, that they might be at Tholouze by break of day in the morning, bidding them take cou∣rage, for I would soon be with them, and deliver'd at the same time four or five Blancks to my Secetay sign'd with my own hand, to send letters to Monsieur de Gondrin, and others to bid them march away immediately to Tholouze, which being done, and having sent to my own Company to return in all diligence to la Sauvetat, I gallopt away full speed to Auch, where being arriv'd fasting at one of the clock in the afternoon, I dispatcht two Letters as I sat at dinner, one to Monsieur de Bellegarde, it being no more than two leagues from thence to his house, and the other to Captain Masses, who was within half a league,The Sieur de Montluc's di∣ligence to re∣lieve Tholouze. sending to Monsieur de Bellegarde immediately to take post, and go put himself in∣to Tholouze, to command the Soldiery there, causing his great horses and arms day and night to follow after. Monsieur de Masses, so soon as he had spoke with me immediately departed, and never stopt nor staid till he was in Tholouze the next morning by break of day, and Monsieur de Bellegarde got thither two hours after midnight. The Baron de Clermont entred the same morning, and at the same instant that the Soldiers entred, they ell to fighting, which was from the place St. George even to the two Gates of the City that lookt towards Montauban, which two Gates were possest by the Enemy. Captain Arne entred about two of the clock in the afternoon, as also did Captain Bazordan at the same time, and so soon as I had pacified them at Auch, I unbethought my self of the Letters Monsieur de Terride had sent me, and concluded that those Ensigns which were come to Montauban, were come thither for no other end, but only to to relieve their people who were engaged at Tholouze. Whereupon I immediately dispatch't away a Soldier upon a good Horse, commanding him to ride directly to Laudecoste, and that he should pass the River at la Peyres, by whom I writ a Letter to Captain Charry, that immediately upon the receipt thereof he should march day and night directly to Tholouze, and should make a halt at Fronton. In like manner I dispatcht away another to Monsieur de Terride to pass over his Company at Borret, sending him word also to halt at Fronton, and keep continu∣ally on horseback day and night, and whilst he waited for Captain Charry, to take care that such as should come from Montauban might not recover Tholouze. An hour after I had made these two dispatches, it came into my head, that in case the Soldier could not pass the River at la Peyre, or that he should chance to be taken, Captain Charry could not be advertiz'd what to do, and the City by that means might be in danger to be lost, which made me immediately dispatch away another, whom I order'd to go by the way of la Mgistere, and it was the next day at noon before he could get to him, for the first had been pursu'd for bove three leagues together. Captain Charry upon the Messengers ar∣rival immediately marcht away, causing bread and wine to be carried along with him, as I had writ to him to do, and as he had learnt under me, that the Soldiers might not en∣ter into any house by the way.Commendati∣on of Captain Charry. He understood as well as any man in France, how such di∣ligences were to be perform'd, and two hours after midnight with two or three hundred
men, arriv'd at Fronton. where he met with Monsieur de Terrides Company, and so, that before they knew one another, they were like to have gone together by the ars. Now as Captain Charry was got within a league of Fronton, two or three Hugonot horse belong∣ing to the Vicount de Bourniquel fell accidentally and undiscover'd amongst them in the night, when understanding them to be our people, they took their way straight to Mon∣tauban, and met the five Ensigns already advanc't the midway betwixt Montauban and Fronton, and not being able to number our men by reason of the obscurity of the night, told them, that ours were three times as many as they were, and that it was Captain Char∣ry who commanded them; which was the reason that they return'd back again to Montau∣ban; and I marcht away with my Company. Monsier de Gondrin came to me to Faudouas, and the next morning we advanc'd within two leagues of Tholouze, to a village called Daux, where we stayd for the Gentlemen who were coming post after us, and where the Sieur de Terride came not up to us till night, by reason he could no sooner get to us with his Company. I sent word to the first President and Monsieur de Bellegarde of our arrival, and that in the morning by Sun-rise we would be with them, but that in the mean time they should be sure to keep the Gate St. Subran free, and let them take care for nothing else, but only that I might get in. The haste wherein I was, made me forget to write them word, that I had sent to Fronton upon the road from Montauban to ight any relief that might come from that side; and they having heard as well as we of the arrival of the five Ensigns that were at Montauban, fearing they would that night enter by the two Gates the Enemy were possessed of, were once in mind to enter into composition, and were advanced so far towards it, that in order thereunto Rapin was deputed for the Enemy, and Monsieur de Masses for the City; during the Treaty the skirmishes ceased for three or four hours, and in the interim of these transactions came the Letters that I had sent to the President, and Monsieur de Bellegarde from Auch. But by fortune the President sent his Letter to Monsieur du Masses, to the end that he might shew it them, to encline them the more to an accommodation, so that unknown to Monsieur de Bellegarde, the said Sieur de Masses, who was already parted from Rapin, having seen my letter, turn'd back to him to shew him what I had writ, who upon the reading of it grew sodainly very me∣lancholy, saying to Captain Masses that they gave themselves for lost seeing I was so near (for they had heard that their succours were return'd back to Montaan, though our people knew nothing of it.) In the end they concluded to talk further of it the next morning, but he never intended it, for at the same instant he went to prepare his party, without giving any notice to those of the Town, in all haste to be gone, so that in the close of the Evening they began to quit the Barricadoes they had made at the corners of the streets, and to steal away, which our Captains perceiving began to charge them from street to street, but they were hindred by the night from seeing their issue out of the Gates, so that in rout and confusion they recover'd the Vines, and got away; but lost five of their Ensigus. Now we had concluded to fight after this manner, to wit, that Messieurs de Terride,Rout of the Hugonots. and de Gondrin should march on without staying in the Town, taking my Com∣pany and the Gentlemen Volunteers along with them, and plant themselves before the Gates the Enemy were possessed of without the City, and that I should alight, and with Monsieur de Teres his Company, whom I would also cause to alight, our own foot and those of the Town o fight on foot,The order de∣sign'd for  fight. resolving to enter and fight by day. In the morning as we began to march an hour before day, there came to us a Capitoul of Tholouse, called Maistre Dourdes, who brought me a letter from the President, and Monsieur de Bellegarde, wherein they sent me word of the departure and slight of the Enemy; for which I was very sorry, for had they staid my coming, not a Rascal of them all should have escapt; and God knows whther I had not a mind to have made clean work, and if I would have spared ever a mothers son. Those who were come from Foix return'd towards their said Country of Foix in route and disorder, for the very Peasants kill'd a great many of them, and the rest led every one to the place from whence they came. Thus was the City reliev'd, where the fight ountiued for three days and three nights together, during which above fifty houses were burnt one after another, and many people on both sides slain: and a∣mongst others two Brothers of Monsieur de Saüignac de Comenge. At our rrival we went and alighted before the Palace all arm'd as we were, my Ensign and Guidon displayd, and indeed for a hundred and fifty or two hundred Gentlemen there might be of us toge∣ther with my Company, it was a handsome appearance, and a very fine sight. We found all the Court assembled,The Seu  Montluc's speech to the Parliament of Tholouze. and any one may judge, whether or no we were welcome. I there in a short speech told them, That although I was not the Kings Lieutenant, nevertheless the service I had of old devoted to their City, and particularly to that honourable Assem∣bly, was the cause that after the advertisements I had received of the danger they were
in, I had gathered together all the friends I could for the conservation of their City, the second of France, and had my self immediately come away in prson o their rescue; but Gentlemen, said I, in the long time that I have born arms, I have learnt that in affais of this nature, 'tis better to keep without, and send in continual succours, know∣ing that such a rabble were not likely so soon to force your City, who had they staid my coming, should have been as well handled, as ever rascals were. It now remains, that since God has been pleased to deliver you, you do your parts, and make your Cantons stink with the Carcasses of these accursed Traytors to God, their King, and their Coun∣y. So soon as I had done speaking, the President Mansencal made me a very honora∣ble Remonstrance, concluding with great thanks both to me, and to all the Gentlemen. The Capitouls thn accmmodated us with very handsome Lodgings, and at the very same instant began to fall in hand with those of the Mutineers who remain'd in the Town, and who had been taken at their going ou,The execution at Tholouze. and the next day proceeded to execution, where I saw more heads ly than ever in one day before. I in the mean time was elsewhere suffi∣ciently employd, for it fail'd but litle, that the City was not sackt by our own people, so: asmuch as so soon as ever the neighbouring Inhabitants heard that the City was reliev'd, they all came running both Peasants and others to the spoil; neither would they be satis∣fied with plundering the houses of the Hugonots only, but began to fall on upon those of the Catholicks also, insomuch that the very house of President Paulo himself had like to have been sackt, through a rumour that within it there was a Student a Kinsman of his who was a Hugonot, though nevertheless there was no such person found; so that I was forc't to run thither, and to remedy the disorder to cause Monsieur de Termes his Company, and my own to mount to horse, the half of which continually from six hours to six hours marcht arm'd, and mounted by six and six together up and down the streets of the City. The third day I had word brought me, that Monsieur de St. Paul of the County of Foix was upon arrival, being come from the said Foix with three or four thousand men, and Monsieur de Lamezan of Comenge with seven or eight hundred more, who had they entred, it had been impossible both for me and all the rest of us who were within to have saved the City from being sackt; to prevent which I sent in all haste to the Capitols to shut their Gates, and all night long we kept continually on horse-back in the streets, and had the foot Companies upon Guard at the Gates, together with the whole City in arms, after the same manner as before, when they had been in continual fight. All this while Captain Charry and Monsieur de Terrides Company never stirred from the two Villages betwixt Fronton and Tholouze. Monsieur de St. Paul quarter'd himself and his people in the Suburbs, and Monsieur de Lamezan also, very much displeased that they might not be permitted to enter the City, threatning that another time they would not come to relieve them, though their relief now did more harm then good, considering that they came not when they ought to have come. The next day I sent out Monsieur de Bellegarde to tell them, that they did but lose time in staying there, for they should not enter, whereupon Monsieur de St. Paul return'd with his people, and Monsieur de Lamezan sent away his, entring himself and his servants only. After this the Capitouls and I concluded together to drive out all those who were come in from the neighbouring places, and accordingly with the Trumpets of the City, and our Drums, Proclamation was made for all strangers to depart, so that in the end we were absolute Masters of the City. Nevertheless it was not possible so to govern our own people, but that there was still some disorder, which made me send all the horse and foot out of the City, surren∣dring the whole power into the hands of the Magistrates. I gave a Company to Captain Masses the younger to remain in the Town, and to Monsieur de Grepit Son to Presi∣dent Mansencal another, who already had it almost full, and so I cleans'd the City, lea∣ving no body in it but the Inhabitants, and two Companies of foot. Captains my Companions, consider I beseech you how narrowly this great and opulent City, the second in France, escap'd being ruin'd and destroy'd for ever. There lives a Gentleman at the Gates of Montauban, called Monsieur de la Serre, whose house was burnt by the Hugonots, who told me that he had been present at a Synod, where it was determin'd, that could they bring about their Enterprize upon Tholouze, they would to∣tally raze it to the ground, and take such of the ruins as were of any use to Montaban to enlarge their own City greater than it was, intending to comprehend their Suburbs within the Walls,The design of the Hugonots concerning Tholouze. and to draw a River thorough it that turn'd a Mll belonging to the said Sieur de la Serre, that there might be no more memory of Tholouze for ever. Besides the testimony of this Gentleman, a hundred others have confirm'd the same, which must be the discourse of their little Ministers only, for the great ones who had the Government of affairs, would have been better dvis'd than to have destroyed such a City, which
would have been to geat a loss both to the King and the whole Kingdom. You may then take notice of the great and extraordinary diligence I used, beginning from the ad∣vertisement I had of the Capitouls promise to the Prince of Conde to put the City into his hands, and next the haste I made the Captains to make in compleating their Companies, which were not half full, to put themselves into the City: then the diligence of Mon∣sieur de Bellgarde, and Captain Masses with his Company: and on the other side the diligence wherewith I caus'd notice to be given to Captain Charry, and my foresight in sending another Mssenger after the former, to bid Monsieur de Terrides Company cross the River at Borret, besides my diligence wherewith I advertiz'd Monsieur de Gondrin and others, all which was done in three dayes and three nights. Wherefore if you will take notice of this exmple, and retein it, it will serve you to so good use, that you will never lose an hours time; and although I have writ in the beginning of my Book (and as some may think with vanity enough) that my diligences and ready foresights have procur'd me the reputation God has given me in point of a Soldier, as great as other men; yet it is evidently true in this as well as upon other occasions: for had I fail'd but a mi∣nute the City had been absolutely lost. You ought not then disdain to learn of me, who am at this day the oldest Capain in France, and whom God has blest with as many suc∣cesses as any man whatever of my time: but you ought to avoid learning of those who have been continually beaten, and have eternally run away where ever they have been engag'd; for if you go to school to such Masters you will hardly ever come to be any great Doctors in Arms. If I had stood long considering, and consum'd the time in consultations, to be satisfied whether before I intermeddled with these affairs, I should not first send to Monsieur de Burie, who was the Kings Lieutenant, I leave you to judge whether or no the Hugonots had not had sfficient leisure wherein to do their work. But whenever they heard of me, they presently fancied the Hangman at their Breech; as also they ordinarily call'd me the Tyrant. When ever you shall be in place to do a notable piece of service, never stay for a command if the occasion be pressing; for in the mean time you lose your opportunity, therefore fall back fall edge try your for∣tune, it will afterwards be well interpreted. I know there are some who think it strange that the City of Tholouze had so great a respect and kindness for me; but should they have other, they would degenerate from all good nature; for they will confess that I sav'd the City together with their lives and estates, and the honor of their wives, which without my resolute and speedy succour had all been lost. Upon which account I hope they will never be ungrateful to me, for the good office I did them upon this occasion: and if any one will say, that what I did was all for the service of the King, I shall answer to that, that at that time I had no Employment from his Majesty, excepting the command of my own Company of Gens d'armes; for Monsieur de Burie was the Kings Lieutenant in Guienne, and the Constable in Languedoc. Yet shall I not deny, but that I was prompt∣ed to it out of an honest desire I have ever had to do my King service, and that not only out of respect to the obligation I have to my Countreys preservation, but also out of a na∣tural affection I have ever had for his Majesties service; and moreover, out of the love and friendship I have ever born, and do still bear to this famous City. For the dispair I was in to see it in danger to be ruin'd, made me take the pains I did: It is not then to be wondred at,Tholouze no friend to the Hugonots. if this City have an animosity against those of this new Religion, for there is not a City in France, who has run so great a hazad as this City has done, nor that has ever manifested it self more affectionate to the King and his service, or stood sharper brunts to maintain themselves in his Majesties obedience. Rouen suffer'd it self to be taken with∣out striking a blow, Lyons, Bourges and Poictirs did the same. Paris was never reduc'd to that extremity, being also another kind of thing than the rest. Bourdeaux made no defence at all, that being no other than a surprize they would make upon Chasteau Trom∣pette, which they also made themselves sure of, forasmuch as Monsieur de Duras was at the same time at the Gates of Bourdeaux. We may all therefore confess with truth, that no City whatever has fought so well, and run so great a hazard as this, having bravely re∣puls'd the Hugonots after they had seiz'd of the Magazine, and were possest of the gates, by which they might introduce succours from Montauban. I was then advis'd to go before Montauban,Enterprize of Montauban. but it was more to draw the Souldiers from about Tholouz, and out of the City, and to live upon the Enemies Country, than out of any hopes I had to take it; for I knew very well there were a great many men within it, that were there assembled for the enterprize of Tholouze. I then march'd thither, having no more than six Ensigns of Foot, which were those of Monsieur de Sainctorens, de Bazor∣dan, the Baron of Clermont, Arne and Charry; to which those of Tholouze gave me two pieces of Canon, and one Culverine, bestowing moreover a civility upon the Souldiers,
they gave them one pay. So soon as I was come before Montaubn, I found that there was in the Town two and twenty hundred Souldiers strangers, and a thusand or twelve hun∣dred Townsmen, all very well arm'd. I might have about eight or nine hundred in all, the most of which had never been in arms before; for all the good old Souldiers were gone over to the Hugonots, after the unfortunate peace, and that upon meer necessity, for they had no Trades, the Wars having continued long, and they having been all that while em∣ploy'd in Italy, and other of the Kings conquests. The godly Ministers promis'd them not only riches, but as I have been told, even Paradice it self, as if they had kept the Keys; and another inconvenience this peace brought after it was, that we had lain long idle, without having any employment wherein to make good Souldiers. So that when I came before Montauban, I was constrain'd to quarter all my Foot together in the Bourg de l' Evesche, for to have separated them had been madness, the Enemy making so great sal∣lies upon me, that they continually beat up my Foot to my body of Gens d' armes, without which they had been stronger than I, and would have cut me to pieces: for for one that I had they came out ten, so that the second day I was constrained to leave the Evesche, to go relieve Monsieur de Terride, whom I had left in the Suburbs on that side the Town to∣wards Moissac, to whom I had given Monsieur de Bazordans Company, where I found that the Enemy had beaten him out of the Bourg to a Brick-kill hard by, which made me speak to the Souldiers to run full drive to recover the Bourg, and to charge them bravely, so that being come running in so grat haste, and going on immediately to the charge, I had no body with me but Captain Cabarret, who is yet living, Mnsieur de Clermont, who is of the House of Fadouas, Monsieur de Beaucaire, who is since dead, and three or four of Monsieur de Trrides men only, with which we gave them so brisk a charge, that we beat them back, laying on in their rear, to the very wicket of the Gate of the City, most of them not being able to get in, but were forc'd to take on the left hand directly to the Bridge, and the others on the right, so that had the great Gate been open, we might have the Town; for Monsieur de Beaucaire's  kill'd before the Gate, hard by the wicket, and mine was shot close by him, and so we retir'd, for all the wall was set thick with Harquebuzeers, and two horses were shot in our coming off, of those of Mon∣sieur de Terride's Company, who had follow'd after us. The third day I took a resolution to retire, for the Gens'd arms were no longer able to guard the Foot; and on the other side, though I had made a Battery, I had not da'd to give the assault to so many as they were within, with so few as I had without. Wherefore I sent back the Artillery to Tholouze, and the Captains to the places to which they desir'd to go to make an end of filling up their Companies compleat. Monsieur de Terride went to Beaumont de Lomaigne, and the places adjacent to his house, for the Enemy had quitted Beaumont so soon as they perceiv'd us to approach. I repast the River at Moissac with the Mareschal de Termes his Company, my own and that of Monsieur de Sainctorens of Harquebuzeers both on horseback, and on Foot, which I always kept about me for my Guard. I sent Captain Charry to Puymirol, to compleat his two Companies, and to make War upon those who kept Agen; and so soon as I had past the River on the side of Gascony, I sent back the Mareschal de Termes his Company towards Auch, to keep that Quarter in aw, and Monsieur de Gondrin into Armag∣nac, with the Gentry he had brought along with him, to see that nothing revolted there. Now I had left Captain Arne at Condom, to hold that Countrey in subjection, who might have about fourscore Launces in his Company, and I had intelligence that Messieurs de Duras and de Caumont held a consultation at Agen, and that Monsieur de Caumont would come at night to lie at la Passage: Which having heard, I sent a man to Captain Arne that he should not fail two hours after midnight to be at Astfort, and that he should not enter the Town, but stay for me in Battalia till I came, which he accordingly did. And as I was going away in the evening, Monsieur de S. Paul, to whose house I was retir'd near unto Donac, asking me whether I was going, I told him in his ear, that I was going to carry a clean shirt to Monsieur de Caumont at la Passage; whereupon he told and assur'd me, that he was gone the day before, after they had concluded of their affairs, and given Commissions to Captains to raise more men; which was the reason that I staid to give our horses, and Monsieur de Sainctorens his Company a little repose. But as this enterprize fail'd, another presented it self; for the same morning that I would have given a Camisado to Monsieur de Caumont, Six hundred men were come out of Nerac, to go give another Camisado to Captain Molia, who had put himself into Franciscas with threescore or fourscore men, and the people of the Town, and those of Nerac, had taken four hundred Corslets out of the King of Navarres Magazine, and at break of day gave three assauls, one immediately after another, but were always repulst. By misfortune I staid there till night, for had I gone away in the evening, as I had done but for what Monsieur de
S. Paul told me concerning Monsieur de Caumont, I had come time enough to have fought the six hundred men of Nerac. And there my diligence once fail'd me. By break of day Captain Arne and I met, and march'd together streight to Moyracs, because he told me he had intelligence that this very morning those of Nerac would come out, and had taken all the arms in the Castle, but he knew not whither they were to go; so that yet we had met them, had it not been that Monsieur de Sainctorens would needs stay to skirmish those of Layrac, who were come out a great way towards the Vines, so that it cost me an hours time before I could get him away, because he had a mind to have charg'd them up to the very gates of the City, could he have tempted them out of the Vines; and when we came to Moiracs, we heard that the enemy was before Franciscas, which made us put on to a good round trot, to hasten thither, sending six light horse before to discover where they were, who sent me word that above an hour before, they were retreated to Nerac, by reason they had had notice of Captain Arnes departure by night from Condom; for they had heard nothing of me. I sent to the Avant-Coureurs still to go on, and that I would follow after; which they did, and at last discover'd them half a quarter of a League from Nerac, we still at a long trot following after, but in vain, for they got safe into the Town. I had a great mind to have been fingering those arms, to arm our new rais'd and naked men. This was the naughty beginning of our War in Guienne, wherein the Hugonots took us at unawares, and unprovided; so that it is a miraculous thing how this Country could save it self, considering the secret intelligences the Rebels had in all the Cities of the Pro∣vince: but they shew'd themselves Novices, and indeed they were guided by their Mini∣sters only: if before they had made so many Surprizes, they had attempted Bourdeaux and Tholouze, they had not fail'd of carrying the one or the other, and possibly both; but we were already upon our Guards, and God preserv'd those two Forts, the Bulwarks of Guienne, to save all the rst. I very much broke their designs, by sending people every where, and never resting long in a place, for by so doing, a Kings Lieutenant shall hold all the world in suspence, because they cannot guess at his design, every one imagining that he is coming upon him; whereas should he always lie still in one Quarter, he cannot pro∣vide against all accidents, nor come in time, where there is immediate and pressing need; and also your being setled in one place, gives a great advantage to your Enemy, who by that means has his arms at liberty to do what he will; but I was not only my self in con∣tinual motion, but also with Letters and Messages was perpetually soliciting and employ∣ing all the Friends we had. Believe me, you who have the honor to be Governors of Provinces, it is a very good thing, and of great utility to your Prince, to keep a corre∣spondence by Letters with those you know have never so little interest in the Country, and I am certain, that had I not done so, the greatest part would have sided with these new people, who have made all this fine work in the Kingdom. Soon after Captain Cosseil return'd with Letters from the King and Queen, wherein they commanded me to stay in Guienne, there to do them the best service I could, for the conservation of the Country, recommending to me the care of their affairs, in more ho∣norable expressions than I could any way deserve: By which I discern'd their Majesties were in great anxiety, especially the Queen, who writ me a very pitiful Letter. The great ones sometimes, when it pleases God, have need of the small, they must now and then be put in mind, that they are men and women as the rest of the world are; for if all should go as they would have it, they would not so much regard those that do them service, as when they see themselves distrest, but consume the time in Plays, Masquerades and Tri∣umphs, which are the cause of their ruine: as it hapned to my good Master, who running at Tilt for his pleasure, was unfortunately slain, which he could not have been in war, he would have been too well guarded for that. 'Tis an old saying, that men scratch al∣ways where they ch, and I also am senseable when I rub upon the old sore, which is the loss of my good King, whom I lament, and shall do the longest day I have to live. Not long after Monsieur de Duras took his way all along by the River Garonne,The Sieur de Duras for the Hugonots. and ren∣dezvouz'd his Army at Clairac, Toneins and Marmanda, which consisted of thirteen En∣signs of Foot, and seven Cornets of Horse, and so soon as the Pardaillans, Savignac (Cap∣tain of the Guard to Monsieur de Burie) Salignac and other Chiefs, were ready to execute their Enterprize upon Chasteau Trompette; Monsieur de Duras march'd towards Mont∣sgr, and the places adjacent to Cadillac, with a great number of Boats, wherein he had ship'd the best of his Souldiers, to present themselves in the beginning of the night before Chasteau Trompette,The Ente∣prize upon Chasteau▪ Trompete fails▪ where the forenam'd Captains had thought to have been got in, and by it to have given them entrance into the City. But their enterprize succeeded ill; for Monsieur de Vaillac the Father was circumspect, and would not let le Puch de Pardaillan
his Brother in Law re-enter, who pretended to be in great fear, saying that those of the City had a design to take him: and Captain de la Salle who belong'd to Monsieur de Vaillac did also very good service upon that occasion. Now this hapned at one of the clock in the night, and all the City was in an alarm. Monsieur de Burie was at the Maierie, he Inhabitants betook themselves to arms, and fell upon the Hugonots (but the said Sieur kept himslf in the Maierie with some Gentlemen of his Guard, and those but very few, fr most of them were of the Conspiracy) whereof some escap'd over the walls, and un∣der a Palsado that goes down towards the River. They were above two or three hun∣dred Conspirators, some of which were taken, and as Monsieur de Duras his people, who were in the Boats, were under Cadillac, they met with the Count de Candalle, Son to Mon∣sie de Candalle, as he was coming from Bourdeaux to the said Cadillac, whom they took Prisoner, and sent him to the Queen of Navarre, who was at Duras, but newly come from Court: and who made him promise her to take arms for their Religion, upon which promise she let him go to his own house, where he staid for a few dayes making shew as if he meant to go joyn with Monsieur de Duras; but it was only to expect when I should draw near, that he might come in to me, as he did; saying, it was a promis extor∣ted from him by force which he was no wayes obliged to keep, being no prisoner of Warre. Ever since which time this Count has been a mortal Enemy to the House of Duras. At this time Monsieur de Burie dispatch'd away to me Raze his Secretary, post, en∣treating me to come to his relief, or that otherwise the City would be lost, for he had no Forces with him; and besides there was not one grain of corn in the City, insomuch that he was reduc'd in a manner to Famine, by reason that the Enemy vvere possest of all the Rivr of Garonne, and that of Dordogne, vvhich are the tvvo Teats that nourish the City of Bourdeaux. I immediately sent back the said Raze to assure Monsieur de Burie, that I vvould soon be vvith him, and in order thereunto presently dispatch'd avvay to Captain Masses to come to me vvith the Mareschal de Termes his Company, and to Captain Arne, to send me fory Launces of the Company belonging to the King of Navarre, command∣ing him vvithal not to stir from Condom, but stay to keep the Country in avv, and to take care the Tovvn did not revolt. I sent likevvise to Captain Bazordan, that he should not stir vvith his tvvo Companies from Beaumont de Lmaigne, and the places adjacent to Mon∣sieur de Terride, to vvhom I vvrit also to put himself into Grenade vvith his Company, and that I had left Captain Bazordan to be near him. I sent in like manner to Monsieu de Gondrin, that he should gather to him his Relations and Neighbours, and some Soul∣diers, to put himself into Euse, and that I vvas going to relieve Monsieur de Burie at Bourdeaux. I vvas not the Kings Lieutenant, and yet every one obey'd me as chearfully as they could have done any man in the vvorld; by vvhich you may see vvhat it is for a man to get the love of the Gentry as I did,All things de∣pend upon the Gentry. and vvho does not so, shall never perform any thing vvorth speaking of; for upon them, almost all things depend, especially consider∣ing hovv Gascony and Armaignac abound in Gentry. The fift day after Raze's departure, there came to me Monsieur de Courre, Nephevv to Monsieur de Burie, and Lieutenant of his Company, vvho came again to solicite my haste, by vvhom the said Sieur de Burie sent me vvord, that if in six days he vvas not reliev'd, the City vvould be lost. The Sieur de Courre told me also, that although he had only travell'd by night, he had nevertheless met vvith the Enemy almost at every step, and that all the Country vvas up in arms against us, either voluntarily or by force. I sent back the said Sieur de Courre by les Landes, he having vvith him five and tvventy Launces compleatly arm'd, recommending him to houses of Gentlemen of my relations, and the next day as∣sembling all my men both Horse and Foot, I began to set forvvards directly to Bourdeaux. The first days march vvas to Bruch, vvhich belongs to Monsieur de Gondrin, and another Vllage a quarter of a League from thence, call'd Fougarolles appertaining to the Queen of Navarre, vvhere I lodg'd the Companies of Monsieur de Termes, and that of Monsieur de Saint Salvy, Brother to Monsieur de Terride, vvhich vvas nevvly rais'd, and so soon as ever their Quarters vvere made, there came three Ensigns of Nerac, led by one Captain Duzan, vvhich might be in all betvvixt five and six hundred men. I had not eaten six bits, vvhen they came to tell me, that at a Castle hard by, call'd Castel-Vieille there were some people who defended the place; whereupon I presently went thither, com∣manding Captain Bardachin, that with a hundred of his Musketeers, he should go and set fire to the gates, and give an assault, which he did, and we carried the place, when as we were entring, there came an Alarm from Fougarolles, that the Enemy were fighting with the Companies of Messieurs de Termes, and de Saint Salvy; whereupon I left the Castle, and ran to Fougarolles, sending to Captain Charry, who was quarter'd with his men close by me, (I never suffer'd him to be very far off, for if it came to striking, he would always
give the first blow) that he should advance with his men to come to the fight. I had some Gentlemen with me, and but a few, forasmuch as they durst not as yet declare, seeing the Enemy to have the upper hand, and amongst others the Governor de la Mothe-Rouge Captain Poy, and fifteen or twenty others. I gave Captain Bardachin order to make the Soldiers give over the sack, and follow after me as fast as he could, but he left the charge thereof to his Lieutenant, and went along with me, with five or six horse more of his. Now from Castel Vieile to Fougarolles it is no more than a quarter of a League, when so soon as I came thither, I found Monsieur de Termes his Company in Battalia by the Bourg, and that of Monsieur de Saint Salvy also close by one another. The Enemy were at the other end of the Bourg, who saw us coming, and began to face about and retire. Whereupon I bid Captain Masses take ten of his Launces, and that the rest should quarter themselves with the Company of Monsieur de Saint Salvy, for we had made a long march on', and would be going an hour before day, by reason of the excessive heat. Captain Charry also came up to me with five or six horse, and the rest were coming after as fast as they could, for I put my self in the Rear of the Enemy. Close by the Village on that side towards Nerac there is an ascent, and when we were at the foot of the Hill, they were in the middle, and upon the top, and there they fac'd about: I had no great mind to fight, because my design was to relieve Bourdeaux, and therefore was unwilling to engage, fearing some disaster might happen, and that then I could not relieve the City. Nevertheless seeing them upon the top of the Hill I followed after, and when I came to the top, saw them in the great High-way betwixt two Copses marching softly on, and in very good order, this Captain Douazan, with four or five horse, and ten or twelve Harquebuzeers, bringing up the Rear. We might be in all with the ten Launces some five and fifty horse good and bad: I made the Harquebuzeers alight, and to put themselves in their Rear, whereupon I perceiv'd them to make a little more haste than before, which made me cry to the Governor la Mothe Rouge, Monsieur de Saincto∣rens, Captain Charry, and the rest of the Gentlemen, follow them close, for upon my life these people are afraid, I see it by their march, they have a long retreat to make, and I will second you with Captain Masses. Captain Bardachin then sent to his Musqueeers, that they should run as fast as ever they could, and we had not march'd after this manner a∣bove two hundred paces, but that I saw our AvantCourers were fallen in pell-mell a∣mongst them, and our Harquebuzeers began to make a little more haste; when seeing their horse pass thorough the files of the foot, to recover the Van (which was because Doua∣zans horse was shot) I rid up to the head of our men, and shew'd them that the Enemies horse gain'd the Front of their own people, either with intention to make them face a∣bout and fight, or else they ran away for fear: But I rather think, said I, it is for fear, for their foot also begin to mend their pace, let us charge them, but first let Captain Masses come up to us, who might be about some two hundred paces behind, to whom I sent that he should gallop away: but as soon as ever they saw our people coming upon the gallop, they began to ply their march,The Hugonot dfeated. and gave over shooting, and then I cried, let us fall on, let us fall on, for they are afraid, which we did, and without resistance charg'd them through and through over the very bellies of them. Their horse fled full speed towards Nerac, and the foot like cowardly rascals crept into the Copses, and squat in the ditches, where our Musketteers sought them in the Woods, and shot at them as they shoot at Birds. Part of those who escap'd threw themselves into the River Baise where some were drown'd, the rest past through the Woods, and recover'd the Vines. We were so few that we were not enow to kill them all: for in those times there was no talk of Prisoners, and had the King paid his Companies,The Ransoms of Prisoners maintain the Warre. I should not have suffered Ransoms to have been in use in this quarrel, which have only serv'd to maintain the War. But neither Gens∣d'arms nor Soldier were paid, and therefore it could not possibly be avoided, though indeed there were not many. It is not in this case as in a forreign War, where men fight for love and honor; but in a Civil War, we must either be master or man, being we live as it were all under a roof; and that's the reason why we must proceed with rigour and cruelty, otherwise the temptation of gain is such, that men would rather desire the con∣tinuation, than the end of a War. But to return to our Runaways, the Alarm ran quite thorough our Camp, so that all of them came powdring in both Horse and Foot, but at eir arrival found that all was done; so that would we have pursued the Victory as far as Nrac, they had all run away, and we might with great ease have taken the Town: but my design was only to relieve Bourdeaux. In this Engagement there died of the Enemy above three hundred men, whom the Judge of Viane caused to be inter∣red, as I have since been told, without comprising those that were slain in the Vins▪
and those who wre drown'd, who might in all amount to betwixt four and five hun∣dred men; and it was fought upon a Friday. This Victory very much dejected the Brethren, and encouraged the Catholicks, for if you once begin to drub your Enemy, you may certainly concluded that you have the better of the Game, for they will ever af∣ter be so afraid, that they will never dare to stand before you. The next morning an hour before day I began to march, and thought to have entred into le M d' Agenois, but I found that there was there three Ensigns of the Enemy who had taken possession before me, and was thereupon constrain'd to quarter at Gruere and Caonges, close by the aforesaid le Mas, both by reason of the long march I had made the day before; and also because the Secretary of the Queen of Navarre call'd Barbant, brought me letters from the said Queen from Duras,The Queen of Navae's Let∣ter to the Sieur de Montluc. wherein she writ me word, that I did not need to proceed any further, for that Monsieur de Burie and she had compos'd all things, and that she was come out of France purposely to appease these Commotions, and to make those of the Religion to lay down their Arms. In answer to this Letter I told Bar∣bant, that I would not return back unless I was first commanded by Monsieur de Burie so to do; for that if the City should chance to be lost, the whole blame of the miscarriage would be laid at my door. We there disputed it above two long hours in the field, he still ex∣postulating with me, whether I thought the Queen of Navarre was against the King, and if I thought she had a mind to make his Majestly lose the City of Bourdeaux; to which I answered with all moderation and respect, for that was the way I was to proceed in this affair; but all he could get of me was, that I would send two Gentlemen along with him to the Queen of Navarre, to see in what psture affairs were betwixt her and Monsieur de Bu∣rie, and that in the mean time I would make four dayes march, of what I had design'd only for two, to give the said Lady time to make an end of the Treaty she had begun with Monsieur de Burie: and accordingly deliver'd him to the two Captains Peug and Sendat, who were in danger to have been kill'd more than twice by the way; for in all the Corners and Villages the Hugonots had planted Courts of Guards to hold every one in suspence, and to fright people into their Party.Consultation upon the Queen o Na∣varr's Letter. In the Evening I call'd a Council of all the Captains, where they were all of opinion, that I should lend no ear either to the Letters or Messa∣ges of the Queen of Navarre, who should she falsifie her word, the loss of the City of Bourdeaux was of so great importance, that what excuses soever I might make, they would not be sufficient to justifie me from the blame that all the world would justly lay to my charge: and on the other side should I be put to vindicate my reputation with my sword, I could not fight with the Queen of Navarre, insomuch that all the world would laugh me to scorn, and she her self the first of all, so that the fault would still lie where it did; and I should have no possible means to clear my own honor. I was very glad to hear them all of this opinion, because should my actions be disapproved, I had to say in my excuse, that all the Captains had advis'd me to it; for if a man commit an error, it is at least more excusable if it be done upon deliberation and advice, than up∣on the meer account of his own humour and fancy; for alwaies to trust to a mans own headpiece is not so well. In the morning two hours before day I departed from my Quarters, and past over a∣bove the Vines, leaving le Mas on the right hand, and came but by break of day onely near unto Caumont, by reason that the Passes were very streight, and I would not leave the Baggage behind me, for a great many people entred all night long into le Mas; who came from that side towards the River. Those of the Castle of Caumont allyed out, and came thorough the Vines, where we could not charge them by reason of the ditches, so that we continued on our march, till we came near unto Reolle, and there I found Monsieur de Courré, who at his return to Bourdeaux had taken the rest of Monsieur de Burie's Company, and was come out to meet me. A little before I had sent to Monsieur Deymet my Cousin-German, who was raising two Companies, to go and put himself in∣to Reolle,La Rolle be∣sieg'd by the Hugonots. which he had done; but the Hugonots had besieg'd it before my coming, and batter'd it with some field-pieces; but they could do no good, and raised the Siege. By whih it is to be concluded, that they were Masters of the field, since they durst adven∣ture to march with Canon, and had not God inspir'd me to oppose them, and to hang up those that fell into my hands, I do believe the whole Country had been lost; for Monsieur de Burie's moderation was by no means seasonable in such a time as this. I quarter'd my self in some houses overagainst Reolle, those of the Town bringing us in provisions, and at midnight without sound of Trumpet or beat of Drum (by reason of a certain jealousie Monsieur de Courré had possest me withal) we began to march, and never staid till we came within two or three leagues of Bourdeaux, I there quarter'd my men in certain Villages, and my self went straight to the City, where I found Messieurs de
Can, and Montferran, the Vcount d', Ciurac, and others, who were there expect∣ing my coming, and where by reason of the great scarcity of all things in the City, I could stay bt thre dayes only; in which time it was concluded betwixt Monsieur de Burie and me, that the fourth day we should pass over the River, and go fight Monsiur de Duras, who was in the Territories of Monsieur de Candalle in the Country of Benauges. Accordingly I began to pass the River, and by noon had got over all the Foot, and in a few hours after my own Company, and the forty Launces belonging to the King of Navarre: when, seeing it began to grow late, I was of opinion that Captain Masses should return to his Quarter with the Company belonging to the Mareschal de Termes, and should pass them over at midnight; which order being given I return'd into the City again to conclude with Monsieur de Burie, that at midnight he should begin to pass over the rest of the men. He had caused four field-pieces to be made ready, which al∣ready were upon the shore, and the Company of Monsieur de Randan commanded by Monsieur d' Argence was arriv'd, as also that of Monsieur de Vauguion commanded by Monsieur Crlus. So soon as it was night Monsieur de Burie caused all the Boats to be brought up under Chsteau Trompette, expresly forbidding that any one should pass the River without leave, so that in the nght when Captain Masses came to the water side, it was not possible for him to get Boats to carry him over. I shall not here dlare what every one said upon this occasion, and what they reported was the cause why the River was not passed at the time appointed; for it signifies nothing, but Monsieur de Masses in excusing himself spoke very plain, and without caring who heard him. I was quarter'd not above half a league from Bourdeaux, and above an hour before day to hrse, and (sending word to Captain Charry, who was Camp-master, that he should stay for Monsieur de Burie with all the foot Companies, excepting those of the Baron de Clermont, and Monsieur de Sainctorens) march'd on till I came to la Seuve, sending word to Mnsieur de Burie, that I had left him the Foot to accompany the Artilly. The Messenger pass'd the River, and found him in his Chamber not yet quie drst, though it was then past six a clock in the morning, by which time I made account he was come over, and so soon as I was come to Seuve, Monsieur de la Seuve, Uncle to Monsieur d' Audx, told me that the Enemy was at Targon, and had no intelligence of our passing the River, and lent me one of his Servants to go carry the news to Monsieur de Burie, whom in my Letter I entreated to advance, for that the Enemy was in a very con∣venient place to be fought withall. Now from la Seuve to Bourdeaux it was about three leagues, and as Monsieur de la Seuve's Servant came to the water side, he saw Monsieur de Trmes his Company going aboard: I also by the same Messenger sent to Captain Chrry to solicite Monsieur de Burie to advance, who seeing them make so little hast, and knowing that I was gone to attaque the Enemy (as I had sent him word) he took three∣score light horse that he had of his own, and leaving the other Captains to wait upon Monsieur de Burie, and to guard the Artillery, came away after me. So soon as I came within sight of Targon, which is a Village (as I think belonging to Monsieur de Candalle) Messieurs de Sainctorens and de Fontenilles went on before, where at some scatter'd houses, they fell upon the Enemies Quarters, and kill'd fourteen or fif∣teen men, by reason whereof the Alarm in their Camp was so great, as made them draw all their Foot into Battalia in a great field, and their Cavalry all along by a little River there is in that place, whom I could not discover by reason of a Wood betwixt them and me, and they were also in a Valley. The field where their Foot was drawn up, was a little more advanc'd than the River, and when Monsieur de Sainctorens fell into their Quar∣ters, it might be about seven of the clock in the morning, after which they never stir'd from this field where they were first drawn up. I was upon a little Eminence at three or four houses that were there, from whence I dspatcht away another Messenger to Monsieur de Burie to entreat him to make haste, for that I was at the head of the Enemy, think∣ing that he was near at hand. The Count de Candalle who was then very young, and full of spirit, came to me to this place, with ten or twelve Gentlemen in company with him, and amongst others the Sieur de Seignan, who had been a Captain of Foot with me in the Kingdom of Naples, at which time we call'd him Captain Montlaur, who also brought two of his Sons along with him, all three very brave Gentlemen. There the Count told me of the promise the Queen of Navarre had compell'd him to make, without which he could not have escap'd out of her hands; in answer to which I merrily told him, that I would cause the Bishop of Bourdeaux to absolve him from that Engagement, neither could that promise any way bind him, forasmuch as he was not a prisoner of Warre, and besides, it was made to the Queen of Navarre, who profest her self to be a most humble servant of the Kings, and very passionate for his Majesties service.
About twelve of the clock the two Messengers I had sent to Monsieur de Burie return'd, and brought me word, that they could not be past over the River till after noon, and that the Company of Monsieur de Termes only was already landed on this side. I had sent back all our Horse to la Seve to ba, having kept with me only twenty, or five and twenty Horse, and there I stood Cntinel, letting our horses eat the while under a Hedge, with the bridles in our hands. The Enemy saw me, and I saw them, and our men having got some victuals came back to me, just as the Enemy began to remove and to take the way directly towards me. We observ'd that they march'd off by Companies, by which we very well understood, that they meant to take some other way than to come to us, and thereupon fell to consult whether we should fight them, or no. In which Consultation the greatest part of the Company said, That in case we should fight them, we should put all Guinne in danger, they being twenty for one, and that therefore it was better to stay for Monsieur de Burie, than commit such an error, which would neither be approved of by the King,Dispute about the fight. nor by any other person whatever. Whereupon I granted them that what they said was very true: but that nevertheless we saw all the Gentry in Guienne in fear, and though it be true, said I, that you are not here above thirty Gentlmen, yet the whole Country is possest with so great a terror, that they dare not rise against them to assist us, which when they shall hear, that we came to face them without daring to fight, will be so augmented, that in eight dayes time we shall have all the whole Country against us; therefore fall back, fall edge, it is my opinion, that we ought rather to hazard the losing our selves by fighting, than by avoiding the Com∣bat, which is equally pernicious, especially considering that all things are in the hands of God. I have already tasted these people, where I have had the fortune to meet them, and have found them men of very little resolution; believe me they will never stand us, and we shall certainly rout them; neither ought we to have come so near if we had not intended to fight; and moreover you see that they are about to steal off, and to escape away. As to what concerns our overthrow, should it so fall out, Bourdeaux will notwithstanding be in no more danger to be lost for that, Monsieur de Burie being there, and a Court of Parliament to defend it. Monsieur de Seignan then being the oldest in the Company answered, and said, that it was very true, we should have all the Country infallibly upon us, and therefore seeing we were reduc't to this necessity, and that there was no hope of Monsieur de Burie's coming up to us,The fight re∣solv'd upon. we ought to fight, whereupon they all in general began to cry, let us fight, let us fight; when as we were mounting to horse, the Mareschal de Termes his Quarter-master, called Moncorneil, came up to us, and told me, that their Company having been on horseback from the beginning of the night, they had been necessitated to stay, and bait at Seuve, at which news I was almost fit to despair. The two foot Companies were marching as fast as they could; but it was so excessively hot that we scorcht as we stood, however Moncorneil seeing us going to fight, gallop't away to la Seuve to make Captain Masses mount to horse. We then marcht on the left hand of the Enemy, when being come within two Har∣quebuze shot of them, I divided my horse into two Troops: we might in all be be∣twixt a hundred and sixscore Light-horse; for I had not above thirty Launces in my Com∣pany, it having been that of Monsieur de la Guiche, and the Soldiers being almost all gone home to their own houses, excepting a very few, and I could not supply their places with others.The order of the Fight. The Enemy still by little and little mounted this Hill, sending most of their Har∣quebuzers down into the Copse below, which was there very thick, and to come to them we were to march thorough a great high-way enclos'd on both sides with Vines. I made Captain Charry follow in their Rear, and gave one of my Troops to my Son Captain Mont∣luc and Fontenilles with the Cornet of Guidons, and kept to my self the other Cornet of Gens-d'armes, which was carried by Monsieur de Berdusan the Seneschal of Bazadois. When we came to the Vines I saw we could not pass them to come to fight, and therefore took on the left hand under the Vineyards. Captain Montluc was about two hundred paces before me, who seeing us take on the left hand, they marcht on by the higher way before us, and when we were got clear of the Vines, and some ditches that were there, we saw Captain Montluc still making on to gain the top of the Hill, to whom I then joyn'd Monsieur de Sainctorens with his Harquebuzeers on horseback, and kept with me the Baron of Clermont, who also had some few. Now,The ight. so soon as we came within betwixt twenty and thirty paces of them, they began to fire, and not before, whereupon the Harquebuzeers of Monsieur de Sainctorens fir'd also, whilst in the mean time Captain Montluc charg'd full drive into the middle of all their Horse: I had an eye to him, and at the same instant a little on the left hand charg'd quite thorough their Foot, where we routed and put them to flight, but not without ha∣ving
first stood our shock, and maintain'd their ground. Their Horse seeing their  de∣feated, fled down the Hill all along by the Wood,The Hugonos defeated. and the Foot I enclosed in the Copse. Though being we had no Foot to do execution (for every one knows, that Horse do not stay to kill, but pursue the victory) there was not many men slain, yet though their loss was not very great, the reputation of the Victory was of as great advantage to us, as the shame of the defeat was prejudicial to them, and every one on our side began to take heart, as they, and those of their Religion began to lose it; boh Gentry and Common people now taking ams, and declaring for us. My Son had two horses kill'd under him, and was himself wounded in two places: both the horses were mine, and one of them was my gray Turk, which next to my children I lov'd above all things in the world, for he had three times sa'd my life, or at least my liberty. The Duke de Paliano had given him me at Rome, I never had, nor ever hope again to have so good a Horse as that was. The Prince of Conde would fain have had him of me, but I put him off as well as I could, for I saw that such a Treasure was not every where to be found. Monsieur de Seignan lost his, the Vcount d'Vza, and the Count de Candalle their's also; to be short, after the charge we rallyed upon the very place where we had fought, and found that in so great a necessity we could not make twenty horse to fight had the Enemy ral∣lied upon us, almost all the horses being either kill'd or shot, and above the third part of our men: but they had not the judgment to examine their own condition, nor ours nei∣ther; and I must needs say, it was one of the rudst and most furious charges, without a Battail, that ever I was in my whole life; neither can it be said, that they ran away for fear without being fought, fr they fac'd about upon us, either to give or to receive the charge, and in plain truth I did not expect to have found them so brave. We lost upon the place but one Gentleman call'd Monsieur de Vigneaux only; but two or three that were wounded died after of their wounds.The Enemy retires. From the top of this Hill we discover'd the Enemy marching off as fast as they could, and saw that they rallied still as they went, still getting further off from us; and then we began to etire, some on horse-back, and some on foot, for most of the horses were kill'd, and those that were not, were almost all fain to be led off, for they were wounded. I was in such a condition, that there was not a horse of mine to be found to remount me; so that had an hundred horse only return'd upon us, I had been a lost man, and the rest that were with me; for as for my part it was not to be hoped that all the world could have sav'd my life, these new Sains had such a malice to me above all others. This was the Engagement of Targon, which was very shameful for the Hugonots, con∣sidering that they suffered themselves to be beaten by a handful of men; and as we were returning back, the two Foot Companies arriv'd, who all day had run as fast as they could, and were ready to faint with excessive heat. Monsieur de Termes his Company, though they came at a good round trot, yet could they not possibly come up in time, for before Moncorneil could get to Seuve, which was a long league from the place where he left us, and they mount to horse and march another league and a half, which they must do to the place where we were, we had done our business, at which they were all very much concern'd, especially Captain Masses: I never saw man in so furious a passion, so that I was fain to enteat him to be quiet, and to hold his tongue, for he had a great mind to say more than I had a mind he should. And so we return'd back to Seuve, where we found Monsieur de Burie, who was but just come, and yet it was betwixt four and five a clock in the afternoon. He was glad to hear of our Victory, and I be∣lieve had made all the haste he could; but he was old, and old men cannot be so diligent as young. We cannot have it twice, I know it by my self. We here concluded that Monsieur de Burie should return to Bourdeaux to bring from thence three pieces of Canon, with which to go and batter Montsegur, and the other places the Enemy held upon the River of Garonne, to clear the River, that provisions might come into Bourdeaux, for they were in a manner reduc't to famine, and carry back with him the four Field-pieces, knowing very well that we should be no more in pro∣bability of a Battail, by reason of the Brush the Enemy had lately receiv'd; and that in the mean time I should march with the Army up the River towards Montsegur and Reolle, there to stay till the said Sieur de Burie should come with the Canon. But before we separated our selves, it was necessary to turn towards Bourg, being that one of the Sons of Montandre had possest himself of it, whose business it was to hinder all sorts of pro∣visions from going down the Dordgne to Bourdeaux, which we did, and when we came to the River near unto Cusc we caus'd our Cavalry and Monsieur de Sanctorens to advance be∣fore towards the Town, who coming before it, the said Montandre quitted the place, into which we put some few men, that we sent for from Bourdeaux. I then remonstra∣ted
to Monsieur de Burie, that we were to run a dangerous fortune, and that therefore it would be convenient for him to take the Castle of Blanquefort, which belonged to Mon∣sieur de Duras, and was his habitation, and retreat, and that in the mean time I would go seize upon the Castle of Caumont, which we did, and I garrison'd Caumont by the way. A thing that Monsieur de Caumont was by no means pleased withal, being afraid that I would make prze of all I found within it: but I was very far from any such intention, as I made it evidently appear; for though there were in it goods to the value of above an hundred thousand Francs, yet did he not lose the worth of one single penny, saving that the Count de Candalle, and Captain Montluc took some Chaples of Corel from the Warden of the Castle, and those with a receipt and an obligation to make them good. And yet if I would I might have taken all the goods in the house, and it had been law∣full prze, forasmuch as within it there had been a party of Hugonots, which had made a Sally upon our people coming from Bourdeaux, where Captain Sendat had his horse kill'd betwixt his leggs, which was a sufficient reason; for that was to declare himself an Enemy. At the same time we had intelligence brought us that the Enemy had abandoned Bazas, out of apprehension that we would pass the River, because they heard that Monsieur de Burie was reurn'd to Bourdeaux, and that I went up to la Reolle: and so they began to carry in some little Corn to Bourdeaux. I had notice that at Gironde there was three or fourscore Hugonots, that were retir'd thither upon the rout of Monsieur de Duras, whom I rapt,Justice xecu∣ted by the Seur de Mont∣luc. and without more ceremony hang'd threescore and ten at the pillars of the Town-Hall, which strook so great a terror into the whole Country, that in every place they quitted the Banks of the River, and led towards Marmanda, and Thoneins; to which place Monsieur de Duras was retreated to rally his scatter'd people, and recruit his Troops, and was forc't to remove from thence, and to retire to Dordogne. One might see all there∣abouts which way I had gone, the Trees upon the High-ways wearing my Livery. One man hang'd, terrified more than an hundred that were kill'd. The Queen of Navarre who was at Duras, after having heard of the defeat of Monsieur de Duras, departed from the Castle of Caumont (which was before I seiz'd upon it) where she had been, but made no stay,The Queen of Navarre a mortal enemy to the Seiur de Montluc. and retir'd into Bearn, and we came after to the said Castle of Caumont. God knows how dearly she lov'd me, and how she baptiz'd me, calling me the Tyrant, and all the ill names she could invent; but she was a Princess, and moreover a Woman, and conse∣quently not to be question'd. Being a Servant to the King, and a Catholick, I did my duty, and had every body else done so, we had never seen such doings as have been pra∣ctised since. Both I and mine have ever been most faithful servants to her and her Fa∣mily, but it was then when the Kings interest was not in question. Monsieur de Burie being come to Reolle with the Canon, we went to besiege Montsegur, and lay one night at Sauveterre, where I took fifteen or sixteen whom I hang'd every Mo∣thers Son, without the expence of paper or ink, or without vouchsafing to hear them speak; for these people would promise mighty matters, which they never intended to per∣form. Now in Monsegur there was betwixt seven and eight hundred men. The Town is ltle, but fortified with walls as good as good can be, and of a very advantageous situ∣ation. We besieg'd it on that side by the Tannery, where they drest their Leather. Mon∣sieur de Burie quarter'd himself in the Houses before the Gate which looks towards la Sau∣vetat, where there are great Towers, and I hard by him. Monsieur d' Ortobie and Frede∣ville, Commissaries of the Artillery would needs go view the Town in open day, where we wanted for no Harquebuz shot, and after the discovery had been made, we concluded to attaque it by the said Tannery. There was on that side a Gate of the Town, which they had lately covered with a Wall, and had let down the Portcullice, which the Wall cover'd, and within had cast up a Rampire of earth and rubbish. I made the approches by night, and lodg'd Bardachins Company in the Tannery. We let Monsieur de Burie take his rest, and presently after midnight our Artillery was planted upon a little Emmi∣nence overagainst, and within a hundred and fifty paces of the said Gate. Against the opinion of the said Commissaries I would try to see what was behind this Wall that co∣ver'd the Gate, and to that end caused some Fagots to be set on fire hard by the Gate; by the light whereof I caused five or six Canon shot to be made at the said Gate, which beat down all this new Wall; whereupon I sent Captain Bardachins Ensign all alone to disco∣ver the place. The Tannery was betwixt the Artillery and the Gate, and betwixt the Gate and the said Tannery there was a great Walnut Tree, behind which Captain Bardachin and I planted our selves, it being no more than five or six paces from the Gate, where the En∣sign came and brought us word that the thing we saw that look white was the Portcullice.
We thereupon made him to return back again, and to climb up the Portcullice; which he did, and at his return told us, that over the top of the Portcullice he had perceiv'd a Terrass within, but that it was but low, and a man might pass betwixt the Arch of the Gate and the Portcullice, creeping upon his belly. The Enemy could not see him, by reason of the fire, but we could who stood behind the Tree, and yet they made above twenty Harquebuz shot. I then sent in all haste to Captain Charry, to bring all the Companies without beat of drum, or making any noise, whom so soon as they came I made to squat close upon their bellies behind the Artillerie, bidding Monsieur d' Ortobie begin to shoot, though it was not yet day, and try to make a Battery hard by the Gate; when so soon as he had made two volleys, I sent away the said Bardachins Ensigne called Captain Vines, who had a Target upon his arm, a Morion upon his head, and a Coat of Mail with sleeves of the same; and after him two Harquebuzeers without Morions, who all went creeping with their bellies almost to the ground. Captain Vines began to mount the Portcullice, and Bardachin and I were again advanc't behind the Tree. The dawn∣ing of the day began to appear, and Monsieur d' Ortobie still continued firing at the Wall, and the Enemy advanced to entrench behind the Battery, which was on one side of the Gate, taking no heed at all to the Gate it self, as not suspecting the Wall which cover'd it was beaten down.Captain Vines enters the first into Montsegur. So soon as Captain Vines was got to the top of the Portcullice he gave his Target to one of the Harquebuzeers, and mounted upon the Rampire, after which taking his Target again, he drew in first one of the Harquebuzeers, and then the other, when seeing three to be got in, taking the advantage of the Thunder of the Ca∣non, I ran to the Tannery, making Bardachins Harquebuzeers one after another to march straight up to the Walnut Tree, and again my self return'd immediately behind it. At the next Volley I made Bardachin approach the Portcullice, having a Target and a Morion, and the Harquebuzeers one after another concealing their matches, when so soon as Bardachin had got five or six men about him he mounted the Portcullice where at the top his Ensign drew him in, and the Harquebuzeers one after another as they came: and still as the Harquebuzeers came behind the Tree I made them slip in, when seeing there was already twenty got into the Town, I my self drew up to the Portcullice. They within entred into a little Chamber of the Tower, to which there was two little doors, which open'd upon two pair of stone stairs on the right hand, and on the left, by which they went up and down on the inside of the Town to the said Tower. In the mean time I still put in more men, one after another, till Bardachin sent me word, that he began to be strong enough to be Master of the Tower, and that he was not as yet discover'd. Whereupon I sent to Captain Charry and the Baron of Clermont, that they should rise and come running all along a high-way there was that came directly up to the Gate; which they did, but before they could come up Bardachin was discover'd, where they be∣gan to fight, and to defend the stairs. Immediately upon which came the Ensigns of Captain Charry and Clermont, and mounted with all their men after them. The Enemy made good those stairs,Montsegur car∣ried by assault. but our people gain'd the top of the Tower, by the help of a little hand ladder they met withal, and were Masters of the inside of the Gate, when the Captains on the right and left ran desperately down the stairs, and came to dispute it hand to hand in the Streets. The Enemy once repuls'd our men, but in the end being overpower'd by numbers they retir'd, the Assailants falling in pell mell amongst them, till they came to the Market-place, where they found three hundred men in Battalia, who made head and disputed it for a time, but in the end were put to rout, and fled every man to shift for himself. I sent an account of all to Monsieur de Burie, but he had heard of it before, and he must needs know also by the Harquebuz shot that they were fighting; whereupon he sent some Gens-d'armes about the Town; but they could do nothing there. I took fouscore or a hundred Soldiers, and with them marcht round the Walls, so that as many as leapt over were dispatcht. The slaughter continued till ten of the clock, or after, because they were fain to ferret them out of the houses, and there was not above fifteen or twenty taken prisoners, whom we presently hang'd up, and amongst the rest all the Kings Officers, and the Consuls with their hoods about their necks. There was no talking of Ransoms unless for the Hangmen. The Captain who commanded there, was called Cap∣tain Heraud, who had formerly been of my Company at Montcallier, as brave a Soldier as any was in Guienne, and was taken alive. There were many who would fain have sav'd him for his valour, but I said, that if he should escape here he would make head against us at every Village, for I very well knew his courage, which made me hang him. Nevertheless he still thought I would save him, because I knew him to be valiant: but that made me the rather put him to death; for I was very well assur'd that he would ne∣ver return to our side, as knowing him to be a stubborn obstinate fellow, and moreover
besotted with this new Religion,The number of the dead. otherwise I would have sav'd him. We numbred the dead, and found them to be above seven hundred, all the Streets and the Walls were cover'd over with dead bodies, and yet I am sure a great many died without, of those who leapt over the Walls, whom I caused to be slain. Thus was Montsegur taken; but I believe it would have been a hard dispute, had we been put to have entred by the breach we were about to make, and yet it would have cost us above five hundred Canon shot before we could have made a Gap wide enough for two men to enter a breast only: for the Walls were built of admirable good stone, and ex∣ceeding thick, as strong as any whatever in the whole Province; and withal it had been a matter of great difficulty to enter, though the breach had been never so sufficient, they having means to entrench themselves within, and I do believe they would have found us work, and it would have been a Mart of honor both for them and us; but it was better as it was. Two dayes after, we went to besiege the Town and Castle of Duras, in which there was a hundred and fifty men. All night long I never rested to lodge the Artillery to batter the Town; for to batter the Castle was a thing of extraordinary difficulty, unless on that side of the Garden behind it, and there also it was very hard to bring up the Artillery: which made us conclude, that it was better to attaque the Town, and afterwards from within to batter the Gate of the Castle; when so soon as I had made all things ready, they call'd to us to know if Monsieur de Burie was there, to which they were answered, that he was quarter'd at the Farms two or three Harquebuz shot distant from the Town: but that I was at the Artillery; whereupon they desir'd to know if I would give them leave to come out in safty, which I promised they should, and so they came to speak with me; but I referr'd them to Monsieur de Burie.Duras surren∣dred. The day began to break when they return'd, and they told me they had capitulated. Monsieur de Burie with some few with him presently entred into the place, but I entred not till eight of the clock in the morning, but laid me down to sleep after the Capitulation; for I wak'd when others took their rest. Mon∣sieur de Burie told me that there was nothing in the place, but a hundred and fifty Cor∣lets that belong'd to the King of Navarre, which the Warden of Thoneins a Hugonot had left there, intending to have carried them to their Camp, but that he was afraid of being snapt by the way. We caused them to be divided amongst the Captains to arm the Soldiers; and from thence Monsieur de Burie went to Bourdeaux, and I with the Army marched down tovvards Marmanda and Thoneins. Every one quitted the places they held for fear, so that I met with none but some few Catholicks; and from thence marcht di∣rectly to Clairac and Aguillon where I passed the River. And as I was passing it I halted before the said Town, because there were three or four thousand men in Agen, and I would go to environ them to trap them within it. Having then reimbarkt the three Ca∣non at la Reolle, which I made to mount up the River, it was night before I had passed over all the men, and as I was marching in the night I had news brought me from Agen, that in the beginning of the night they had abandoned the City, and were gone away to∣wards Montauban. I wondred that these people should be so damnably timerous, and that they did no better defend their Religion, they having not so much leisure as to take their prisoners along with them;Agen abandon∣ed by the Hu∣gonots. a sudden terror having surprized them, when they heard that I was at hand; for they no sooner heard my name, but they fancied the rope al∣ready about their necks. Those whom they had clapt up in prison were Messieurs de la Lande, de Nort, all the Officers of the King, and the Consuls, excepting the President of Agen, against whom they had no prejudice. These poor Officers, very honst men, had been two or three months detein'd in prison, in which space above a hundred times the ropes were presented before them to hang them up, so that I wonder they did not die for fear. Monsieur de Burie being arrived at Port St. Mari, we there and in the adjacent Vil∣lages quarter'd the Army, and from thence went with a few men only to Agen, where we found the City ruin'd; for these people where ever they came left sad marks behind them, and there we staid three or four dayes. Monsieur de Burie sent to Ville-Neufue, and to Montstanquin three Companies of Gens-d'armes, namely his own, that of Mon∣sieur d' Argence, and that of Monsieur de Carlus, Lieuenant to Monsieur de Vauguon. They sent to Monsieur de Burie to send them four or five hundred Foot, and that they would go and fight Captain Bordet, who was coming from Xaintonge with three hundred Horse, of which sixscore were Cuirasseers, and Lances all, the rest Pstolers, and Harque∣buzeers on horse-back, together with three Ensigns of Foot. I offer'd my self to Monsie de Burie for this service, who told me that he would go himself, and be engag'd in this action, and that he would go away at midnight. I would not contradict him lest he should
think that I had a mind to do all my self, and get an advantage over him, and therefore retir'd my self to Esillac to take some order in the affairs of my Family, hearing that my Wife was lately dead. The next day Monsieur de Burie was yet at Agen, and the next day after that, and in the mean time Bordet passed by, and marcht to get to Montauban, where Monsieur de Duras staid to expect him. I know very well that Monsieur d' Ar∣gence and his Companions advertized Monsieur de Burie in all haste to sent them the Foo they desir'd, that they might fight, and am very confident the falt was not in them: but Monsieur d' Argence is yet living, who is able to give an account where the fault lay, I have nothing to do to meddle, or make in the business. At my return back to Agen we concluded to go and assault the Castle of Pene; for du∣ring the time that our Company lay about Agen,Spanish Com∣panies. there came to us three Spanish Com∣panies commanded by Don Lewis de Carbajac, in the absence of his Uncle Don Iohn de Carbajac,The Siege of the Castle of Pene. who afterwards came and brought the other ten Ensigns. We attaqu'd the Castle in the Front of it, for we could batter it in no other place, it being very strong both in structure and situation; and there we made above three hundred Canon shot. They had here a great Terrass cast up within, and in the Terrass had made a Trench where the Sol∣diers lay to defend the Breach, which also was of very difficult access, because we were to mount by ladders from the Breach up to the Terrass. Novv vve had the first night taken the Town, for Captain Charry and his Companions had set fire to the Gates, which the besieged having long and bravely defended in vain, they all retir'd into the Castle. They might be within it about three hundred men; and I went to discover the Breach by the Houses on the right hand, which I caused to be pierc'd thorough, passing from one to ano∣ther till I came to the last, which was so near to the Castle, that there was no more than the way betwixt them; from whence I perceived an out-jut of stone at the flanck on the right hand in the Wall, and sent a Soldier creeping on all four to discover this place. He went up the half-way, and found that it was made, as if they had purposely left steps to go up by in that place; which having done, he came back to me, and upon his report I went immediately to Monsieur d' Ortoble, where we drew a piece of Canon a little on the right hand this place. We had enough to do to lodg it there, by reason that it was a very great Precipice that went down to the River; and from thence we shot side-wayes at this Wall, which being not very strong, was in four shots pierc'd quite thorough, so that one might see thorough the hole into their Trenches; whereupon I immediately went down,The Breac discover'd. and made the same Soldier climb up by those steps so far as to discover if the hole was over against the Trench, bidding him in no wise to discover himself; which he ac∣cordingly did, and brought me word, that they stood all in Battalia in the Trench, and that there was a great number of Corslets, as it was true. I then caused the Ladders to be brought, which I had made to be sought for in every place, and which might be some twelve or fifteen in all. Monsieur de Burie was with the Artillery, whither I went to con∣clude the Assault before him, entreating him that the Gascons might go on first, and the Spaniards after: but Don Lewis desir'd they might fall on together, which was also grant∣ed. In the mean time I made choice of four Harquebuzeers to mount these steps, for more could not stand upon the top to shoot thorough the hole into the Trench, when ours should give the assault to the Front of the Castle, and so I committed to them the assault. The Soldiers themselves took the Ladders, and I went to the forementioned steps with my four Harquebuzeers, when as the one were rearing their Ladders, the four went up by the steps, and at the same instant that the Spanish and Gascon Foot mounted the Ladder, the four Harquebuzeers fir'd into the Trench. They kill'd one of them, who tumbled down dead at my feet, and I sent up another in his room: but when the Enemy saw themselves kill'd thorough this hole,The Assailan repulsed. they retir'd into another Fortress, where they de∣fended themselves above three long hours, and twice repuls'd our people to the very Breach. Where I perceiv'd two things, though I had very well observ'd them before, the one that the Spaniards are not more valiant than the Gascons; and the other, that the brisk di∣sputes are alwayes made by the Gentlemen, for above five hundred Spaniards and Gascons were overturn'd either upon the Ladders, or down to the ground, yet must we not de∣prive those of their due honor, who worthily atchieved it; for though the Gascon Cap∣tains, and the Gentlemen of their Companies, all day bore the brunt of the fight, I will not say but that the Spanish Captains very bravely behav'd themselves, but in truth their Soldiers did very little. In the end I encourag'd our people, making them again to mount the Ladders, encouraging some, and threatning others, for I had my sword drawn in my hand, ready to have given them a cast of my Office, had I perceived any Polrons. But they all now began to do better both Spaniards and Gascons, insomuch that they gain'd the second Fort. The Enemy then divided themselves into two other Forts, namely the
great Tower, and another quarter of the house on the left hand. Now we were to go up a pair of stone steps into a base Court, betwixt the said Tower and the other Fort, so that our people were constrain'd to set fire to the Gate of the said Base-Court. On the top of these steps, and close by the Gate there was a corner on the left hand, where fifteen o sixteen men had room to stand. Captain Charry and the Baron de Clermont were in this place encouraging the men to shoot thorough the Gate into the Base-Court, and so soon as the Gate was burnt it fell down just in the Passage. I was upon the middle of the steps, when seeing the Gate fall'n down,Captain Charry leaps thorough the fire. I call'd to Captain Charry, that they should leap in thorough the fie, which they did without disputing the business, a man needed not to bid him twice, he fear'd not death. I pusht forwards those who were upon the steps before me, whether they would or no, and so we all entred in fury, but found no body in the Base-Court save Women and Maids, of which it was all full, even to the very Stables. Those of the Tower of the other Fort on the left hand shot at us in the Court, and kill'd five or six Soldiers. Captain Charry was there a little hurt, and the Sieur de Bardachin also. We made the Women go down by those stone steps, where the Spaniards who were at the foot of the stairs in the great Base-Court below, kill'd them saying they were Lu∣therans disguis'd. We redoubled the assault upon this Fort on the left hand both by a door, and by two windows that went into it, which we carried, putting all we found within it to the Sword. Now we were afterwards to assault the great Tower, and the Gate that was between. I there left the Captains who were not hurt in this Fort on the left had, and in the Stables to keep them penn'd in, and as fortune would have it, they had all their provisions in this Fort on the left hand, and none at all in the great Tower; and that was the reason that in the close of the Evening they surrendred themselves to the Captains upon Quarter for lif. The Spaniards were lodg'd in the Town, who knew they were surrendred, and that in the morning our Captains were to bring them to Monsieur de Burie and me▪ who were quarter'd in the House of Monsieur de Cathus a Harquebuz shot from the Castle. Monsieur de Pons lay there also, being come with Monsieur de Bu∣rie, and so soon as the Prisoners came, who might be forty or fifty in number, we deliver'd them to fifteen or twenty Soldiers in guard; but the Spaniards came and took them from those fifteen or twenty Soldiers, and kill'd them all excepting two servants of Madam la Mareschalle de St. Andre, that I had kept at my lodging; so that of all these three hun∣dred men there was not a man escaped, saving these two that I sav'd, and another that went dowe the Wall of the Castle by a Rope, and swam the River, who had also a great many Soldiers at his heels plying him all the way with their Harquebuz shot, but he mira∣culously escap't in despight of them all. His hour was not come, for he had an infinite number of shots made at him, but none of them had the fortune to hit. I here perceiv'd that Don Lewis his men were for the most part raw rascals; for old Soldiers do not use to kill Women, and these kill'd above fourty, at which I was furiously angry. Their Captains were sorry for and asham'd of the action, but they could not help it, for they said they were Lutherans in disguise, because having been fumbling with one of them to lye with her, they had found that it was a beardless Deacon, who had disguis'd himself in wo∣mans clothes.Pene taken by assault. This was the taking of Pene, which was of no little importance, as being an extraordinary strong place, and in a good Country upon the River, where a great ma∣ny Rogues were dispatcht out of the way, whose bodies serv'd to fill up a very deep Well that was in the Castle. It may truly be said, that every one here play'd his part, as al∣so did Monsieur de Burie, who never stirr'd from the Canon, but took as much pains as any man of his age could possibly do, Now so soon as Captain Bordet was joyn'd with Monsieur de Duras, their Army began very much to encrease, forasmuch as those who before had forborn to declare themselves in expectation of the said Bordets coming, now that they saw he was come, conceiving a better opinion of their affairs, they repair'd boldly to the Army. The Enemy then being in this condition, we were one night afraid that they would take from us Moissac, or else Cahors, by reason that the Rivers were so low, that they were almost every where to be foarded, which made me tell Monsieur de Burie that it was necessary vve should spee∣dily send avvay some men to Cahors; for the vvater being every vvhere to be foarded o∣ver, they vvould at the very first carry the Tovvn, there being no body there but the In∣habitants only to defend it; vvhereupon he presently made choice of Monsieur de Sain∣ctorens vvith fourscor or a hundred Light-horse he had besides his Foot Company, vvhom I entreated to make all the haste he possibly could, and never to rest day nor night, till he had put himself into the place.The Sieur de Sainctorens sent to relieve Cahrs. I made account that from the place vvhere the Enemy lay he vvould go in eight hours to Cahors, and (as God vvhen he pleases vvill prevent the evil from coming to pass) vve had nevvs brought, and did believe it, that the Enemy vvas
design'd for Moissac, and had no thought of Cahors at all. Monsieur de Sainctorens made very great haste without either stop or stay, unless to eat a little bread, and drink a little wine, he had caus'd to be carried along with him for the Soldiers by the way; and also it stood him upon to lose no time. He was to go very near to their Camp, and as he marcht by night, the Enemy at the same time did the same, so that in the morning by sun-rise, just as he was got over the River, the Enemy came to the water side, so little had he the start of them, and so narrowly they mist of him. At his coming to the Town he found all the people in so great a terror and confusion, that they were forsaking the Town to fly to the mountains for safety; but at his coming they took courage; and immediately without entring into any house, Monsieur de Sainctorens went out to skirmish, and put himself upon the passage of the River to defend it, for he had very good men, and it was also the first Company that had been rais'd. All day the Enemy was hovering about the River, making a shew as if they intended to pass it, and I believe staid for the rest of the Army, who were marching after them; but made no attempt to pass. At last the night drawing on, Monsieur de Sainctorens fortified himself with Barrels, logs, and stones, and such materials as he could find; wherein the whole City were employed at work, and plied it so well, that in the morning the Enemy saw there would be no good to be done; so that the remainder of their Army coming up to them, they all quarte'd themselves in the Villages nearest to the River, and there some dayes remain'd without making any further attempt. In the mean time we went to Moissac, to which place Monsieur de Burie had caused two great Culverins, and two Field-pieces to be brought from Bourdeaux, and where we left the three pieces of Canon, and marcht toward Caussade, Mirabel, and Realville;The Sieur de Malicorne sent by the King. to which places their Camp was retir'd. A little before this the King had sent to Monsieur de Malicorne, to give us an account how affairs stood in France, and al∣so to bring him word in what posture they were with us. In two or three dayes we came to Mirabel, during which I could not make it sink into Monsieur de Buries head, that we vvere to make haste to snap the Enemy, there being some who continually laid diffi∣culty upon difficulty before him. All of us vvho vvere there, and vvho are yet living, must needs confess that vve vvere all troubled at him, and at this cold proceeding of his, because he had ever had the reputa∣tion of a ighting man, and was reputed a great Captain, of which he had also upon se∣veral occasions given sufficient proof: where as we found him so heavy, and s slow, that it appeaed to every one as if he avoided fighting only to give the Enemy opportunity to escape out of our hands, insomuch that he stood highly suspected to many, both by rea∣son of this supineness and remiss way of proceeding, and also for that almost all his Ser∣vants, especially a Secretary of his, whom he extremely lov'd, were Hugonots. A Servant of his a Basque, whose name was Hactsé, told us, that would Monsieur de Burie have gi∣ven ear to him he should have chang'd his Servants, knowing very well that they rendred him suspected, especially to the Spaniards; and in truth it was intollerable, by reason of the jealousie we all had, that the Enemy had perpetual intelligence of our designs; for I never knew any of that party, how moderate soever they might seem to be, that did not hear∣tily desire the King's ruine. As for my own part I do really believe that never any ill entred into his heart, and that which made him deferre things so, was only the continual buzzing him in the ear, that I would make him lose himself. So soon as we came to Pecornet, which belongs to Monsieur de Thoneins, Monsieur de Burie vvould take up his Quarters there, and I with my own Company, and a good Troop of Gentlemen marcht on straight to Mirabel, sending my Son upon the Forlorn Hope before; who coming to Mirabel, found the Enemy newly risen from their Quarters, and marching away towards Caussade, where he fell upon the Rear, and defeated a Troop, the rest putting themselves into two or three houses, vvhich being near unto Caussade, where their vvhole Army was, and he having no Foot vvith him, he was constrain'd to let them alone, and to retire to Mirabel, where I staid to expect him. Now I had sent to Monsieur de Burie to entreat him to come and quarter at Mirabel, it being no more than a league only from Pecornet; to which he sent me answer back, that the greatest part of the Army was already settled in their Quarters; vvhereupon I vvent my self in all haste, vvhere at my coming I found that he had already taken up his lodging in a Grange belonging to Monsieur de Thoneins: but vvith the help of Messieurs de Malicorne, d' Ar∣gence, and other Captains of Gens d'arms, I prevailed so far upon him, that vve per∣swaded him to march. I never (as I have already said) vvhat reports soever vvere made of him, suspected him in the least, but ever attributed his low and wary proceeding only to his fear of misadventure, being unwilling to hazard any thing, as knowing very well, that should he lose a Battail, the Country would be totally lost, and on the other
side, h saw also that the Enmy was going into France: but I alwaies said it would be a good service to the King to defeat them before they should joyn with their Confede∣rates there, and that a hundred Rebels and Traitors would never dare to stand ten honest men. He wuld often complain of me to Monsiur de Courré his Nephew, saying that one time or another I would make him to lose all, and consequently the Province of Gui∣nne would be lst to the King; so that as to my own particular I durst answer for him, that it was this apprehension only that restrain'd him; for he was neither corrupted nor dsloyal to his Master, and neither wanted courage, nor conduct; but he would hazard nothing, which was a great fault in him. Twice that night we sent out Parties to discover the Enemy at Caussade, which was no more than half a league distant from us, and the second time it was by Monsieur de Ver∣dusa my Ensign, who fell upon one of their Courts of Guard. Now I would fain have bat up their Quarters in the night: for all their Army lay without the Town, and far enugh from ne another: but it was impossible ever to perswade Monsieur de Burie to it. The next morning I went with the King of Navarrs Company, that of Monsieur de Termes, and my own, to discover, taking Monsieur de Malicorne along with me, and fund that there was some Harquebuzeers in the Town, vvho shot at us. Now Monsieur de Duras and Captain Bordet vvere gone to Montauban, it being but two Leages thither, and had left there all the good Horse, that Captain Bordet had brought, behind them; Monsiur de Duras and he having taken only ten or twelve along vvith them, and had lain all night at Montauban; by reason of whose absence they never offer'd to appear, and were in very great fear, lest all our Army should come down, it being from Mirabel to Realville, no more than a quarter of a league. We dallied there above two hours be∣fore the Town, not knowing that these people were within it: 'tis true the Country people told us, that Monsiur de Duras was gone the day before to Montauban, but they did not know vvhether or no he might not be return'd.Consultation abou the Bat∣tal. At night we return'd to Monsieur de Burie, and entred into Councel, to which vvere called all the Captains of Gens d'arms, and Don Lewis de Carbajac also, vvhere vve fell to debate, vvhether the Walls being of no strength, vve should not go vvith the two great Culverins, and assault them in Caussade. To which proposition some said I, and others no; but in the end the Negative voices carried it, which so soon as I perceiv'd, I made a motion, that after dinner vve should descend into the Plain, and there draw up in Battalia, by which I said we should produce two effects; the first, that we should by that means discover the strength of the Enemy, and discern by their countenance whether they were in fear, or no; and secondly we should order our men as if they were to fight, and separate our Harquebu∣zeers from the Gens d'arms, so that every one might know his own place when we came to fight, which we could not do where we were quartered; by reason that there was no even ground. This in the end was concluded of, and agreed, that so soon as we had eaten a little we should mount to horse. All the Gentry, which was a sprightly and brave Troop, retir'd with me, and we soon dispatcht our dinner; after which I sent away a Gentle∣man to Monsieur de Burie to give him notice that I began to march to take my place in the field; when presently there came Monsieur de Malicorne, who had been present at the first deliberation to tell me, that Monsieur de Burie was resolved not to come down into the Plain, nor to suffer the Army to do it, and told me moreover, that those whom I thought to have been the most forward to have stood to the former resolution, were the first who retreated, and were now of a quite contrary opinion; which is an abominable thing, that men should out of respect to authority go contrary to their own sense. I entreated him that he would go back again, and remonstrate to Monsieur de Burie the great error he com∣mitted in not ordering our men as they ought to fight, and that I would engage my ho∣nor to him we vvould not fight, but only observe the countenance of the Enemy, and play upon him vvith our Artilerie in case they should present themselves on the other side of the River: but I had something else in my thoughts, and had I seen a fit opportunity, vvould have come so near that it should not have been possible to have retir'd vvithout fighting. Hovvever the said Sieur de Malicorne absolutely refused to go, saying that he had already said all he could to perswade him, and vvould meddle nor make no more in the business, and I perceiv'd vvas very angry, though he forbore to say all that he thought. I therefore sent Monsieur de Madaillan, but Monsieur de Malicorne staid vvith me, and vvould no more return. We then march'd and pass'd before his Lodging, all of us ho∣ping that vvhen he savv us upon our march, his humour vvould come about, and that he vvould come, and so soon as vve vvere come into the bottom vvere avvare of the Compa∣nie of the King of Navarre, and the Mareschal de Termes, commanded by Captain Arne, and Captain Masses, vvho told me that Monsieur de Burie had sent to protest against
them if they came dovvn to me, but they had return'd him ansvver that before dinner they had concluded to descend into the Plain, and that for their parts they vvould stand to the first resolution, that I vvas there already, and that should the Enemy come out to fight me, they vvould share in the sport. He protested also against the other Captains (I have heard since, that Don Lewis vvas one of those vvho alter'd his opinion) and particularly against Captain Charry the Camp-master, vvho thereupon left him the Com∣panies, and came himself alone to find me out, and to run the same fortune vvith me. In short vve vvere all in divison, vvhich is an unruly Beast vvhen it once gets into an Army; and therefore you, vvho have the command of Armies as much as you can oppose its entrance, for if it once get a foot within the door, it is very hard to thrust him out a∣gain. The Enemy departed from Caussade, taking their way directly to Realville, to escape tovvards Montauban, vvhen so soon as they came into their side of the Plain, they vvere aware of me, and made a halt: after which they began to put themselves into Battalia, and were above a long hour in doing it, by which I very vvell perceiv'd they were but raw Soldiers, and that their orders were either not well given, or not well obeyed. They durst not venture a step further upon their march, fearing lest I should charge them in the Rear, and so we stood facing one another above four long hours with a little River betwixt us. I would not suffer some Harquebuzeers on horseback that I had to make any attaque upon them, to the end that Monsieur de Burie might see that I had no mind to fight un∣less he himself was there, hoping that his knowing us to be so near would bring him out into the field, but all signified nothing, and so we were constrain'd to retire from thence. As we were retreating towards Mirabel some of their Cavalrly that was in Realville, and that before had not dar'd to shew their heads pass'd the River (which were Captain Bor∣dets men) they had all white Cassocks, which were the first that I had ever seen, but so soon as they saw us face about upon them, they turn'd back again to repass the River, and in our sight crost the water above Realville, taking the way to Montauban. I then retir'd to my Quarters as angry as ever I was in all my life, that we had lost so fair an opportuni∣ty of fighting the Enemy, and what promise soever I had made to the contrary, had the gross of our Army come down to us, we would have had a brush with them, and I would (as I have already said) have approacht them so near, that it should not have been possible for either side to have retir'd without fighting. In the Evening Monsieur de Burie sent to me to know if I would come to the Council, which after many entreaties, with much ado I did, but they had much ado to perswade me to it. Where being come, I remonstrated to him what a piece of cowardize we had committed, who thereupon told me, that it had not stuck at him, we had not fought; but he did not go without an answer. Messieurs de Malicorne and d' Argence are both of them yet living, who I believe can better remember what I said than I; for I was scarce∣ly my self, I was so transported with passion. To be short, in this huffe I left him and his Council, upon which occasion he shewed himself to be wiser than I, and more pati∣tent to bear with my imperfections, and I do believe in his conscience knew himself to be in fault. At night Captain Masses, Arne, and I, with my Company, and the Gentlemen went out thinking to find the Enemy on this side the River Labeyron; not ima∣gining the passage being very dangerous and bad, that they would offer to venture over in the night; but so soon as ever they came to the water side they hurried over in great dis∣order, and went to gain a Wood near unto Montauban call'd le Ramier. Captain Masses and Captain Arne met with some who staid behind in the Farms on this side the River, as being afraid to venture over, having seen some of their men drown'd in the passage, and those they took an order withall for drowning, and so we return'd back without being able to do any thing more; having resolv'd to have fought could we have met with them, though it had cost us all our lives, and I do believe that the rage wherein we were, would have redoubled our Forces to have fought them to some purpose; if but in spite to have let the shame and reproach at their doors, whose gums were so tender they would not bite. The Farmers assur'd us that they would neither stop nor stay till they came to Montauban, which was the reason we did not pass the River, and they moreover affirm'd, that had a hundred horse only come in, when they began to foard the River, they had defeated them all,The strange fear the Hugo∣ns were in. or they would have drown'd themselves, they were in so great a fright, and that a great many of them were drown'd upon a false alarme, Horse and Foot throwing them∣selves desperately into the River to escape away. And this was the fine piece of cowar∣dize we committed, which never went off my heart till after the Battail of Ver, that we fought a little while after. Me thought the very stones lookt upon us, and that the Peasants pointed at us; for we had here a much better opportunity to have done their bu∣siness, than we had afterwards at Ver.
I was in so great a rage, that I was very near going away from Monsieur de Burie in the morning, and had it not been for the Captains and Gentlemen, who were with us, and disswaded me from that resolution, I had done it, being very sure that the greatest part of the Army would have gone along with me: but he that of all others most pre∣vail'd upon me to stay was Monsieur de Malicorne, who remonstrated to me, that the King would take it highly ill at my hands, that all things would go amiss, and that afterwards all the blame would be laid upon me, which would be sufficient to pull down upon me the Queens hatred and indignation, and ruine me for ever. As for my own part I had a minde to have pursued the Warre after my own way, wherein I fancied at least I should succeed much better, the business of Targon evermore running in my mind, where I had defeated them with so few men; and I had also an opinion that the Sieurs d' Argence and de Carlus would go along with me, although they came with him. Nevertheless I suffer'd my self to be govern'd by the said Sieur de Malicorne, and the rest who reconcil'd me to him; for my anger though it be suddain and violent, is none of the worst sort, and besides he was the Kings Lieutenant. He was pleased upon our reconciliation to assure me, that upon the first occasion that should present it self he would lay aside all fear of losing the Province, and resolutely fight them; and that which made him bear with my rough humour was, that he knew all my heat proceeded from the zeal I had to his Majesties service, which made me talk after that disrespective manner, neither had any thing else restrain'd him but only the fear of disaster, being certain that the King would lay all the fault to him with whom he had entrusted the Government and care of the Province. Oh 'tis an ill thing when a Lieutenant of a Province is alwayes in fear of losing;A fault in a Lieutenant of a Province. in the name of God be as cautious as you will when you are to keep a place, raise fortifica∣tions as high as Heaven if you can, watch, ward, and still be jealous of surprizes: but to have sufficient Forces, and evermore to be in fear of losing, this favours of I know not what, and believe me (Lord Lieutenants) 'tis an ill Omen. For my part I was of a quite contrary humour; for I evermore saw that if the affairs of Guienne went well, those of France would succeed the better, and if we defeated the Forces on this side, we might afterwards go over into Languedoc, and by that means frustrate the Prince of Condé from having either men or money out of those two Provinces. A few dayes after Monsieur de Malicorne return'd back to Court, and I believe ac∣quainted the King with what he had seen, which I presume was the reason of his Maje∣sties sending Monsieur de Monpensier into these parts, having heard that there was no ve∣ry good intelligence betwixt Monsieur de Burie and me. A thing very prejudicial to the service of those we serve, and I should never advise that the supreme power be divided betwixt two, for an indifferent Captain will do better alone, than two good ones in joint Commission. It is true that I took more authority upon me than the King inve∣sted me withall; and perhaps it was necessary so to do; there are enow that can witness it. Would to God the King had taken the same course in this last War, he did here in send∣ing Monsieur de Montpensier, which if he had, there would perhaps have been a better account given of his service in this Country; neither was I single in this opinion, for I was very well accompanied, and with men of the best understandings. And I would alwaies advise his Majestie, that when ever he shall hear of any division in an Army, evermore to send away a Prince of the blood to command in chief, and the sooner the better, before the division have got any great footing to endanger his affairs: for af∣ter it is once establish, and that the disorder is once hapned, it is never to be remedied but with great difficulty and dammage; or by separating those who disagree, which also is not to be done without great inconvenience, considering that both the one and the o∣ther must needs have many friends and servants depending upon them. A little while after Monsieur de Burie propos'd an Enterprize,The Siege of Montauban. which was to goe and lay Siege to Montauban on that side towards Tholouze, and that in order thereunto we should return back to Moissac, and there pass over the River; and to this end he caused another Canon and another Culvein to be brought from Bourdeaux, and took the way directly to Moissac. I was resolv'd to let him alone without contradicting him in the least (having made a vow not to speak a word) to see what he would do, though I was certain beforehand that his Enterprize would vanish in smoke and come to nothing; for seeing we had not dar'd to fight them in the field, what hopes could we have of doing any good upon them in a Town, and such a one as that was? Nevertheless I followed as others did, and we came to the Bourg, where we staid seven or eight daies, having spent some Canon shot against the Tower of the Bridge where there was a Church the Enemy had fortified. In short I know not at which end to begin to give a Narration of this brave Enter∣prize,
neither can I make of it either good Pottage, or good Broth, and therefore I con∣ceive it better without saying any more to let it alone, and only to tell you, that after these seven or eight days, it was resolved that we should retire to Montech. At our coming to Moissac, I had there intelligence, that those of Lectoure had taken the Field, making prodigious havock, and committing infinite insolences upon the Gentle∣men and their Estates, in all places where they could get in, and that they expected Forces out of Bearne, that Captain Mesmes was bringing into them, being five hundred men. Their design was to make a flying Army, which was the reason that I sent back Captain Montluc with part of my Company; upon which occasion the Count de Candalle, the Sieurs de Cançon, de Montferran, Guitinieres, and some other Gentlemen would needs bear him company; Captain Parron also went along, taking with him the Company of the Baron de Pourdeac commanded by Captain la Rocque d' Orman, for the Baron himself had some dayes before this been wounded in a skirmish Captain Montluc had made be∣fore Lectoure. So soon as they came to Florence they understood that the Begolles, Ne∣phews to Monsieur d' Aussun, were the Heads of those who were gone out of Lectoure, and that they had taken their way directly to Sampoy to go meet the said de Mesmes, who was to be that morning at Aiguetint. Monsieur de Baretnau, who was raising a Foot Company hapning to be there, went to put himself betwixt Terraube and Lectoure, be∣cause they there intended to fight them: but the Enemy having intelligence of his depar∣ture from Florence, thought to return back to Lectoure, and also because they had notice that Captain Mesmes could not that day come to Aiguetint, when having passed Terraube to return to Lectoure; they saw they must of necessity fight Captain Montluc by the way, who had intercepted their retreat, which rather than do they would return to Terraube; though they could not do that neither, but so as there was some skirmishing at the en∣tring into the Town, and had they had but five hundred paces further to go, Captain Mont∣luc had defeated them before they could have got in. He then dispatcht away to Auch, Florence, la Sauvetat, la Sampoy, and as far as Condom for succours to come in to besiege them, which every one did, so that there came in to him above two thousand men. He dispatcht away a Courier to me also in all haste, giving me to understand, that if I would come thither with the Artillery, we might take Lectoure, for that all the good men that belong'd to it he kept shut up in Terraube to the number of four hundred men, together with the two Begolles, Nephews to Monsieur d'Aussun, who were also coop't up with the rest. I shewed the Letter to Monsieur de Burie, and we had some dispute upon it, he being unwilling to suffer me to take any of the Foot Companies, but in the end he granted me the Baron of Clermont my Nephew, to whom I had given a Company of recruit, and Monsieur d'Ortobie, and de Fredeville immediately yoked three pieces of Canon; and went before to Moissac to prepare the Boats, so that when the Canon came they found the Boats all ready, and all night long we did nothing but pass the River. I then sent a Quarter-Master from Village to Village to get Oxen ready to relieve the others, which ha∣ving done, I gallop'd away before, and found that Captain Montluc had besieg'd the Town, and that the four hundred men which were in Terraube had surrendred to him up∣on Quarter for life. Captain Mesmes advanc't as far as the River Baise within a League of the said Terraube, when hearing the others were besieg'd, he went back the same way he came, and retir'd himself into a little Village called Roquibrune near unto Viefezensac. My Nephew Mon∣sieur de Gohas, who had been Lieutenant to Monsieur de la Moth-Gondrin in Piedmont, and had married his Daughter, hearing of his motion, had taken the Field with some Gentlemen his Neighbours, and some Country-fellows, whom he had call'd together by the ringing of a Bell, and putting himself in his Rear had constrain'd him to take into Ro∣quebrune for his safety: where the Peasants impatient of lying all night to besiege him, al∣most all of them stole away, so that Captain Mesmes went away in the morning towards Bearn, from whence he was come, to tell his friends there the news of the fine frights he had been in. Now Monsieur d' Ortobie made so good haste, that the next morning two hours before day he was got over the River, and come before Lectoure. At break of day, he, Monsieur de Fredeville,Lectoure be∣sieged. Monsieur de la Mothe-Rouge, and I went to view where we should plant the Artillery, and concluded to plant it on a little Hill on that side by the River, where there was a Windmill, to batter the Town on that side by the Fountain. And here we bat∣tered it all day long, and to so good effect, that a Breach was made betwixt seven and eight paces wide. They had entrencht themselves within, and had Bastion'd the ends of the Streets with the way that went all along by the Wall, and pierced two or three houses that lookt into the Breach. In the interim that the Canon was batterng I was busie
causing Ladders to be made wherewith to assault the Bulwark that lanckt the Breach, to hinder those that mann'd that Bulwark from shooting into the Breach: but being they had environ'd the Bulwark with Pipes and Gabions fill'd with earth, and that also the Breach was not yet reasonable, I would not this night do that which I did the night after. The next morning I caused the Artillery to play upon these Pipes and Gabions, and to widen the Breach, and lay it lower, and the night following we put our selves into Ca∣misdo, where I ordered that Captain Montluc should assault the Breach with the two Cmpanies of the Baron de Clermont, that of the Baron de Pourdeac, and such Gentlemen as would go along with him, of which the Count de Candalle was one, a young Lord full of noble courage, who also has since lost his life in a Breach in Languedoc, as I have been told; and as for me I was by the Ladders to storm the Bulwark, with the Sieur de Batternau's Company, and another with my own Company of Gens d'arms, whom I had dismount∣ed for that purpose. This order being concluded I caused them to take up the Ladders, putting Captain Montluc and his men before, and marching my self in their Rear, to see what would be the issue of their assault, and after me came the Ladders, and my fellows. They carried the Breach with very great boldness and bravery, entred thorough it, and be∣gan to dispute the Rampires they had cast up in the streets, and were already almost Masters of one. Now the Enemy the night before had made a Ditch betwixt the Breach and the Ram∣pires, and had put a very great train of powder into it, to which they were to give fire from within a House in the Town. We set up our Ladders, and two Ensigns mounted up to the very top of the Bastion: I was making the Soldiers still to mount, and to rear the rest of the Ladders, when just as our people of the Breach were as good as Masters of the Rampires, some of those who came after, clapping a foot into the ditch of the Train, which was cover'd over with Bavins,A mine sprung at Lctoure. began to cry out we are in the Train, and took such a fright, that they overturn'd one another upon the Breach. Upon this accident, the for∣most who were diputing the Rampires, had no other remedy but to retire, and there Cap∣tain la Rocque was hurt, Lieutenant and Kinsman to the Baron de Pourdeac, who died the next day, one of the bravest Gentlemen that these fifty years has come out of Gascony. Others also were slain there, and some of those were hurt who storm'd by the Ladders; when seeing those of the Breach retir'd, I also drew off mine, very glad to have escap'd so good cheap; for had they sprung the Mine in time, they had made a terrible Fricassee. The next day Monsieur d' Ortobie, the Governor of la Mothe-Rouge, and I went to view the other side of the Town towards the little Bulwark; but could find no place where we could convenienly plant any more than two pieces of Canon, for this Town (for a Town of War is one of the best situated in all Guienne, and very strong) and there also was the little Bulwark that flanckt the place where we had a mind to batter, which put us to such a stand, that we could not resolve what to do; so that about noon Monsieur d' Ortobie return'd to batter again by the Breach at some Flankers there were, because the next morning I was resolv'd to give an assault in open day, where as he himself was levelling a piece of Canon,The Sieur d' Ortobie mor∣tally wounded. he was wounded in the thigh by a Faulconet shot from the great Bulwark; which went very near to my heart, for he was a valiant Captain and an admirable Engineer. He died two dayes after. 'Tis of all others of our Trade a Com∣mand of the most danger; nevertheless in all Sieges where I have been, I was ever by the Canon, and fancied that all things did not go right, if I was not there. This Gentleman very well understood his business, which is very rare, and (as I have said) exceeding dangerous, and few escape of those who expose themselves too much. In the mean time the Enemy parlied, where it was agreed, that they should give me three of those within in Hostage, and that I should send them in other three, which they desir'd might be Messieurs de Berduzan;Troachery of the besieged. de la Chapelle, and another, who being accordingly advanc' near to the Gate, and that we expected the others should come out, thirty or fourty Har∣quebuz shot was fir'd upon them all at a clap, by which they narrowly escap't being slain, and one of my Trumpes was wounded; whereupon I caus'd them to call out to Bri∣mond, that this was not the faith of a man of honor, but of a Rascal; he excus'd himself, saying it was a Rogue who had begun it, and that I should soon see him made an ex∣ample. But the treacherous Rogues instead of executing justice upon the offenders, hang'd a poor Catholick at the Battlements, who could be in no fault at all. Now they were ever∣more asking to see me, saying they could not believe I was there, whereupon I was ad∣vis'd by some to shew my self; but they could never perswade me to it, and it was well
for me. Old Birds are not caught with Chast: suspect every thing from an Enemy, with∣out discovering nevertheless openly your mistrust. After the hang'd man was dead, they cut the rope, and let the body umble into the Graff; after which it was again concluded, that the same Deputies should go in, and their Hostages come out, for we believ'd, that he who had been hang'd was the man that had committed the treachery, and now every body went confidently into the street nea unto St. Claire, and in a Crowd to see what the Deputies did, and when the others would come out. The Enemy had levell'd and prim'd three or four pieces of Ordinance they had, and some Muskets exactly upon th Company, thinking that I was there; so that when our Deputies were again advanc't al∣most to the Wall, they began to fire their pieces directly at the Crowd, and there kill'd a Gentleman who liv'd hard by Agen call'd Monsieur de Castels, and hurt three or four others. I saw all this from behind a little Wall, and wondred that our Deputies were not kill'd, for they fired at them above threescore Harquebuz shot, but they got off, running as fast as they could drive▪ when seeing this treachey the second time practised upon us, I sent to tell them from behind the Wall, that since they had made so little account of their faith, and promises, I would make as little of mine, and accordingly sent Monsieur de Berduzan my Ensign, who was one of the Deputies, with my own Company of Gens-d'armes, and another of Foot to Terraube, to kill and dispatch all those that were there, giving him with him the Hangman to truss up the Chief, which he perform'd with a very good will (as he had reason, considering the foul play those of Lectoure had twice practised upon him) and after they were dead threw all the bodies into a Well of the Town, which was very deep, and yet so well fill'd, that a man might reach the bodies from the top with his hand,Their treache∣ry requied. which was a very good riddance of a pack of very great Rogues. They brought me the two Begolles, and two others of good Families of Lctoure, whom I caused to be hang'd upon a Walnut-tree by the Town in the sight of the Enemy, and had it not been for the honor I bore to the Memory of Monsieur d' Aussun, the Begolles his Nephews had fared no better than the rest: they were within two fingers breadth of it, for I had once given the word to dispatch them; but afterwards, I know not how, alter'd my resolution. Their hour it seems was not come, and as for the other two, had it not been to give those of Lectoure the pleasure of the spectacle, they had not been put to the pains of coming so far for their hanging, but had been lodg'd in the Well with the rest. The night following I began to remove my Artillery to the other side, where Monsieur d' Ortobie, the Governor of la Mothe-Rouge and I had discover'd, by which removal, which the Enemy was presently aware of, they perceived where I intended to begin a new Battery, and thereupon began to doubt they had not men enow to withstand an assault at two Breaches at once;The besieg'd pary, which made them desire to speak with Captain Montluc, who ac∣cordingly had some conference with Brimond, who told him, that he would capitulate, provided he would beforehand give him his faith to let them march out with their Arms,and and quarter for life. In the mean time the day appear'd, when at the imporunity of the Captains I granted their conditions,Surrender. for I saw very well I was not yet at the end of my task. When I parted from Monsieur de Burie I carried Monsieur de Sainctorens along with me, and Captain Gimond; but when I came to Moissac, I was there advertised by Mon∣sieur de Burie, that the Enemies Camp was upon their March from Montauban, and ta∣king the way towards Cahors, which made me send back Monsieur de Sainctorens and Captain Gimond, to put themselves into Cahors, where if Monsieur de Sainctorens had with great difficulty entred before, he found it much harder to do it now, which was the second time, that by great and extream diligence he saved the Town. The said Sieur de Burie sent me word also, that in case I saw I could not carry Lectoure in two days time, I should let it alone, and come joyn with him, for that without me he was the weaker party,The Spaniards mutiny. having since I parted from him lost four hundred Spaniards of the three Spanis Companies, who had mutinied, and were departed towards their own Country. I therefore sent a Genleman after these Spaniards, who being able to prevail nothing upon them, I was fain to send again Monsieur de Durfort de Bajaumond with letters and entreaties to reduce them to reason, which letters so stagger'd them in their ill taken reso∣lution, that they call'd a Council to deliberate what they were best to do. In my letters I told them, that I would not give the assault unless they were there, which so tickled their vain humour, and was taken so kindly by them, that they all resolved to turn back to me; so that just as I had sign'd the Capitulation, they arriv'd at Florence a league from Lectoure, which was upon a Friday. Into Lectoure I put the Baron de Pourdeac with his Company, for he was now come up to us with his foot bound up; and upon Saturday
morning I made all the Hugonots march out of Town, that every one might go whither he pleased; some whereof listed themselves into our Companies. They had never heard any thing of the death of their fellows at Terraube, till I had taken possession of the Town, and then expected to scape no better than the rest: but I kept my word with them. I then immediately sent away the Baron of Clermont with the five Ensigns I had, bidding him go and pass the River Garonne at Leyrac, and went my self to talk with the Spaniards in a great Meadow, where I promised to reconcile them to their Captains, remonstrating to them so many things,They are ap∣peas'd. that in the end they resolved to follow me; whom I left under the command of Monsieur de Durfort, and they marcht away with the five Companies to pass the River at Leyrac. The remainder of the day I spent in resettling the Clergy in the Bishoprick, and the Monasteries, and those of the Long-Robe in their Courts and Tribunals, leaving with the Baron de Pourdeac such orders as he vvas to ob∣serve for the Government of the Town. Which being done, on Sunday morning I went to dne at Stillac a house of mine own, and to lie at Agen, vvhere I vvas told that Mon∣sieur de Duras had taken the Castle of Marques belonging to the Bishop of Cahors, and the Bishop himself in it, vvhom he had carried away prisoner; vvhen having heard that Monsieur de Sainctorens had put himself into Cahors, they marcht avvay directly to Sar∣lac. I vvas told also that Monsieur de Burie followed after them, and moreover heard news of Monsieur de Montpensier, vvho vvas come to Bergerac, having vvith him the Sei∣gneurs de Candalle, de la Vauguyon, d'Estissac, de Lauzn, and de Chavigny. All Sunday and Sunday night our people were continually ferrying over at Leyrac, for there was but two Boats, so that they could not get over till near ten of the clock on Monday morning, by which means I could that night march no further than Villeufue; and there the Count de Candalle fell sick upon our hands, so that we were constrain'd to send him home to his own House, and Captain Montluc also, who had already had two fits of an Ague. Upon Tuesday the Baron of Clermont sent me word, that upon Monday he could march no more but two leagues, being hindred by the passage of the River, and that he was making all the haste he possibly could to Belvé, to which place I had appoin∣ted him to come: wherefore to give him some advantage, I marcht but three leagues on Tuesday morning, which was to Montaignac, near unto Montanquin. Upon Wednesday two hours before day I was on horseback, and went to bait at Belvé, where the foot Com∣panies began to arrive, and where I made them stay two hours, whilst I went before to Ciurac upon the Dordogne. There I was advertiz'd that Monsieur de Burie was at the Mirandes (which belongs to Monsieur de Caumont) with the Army, and that Monsieur de Montpensier was at Bergerac. Immediately upon my Quarters being made, a Gentle∣man of Cirac of the new Religion len me two of his Servants, one to send to Bergerac to Monsieur de Montpensier to give him notice of my arrival, and of the taking of Lectoure; of which till then he had heard nothing, and withall to tell him, that if he pleased to ad∣vance a little towards us, we might find means the next day to joyn, and to fight with Monsieur de Duras, who was encamped upon a little River called la Vezere, near unto Fages. I writ to Monsieur de Burie to the same effect, that he might by break of day pass the Dordogne, as I had already done: at which Monsieur de Burie was strangely a∣stonisht that I could be so soon there, considering that but two days before he had receiv'd intelligence from Agenois, that I was yet before Lectoure, and in danger not to carry the place. I had scarce made an end of my dispatches, when the Baron de Clermont arrived with the five Ensigns, and the Spanish Foot, whom I made to pass the River in two great Boats, and go to lye at Saint Subran near unto Fages, to which place they came not till two hours within night, and there found already quarter'd the Companies of Messieurs d Burie, de Randan, and de la Vauguyon; so that had it not been for Madamoiselle de Fages, Mother to Madam de Lioux my Sister-in-law, they had not that night got one bit of any thing to eat; but she shewed her self to be the Wife of a brave Captain, which was the late Mon∣sieur de Fages; for she not only gave them all the bread she had in the house, and seven or eight puncions of wine, but moreover did nothing else but make her people bake bread all night long, giving them all her Bacon, and other Provisions, without sleeping a wink of all night, and was never at rest till they had all eaten enough. In the Morning, which was Thursday, I foarded the River Dordogne (for the River was foardable here, and there in some certain places my Guides led me to) having with me in all not above fourty or fifty Light-horse, and upon my departure from Ciurac I re∣ceiv'd an answer from Monsieur de Burie, who sent me word that he was exceeding glad of my coming, and that I had taken Lectoure: but that nevertheless he was not of opi∣nion to pass the River Dordogne by reason the Enemy was stronger than we, and that
therefore it was our bst way to try to joyn with Monsieur de Montpensier, after which the said Sieur would himslf determine whether we should fight or no. This answer put me into a suddain ury, feaing we should do here as we had done before at Mirabel, and was advised by the Gentlemn who were with me to send to protest against him if he did not pass the River,Dispute be∣twixt Messieurs de Burie and de Montluc. and that I was my self gone with a resolution to fight: which not∣withstanding I did not think fit to do: but by Seignan one of my men at Arms, sent however to protst against Messieurs d' Arne, du Masses, and de Charry our Camp-master, who thereupon immediately went to Monsieur de Burie, and plainly told him, that as for their parts they were resolved to pass the River, and that they would not have it laid in their dish before Monsieur de Monpensier, whom we already lookt upon as our General, and immediately caused their Trumpes to sound to horse, whilst Captain Charry drew out his Ensigns of Foot into the ield. And then it was, that seeing no other remedy, he pre∣par'd himself to go. Captain Charry according to his custom put himself before with his Foot, and coming to the water side, suddenly made a Bridge of Carts, and passed over in all haste. I staid not at St. Subran under Fages, but only spoke with Messieurs d' Argence, and du Courre, enreating them to mount to horse, and telling them that I had writ to Monsieur de Burie to come, and that at noon we were to fight. They promised me they would mount to horse, but that withal they must of necessity send away a Messenger post to Monsieur de Burie to acquaint him with it. I then spoke to the Baron de Clermont imme∣diately to make his Soldiers eat something, and Monsieur de Durfort to do the same by the Spaniards, and presently to come away after me to the Ferry of Vezere, when as I was talking wih them, came Seignan (for he had gone away at midnight to go speak to Mon∣sieur de Burie) who brought me word that he had left Monsieur d'Arne, and Captain Masses ready to set out, and that Captain Charry was already passing the River. I then went before. Now from Fages to the Ferry at Vezere, it is no more than a good league, so that I was presently there, where I met with several Country people coming back from them, who told me, that the Enemy were dislodging from two or three Villages where they had lain that night, and that we were not above a league from thence. I passed the River, and at night sent out Monsieur de Fontenilles with two or three horse to scout. Messieurs d'Ar∣gence and de Courre had also sent out the Quartermaster of Monsieur de Randan, so that Monsieur de Fontenilles and he hapned to meet, where the Quartermaster assur'd him that he had seen the Camp dislodg, and upon their march, and (as God when it pleases him will sometimes assist some, and punish others) it was from the Quarters they rose from, but two little leagues only to Ver, and from Ver but two little leagues more to the passage of the River de l'Isle, where they had made account to pass over that day. But being they saw Monsieur de Monpensier was at Bergerac with very small Forces, and Monsieur de Burie at the Mirande, they would make no great haste, forasmuch as they had two good Quarters between: Ver for the Foot and the Artillery, and St. Andras and two or three other little Villages for the Horse; for they knew nothing of me: but it had been better for them to have consulted their ease less, and their safety more. Monsieur de Burie came having only two or three horse with him, and found me talking with the Quartermaster, who was telling me that the Enemy was going to pass the River de l' Isl as he had been told by a prisoner he had taken, and some Peasants that came from their Camp; and that from thence they were going into France to joyn with the Prince of Condé. I then told Monsieur de Burie, that it was necessary he should make haste and fight them that day: to which he made answer, that Monsieur de Montpensier would take it ill if we did not stay for him:The Sieur de Montluc's rea∣sons why they ought to fight. but I replied again, that he was so far off, it would hardly be possible for us to joyn that day, and that therefore we were not to forbear to sight out of that consideration; for should we suffer them to pass the River, and joyn with Monsieur de la Rochefaucaut, who waited with his Forces in expectation of them about St. Iean d'Angely, the King and Queen would never more look upon us as men of honor. I warrant you, said I, they are our own, my good genius tells me so. As we were in this dispute came Captain Charry, and I began to discover his men coming down a little Hll that shoots down on the other side towards la Vizere. I also saw the Cornets of the King of Navarre and Monsieur de Termes, and at the same time the three Cornets of the King of Navarre and Monsieur de Termes, and at the same time the three Cornets of Mon∣sieur de Burie, de Randn, and de la Vauguyon, at which I very much rejoyced, telling Monsieur de Burie that we must instantly march, and fall into their Rear, and that at the passage of the River e would sight them. To which he made answer, that it should not stick at him; but that if Monsieur de Montpensier should be displeased, or that matters did not succeed well, he would lay the blame upon me. To which I replied in the presence
of a great many, Sir, Sir, let every one charge the fault upon me, and spare not, I will bear the blame of all, my shoulders are broad enough, but I do assure you I will be loaden with honor, and not with shame, or be left with my belly toasting against the Sun. Whereupon Monsieur de Burie making a sign with his hand, said, let us go then in the name of God. In the mean time the Baron de Clermont and the Spaniards were passing the Vezere, where the water was deep to the middle of the thigh only, and Captain Charry return'd to pass over his; when still as the Foot got over they drew up in Battailia in a Plain there was in that place. The Captains Arne and Masses then came to me full gallop to embrace me, and all the Gens d' ams after them; Mssieurs d' Argence and du Courre, and de Carlus did the same, having already understood by the Quartermaster, that the Enemy was not far from us,Good oen for the Battel. and we all hoped, that within three or four hours we should fight. I have been in seven or eight Battails besides this, but never saw the Captains and Soldiers both Horse and Foot so chearful as at this time, which I lookt upon as a very good Omen. Now that I might stay to give all the Army time to pass over, and be drawn up in order to fight, I drew all my Horse along by the side of a Hedge, sending to a Farm hard by for a little hay wherewith to bait them, for every one had brought a few Oats along with him, and to say the truth,Commendati∣on of Monsieur de Burie. I never in my life saw Monsieur de Burie so pleasant as that day, which gave me sufficiently to understand, that all his delays had proceeded more from his appre∣hension of losing the Province, than from any defect in himself; and I dare answer for him, that neither treachery nor cowardize ever entred into his heart; for he was an old and a valiant Cavalier, and one that had ever given very brave testimonies of his worth and valour; but he was afraid of failing. I sent Monsieur de Fontenilles, and the foremention'd Quartermaster with thirty Horse to follow in the Rear of the Enemy: and my self, who might have some fifteen Curasseers of my own Company, and about thirty Gentlemen (betwixt forty and fifty Horse in all) marcht in the Rear of them, intreating Monsieur de Burie to follow after; and so we set forwards. Monsieur de Fontenilles had not gone above half a league, before in some certain Farms upon the way he met with some straglers of the Enemies Camp whom he cut to pieces. They had three Corners of Horse in the Rear of their Army, who some of them sometimes fac'd about upon Monsieur de Fontenilles, and now and then the whole Body made a halt. I still follow'd after him, sending Monsieur de Burie continual notice of all that past, and solliciting him withal to march as fast as he could, for that I was within sight of their Army; and so I marcht continually in the Enemies Rear, till about two of the clock in the afternoon, about which time there came to me Monsieur de St. Genies, the Father of Monsieur d' Audax, whom Monsieur de Burie had sent to me to enquire of my news, and to bring me an account of him; by which I found that he was still in the Plain of Vezere, where I had left the Army in Battalia, and he told m so many stories, that my joy was soon turn'd into vexation. I entreated the said Sieur de St. Genies, that he would return back to him, and entreat him to come away, which he refused to do, being resolved no to leave me; seeing which I took him aside, where we concluded together to speak to the Captains of Horse, and tell them plainly what we thought, which perhaps might en∣cline them to come away, and then he return'd, and found them yet in the same place, but after he had spoken to the Captains, and as a secret told Monsieur de Burie what had been concluded betwixt him and me,The Sieur de St. Genies cause of the Battel. he was then resolv'd to set forwards. And I must needs give Monsieur de St. Genies this due commendation, that he was the cause the Bat∣tel was fought. Thus then Monsieur de Burie marcht after me, with an intention to quarter all his Army at St. Alvare. About half a quarter of a league above the said St. Alvare, there were ten or twelve Houses that kept entertainment for passengers, and chiefly for the trading Mer∣chants, it being a great Road from Perigueux to Bergerac. So soon as I came to these houses, I joyn'd my self with Monsieur de Fontenilles, who shewed me that the Enemies Camp was taking up their Quarters on the further side of a little River in certain little Villages that lay before us; wherefore we were of opinion to bait our horses, for we found there Hay and Oats, but no people, saving some fevv poor vvomen, the Peasants being all fled avvay upon the report of the Enemies approach; and so soon as our horses had baited (vvhich they did vvith every man his bridle on his arm) there came a servant of Monsieur ' Alvare, vvho had been to vvait upon tvvo Nephevvs of the said Sieur, and the younger Bordet to their Camp, and told us that the Artillery and the Foot vvere quarter'd at Ver, vvhich is a great Bourg, and Monsieur de Duras vvith the Cavalry at St. Andras vvithin half a league of the place vve vvere, shevving us the Villages. We savv that there vvere three Cornets of Horse of them, and he told us that on this side, close by the River vvere quarter'd the Captains Saligna, Moncaut, and another vvhose name I have forgot, vvho
might have with them twenty or five and twenty horse only; but that the Village where the three Cornets lay was within less than two Harquebuz shot of the said house, and that he had left the said Salignc preparing a Supper for young Monferran, since called Lan∣goirau, Lepuch de Pardillan, and five or six others, whom he had left hawking in a field hard by, having brought their Hawks along with them. You may judge whether this was a time to hawk in, or no, and whether this was to march like Soldiers, when they had an Enemy so near. I then askt the fellow if he would guide me thither, to which having made answer that he would, we immediately mounted to horse. I gave half the Troop to Monsieur de Moterran to fall upon the House, and with the rest went to put my self betwixt the House and the Village where the three Cornets lay: but I would not give Monsieur de Fontenilles, who was quarter'd at an odd House at the end of the Village, notice of my design, because I intended that the Company should remain all night on horseback,The Enemy have ill inel∣ligence. and so we went, and came up to the House so little expected, that they never dreamt of an Enemy within two leagues of them. Monsieur de Montferran flew sud∣denly into the Court of the House, and at his first coming took Salignac and Moncaut, and forcing a lower room into which some of them had retir'd themselves, kill'd all they found within it. Monsieur de Canon was with me, and Monsieur de St. Alvare's Ser∣vant advised me to retire, telling me that the three Cornets in the Village were the best horse in the whole Army, it being Monsieur de Tors his Troop, who was come with Captain Bordet. I took his advice, and we retreated to the place from whence we came, where at my coming I found that Monsieur de Burie was passed by, and was gone to quar∣ter at St. Alvare, the Army going after in file. I staid the five Ensigns that had been with me at Lectoure, and the mutinous Spaniards, whom I quarter'd promiscuously among our Horse. Flesh, Wine, and Chesnuts we found store, and I got some great loaves of course brown bread they make in that Country, which I gave to the Spaniards; which being done without alighting, I went to wait upon Monsieur de Burie, taking Monsieur de Monferran only in my Company, who also carried Captain Salignac his Prisoner along with him. I found him lodg'd in Monsieur d' Alvare's Castle, where at my coming into the room I said to him, Look you Sir, I have taken one who was once in times past a great favourite of yours, Captain Salignac. He then demanded of we where I had taken him; I made answer in the Enemies Camp. He thought their Camp had been three leagues off towards the passage of the River de l' Isle, and askt me where their Camp was, where∣upon I told him it was close by, and that we were quarter'd promiscuously amongst one another. At which news he seem'd to be something amaz'd, when I took occasion to say these words to him, Sir you must now justifie the old Proverb to be true, That a good horse will never tire. In like manner you must resolve to fight to morrow morning, and send order to all the Gens-d'armes who are not yet alighted, that they must bait their horses with their bridles in their hands, and not a man of them to unarm; for we are come so near, that it is not possible to avoid fighting: In saying of which I was aware of Monsieur de St. Alvare, whom I saluted, desiring him to call in his Servant, whom he had sent along with his Nephews to conduct them to the Enemies Camp, who stood without, which he did, and being come in I entreated him to tell Monsieur de Burie where the Enemies Camp lay, which he accordingly did, place by place, and so exactly, that their own Quartermasters could not have given a more perfect account. Whereupon Monsieur d' Alvare said, you are quarter'd within four Harquebuz shot of one another, excepting the Infantry which lies at Ver, from whence 'tis a league and a half to St. Andras, where Monsieur de Duras is quar∣ter'd, and whose Quarters take up all the space betwixt St. Andras and this place. Well, said Monsieur de Burie, I see we are engag'd to a Battel, and seeing it is so, we must fight it as well as we can. Whereupon I saw joy sparkle in his eyes, which I was exceeding glad of,The Battel re∣solv'd upon. and taking him in my arms, said to him these words; Sir, if we must die, we cannot honor our deaths more, than by dying in a Battel for the service of our Prince, to which he made answer, and said, that is the least of my concern, 'tis no matter what becomes of me, but I fear to loose the Country. I then entreated him that by break of day, every one might be on horseback, and that we must say with the Italian, Qui assalta vince, and thereupon bad him good night, and retir'd to my own Quarters, leaving him very well resolv'd to fight. All night we remain'd in arms, and our horses sadled, their Centinels and ours being so near, that they could hear one another talk, and by break of day we were on horseback, when I sent to see if Monsieur de Burie was ready, and to tell him, that it was his way to pass by my Quarters. He sent me word, that as soon as ever the Army could be got ready to march, he would immediately come away, and in the mean time I marcht di∣rectly to St. Andras, where I found that Monsieur de Duras was already dislodg'd, and
gone to Vr. I then sent Monsieur de Fontenilles with five and twenty horse upon the Folorn, giving him order to halt at the entrance into a little Wood there is under Ver, and telling him that I would halt at a little Village four or five Harquebuz shots on this side, till Monsieur de Buire should come up to me. Monsieur de Duras this while made no haste at all, believing that our Camp was yet upon the Vezere, and that those who over∣night had taken Salignac were only some Avant-Coureurs of the Army. Monsieur de Fon∣tenills sent me word, that he had sent out two Light-horse to discover the Enemy, who had brought word back, that their Camp was drawn up in Battalia in the Meadow of Ver. Whereupon I sent to Monsieur de Burie to make haste, and to hasten away four Field-pieces he brought along with him, which he did, when so soon as I was advertised that he was▪ within half a mle of me, I marcht up to Monsieur de Fontenilles, and the three Companies of Gens d'arms, namely that of Monsieur de Burie, and those of Messieurs de Randan, and de la Vauguyon, advanced to come up, and joyn with me. But they mist their way, and went by the Chesnut Trees directly into the view of Ver, thinking that I was already at Vr, and never perceiv'd their error, till they were just upon the Enemy, having with them also a Company of Light-horse which Captain Pechié of Perigort com∣manded. So soon as I came to the Wood I commanded Monsieur de Fontenilles to ad∣vance, which he did, and it was well for us he did so, for he came just in the nick of a charge that Captain Bordet made upon the Companies with a hundred or sixscore Horse, Launceers all; which so soon as Captain Pechie's Light-horse saw coming upon them, they fac'd about, and fled amost into the three Companies. The Charge was so rude, that all our three Companies were once disorde'd,Commendati∣on of Monsieur d' Argence. and there Monsieur d' Argence bravely signaliz'd himself, but for whom, as I was told, they had all run away. Monsieur de Fon∣tenilles then with only five and twenty Launces that he had with him, charg'd desperately in amongst the Enemy, and so fortunaely, that he made them retire three hundred paces, where they made a halt as ours did also. Upon this I came in, seeing which the Enemy clos'd up with the other Troops of horse. There were above twenty Launces broken in this charge, and all the Enemies Camp made a halt. I then took Monsieur de Montfer∣ran only, and went to discover the Enemy at my ease, where I saw that they began to march wih Drums beating, that they had left in a corner of the field on the left hand Harquebuzeers both on foot and on horseback, and in a little Wood on the right hand Harquebuzeers on foot. In the mean time Monsieur de Burie arriv'd, where I acquainted him with all I had seen, entreating him to cause his Field-pieces to advance to the brink of a Ditch, and to shoot at those people in the Corner, which approving of my advice, he did; I then spoke to Monsieur du Masses to place himself on the right hand by the side of a little hill there was there, and placed the King of Navarre's Company, and my own on the left hand towards that Corner, as I also did the three Companies of Messieurs de Burie, de Randan, and de Vauguyon in the Meadow betwixt them. Monsieur de Burie then began to make his Ar∣tilley play, and so soon as we had put our selves into this posture, all our foot came up together, the Gascons before, and the Spaniards after within fourscore or a hundred paces of one another. I then rid up to the Spaniards, where addressing my self to Don Lewis de Carbajac, and the rest, I spoke to them in Spanish after the best manner I could; for du∣ring the time of the War I had learn't something of their language; and you Gentlemen who have Estates to allow your Children a liberal education, take it from me, that it is a very good thing to make them, if possible, acquainted with forreign Languages, which will be of great use to them, both upon the account of Travel, Escapes, and Negotiations, and also to gain the hearts of Strangers. I spoke to them then after this manner, which I had been hammering in my head the night before, and God has given me a gift, though I am no great Clerk, that I can express my self well enough upon occasion. Remember,The Sieur de Montluc's Speech to the Spaniards. Fellows in arms (for so I may now call you, since we fight together under the same Ensigns) remember the great and noble reputation wherewith your Nation have at all times signaliz'd themselves throughout the whole world, where they have obtein'd so many famous Victories, as well over the Turks, Moors, and Barbarans, as against those of our own Faith. You have often made us feel the valour of the Spanish In∣fantry, which throughout the Universe are allow'd to have the precedence of all others, and since it has pleased God that we, who not above three dayes ago were Enemies, are now assembled to ight under one and the same Standard, make it appear, that the opi∣nion we have ever had of your worth and valour is justly grounded. Our French Foot will have an eye to your behaviour, they are emulous of your reputation, and have an ambition to excell you, therefore maintain your antient renown, or you dishonor the
Spanish Nation for ever. The King your Master hearing how bravely you have behav'd your selves, will take it better at your hands, than if you had fought in his own parti∣cular concern, for this is Gods quarrel against the Lutherans, who will cut you into a thousand pieces if you fall into their hands; a consideration, that if it have not alone the power to encourage you to go bravely and cheerfully to the fight, it is not to be expected that any thing in the world can excite your courages, or enflame your hearts. I fancy that were I fighting in Spain, my arm would be as strong again, and you are (fellow Soldiers) in France, that rejoices at your coming, expects great advantages by your assistance, and our being thus far reconciled, begets in us a hope, that these two great Kingdoms will one day be united to justle the great Turk out of his Dominions. Go to then (fellow Soldiers) betake your selves to your arms, and were it not that I will not deprive Don Lewis of his due honor, I would put my self in the head of your Battalion, with a Pike in my hand, to see how you will lay about you, but I shall not be very far off, that I may see how well you can imitate the actions of your fathers, of which I my self have been an eye witness both in Italy and in Piedmont, at Roussillion, and Fontarabie. Methinks I long for to Morrows light, that we may send an account to both our Kings of the brave service you have perform'd against an Enemy a hundred times worse than the Moors of Barbary, having broken down the Crosses and Altars, and polluted the Churches of God, built by our pions Ancestors, Sacriledges, of which I assure my self you will take an honourable and severe revenge. No quieren vouestras Mercedes nos otros que semos Hermanos, y Compagneros por todas las fouereas nouestras per hoara de Dios y Protection del Rey Christianissimo Hermano de l' Rey Catholico, which when I had said, Don Lewis making answer for them all, said to me these vvords. Crea vou∣estra merced que nos avemos bien apeear del primero asta e postero, y quanto averemo unu gotta di Sungre nellos cuerpos. Nos tarda il Tempo que non veniamos a las manos coutra los Hereges. As Don Lewis had made an end of speaking, I desired them all as a token of their chearfulness to hold up their hands, which they did, after they had first kiss'd the ground: after which I return'd to the Gascons, bidding Captain Charry remount to horse, and go bring all the Harquebuzeers on horseback on my left hand, that they might be ready to a∣light when I should command them, which he accordingly did. I then made a speech to the Gascons, wherein I told them, that there had been a long dispute betwixt the Spani∣ards and the Gascons,The Sieur de Montluc's Speech to the Gascons. and that they were now to end the Controversie, that above fifty years agoe had been begun; which was, that the Spaniards pretended to be stouter than the Gascons, and the Gascons on the contrary to be braver than they; and that since God had done us the grace to bring us upon this occasion to fight a Battel under the same Standard, the difference was to be determinately decided, and the honor made clearly our own. I am a Gascon, said I, but I will henceforth renounce my Country, and never own my self to be a Gascon more, if this day you do not by bravely fighting win the Prize, and gain the process of your adversaries, and you shall see I will be a good Advocate in this cause. They are Swash-bucklers, and think no people under the Sun so brave as they; therefore (fellow Soldiers) let them see what you can do, where they give one blow, give you four. You have more reason to fight than they; for you fight for your Prince, for your Altars, your Fires, your Wives and Children; and if you be overcome, besides the shame that attends your defeat, your Country is lost for ever, and which is worse your Religion. I assure my self I shall not be put to the trouble of thrusting my Sword into the reins of such as shall shew their backs to the Enemy, and that you will every one do your devoir. These people are no other than a Crew of baffel'd Rascals, gather'd seditiously together, people inr'd to be beaten, and that already fancie the Hangman at their heels, so highly do their own consciences accuse them. It is not so with you, who fight for the honor of God, the service of your Prince, and the conservation of your Country; therefore fight like men, and hold up your hands in token of your chearfulness, and consent; which they all did, and began to cry with one voice, Let us go, and we will never stop till we come to grapple with them with the Sword, and thereupon kiss'd the earth. The Spaniards then drew up to our men, and I commanded both the one and the other to move but a foot pace only, that they might not put themselves out of breath; which order being given, I gallopt up to the Gens-d'arms, entreating them to move gently forward, and saying to them, It is not to you (Gentlemen) that fine speehes are necessary to enflame your breasts, I know you stand in no need of such encouragements; there is not a Gentry in France equal to ours in Gascony, to um then Gentlemen, to um, and you shall see how I will second you.
Monsieur de Burie then mounted upon a great horse,The Order of the Battel. having put on his arms behind the Artllery, where I told him, that if he would please to march at the head of the Foot with the Artillery, the three Companies of Gens-d'armes should flank him, and he should make the main Battail, which he instantly consened to, and in truth I never saw him so brisk, nor more full of noble resolution to fight than at that time. Neither did he contradict me in any thing whatever, as if I had been in his place, and I was told that he should say, this man is fortunate, let him do what he will. So soon as the whole Army began to move in this order, I gallopt away, Monsieur de Monferran, and the Sieur de Cajelles (who is of the Family of Mongairel, and now Knight of the Order) along with me, and staid not till I came within thirty or fourty paces of five or six horse who were under a Tree. The Sieur de Puch de Pardaillan has since told me, that these were Monsieur de Duras, de Bordet, and himself, Captain Peyralongue and another, whose name I do not remember. The said Captain Peyralongue was their Camp-master of Foot, and in the Charge that Captain Borde had made, they had taken an Archer of Monsieur de Randan's Company, whom they led prisoner near unto this Tree, and there gave him two Pstol shot in cold blood, and being not yet dead, demanded of hi, who was in our Camp, and who commanded in chief. To which he he return'd hem answer, that I was come to the Army, and that I commanded, Monsieur de Burie having referr'd all things to my conduct, which he said, as knowing very well that news would startle them. Captain Peyralongu then went to Monsieur de Duras, vvho vvas under the forementioned Tree, about some ten paces from the Archer, who himself came to him, and again de∣manded of him if I was in the Camp, to which he answered, that I was, and was come thither the night before, having taken Lectoure, at which they were basely down in the mouth. They thereupon return'd roundly to their men, vvho vvere marching a foot pace only, and vvere not yet got clear of the Meadow, vvhere I percieved that upon their coming the Foot began to double their pace, and said to Monsieur de Monferran, do you see these five horse that were under the Tree, they are run to make their people mend thir pace,The great judgment of the Sieur de Montluc. do you not see what long strides they take? which having said, I turn'd upon the spur to the Troop vvhere Monsieur d' Argence was, and said to him these vvords: O Monsieur d'Argence (my Camrade) see, see the Enemy are in fear, upon my life the day's our own, and cried out aloud, O Gentlemen, let us think of nothing but killing, for the Enemy is a∣fraid, and will never this day make head against us. Let us only go boldly to the fight, they are our own. I have a hundred times had experience of the same, they are only endeavouring to steal off the Field. I then embraced the Captains, and return'd to Captain Masses, and said as much to him, after which I return'd to Captain Arne, and the Gentlemen vvho rid under my ovvn Corne, being come along vvith my Company, and we began to march at a false trot. I then galloped towards the Enemy, being my self very hot, and my horse all of a foam, having only Monsieur de Monferran with me: vvhen being come very near them, I observ'd their countenance, and saw their design vvas to make all the haste they could to recover a little hill that was hard by; and on the other side our own men coming on in great fury: I observ'd also their Cornets of horse, and saw one march∣ing, and another facing about. I took notice likewise of three or four Horse amongst the Foot, and perciev'd by their gesture, that they vvere hasting their people forward, and thereupon turn'd back to our own Horse,The Sieur de Montluc en∣courages; his people. crying out to them, they are afraid, they are afraid, let us take them at their word, Camrades, let us take them at their word, that they fly not back. These are Poltrons, they tremble at the very sight of us. I then sent to Monsieur de Burie to leave the Artillery, and advance to put himself into the Squadron of the three Companies of Gensd'arms, and vve began to march at a good round trot to∣wards them. Some there were who call'd out to me to stay for the Foot; but I made answer, that vve must not suffer them to recover the Mountain, for they would make head against us, and fight at their advantage. I evermore remembred Targon, where they had made head against us upon the Hill, so that we were constrain'd to charge them a∣gainst the ascent of the Mountain, vvhere had they come down upon us, we had infllibly been defeated. Our Foot made all the haste that Foot could possibly make, and when the Enemy savv they could not recover the Mountain, they rallied a thousand or twelve hundred old Soldiers they had left in the corner of the field, whom Monsieur de Burie had plaid upon vvith his Artillery, and so all their Forces march't side by side at a good round trot; when so soon as we came vvithin two hundred paces of one another, I be∣gan to cry out,The Battel. charge, charge; vvhich I had no sooner said, but that we all fell in pell∣mell amongst their Horse and Foot, except Captain Masses, who at the same time that he saw their people overthrown, saw also another great party of them hard by the Hill, who did not offer to move, and therefore did not charge till he came up to the party, and
then flew in friously amngst them. Monsieur de Fontenilles, vvho had rallied ome few of our men, vvas in this second charge also, and there they were all defeated, and their Artillery taken. We pursued the Victory all along the Plain, and thorough the Vineyards, vvhere many of them threw themselves into a Wood on the left hand, and swarm'd up the Chsnut Trees, vvhere the Spanish and Gascon Foot shot at them as they do at Rooks.The Sieur de Montluc en∣gg'd. It vvas vvell for me that I vvas vvell arm'd, for three pikes had enclosed me amongst them, and put me to my Trumps, but Captain Baretnau the younger, and two others had dsengag'd me, vvhere the said Captain Baretnau had his horse kill'd un∣der him, and mne was hurt in the nose, and in the head, with two thrusts of Pikes; for my horse had carried me whether I would or no into their Battalion, and I never knew that he had an ill mouth till then, that it had like to have cost me my life: the Captains Arne and Bourdilln were both wounded close by me. My being thus engag'd was the reason that I could not rally with the Cavalry, for they vvere following the Chace on the left hand; and I vvith fifteen or tenty horse that vvere rallied pursued the Victory on the right hand towards a little Village, vvhere thirty or forty vvere slain. I there made a little halt to take breath, after vvhich I returned to the Artillery vve had taken, vvhere I found Monsieur de Burie, and vvhere vve staid the return of our people, vvho vvere yet pursuing the Chace, and rallied our men. We found that some of ours had followed the pursuit for above two long leagues from the Field of Battel, and about two a clock in the afternoon return'd to quarter at Ver, from whence vve sent Oxen to fetch in the Artillerie vve had taken, and all the next day continued there. The Runawayes failed but a very little of meeting vvith Monsieur de Montpensier, vvho vvent to put himself into Mussidan, thinking to joyn vvith us, which had it pleased God that it had so fall'n out the business had been done, though he had but very few Forces vvith him; for men that ly seldom or never face about, and are so afraid of every thing, that they take Bushes for Squadrons. Those vvho escaped of their Foot (vvhich vvere very few) rallied to their horse, and marcht all the rest of the day, and the night fol∣lowing towards Xaintonge to carry the good news to their Brethren.Nineteen En∣signs taken, and five Cor∣nets. Of three and twen∣ty Ensigns that they had we took nineteen, and of thirteen Corets of Horse, five, all which we sent to Monsieur de Montpensier, by that Complement acknowledging him for our Chief. The Country people kill'd more than we, for in the night they stole away to retire themselves into their houses, and some hid themselves in the Woods, but so soon as ever they were discover'd,Number of the dead. both men and women fell upon them, so that they could find no place of safety. There was numbred upon the Plain, and in the Vineyards above two thousand slain, besides those who were dispatch't by the Boors. After this Victory we marcht straight to Mussidan: Monsieur de Burie went before to attend Monsieur de Montpensier, and we left all the Army at Grigoux in two or three great Villages there are betwixt Mauriac and Mussidan, where after I had seen them settled in their Quarters, I also went to pay my duty to him at Mussidan, where I was as well receiv'd as I shall ever be in any Company what ever so long as I live, and do think that Monsieur de Montpensier took me above ten times in his arms,The Sieurs de Burie, and de Montluc with Monsieur de Montpensier. making me stay a∣bove four hours with him. He was a good Prince a truly honest man, and very zealous for the Catholick Religion. He was of opinion that I should return into Guienne, which was also the Judgment of all the forementioned Seigneurs who were with him, and in∣deed in the King of Navarre's Company and mine there were not thirty Horse that were not wounded; and was resolv'd to take along with him Monsieur de Burie, the three Companies of Gens-d'arms, and that of the Mareshal de Termes, together with the three Spanish Companies to go and joyn with the other ten led by Don Iuan de Carbajac, who was that day to be at Bergerac. This was the success of the Battel of Ver, and be∣cause some perhaps may say that I commend my self as the sole cause that the Battel was fought, and attribute to my own courage, and conduct the entire glory of the victory▪ Monsieur de Montpensier, and Messieurs de Chevigny, and de Vauguyon are yet living, who if they please can bear witness, what they heard the whole Army say, and particularly the very Servants of Monsieur de Burie, which Sieur de Burie himself did not deny, but that he refer'd the whole management of that business to my conduct: for he was old, and not so active as I to command, and to run up and down from one to another as I did, being at the end of the Battel as wet as if I had been plung'd into the River. Neither is the said Sieur de Burie to be reprehended, for he came in good time, and though he did not meddle himself, yet the Battallion he brought along with him strook a terror into the Enemy,Importance of the Battel of Ver. which made us have a better match. If this Body of Hugonots could have joyn'd with the Prince of Conde they had mated the King's Army, as may well be suppos'd, when without them he was very near winning the Battel of Dreux: and besides, had it
not been for ths Battel the Spaniards would never have da'd to have entred into France, nither could Mnsieur de Montpensier himself have been there, but had been sent to de∣fend and relieve Guienne, whereas by means of this victory he carried all the Forces of Guienne and Xaintonge, which consisted of four Companies of Gens-d'armes, and six, what of his , and what of Xaintonge, and Monsieur de Snsac with his three and twen∣ty Ensigns of Gascons and Spaniards,The Succours of Guienne sent to the King. which were no contemptible succours that he car∣ried to the King, of which a good part also were at the winning of the Battel, and I have been told, that all those who went from that side behav'd themselves admirably well at the Battel of Drux (and indeed there are no Soldiers in the Kingdom that surpass the Gascons, if they be well commanded) especially the ten Ensigns of Captain Charry, whom the King since honor'd so far, as to take them into his own Guards, and keeps them to this day, that Monsieur de Strozzy has the command of them after the execrable murther murther of Captain Charry most viley assassinated at Paris. And although a man should nt commend himself, I shall not nevertheless forbear to deliver the truth, and to give it under my hand, that I did at that time as great service for the King my Lord and Master, as ever Gentleman did, and in a time of extreme need, and the greatest necessity of his affairs. And if the Queen please to lay her hand upon her heart, I am confident she will confess the same; she better knew than any other the condition affairs were in, and how much I traverst and prevented the intelligences the Prince of Condé had in Guienne, of which he counted himself cock sure. You Lods then and Companions of mine, who shall read my Book, take example by the great diligence and sudden execution I perform'd after the taking of Letoure, and do not (you who are Lieutenants of Provinces) I besiech you deped upon the reports others may make you of the discovery of an Enemy, at least if you be able to do it your selves: for you your selves ought to see and observe their order, countenance, and motion; and in so doing shall ever be better able to command, than upon the report of another. Your own eyes will better discern what is necessary to be done, than any other whoever you can send to perform that service, you may take an old Captain or two along with you; but above all things have a care of taking an old Captain out of any particular affection you have to him, in company with you when you go to discover; for it is to be fear'd, that that affe∣ction of yours may▪ make you take some swaggering insignificant Coxcomb, instead of a good Soldier, who so soon as he shall discover the Enemy, will find a false friend about his heart, which will be the cause, that out of the opinion you have of his judgment and valour, and the friendship you have for him, he will make you commit so great an error, and lose such an opportunity as perhaps you shall never again retrieve: but alwayes take some old Captain, who in all places whereever he has been, shall not only have fought but have been moreover the occasion of fighting; and although he may have been sometimes, unfortunate, and beaten, provided it was not thorough default of courage or understand∣ing, do not forbear out of that consideration to take him about you. For all the world are not so fortunate as Montluc, who was never defeated. Rather take such a one, than one who has never either wonne or lost, and that has never serv'd in an Army otherwise than as a looker on. I do not say this without experience, I have learnt these Lessons under the late Monsieur de Lautrec,The qualities of Monsieur de Lautrec. who was a brave commander, and if he was unfor∣tunate, it was rather thorough the defect of his Councel, than thorough want of courage, or good conduct, for he had as much of both those qualities, as any Lord Lieutenant I ever serv'd under. I continued my Apprentiship under Messieurs les Mareschaux de Strozzy, and de Brissac, and others. I have seen errors enow committed by the King's Lieutenants upon he reports have been made them by those they have sent out to disco∣ver, and will moreover be bold to say,A General ought to disco∣ver an Enemy in his own per∣son. that when a General has himself seen and discover'd the Enemy, he is more confident, and commands with greater boldness; and if before he was in some apprehension (as no man living is without fear, when he sees his Enemy make head against him) he will reassure himself, and forget his apprehension. How ma∣ny times did Monsieur d' Anguien curse and revile himself upon Easter day at night, be∣fore the Battel of Serisolles, that he had not trusted to his own opinion, and that of the rest who were for fighting, when he saw the Enemy face to face, and had not his Army with him? Assure your selves (Lords Lieutenants) I do not write this without great reason on my side; but you will say, that this were to put the person of the Chief in ha∣zard, though it may be done without any such apparent danger. Let such as are afraid of danger lie abed, go to discover in your own person, no one can be a better judge than your self, who will easily discern if you have never so little experience, by your Enemies countenance and motion, if he be timerous or resolute. And pardon me if I be constrain'd to write my own praises, for seeing I am to write my own Life, you shall have the truth,
neither would I have seupled, had I been beaten, to have confessed it. If I lye in any thing I have said, there are a thousand Gentlemen that are able to disprove me. But to return to my Subject, and to make an end of this War, Monsieur de Montpen∣sier went with all  Forces to stay for the Spaniards at Barbezieux, where he met with intelligence from Monsieur de Sansac, that Monsieur de Duras was retir'd, and Monsieur de la Rochfoucaut, and that they made a shew as if they intended to turn towards him. I was come to Bergra, to which place Monsieur de Montpensier dispatcht away to me two Courriers, ne in the heels of another, intreating me with all possible speed to return back to him, for that Messiurs de Duras, and de la Rouchefoucaut were rallied together, and as he was enorm'd, were turning towards him. As God shall help me, amongst all the Gentlemen, both of the King of Navarre's Company and my own, I could not find thirty Horse that could go a step without great pain, however two hours within night I set out, and except to eat a bit or two by the way, never rested till I came with∣in two leagues of Barbezieux; in which march I twice met parties of the Enemy by the way, of those who were escap'd from the Battel, whom I cut to pieces, and about one of the clock in the night took up my Quarters at St. Private; my Brother Monsieur de Lieux was with me, who could not come time enough to the Battel, and we were at Monsieur de Montpensiers riing, who took the great haste I had made to come to him very kindly at my hands: and there I found Monsieur de Sansac, who told me that the Enemy in a day and a night had marcht eighteen or twenty Leagues. There being then nothing to do, Monsieur de Mopnsier dismist me, and I return'd to lie at St. Privat near unto Au∣beterre, and the next day to Bergerac, where at my return I found Don Iuan de Carbajac with the ten Spanih Companies, who staid one day there, and the next morning marcht away.Gyenne iec. Thus I return'd and dismist every one to his own house, there being nothing that st'd in all Guienne, nor a man that dar'd to own he had ever been of that Religion, eve∣ry one going to Mass, and to the Processions, and assisting at Divine Service, and the Mi∣sters who had been the Trumpets of this Sedition were all vanisht and gone, for they knew very well that in what corner soever they could lie, I should trap them, and then they knew what would follow. Being come to Agen I there heard that Monsieur de Terride was gone to engage himself before Montauban,The Sieur de Terride before Montauban. with the Artillery of Tholouze, and the two Companies of Bazordan, that I had left to guard the Country, and seven or eight more that those of the City had set on foot, which Siege he had undertaken immediately upon the news of the Battel being won: and after I had been eight daies there the Cardinal of Armagnac, who at that time commanded Tholouze, sent to entreat me, with whom the Court of Parliament also joyn'd in the request, that I would go to Montauban, they conceiving that matters there went very slowly on, which put them out of all hope of any good account of that Enterprize. I immediately then departed, and took the way directly to Tholouze, where I recieved a Letter from a friend of mine, wherein he writ me word, that Monsiur de Terride had sent a Letter to the Cardinal, another to the Court, and another to the Capitouls, where∣in he writ, that he had heard they had sent for me to command at the Siege of Montau∣ban, complaining that they did him great and manifest wrong, and invaded his honor; for by that means after he had beaten the Bush another must come and take the Hare. These were the contents of his Letters, which were brought by Captain Bidonnet. Being then at Tholouze, I was pes'd to go to the Leaguer; but I made answer to the Cardinal and the rest, that I would not do my friend that wrong, especially since it appear'd by hi Letters, that he made himself sure of the place; when seeing they could not prevail with me, to take upon me the command of the Siege, they entreated me at least to go thither, to see how matters went, which I did. At my coming thither Monsieur de Terride shewed me all he had done, by which I found that in twelve dayes he had lain before it he had not done two dayes work, and saw the beginning had not been very good, which made me doubt the end would be worse: for I found that he had quitted the Fauxbourg St. Antoine, which is upon the way from Caussade, by which they carried out, and brought into the Town whatever they would. He had indeed been necessitated to do it, because the Soldiers had forsaken him after the death of Captain Bazordan,Captain Ba∣zorda lain before Mon∣tauban. who had been there slain, and serv'd him in the quality of Camp-master, which had it not so fallen out, it was my opinion, and several others were of the same, that matters would have gone much better; for he was an understanding man, and a good Soldier. Neither is it to be wondred at, if Monsieur de Terride was not very perfect in he bsieging of places; for I will maintain that no man understands a Siege but a Mastr of the Ordnance (who has also been long in that employment) the of the Artillery, an Engineer, the Camp-master, and the Colonel, if they
be old Soldiers, who in these commands (if they have been long in them) must necessarily have seen much of that kind of service. All the rest understand nothing of it, nor the General himself, if he have not learnt by being very much with them, but having us'd to go with them, when they have gone to discover places, learns to know what belongs to a Siege, but otherwise not: for the Captains of Gens d'armes never go to discover; nor to the approaches, it being their business to be in a readiness to ight, and to watch that no kind of relief enter into the place. How then should they be expert in Sieges, conside∣ring that they have never assisted at discoveries, nor heard the debates that old Soldiers enter into with one another upon that Subject; for there they argue upon what they themselves have discover'd, and in sight of the strengths and defects of the place. 'Tis a thing of all others in War of the greatest difficulty and importance, and by which many who are o∣therwise great Captains are put to a stand: and it requires a long practice to understand fortification, to observe and know the defects of a Bastion, a Spur, a Flanker, and to guess what may be within it, by what you your selves would do if you were in the place. Monsieur de Terride was a good Horse Officer, and very proper for fighting, but not for beleaguering of places, no more than several others, who have never had other command than those he had been trained up in; although in his Quarters every one will be giving his vote, and spending his judgment upon a Carpet, or over a sheet of Paper. It is in∣deed good to see the Map, but that very often deceives. I could wish, that when any one, who has never been employed in any of the forementioned Commands, nor ever follow'd the Kings Lieutenant when he went to view a place, nor heard the dispute of the above named Officers upon their said discovery will be prating, and offering to put in their Verdict: the Kings Lieutenant would bid him, first go hazard himself through the Enemies shot at the discovery, and then deliver his advie. 'Tis alwayes the tickliest place, forasmuch as if the besieged be men of any metal, they will hinder as much as in them lies, the assailant from discovering their Fort: and as much as they possibly can will dispute all they have without, as much as to a hut, for if they suffer them to make their approaches at first, they either discover themselves to be weak, or that they are no Soldiers. I left then this hopeful Siege, and return'd to Agen, having told Monsieur de Terride my opinion, that he would have no better success, than what I had prophecied to him. A few dayes after the Parliament of Bourdeaux,The Sieur de Montluc at ourdeaux. and Monsieur de Novailles Governor of the City, sent to entreat me that I would come to Bourdeaux, to help to pacifie a Tumult was risin in the City, which I accordingly did, and there staid some dayes; after which I returned again to Agn, that I might be in the heart of the Country, to which all the Gentry ordinarily repair. And there it is that the Lieutenant of a Province ought to reside, and not at Bourdeaux, although that be the Capital City, it being too farre off. And moreover there is a Court of Parliament, that will have a hand in every thing, and the Gentry cannot go thither without great expence, and besides there is alwayes something or other amiss, and some one or another question'd, which frights the Gentlemen from going thither. Not long after the Cardinal of Armagnac, Court of Parliament of Tholouze, and the Capitouls of the same, sent to entreat me to come thither about some affairs of importance they could not commit to writing, which I did, they needed not to summon me twice, and when I came there they called a Council wherein were assisting Messieurs de Cardi∣nals of Armagnac, and de Strozzy, Monsieur le primier President d'Assis, the Seigneurs de Terride,The design of those of Tho∣louze. de Negrepelice, Fourquevaux, du Faut the Kings Advocat General, and the Ca∣pitouls, where they gave me to understand that they intended to set some Forces on foot to go into Languedoc, and that they had chosen me for head of the Army: but I excus'd my self, representing to them, that the Constable would not take it well, considerng it was in his Government, and that besides he had no great kindness for me. Now the Battel of Drux had already been fought, where, as every one knows, his Majesties affairs were very foul shaken, but the Victory remain'd to the King, thorough the valour and conduct of the Duke of Guise. Nevertheless the said Constable was taken prisoner on the one side, as the Prince of Conde was on the other, and so both the Generals wee ta∣ken, a thing that was never known before; which shews that it was well fought, but be∣ing that I was not there it nothing concerns me to speak of that business. I was so im∣portun'd by these people, that in the end I was fain to accept the Commission, and we set down in writing all things that were necessary to be provided for the expedition. Of which the Cardinal de Strozzy undertook to cause twelve hundred Canon shot, and a proportionable quantity of Powder to be brought from Marcelles, and Monsieur de Four∣quevaux took upon him to send some also from Narbonne; and so we began to distribute
the foot Commissions, concluding within thirty dayes to have all things in a readiness, together with the money that was to be levied by the City and the Country of Languedc, who were also associated in the Dsign. During these transactions in a day and a nights time no less than three Couriers came to me from Bourdeaux, of which the eldest Son of the Recorder Pontac was the first, the Kings Advocate la Het (who since has been Atturney-General) the second, and a Gentle∣man belonging to Monsieur de Novailles the Third; who all came upon one and the same errand, which was to tell me, that if I did not suddenly, and with the extremest diligence go to relieve the City of Bourdeaux, it would infallibly be lost, through an un∣happy difference was fall'n out there betwixt the fist President Lagabaston, and Monsieur de Novailles the Governor:Divisin at Bourdeaux. wherefore the Court of Parliament, the Jurats, and the said Monsieur de Novailles, all of them entreated me to make haste, or otherwise I would come too late, for Monsieur de Novailles had already sent for all the Train'd-Bands to bring them into the City by the Castle of Ha, that was in his possession, and some of those of the Town possest themselves of the Gates, for part of the City sided with Monsieur de Novailles. I had much ado to prevail with these Gentlemen to let me go thither, till I was fain to promise them upon my honor within fifteen dayes to return to Tholouze, de∣siring them in the mean time to hastn their Levies and Preparations, that I might find all things ready at my return; and so I put my self upon my way, for I was never a man of delays; and being I had a great number of Gentlemen with me, I could not go by water, but was constrain'd to make my journey by land, by reason of the armes and great Horses we had, so that we were three dayes in going to Agen. I had dispatcht away Pon∣tac, and Monsieur de Novailles his Gentleman, to assure those of Bourdeaux of my com∣ing: but Monsieur de Het would not go away till he first saw me on horseback, and af∣terwards rid so hard, that he fell sick, and had like to have died. Their arrival held every one in suspence, both on the one side and the other. We staid but one night at Agen, and went forwards, and in three dayes more I came to Bourdeaux, where I found a Patent the King had sent me, by which he made me his Lieutenant in the one half of the Government of Guienne in the absence of the King of Navarre, and the other half to remain to Monsieur de Burie, without making nevertheless any distinction as then, which part should belong to Monsieur de Burie, and which to me. They believ'd that at my coming I would presently have had recourse to arms, and have kill'd all those of the Presidents Party, and out of that beliefe many were fled away: but I knew very well that that had been to ruine the City, and that the King would be a great loser by it; for had I gone that way to work the Earth could not have saved the City from being sacked. I went by Cadiac, where Monsieur de Candalle did me the honor to bear me company, and we shipt our selves in his Galion, and other Vessels, for there was a great number of Gentlemen,The death of Monsieur de Novailles. and by the way met news, that Monsieur de Novailles died that night, having lain only two dayes sick, which gave occasion to some afterwards to say that he died of poison, how true it was I know not, but it was great pity, for he was a prudent honest Gentleman, and a good Subject. The next morning after my arrival I went to the Palace, and there propounded to the Court what I had retein'd from the Siege of Sienna, and after what manner we ought to proceed in a great City, either in Warre or in Sedition; telling them that should we put our hands to blood, the City would be totally destroyed, wherein both parties would suffer alike, laying before them the example of Tholouze, where had I permitted those who came from the Mountains, and Comenge, to enter the City, it had not been in the power of man to have preserv'd it from being sackt, which would also befall them, if we once proceeded to blood, and gave reins to the peoples fury, especially those from without, bidding them remember what hapned when Monsieur de Monens was slain, that the people took the Authority upon them. That they were therefore to begin with a good reconciliation and union, without engaging in any disorders or trouble, after which they might proceed to punish the Delinquents by the way of justice. All the Assembly approv'd of my advice, and return'd me infinite thanks. At my departure from thence, so soon as I had din'd I went to the Town Hall, where I had appointed the Jurats and all the Council to meet me, and made them the same remonstrance, where though there were some who had a mind to blow the coals, nevertheless I laid so many exemples and good reasons before them, that they all alered their resolution, and about four of the clock I went to the Arch Bishoprick, where I had assign'd all the Clergy to expect me, and there made them also a Remonstrance touching the Estate of the Church, as I had done to the other two concerning theirs: so that that very day I appeas'd the City, and the next day we fell to consult of the order was to be observ'd, that the pac∣fication
might endure, wherein I so bestirr'd my self, that in three dayes all tumults were converted into peace and perfect union. I will be bold to say, and call all the City of Rourdeaux to witness it, that had I proceeded otherwise the City had been destroyed; neither ought we to have recourse to violence, where there is any other way left open, e∣specially considering, that it was a division amongst the Catholicks, or at least those who professed themselves to be such, for I am not God Almighty to dive into mens hearts. Oh that the King ought well to consider to whom he entrusts the Government of a Pro∣vince, and above all things to make choice of such as have formerly been Governors of places; for if by a long experience he be not intelligent in such employments, the Country or City where such Tumults shall arise, run a manifest danger. I had been Governor of Montallier and Alba, and the Kings Lieutenant first at Sienna, and afterwards at Mon∣talsin: Where the various accidents I had had experience of, had taught me to know, and to foresee the ruine or preservation of a place; without which experience I do believe I had taken the way of execution,The Nature of the Sieur de Montluc. I being in my own nature rather enclin'd to scuffle, than to pacifi affairs, and more to fighting and cutting of throats, than to making of speeches: but my discretion govern'd me upon this occasion; neither ought a man to suffer himself to be hurried away by his own inclination, or transported by his passion, forasmuch as his Masters affairs will suffer by it. There were enow in the City that would have been glad to have cut out work enough, in hatred to the chief President, who was never much belov'd amongst them: but whether he were hated with reason, or otherwise I referre to others to determine. Monsieur de Bourdeaux who is yet living, knows very well what intelligence a certain person brought me as I was walking with him in his Garden. I was then solicited by all the Court of Parliament, all the Gentry, and the whole City, to accept the Charge the King had conferr'd upon me, which nevertheless I would by no means be perswaded to do, and had sent away a dispatch to the King and Queen to re∣turn their Majesties my most humble thanks, and to excuse my self from that employ∣ment; for I still fancied to my self that that would happen which has since befaln me, and that this Government would bring upon me the envy and hatred which peradventure I might otherwise avoid: neither did I ever prophesie any thing of my self that has not come to pass. Let any one ask President Lagbaston, who made me the Harangue in the Palace to perswade me to take the Government upon me, what answer I made him there in publick, and what I afterwards said to him in private. There are also other Presi∣dents and Counsellors yet living, who heard my reasons, and who I am confident can re∣member if the Predictions I then made of my self be come to pass. So it was that at that time I did not accept it, nor of two dayes after; not that the King did not herein con∣ferre a greater honor upon me than I deserv'd; nor that I would not have been glad of so good a fortune; but I had evermore a thousand niceties before my eye. But the pre∣mier President Lagebaston, the other Presidents his Brethren, and the antient Councellors, came to my lodging, and gave me very many arguments to perswade me, and on the o∣ther side Monsieur de Candalle, Monsieur d' Escars (whom I found there) Monsieur de Lieux my Brother, Messieurs de Barsac, d'Vza, and all the Gentlemen who were with me, were very pressing upon me, saying that I ought to accept it; and the Jurats, together with the whole Body of the City did the same; by which means being left single in my opi∣nion, I was constrain'd to pass the Wicket, like a man that is thrust into the Gaol; for so I may say I was forc'd in, and had I been left at liberty, I would have lost my life, or have perform'd some services that should have been acceptable to the King, and from which I would have deriv'd some recompence, whereas by the services I have perform'd in my administration in these parts, I have reapt no other advantage than reproaches and disgrace. And yet I will be bold to say that no man under heaven could have behav'd himself better than I did, by the testimony of all the three Estates of Guienne, and had I done such services in the life time of either of the late Kings, Francis, or Henry, there had not been a Gentleman in France under the Title of a Prince, who had been higher preferr'd, or in greater esteem than I had been. But God be praised for all; all the re∣compence I have had is a great Harquebuz shot in my face, of which I shall never be cu'd so long as I live, which makes me eternally curse the hour that ever I had this Com∣mand. Considerations of the Sieur de Montluc. Many better men than I would have esteem'd themselves honor'd by it, and so did I, but being to serve a King in his Minority, and in a Country where I foresaw I should have enough to do, and very little means wherewithal to do it, I conceived it might have been more advantageous to me, to have gone further off from my own Dunghil. And I would ever advise any friend of mine rather to accept a remote Command, than one
near home; for no man is a Prophet in his own Country. However for the benefit of my Country I was content to take this great burthen upon me. Now as I thought to have departed from Bourdeaux to go to Tholouze after I had ap∣peased all things here,The Peace af∣ter the first Troubles con∣cluded. the Peace came, which was brought by Captain Fleurdelis. He had met with Captain Montluc hard by Mussidan, who was carrying twelve Compa∣nies of Foot (the finest Companies, and the best arm'd that ever had been raised in Guienne) and one Troop of Lighthorse, to the King; the Sieur de Lanon was his Lieutenant, and the Sieur de Montferran his Ensign. The City of Bourdeaux had sent him two pieces of Canon, and one Culverine, which the said Captain Fleurdelis met two leagues from Mus∣sidan: but Captain Montluc would not stop his March till first he heard from me. The Peace being publisht, every one was of opinion that I should countermand him, which I therefore did, brought back the Artillery, and disbanded all the Foot and Horse, that the people might no longer be eaten up: sending in like manner to Tholouze to do the same: so that in eight dayes time every one was retir'd to his own home, I making no question of securing Guienne without Garison either of Horse or Foot: which I did, and so well, that for the space of five years neither Trooper nor Foot Soldier eat so much as a Hen throughout the whole Province upon the account of arms. I had three pieces of Canon at Agen, and with threats and bravadoes kept all the world in awe, making every one lay aside his arms, especially fire arms, so that not a man was seen to wear any arms, the Gentlemen excepted, who were allow'd their Swords and Stillettoes. And for two Catholick Souldiers that I caused to be hang'd for transgressing the Edict, I stroke so great a terror into the whole Countrey, that no one dar'd any more to lay hand to his arms. The Hugonots thinking to escape better cheap, and that I would not offer to punish them; two other Soldiers of the Religion also transgressed the Edict, whom I likewise immediately truss'd up to bear company with the others; so that the two Religions seeing there was no impunity for either of them, and that neither the one nor the other could promise to themselves any assurance of me if they should offend, they began to love one another, and to frequent one anothers houses. Thus did I maintain the Peace for the space of five years betwixt both parties in this Country of Guienne, and do believe that if every one would have taken the same course, without partiality to the one side, or the other, and have executed justice indifferently upon those who deserv'd it, we had never seen so many troubles in this Kingdom. And it was no little thing that I perform'd, for I had to do with as capricious and fanatick head-pieces as any in the whole Kingdom of France, or peradventure in all Europe; and who governs a Gascon may assure himself he has done a Masterpiece,The Nature of the Gascos. who as he is naturally warlike, so is he proud, mutinous, and insolent; nevertheless by playing one while the gentle, and another the austere, I subjected all to me, without any one so much as once daring to lift up his head. In brief the King was ac∣knowledg'd, and his Laws obey'd. This was the end of the first Civil War, and the first troubles in those places where I was, with the account of what I did in them, which is in summe, that if God had not inspir'd me with courage to oppose the Hugonots in due time, they would have been so establisht, that it had not been in the power of the King of a long time to have remov'd them: for I am not of the opinion of those, who say it had signified nothing, and that though they had been canton'd here, one might have shut them up: It is a rich and plen∣tiful Country as any in the Kingdom of France, abounding in Navigable Rivers, strong Holds, and very good Harbours; how then should such a Country be shut up, consider∣ing that the English, and other forreign Nations may at all times come to it by Sea? The King has set but two little value upon it; 'tis well if he do not one day repent it. But provided these fine talking Gentlemen, who prate at their ease, may have their own arms at liberty, they care not for any body else, and when one comes to demand of them assi∣stance of money (for of every thing else we have but too much) they cry, let them raise it upon the Country, and so the Soldier, not being paid, is necessitated to plunder, and rob, and the King's Lieutenant to endure it. 'Tis all one say they, a Country spoiled is not lost. O lewd expression, and unworthy of a Counsellor of the Kings, who has the management of affairs of State! He has not the trouble of it, nor does he bear the reproach; but he who has the charge of the Province, and whom the people load with continual exerca∣tions. Behold then our Guienne thus lost, and recover'd, and since maintain'd in peace for the good of the people; and to my particular and great misfortune: for my Son Captain Montluc being no more able to live at rest than his Father, seeing himself useless in France, as being no Courtier,The Design of Captain Mont∣luc. and knowing of no forreign War wherein to employ his arms, de∣sign'd an Enterprize by Sea, to go to make his fortune in Affrick, and to this end followed
by a brave number of Gentlemen Volunteers (for he had above three hundred with him) and by a great many of the best Officers and Soldiers he could cull out, he embarkt at Bourdeaux in a Fleet of six Men of War, as well equipt as Vessels could possibly be. I shall not insist upon the design of this unfortunate Expedition,He is slain. wherein he lost his life, being slain with a Musket shot in the Island of Maderas going ashore to water, and where being the Islanders would not peaceably permit him to refresh his Ships, he was constrain'd to have recourse to violence, to their loss and ruine; but much more to mine, who there lost my right hand. Had it pleased God to have preserv'd him to me, they had not done me those charitable Offices at Court they have since done. In short I lost him in the flow∣er of his age, and then when I expected he should have been both the prop of mine, and the support of his Country; which has very much miss't him since. I had lost the brave Mark Anthony my eldest Son at the Port of Ostia, but this that died at the Maderas was of such value,Commendati∣on of the Mnt∣lucs. that there is not a Gentleman in Guienne who did not judge he would surpass his Father. But I leave it to those who knew him, to give an account of his va∣lour and prudence. He could not have fail'd of being a good Captain, had God been pleased to preserve him; but he disposes of us all, as seems best to his own wisdom. I think this little Montluc that he has left me will endeavour to imitate him both in valour and loyalty to his Prince, which all the Montluc's have ever been eminent for, and if he prove not such, I disclaim him. Every one knows, and the Queen more than any other, that I was never the Author of this unfortunate Voyage; and the Admiral knows very well how much I endeavour'd to break the design; not that I had a mind to keep him dle by the fire, but out of the apprehension I had it might occasion a Breach betwixt the two Crowns of France and Spain, which though I might perhaps in my own bosom de∣sire, to remove the War from our own doors, I would also have wisht that some other might have been the occasion of the rupture. My sons design was not to break any Truce with the Spaniard; but I saw very well that it was impossible, but he must do it there, either with him or the King of Portugal: For to hear these people talk, a man would think that the Sea was their own. The Admiral lov'd and esteem'd this poor Son of mine but too much, having told the King, that never a Prince nor Lord in France, up∣on his own single account, and without his Majesties assissance, could in so short a time have made ready so great an Equipage. And he said true, for he won the hearts of all that knew him, and that were enamour'd of the practice of arms; and I was so wise as to think that fortune was oblig'd to be as favourable to him as she had been to me. For an old Soldier as I am, I confess I committed a great error, that I did not discover the design to some other (considering that the Vicount d'Vza, and de Pampadour, and my young Son were of the party) who might have tried their fortune, and pursued the Enterprize projected; which nevertheless I shall not here discover, because the Queen may perad∣venture another day again set it on foot. The End of the Fifth Book.
THE COMMENTARIES OF Messire Blaize de Montluc, MARESCHAL of FRANCE. The Sixth Book. FOr the space of five years France enjoyed this tranquility and re∣pose with the two Religions that divided the Kingdom; neverthe∣less I still doubted there was some Snake lurking in the grass: though for what concern'd the Province of Guyenne, I was in no great apprehension; for I had evermore an eye to all things, send∣ing the Queen notice of every thing I heard, with all the fidelity and care wherewith any man living could give an account of his trust.The King at Tholouze. The King at this time went a Progress to visit the several Provinces of his Kingdom, and being come to Tholouze, I went to kiss his Majesties hand, who gave me a more honorable reception than I deserv'd. The Hugonots faild not upon this occasion to make use of their wonted artifices and practices, and made me false fire under hand, for openly they durst not do it; but I did not much regard their malice. The Queen did me the honor to tell me all, wherein she manifested the confidence she repos'd in me, and I by that very well, that she did not love the Hu∣gonots. One day being in her Chamber with Messieurs the Cardinal of Bourbon and Guise, she repeated to me all her fortune,The Queens discourse to the Sieur de Mont∣luc. and the perplexity she had been in. And amongst other things, that the night news was brought her of the loss of the Battel of Dreux (for some brave fellow who had not leisure to stay to see what Monsieur de Guise did after the Con∣stable was routed and taken, had given her this false Alarm) she was all night in Council with the said Cardinals, to consult what course she should take to save the King; where in the end it was resolv'd, that if in the morning the news should be confirm'd, she should try to retire into Guienne, though the Journey was very long, accounting that she should be safer there than in any other part of the Kingdom. May God for ever refuse to assist me, if hearing this sad story, the tears did not start into my eyes, saying to her these very words; Good God! Madam was your Majesty reduc'd to that necessity? which she assur'd me, and swore upon her soul. she was, as also did both the Cardinals, and to speak the truth had this Battel been lost, her Majesty had been in a very deplorable condition, and I do believe there had been an end of France; for the whole State and Religion had been turn'd topsie turvy, and with a young King every body does what they will. Now their Majesties having passed thorough Guienne, found all things in a better po∣sture than had been represented to them: For my good friends the Hugonots had spread a report that all was ruin'd and lost: but their Majesties found it in a much better con∣dition than Languedcs. They sojourn'd some time at Mont-de Marsan in expectation of the Queen of Spains coming to Bayonne; and I will here set down a thing that I discover'd there, to shew that I have ever inviolably kept with the Queen the Promise I made her at Orleans, after the death of King Francis, that I would never depend upon any other than the King and her, as I have never done, and although I have reapt no great advantage
by it, yet I had rather the default should be on the other side, than that I had fail'd of my word.A League  on foot in France. I heard then some whisper of a League that was forming in France, where∣in were several very great persons, both Princes and others, whom nevertheless I have no∣thing to do to name, being engag'd by promise to the contrary. I cannot certainly say to what end this League was contriv'd: but a certain Gentleman named them to me every one, endavouring at the same time to perswade me to make one in the Association, assuring me it was to a good end: but he perceiv'd by my countenance, that it was not a my pallae. I presently gave the Queen private intimation of it; for I could not endure suh kind of doings, who seem'd to be very much astonisht at it, telling me it was the first syllable she had ever heard of any such thing; and commanding me to enquire further into the business, which I did, but could get nothing more out of my Gentleman; for he now lay upon his Guard. Her Majesty then was pleased to ask my advice,The Sieur de Monluc's ad∣vice to the Queen. how she should behave her self in this business, whereupon I gave her counsel to order it so, that the King himself should say in publick, that he had heard of a League that was forming in his Kingdom, which no one could do without giving him some jealousie and offence: and that therefore he must require every one without exception to break off this League, and that he would make an association in his Kingdom, of which he himself would be the Head; for so for some time it was call'd, though they afterwards chang'd the name, and call'd it the Con∣federation of the King. The Queen at the time that I gave her this advice did by no means approve of it, objecting, that should the King make one, it was to be feared that others would make another; but I made answer and said, that the King must engage in his own all such as were in any capacity of doing the contrary, which however was a thing that could not be conceal'd, and might well enough be provided against. Two dayes after her Majesty being at Supper called me to her, and told me, that she had consider'd better of the affair I had spoke to her about, and found my counsel to be very good, and that the next day, without further delay, she would make the King propound the busi∣ness to his Council; which she accordingly did, and sent to enquire for me at my lodging, but I was not within. In the Evening she askt me why I did not come to her, and commanded me not to fail to come the next day, because there were several great difficul∣ties in the Council, of which they had not been able to determine. I came according to her command,The advice of Messieurs de Nemours, and de Montpensier. and there were several disputes. Monsieur de Nemours made very ele∣gant Speech, remonstrating That it would be very convenient to make a League and Asso∣ciation for the good of the King and his Kingdom, to the end, that if affairs should so require, every one with one and the same will might repair to his Majesties person, to stake their lives and fortunes for his service, and also in case any one of what Religion soever, should offer to invade or assault them, or raise any commotion in the State, that they might with one accord unite, and expose their lives in their common defence. The Duke of Montpensier was of the same opinion, and several others, saying, that this could not choose but so much the more secure the peace of the Kingdom when it should be known, that all the Nobility were thus united for the defence of the Crown. The Queen then did me the honor to command me to speak;The advice of the Sieur de Montluc. whereupon I began, and said, That the League propos'd could be no wayes prejudicial to the King, being that it tended to a good end for his Majesties service, the good of his Kingdom, and the peace and security of his People; but that one which should be form'd in private could produce nothing but disorder and mischief: for the good could not answer for the evil dispos'd; and should the Cards once be shuffled betwixt League and League, it would be a hard matter to make of it a good game; that being the most infallible way to open a door to let Strangers into the Kingdom, and to expose all things to spoil and ruine; but that all of us in general, both Princes and others, ought to make an Asso∣ciation, which should bear the Title of the League, or the Confederation of the King, and to take a great and solemn Oath, not to decline or swerve from it upon penalty of be∣ing declar'd such as the Oath should import: and that his Majesty having so concluded, ought to dispatch Messsengers to all parts of the Kingdom, with Commission to take the Oathes of such as were not there present, by which means it would be known, who were willing to live and die in the service of the King and State. And should any one be so foolish or impudent, as to offer to take arms, let us all Sir swear to fall upon them; I warrant your Majesty I will take such order in these parts, that nothing shall stirre to the prejudice of your royal Authority. And in like manner let us engage by the faith we owe to God, that if any Counter-League shall disclose it self, we will give your Ma∣jesty immediate notice of it: and let your Majestie's be subscrib'd by all the great men of your Kingdom. The Feast will not be right without them, and they also are easie
to be perswaded to it, and the fittest to provide against any inconveniency may happen. This was my Proposition, upon which several disputes ensued; but in the end the King's Association was concluded on, and it was agreed, that all the Princes, great Lords, Governors of Provinces, and Captains of Gens d' arms should renounce all Leagues and Confederacies whatsoever, as well without as within the Kingdom, excepting that of the King, and should take the Oath upon pain of being declar'd Rebels to the Crown; to which there were also other obligations added, which I do not remember. There arose several difficulties about couching the Articles, some saying they were to be couch'd after one manner, and others after another; for in these great, as well as in our inferior Councils there is black and white, and obstinacy and dissimulation, and some perhaps there were, who though they set a good face on the matter, were elsewhere engag'd. So goes the World. O 'is a miserable thing when a Kingdom falls to a King in minority, had he then had the knowledge that he has had since, I do believe he would have made some people speak good French. In the end all was past and concluded, and the Princes began to take the Oath, and to sign the Articles, where though I was but a poor Gentle∣man, the King would also that I should sign with them, by reason of the charge I had un∣der him, and it was also sent to the Constable at Bayonne, who sign'd it there. On the o∣ther side they sent to the Prince of Condé, to the Admiral, Monsieur d' Andelot, and other Lords and Goverors of France; and at the return of the Messengers the King (as I was told) caus'd an Instrument to be ingrost of all, and put amongst the Records of the Crown. I do believe it cannot be lost, and that there a man may see in black and white some peo∣ple forsworn to some purpose. I know not who was the beginning of the War a la St. Michel; but whoever it was I know he went contrary to his Oath, and that the King, if he so pleased, might justly declare him perjur'd, forasmuch as he stands obliged by his Oath, and his own hand and seal are against him: neither would he have any wrong done him, because he was consenting to the conditions. And although there was no fight∣ing work in this affair, I do nevertheless conceive, that I did the King and Queen a good piece of service in discovering this practice, which had it not been discover'd, matters might peradventure have gone worse than they did. The King at his return from Bayonne took his way towards Xaintonge, and Rochelle, to which place I attended him, and there he commanded me to return, giving me instructi∣ons to cause the Edicts of Pacification to be inviolably observ'd; which I have ever done; neither can it be said that the War began in my Government: and also if they had begun with me, they would have had no great match on't, neither could they have taken me unprovided: but their design was at the head. The Queen who is yet living may re∣member what I said to her concerning Rochelle; for had this feather been pluckt from the Hugonots wing; and secur'd to his Majesties devotion, as I advis'd her it ought to be, France had never seen those many mischiefs that have follow'd since.The timerous∣ness of the Queen Mother But she was so ti∣merous and fearful of giving any occasion of new trouble, that she durst attempt to alter nothing, and I know very well, that she one night entertein'd me above two hours, talk∣ing of nothing but things that had past during the life-time of the King her Husband my good Master. And yet one, who was none of the least, went and reported that I was contriving something to the prejudice of the Peace. Would to God her Majesty had ta∣ken my advice, Rochelle should never have dar'd to have mutter'd. Now as the King was going out of Brittany, to take his way to Blois, I had intelli∣gence from Rüergue, Quercy, Perigord, Burdelois, and Agenois, that the Hugonots were seen to go up and down with great horses in small parties, carrying Sumpters along with them, wherein 'twas said they carried their Arms and Pistols. Three or four times I gave the Queen notice of it, but she would never give credit to my intelligence. In the end I sent to her Martineau, the same who at this present isA kind of Secretary who is to give an account of the charge and ex∣pence of the Warre. Comptroller of the Wars, who was not very welcome to bring such news, and three dayes after his arrival at Court Boery a Secretary of mine arriv'd also with other intelligence from me to the Queen, that they all march't openly day and night, though I think she would hardly have believ'd it, had it not been, that at the same time her Majesty had advertisements from all the other Governments of the Kingdom, which made the King go in all diligence directly to Mou∣lins. I know not to what this tended, nor why they march' up and down in Troops after that manner, but it ought to have been known, and it was a sign of no good: for without the knowledge of the King, or his Lieutenant, no one ought to have attempted any such thing: and had it not been that I was afraid of being accused for breaking the Peace, I would soon have sent them to their own houses with a vengeance: for I did not sleep. I went however very well accompanied with a good number of Gentlemen, and
my own Company of Gens-d'arms into Roüergue, Qurcy, and all along by the skirts of Prigard, to see i any one would openly stir, and sent to the King to tell him, that if his pleas'd to give me leave to talk with them at their return, I hop'd I should be able to give him a good account of their intention: But the King sent me a positive command not to do it, but let them quietly return every man to his own house, and then it was, tha I  the League of Mont de Marsan would not long be observ'd. I thought fit to write this passage, to the end that every one may see how vigilant in my Govern∣ment I have ever been, seeing that I who was the furthest off, gave his Majestie the first intelligence. And now I will begin the War de la St. Michel, which were the second Troubles. Though it has been said, and I know it also to be true, that the Hugonots did perfect∣ly hate me, yet was I not so negligent in my administration, but that I had acquir'd some friends amongst them,The Sieu de Motluc has in∣telligence a∣mongst the Hugonots. and even some who were of their Consistory. It was not now as in the former troubles, our Cards were so shuffled, and confused, as nothing could be more, and these people were not now so hot in their Religion, as they had formerly been; many either out of fear, or for good will, came to us, so that we began to be soci∣abe, and to converse with one another. The fear also they were in of me made some few my friends, or at least seem to be. About two Moneths and a half before la Sainct Mi∣chel, I had notice by a Gentleman, and another rich man in the Country, who knew no∣thing of one another, that the Prince of Condé, and the Admiral, had sent to them all to make themselves ready, with horses and arms, as many as had wherewithal to procure them, and that those who had not, should arm themselves as well as they could; and al∣so that they should lay in great store of Corn and other provisions of Victual at Montau∣an. I judg'd this intelligence to be very probable, forasmuch as there was not a horse to be bought for money in the whole Country, and some there were who sent to the Passes of Spain to furnish themselves from thence, and nothing was too dear, young nor old. I therefore dispatcht away the Sieur de Lussan post to the Queen, to give her an account of all these things, but her Majesty would believe nothing, sending me word that I was not to give credit to such informations, and was only to take care, that the Edicts were duly observ'd.The Hugonots begin to . In the mean time from day to day I had continual advertisements, that their practise still continued, and that they had a private Assembly at Montauban, and ano∣ther at Tholouze in the House of Dacetat. I again sent the Queen word of all I had heard; but her Majesty would never be induc'd to believe any thing, though I sent three or four Messengers one after another. In the end she grew so angry at my frequent and reitera∣ted Advertisements, that she commanded Araignes Sindic of Condommois, to bid me snd her no more, for that she knew the contrary of what I sent her intelligence, and said moreover, it seem'd as if I was afraid, and I had word also sent me by others, that they laught and jeer'd at me in the Council, calling me Trompeter and make-war, they might have said more because I did not hear them; but had I been within a Pikes length, I should have made some of them silent that spoke very loud. I except those that ought to be excepted: but these Countiers, who never handle other Iron than a knife and fork, prate at their own pleasure, and play the Demi-Gods, and keep a clutter, as if nothing could be well but what passes through their learned Coxcombs. Nothing of this kind is strange from such people as those; but I could not but wonder that the Queen being a woman of so great understanding, and knowing what she said to me, should use me so. There was no remedy; for I was so far off I could make no reply. About fifteen or twenty dayes before la Sainct Michel, I went to dine at a Gentlemans house a friend of mine, to which place also came one of those who used to give me intelli∣gence, who told me, that but two dayes before one of the Admiral's Gentlemen passed by Montauban, and that he was going post from Church to Church, to give them notice to be all in a readiness to rise at the time, when another Gentleman from the said Admiral, or the Prince of Condé should come to call them out, which at the furthest would be within fifteen or twenty dayes. I thereupon entreated him, that if he should be in Montauan at the time when the Gentleman should come thither, that he would save all the Catholicks that were in it, which he promised he would do; and so I departed thence and came to Cassaigne, where I met with a Letter from a Gentleman, who was at that time at Tholouze, wherein he gave me the same advice: but being the Letter was not sign'd, I would not send it to the Queen, doubting she should not believe it. The next day there came to th said Cassaigne the Baron de Gondrin, whom we now call Monsieur de Montepan, who was going post to Court to obtein her Majesties Letters in the behalf of his Father and him∣self, concerning a Suit they had depending in the Parliament of Tholouze. I gave credit to those who gave me intelligence, and they were faithful to me; forasmuch as of three
they were, two of them had occasion to use me, in the concern of some Estates they were in suit about, and upon that occasion it was, that I knew by their complexion they were not so zealous in their Religion, but that they had a greater kindness for worldly concerns, and would forsake Religion, Ministers, and all, to gain that for which they were in con∣test. (I believe this Religion is nothing but a meer cheat) and without me they could not do their business: neither was I wanting to assist them all I could, that I might have conti∣nual intelligence from them:The Parlia∣ments of Bour∣deaux and Tho∣louze affectio∣nate to the Kings service. for I had some interest, and was well belov'd in the Par∣liaments of Tholouze and Bourdeaux, and by the Kings Officers. They had reason to do as they did, and I to requte their kindness, forasmuch as I ever found them very affe∣ctionate to the Kings service. I then intreated the Baron de Gondrin to present my most humble and obedient service to the Queen, and to desire her Majesty to remember, that she had never been pleased to give any credit to the several advertisements I had continual∣ly given her upon all occasions; and to tell her that her own eyes would shortly weep for her unbelief; that her Majesty had sent me word he thought I was afraid; and that in the Kings Council they had been pleased to call me Trompetter, and Make-war; but that I did most humbly beseech her Majesty to believe, that I had no other apprechensi∣on for my self, who God be thanked was born without fear, and knew not what be∣longed to any other than what an honest man ought to have: But that I was afraid of the King, and of her, they being threatned with no less than death, or imprisonment; and that therefore she should look to her self for a few dayes, and detein the King from going so often a hunting, and appearing so much in publick as he used to do; especial∣ly if she had a mind to save his life and his Crown. The Baron de Gondrin acquitted himself faithfully of his Commission, and told me her Majesty had made answer, that she would give ar to no intelligence I should send her, and that she better knew the Hu∣gonots intentions than I, and also their power how far it could extend  and that they de∣sir'd nothing but peace. These people pursued their practises with great cunning, and a far off, and she was certainly charm'd by some of their Agents. The said Sieur de Mon∣tespan made so great haste, that he return'd ten or twelve dayes before la St. Michel, and told me what answer her Majesty had given him. It is impossible, but that as I have said, she was either gull'd or bewitch'd by some one or other she had about her, who did it ei∣ther out of malice or ignorance: but it was however a most strange thing, that she should be so deluded, it being a thing so notoriously publick with us, that so much as the very Pages and Footmen knew of the Preparation the Hugonots made to rise, and before the said Baron de Gondrin return'd, I had inteligence, that eight dayes before or eight dayes after la Sainct Michel, the Admirals Gentleman was certainly to come. Upon these slight answers of the Queens I had like to have committed a very great error, in laying aside all suspicion, believing that her Majesty was better enform'd than I, and that therefore I ought no more to give credit to those who gave me these daily advertisements. Where∣upon I made a match with the late Bishop of Condom, and the Sieurs de Sainctorens and de Tiadet, Brothers, to go the Baths at Barbottan, as I had been by the Physicians appoint∣ed to do, for a pain in my hip I got at the taking of Quires, which Monsieur d' Aumale I know does very well remember, and that I believe I shall carry along with me to my Grave. We went upon the Saturday from Cassaigne to go lie at Monsieur de Panias his house,The Sieur de Montluc goes to th Baths. taking two Tassels of Goshawks along with us, wherewith to pass away the time at the Baths: and the very night that we came thither in my first sleep I dreamt a dream, that did more discompose and weaken me, than if I had four dayes had a continued Fevr, which I will here set down, because there are many living to whom I told it, for these are no tales made for pleasure.A strang Dream of the Sieut de Mont∣luc. I dreamt that all the Kingdom of France was in Rebellion, and that a stranger Prince had seiz'd upon it, and had kill'd the King▪ my Lords his Bro∣thers, and the Queen, and that I was flying night and day on every side to escape; for me thought I had all the world in search of me to take me: sometimes I fled to one place, and sometimes to another, till at length I was surpriz'd in a house, and carried before the new King, who was walking betwixt two great men in a Church. He was low of stature, but gross, and well knit, and had on his head a square velvet Cap, such a one as they wore in former times. The Archers of his Guard were clad in yellow, red, and black, and me-thought as they led me prisoner thorough the Streets, all the people ran after me crying, kill the Villain; one presented a naked Sword to my throat, and another a Pistl to my breast: those that led me, crying out, do not kill him, for the King will have him hang'd in his own presence. And thus they carried me before the new King, who was walk∣ing, as I said before. There was in the Church neither Image nor Altar; and so soon as I came before him, he said to me in Italian;Come hither Rogue, thou hast made war against me, ad these servants of mine, for which I will presenly hang the. Veni que forsante, tu mai fatto la gurra,
& a quelli i quelli suno mei servitori, io ti faro apicqu  adesso, adesso. To which I made answer in the same language, (for me-thought I spoke Tuscan as well as when I was in Sienna)Sacred Maje∣sty, I have serv'd my King a all honest men are ob∣lig'd to do; your Majesty ought not to take that in e∣vil part. Sacr Msta, to servito al mio Re, si come suono obligati fari tutti gli huomi∣ni de bene, su Maesta ne deve pigliar questo a male. At which, enflamed with fury, he said to the Archrs of his Guard,Go go hang this Rascal, who will again make war a∣gainst me. Andate, andate menate lo adpicar que forfante, que mi farebe  la guerra. Whereupon they would have led me away; but I stood firm, and said to him,I beseech your Majesty to save my life, and seeing the King my Lord and Master is dead, together with my Lords his Brothers, I do promise o serve you with the same fide∣lity I did the King when he was alive. Io supplico su Maesta voler mi salvar la vita, poi che il Re mio signi∣re é morto ensicmi gli signiori suoi fratelli: Io vi prometto che vi serviro con medesima fidelta con la quale io servito il re mentr vivva. Vpon this the Lords who were walking with him, begg'd of him to save my life: upon whose intercession, looking stedfastly upon me, he said to me,Dost thou promise this from thy heart? Go to, I give thee thy life at the re∣quest of these who entreat me, be faithful to me. Prometti tu questo del cuore? or Su io ti da la vit per le pregiere di quelli che mi prgano, sie mi fidele. These Lords me thought spoke French, but we two spoke Italian; whereupon he commanded them to take me a little aside, and that he would by and by talk to me again. They then set me by a Chest that stood hard by the Church door, and those who were to look to me fell to talking with the Archers of the Guard. As I was there standing by this Chest, I began to think of the king, and repented me of the oath of Fidelity I had taken; for that peradventure the King might not be yet dead, and that if I could escape away, I would rather wander alone, and on foo, throughout the world to seek the King if he were yet alive; and thereupon took a resolution to run away. Thus resolv'd I went out of the Church, and being got into the Street began to run, and never thought of my hip, for me-thought I ran faster than I would, when on a sudden I heard a cry behind me, stop the villain; whereupon some came out of their houses to take me, and others stood in my way; but still I escap'd both from the one, and the other, and recover'd a pair of stone stairs that went up to the Wall of the Town, where coming to the top, I lookt down, and methought the Precipice was so great, thet I could hardly see to the bottom. They mounted the stairs after me, and I had nothing wherewith to defend my self, but three or four stones that I threw at them, and had a great mind to make them kill me; for me-thought they would put me to a crul death; when having nothing left to defend my self withall, I threw my self head∣long from the Battlements, and in falling awaked, and found my self all on a water, as if I had come out of a River, my Shir, the Sheets, the Counterpain all wringing wet, and I fancied that my head was bigger than a Drum. I call'd my Valet de Chamre, who presently made a fire, took off my wet shirt, and gave me another. They went also to Madam de Panias, who commanded another pair of Sheets to be given them, and her self rose and came into my Chamber, and saw the Sheets, Blankets, and Counterpain all wet, and never departed the room till all was dried; which whilst they were in doing, I told her my dream, and the fright I had been in, which had put me into this sweat; She remembers it as well as I. The Dream I dreamt of the death of King Henry my good Master, and this put me into a greater weakness than if I had had a continued Fever for a whole week together. The Physitians told me that it was nothing but force of imagina∣tion, my mind being wholly taken up with these thoughts: And I do believe it was so; for I have fancied my self in the night fighting with the Enemy, dreaming of the mis∣haps, and the successes also I afterwards saw come to pass. I have had that misfortune all my life, that sleeping and waking I have never been at rest, and was alwayes sure when I had any thing working in my head that I was to do, not to fail to dream all that night; which is very troublesome. The next day being Sunday they would needs have had me away to the Baths; but I would never be perswaded to go; for it still ran in my mind, that some disaster would befall the King, ever remembring my dream about King Henry; so that for all they could say upon Monday we return'd.Intelligence of the design up∣on Lectoure. Upon Thursday came a Consul from Lectoure, who told me that Monsieur de Fonterailles, Seneschal of Armagnac, kept himself shut up in his Castle, and stirr'd not out, and that all night they heard a knocking within against some Wall, or Wood, and that the Hugonots of the City were secretly providing arms. I made him to return, assuring him, that the Sieur de Fonterailles would never do any thing pre∣judicial to the Kings service, which I said, relying upon his word, and a promise he had made me in my House at Agen. But the said Consul would not take this for current pay: wherefore I bad him to pry more narrowly into what the Seneschal was doing. Upon Friday there came to me two Consuls from Moissac, who came to tell me, that two of the Kings Officers of Montauban, and several others were fled to Moissac, upon some apparences they had seen in the said Montauban of the taking of Arms. I made these also to return, giving them in charge that without any bustle, or raising of arms, they should be careful of the preservation of their Town, and that if they should hear, that the others
took arms they should beake themselves to arms also, and send me an account of all. Upon Sunday Monsieur de Sainctorens came to dine with me, where we made a Mach the next day to go see our Hawks sly, and that he should come by break of day in the morning to Cassagne. At midnight there came to me a Messenger from the Sieur de la Lande, Canon of Agen, who brought me a letter from him, and another that had been sent to him by Monsieur de Lauzun. Monsieur de la Lande's Letter was,The Sieur de Lauzun sends notice of the Hugonots ta∣king arms. I send you a Letter, which Monsieur de Lauzun has sent me in so great haste, that the man who brought it is able to go no farther. In that of Monsieur de Lauzun there was Monsieur de la Lande I pray send speedy notice to Monsieur de Montluc, that the Hugonots have taken arms at Bergerac, and are gone in all haste to seize upon some horses of the Marquis de Trans, which are kept at Eyet, and that all those of this Country take horses where ever they can find them. Now because the Marquis de Trans was in suit with his Brother-in law call'd Monsieur de St. Laurence, it presently came into my fancy, that these might be some of the said St. Laurence his people, who were going to execute some distress for Costs against the said Marquis, and made no other account of it. About break of day I arose, and looking out of the window whilst my man was trussing me, to see if Monsieur de Saincto∣rens came, there comes in a man on horseback, who came from a place upon the River Garonne, whom I will not name, for fear he should be kill'd; for the man that sent him to me is yet living; and as I was opening the Letter my Valet de Chambre saw a Ticket fall down upon the floor. I fell to reading the Letter, the contents whereof were, that he en∣treated me to give him leave to sell a Quintal of Pepper to a Portuguese, which made me in a rage tear the Letter to pieces, cursing all the Portuguese to the pit of Hell; for it put me in mind of the death of my Son at the Maderas. This Letter was only purposely con∣triv'd to enclose the Ticket, and my Valet de Chambre began to gather up the Ticket, tel∣ling me it fell out as I open'd the Letter. I then fell to reading the Ticket, where it was thus written,Advertisement to the Sieur d Montluc. Betwixt the twenty eighth and thirtith of this present September, The King taken, the Queen dead, Rochelle taken, Bergerac taken, Montauban taken, Lectur taken, and Montluc dead. These were the very words of the Ticket; which put me quite out of the humour of Hawking, and reconcil'd me to the Portugal; so that I immediately sent away Captain Mauries, who had been Lieutenant to the late Captain Montluc in Pied∣mont, Captain Iean of Agen, and Tibanville Commissaries of the Artillery, commanding them to go directly towards Monsieur de Sainctorens his house, whom they would meet by the way, and bid him return home, and send notice to Monsieur de Tilladet his Brother, and the Gentlemen his Neighbours, to come by ten of the clock to Sampoy (a Town in the Kings possession, where I have a house) with their horses and arms, without any noise at all; for we were within a league of one another. I gave them also in charge, that so soon as they had spoke with Monsieur de Sainctorens, they should gallop away to Lectoure, which was three leagues from Cassaigne (for what the Consul had told me came into my head, and it was very probable, that to cut out work in Gascony they would begin with this strong place) giving them instructions withal, that so soon as they should come with∣in sight of the Castle, to ride softly, pretending to be Merchants, and enter in by the Gate of the Bulwark (doubting the Seneschal might have taken some people into the Castle by the Postern Gate, who if they perceiv'd themselves once to be suspected, might presently seize upon the Town by the help of the Hugonots who were in it) but that so soon as they should be got in, they should talk privately with the Consul, possessing themselves of the said Gate of the Bulwark, and that dead or alive I might find them within it; for I would soon be with them; which they accordingly did. I sent Dispatches also to Mon∣sieur de Vrduzan, Seneschal of Bazadois, and to several other Gentlemen his Neighbours assigning them all to repair to Sampoy by ten of the clock;Diligence of the Sieur de Montluc to pre∣serve Lectoure. to which place according to ap∣pointment I went my self, but found no body there but Monsieur de Sainctorens, who by misfortune had found none of the Genlemen his Neighbours at home, and Monsieur de Tillaet had been let blood that morning, so that no body came but an Archer of my Company call'd Seridos, and two Sons of Monsieur de Beraud, who were also of my Com∣pany, their Father being sick, and a Kinsman of mine call'd Monsieur de la Vit. I staid there for Monsieur de Verduzan till twelve a clock, when seeing no body come, I resolv'd to go to Lectoure without expecting any longer, where also I doubted I should come with the latest. Those who were in my company remonstrated to me, that if the Seneschal was crafty, and that he had men in the Castle he would easily defeat me in the Town; to which I made answer, that should I longer deferre going, he would have notice of the three Gentlemen I had sent before, and would so secure the Gates, that I should not be able to enter, and that it was better for us to venture our lives in the Town, than to keep out, and suffer the Town to be lost. We then mounted to horse, being no more than six
Light-horse, and we might be in all (the Servants compriz'd) thirty horse. I command∣ed fourteen Harquebuzeers to follow after me, under the conduct of a Priest called Ma∣laubaere, commanding them to follow at a good shog trot, and so we marcht with these mighty Forces. When we came near unto Terraube, a little league from Lectoure, there came a man on horseback, dispatcht away by the Consul and Captain Mauriez, by whom they sent me word, that they had possessed themselves of the Gates, and that the City was all in arms, desiring to know by which Gate I would enter, I told him by the Gate of the Castle; whereupon he return'd upon the spur as he came. By good fortune thee hapned to be in the Town the Sieur de Lussan, and the Captain his Brother, who came out to meet me, knowing nothing of all this business, they being come thither by appointment of Process,The Sieur de Montluc in Lectour. and so we entred into the Town. So soon as we were come into Monsieur de Poisegurs house, I entreated the Sieur de Lussan to go bid Monsieur de Fon∣terailles come and speak with me, for I had something to say to him that concerned his Majesties service. He sent me word back, that he would not come, and that he was in the Castle in the behalf of the Queen of Navarre, Lady and Mistress of the said Castle and Town. Whereupon I sent him word again, that if he did not come I would assault the said Castle, and at the ringing of the Tocquesaint call in all the neighbouring Towns to my assi∣stance: which I think statled him, for he came. At his coming I told him, that I would have the Castle to put people into it, who were of the Religion of the King, and a Gentleman to command them, till I should see to what the beginning of this Commotian tended; to which he made answer, that he was a faithful Servant of the Kings, and that he would rather die than do any thing contrary to his Majesties pleasure. To which I replied again, that I did believe him to be so, but that notwithstanding I would in the mean time scure the Castle, and that I had a greater confidence in my self than in him; and after some disputes Monsieur de Sainctorens put in, and said something, to which the other replied briskly upon him: but he did not go without his answer; and had he not suddenly resolv'd, I was about to have taken him prisoner. Monsieur de Lussan then took him aside, remonstrating to him, that he was highly too blame not to obey, and that it was as much as his life was worth; for I would die there but I would have it, and that he himself knew well enough what a kind a man I was. Monsieur de Fonterailles thereupon came to me, and told me, that he was ready to deliver up the Castle into my hands, but that he earnestly beggd of me, that I would permit him to reenter into it, and sleep there that night, that he might pack up all the goods he had there, ready to go away in the morning. I desir'd him on the contrary, that he would not ofer to stir out of the Town, and that I would deliver the Guard of the Castle to such Catho∣lick Gentlemen as he should name. He therefore nam'd several, but I would like of none of them, when seeing I would not put in those he desir'd, he nam'd Monsieur de Cassaigne (a neighbour to the Town, who since has been Lieutenant to Monsieur d' Arnes Compa∣ny) with whom I was content, and sent presently for him. However I plaid the Novice in one thing, for I let the said Sieur de Fonterailles go in again upon his word into the Castle, which was not discreetly done; for a man should alwayes in such cases take all things at the worst. In the mean time Monsieur de Verduzan arriv'd with four or five Gentlemen in Com∣pany with him, and presently after Monsieur de Maignas, and every hour some or other came in to us. After Supper we went out of the Castle, where I fell to view and consi∣der the Postern of the false Bray, and began to remonstrate to those friends who were with me, that in case the Seneschal should have made an appointment for those of his Party to come that night to the Portal, the Guards and Centinels of the Town could not possibly hinder him from letting in whom he pleased, wherefore I was resolv'd to lodge Thean∣ville Commissary of the Artillery, and the Priest with the fourteen Harquebuzeers in the false Bray, betwixt the two Portals; and it was well for me I did so, for otherwise they had trapp'd us, and cut all our throats that night. See how a man may fall into danger thorough his own fault: for I thought my self wonderful wie and circumspect; and yet notwithstanding I put a place of so great importance, together with the whole Country in danger to be lost. I was not yet satisfied with this Guard, but I moreover order'd all the Gentlemen and their Servants to lie down in their Cloaths,Order given to the Captains. and sent a command to all those of the Town to do the same. In the morning by Sun-rise the said Seneschal came to me again,The Sieur de Fonterailles delivers up the Castle of Le∣ctoure to Mon∣sieur de Mont∣luc. to entreat me to leave him the Castle, and that he would give me security, with a great many other fine good morrows; but I told him he did but lose time in such proposals; for I was resolv'd to put men into it: so that seeing no other remedy, he re∣ceiv'd the Sieur de la Cassaigne with twenty Soldiers into the place, and then came to take his leave of me. I did what I could to perswade him to stay in the Town; but he made answer, that he would not trust himself with the Inhabitants, beginning to tell me, that I
put a very great affront upon him, in not confiding in his Loyalty; that he was a man of a race too remarkable for thir services, and fidelity so the Crown of France, to be suspested, and that his Ancestors had sav'd the Kingdom. To which I made answer, that his Grand∣father, of whom he intended to speak, did never save the Kingdom, and that in his time reigned Lewis the twelfth, in whose Reign the Kingdom had never been in any such danger, and that if it was of the time that King Charles retir'd to Bourges, that he intended to speak, that honor was to be attributed to Potton, and la Hire, of whose valour all the Chronicles are full. For la Hire and Potton, two Gascon Gentlemen, were indeed cause of the recovery of the Kingdom of France: yet would I not deny but that his Grand father was a great and valiant Captain,The ordinary men at arms in France first reduc'd by Charles the 7th in the year 1444 into cer∣tain Compa∣nies, and un∣der particular orders, one whereof was that the Gen-d'arm must at the youngest be twenty, and one and twen∣ty years of age, and must have been one year at least an Ar∣cher, which no man was to be but a Gentle∣man born, or one that had been a Cap∣tain, Lieut∣enant, Ensign, or Serjeant-Major of a Foot Company six years. Who was also by the order of his admission to keep three Horses, two for service, and one for his Bag∣gage, in regard whereof he had 400 Livers Tournon yearly entertainment. These Gens-d'arms were at first but 1500 in all: but they have since been encreased to a hundred Com∣panies. who having fifty Gens-d' armes des Ordonnances, and being General of twelve hun∣dred Light-horse, the most of which were Albanois, perform'd great services for the Crown. In recompence whereof the King also married him to the Inheritrix of Chattillon, by whom he had seven or eight thousand Livers yearly revenue: but that the House from which his Father descended, which was that of Fonterailles, was as mean a Family as mine; At which he broke out into a sudden passion, saying, would to God, would to God I might die at this instant, provided the Prince of Navarre was at age to command! Why said I? what reason have you to wish your own death for the Prince of Navarre, seeing that neither you, nor any of your Race, have ever receiv'd any benefit or honor from the House of Navarre, nor other, than from the King? to which he replied, that it was true, but that he did so love the Prince of Navarre, that he would be content to die upon that condition. I then began to suspect there was some knavery in the wind, and so he bad me farewel. Monsieur de la Cassaigne, who was present at all this discourse, waited upon him to his Horse, where, as he was going to put foot in the stirrup, he cried out like a man in dispair, O unfortu∣nate man that I am, I shall never again have the conidence to shew my face amongst men of honor! Whereupon Monsieur de la Cassaigne took occasion to tell him, that he was too blame to complain of me, who had treated him with all the civility h could himself expect, or desire, and that perhaps another would not have used him with so great respect, as I had done; to which he replied in these words, but you do not know all; this day the Kingdom is set to sail, farewell France; and so mounting to horse, he went directly to la Garde, the House of Monsieur de Firmacon his Uncle. Before the Sieur de la Cassaigne could return back to me there came fifteen or sixteen Peasants loaden with Harquebuzes, Halberts, and Cross-bows, leading a boy prisoner a∣long with them, whom they brought into my Chamber, in the presence of all the Gentle∣men that were there, telling me they were of la Masquere, within a quarter of a league of Lectoure (which is a little Hamlet consisting of seven or eight Tenements) and that at midnight there came a great company of armed men, both horse and foot, and drew themselves into a great Meadow close by the houses, where they laid them down upon the ground. The poor people saw them, and durst not stir out of their houses: but they saw them send six horse-men as far as the Suburbs of Lectoure, where they met intelli∣gence, that I with a great number of Gentlemen was entred into the Town; and had also sent to discover those whom I had planted without to hinder the relief: by which seeing their enterprise was defeated, and concluding that the Seneschal was taken prisoner, they return'd full speed to their Troops, telling them that I was entred into the Town, and had taken the Senescal prisoner, wherefore they must retire before it was day, that they might not be known. And (as the night has no shame) they took so great a fright at the news, that they began to throw away their arms in flying, and by break of day passed by Plieux, where the common people began to pursue them, and they running away to a∣bandon their arms, which the Inhabitants of Plieux had almost all, excepting some few that fell into the hands of those of la Maquere. The horse ran straight to their other Troop that had made a halt at St. Rose, till they should be commanded to march; who also took a terrible fright in retiring, running every man as fast as his horse would carry him to his own house. The chief Leaders of these two Parties of Horse and Foot were the Sieur de Montamat, brother to the Seneschal, the Sieurs de Castelnau, d' Audax, de Popas, and de Peyrecave.The Hugonots come too late to relieve Le∣ctoure. I knew nothing as yet of the Troop at St. Rose, for neither the Boy nor the Boors of la Masquere had heard of any other than that they had seen. All the Gentlemen hereupon advis'd me to go take the Seneschal, and clap him up priso∣ner, which nevertheless I would not do out of respect to the House of Firmacon, to which he was a Nephew, remonstrating to them, that should I take him prisoner, the Court of Parliament of Tholouze would immediately send to demand him of me, whom I could not justly deny, and if they once got him, he would not be two hours alive, and I would by no means be the occasion of his ruine.
Whilst we were in these disputes, Monsieur de la Cassaigne came, and told me the words he had said to him at his going away, no body being by; whereupon I entreated him to go into the Town to seek out some Hugonot, who was a friend to the Seneschal, and to give him all asurance that he should receive no manner of injury, nor displeasure, pro∣vided he would reveal the Enterprize. He went then to speak with one who was a very intimate friend of his, telling him what words the Seneschal had cast out at his depar∣ture, and that it was as much as his life was worth, if he did not discover all he knew: who after he had given him all the assurance he desir'd, made him this reply. What did the Sneschal mean to enter into so many disputes with Monsieur de Montluc, I was behind him when he contested so highly with the said Sieur, and do wonder that he did not seize him prisner, which had he done all we of the Religion had been dead men: I pray be faithful, and take care, that we may have no harm done us; for there is not a person of the Religion, who knows any thing of the Enterprize of France, and of this Town, but those who are gone out with him,Design upon the King. my self excepted, who durst not go. This day or to-morrow the King or the Queen shall be taken or dead, and all the whole Kingdom of France revolted. I pray consider a little how closely these people could carry on such an Enterprize as this: I was told that in their Consistory they made them swear to renounce Paradice, if they ever reveal'd any thing. Monsieur de la Cassaigne returned presently to me, and ta∣king me aside told me all that the other had said to him, and then I remembred my self of the Advertisements in the Ticket, and of my unfortunate Dream, and began with tears in my eyes to declare all I had heard to Messieurs the Seneschal of Bazadois, de Sainctorens, and to all the Gentlemen who were present, who all began to cry out, that we ought to mount presently to horse; and gallop after the Seneschal, which nevertheless I would not do for the aforementioned reasons, remonstrating to them, that though he should be taken, the evil would not be prevented by the seiing of his person, and that the mischief was sufficiently discover'd by the words he had cast out to Monsieur de la Cassaigne: which also this other had confirm'd to him: but that I would presently send away to all the Gentlemen, to give notice to all the other Gentry, and their Neighbours, to assemble together for the common safety, which I did, and was very glad within my self, in this ill aspect of affairs, to have pluckt so considerable a feather from their wing. I sent immediately post to Tholouze to advertize the Court and the Capitouls, that they must forthwith betake themselves to arms, and employ all they could wrap and wring, either to succour the King, if he was living; or to revenge his death, if he were dead. I caused some provisions immediately to be put into the Castle, and left the fourteen Har∣quebuzeers with Monsieur de la Cassaigne, sending to the Soldiers of Florence and Pan∣cillac forthwith to come, and put themselves into the Town, and that they were to obey Monsieur de la Cassaigne. Whilst I was about these dispatches there arriv'd Monsieur de la Chappelle, Vice-Senescal, and Monsieur de Romegas (the same who has so signaliz'd him∣self against the Turk at Malta) who had both of them been all night on horse-back, by reason that a Hugonot (whose life Monsieur de la Chapelle had sav'd) came ad midnight to give them notice that we were marching directly to Lectoure, where the Seneschal was by the Postern to let them in. Upon this intelligence they had mounted to horse (for they were near Neighbours) and put themselves into a little Wood, where they discover'd these people, who were retiring in great fear, but durst not stir out of the Wood, having no more than seven or eight horse; but so soon as it was day took their way towards Le∣ctoure, though they fear'd it was already taken, and as they came to the Town were in∣form'd, that I was within it, where they told me of the disorder they had seen in the Troop of St. Rose, and then we knew that they had been in two Troops. Monsieur de la Chappelle then beg to enform himself on his part, and the Court of Parliament sent in all dilligence to enform themselves on theirs. The Indictment was drawn up, and a hun∣dred or more Witnesses examin'd, the most of which were of the new Religion, and who had actually been in those forenamed Troops, who all depos'd one and the same thing, of a Conspiracy plotted against the King and State. In the progress of the Tryal the Witnesses gave evidence of the Enterprize, which was, That that very night de la St. Michel the Seneschal was to let in the two Companies of Foot into the Town by the Postern of the False-Bray, and afterwards into the Castle by the Postern belonging to it. Of these the Consuls of the Town kept one key, and the Seneschal another, and so soon as he was gone the Enterprize being discover'd, they went to examine the two Locks, and found that those of the Consuls were broke open, and put again into their place, with nails that were not clencht. (All this is couch'd in the Pro∣cess) and that after the two Foot Companies should be Masters of the Town, the Horse were to come at a good round trot before Cassaigne where I was, which was but three
leagues from Lectu, and shut me up in the Castle; and that at the same time all their Churches of Nerac, Castelgeloux, Thoneins, Cleirac, Mourejau, Condom, Moncrabeau, and other adjacent places were to come flocking about the Castle. These were the fruits of the good prayers of their Godly Ministers; and being the Castle had no Flanckers, they made sure to have me in four and twenty hours by sapping. Rapin the same day came with four hundred men to Grnade, being come from Montauban, who so soon as ever he should have notice that I was shut up, was to march day and night to come before the said Cassaigne, they making account that I could not be reliev'd in eight dayes, there be∣ing no place of any strength to which any one could repair, they having possessed them∣selves of Lectoure. The Enterprize was so laid, as it had been certain, and would infal∣libly have taken effect, had I been asleep in the business; or if to move in State like the Kings Lieutenant, I had staid till morning, that those I had sent for had come in. The Kings Lieutenants may here take a good example by me, both as to the good in∣telligence I was careful to keep, in my judgment to provide against the present extremity, and in my prompt resolution (not regarding whether I was weak or strong) to go, as I did, to put my self into the Town: for all these things together preserv'd the place in the Kings obedience, together with my own life, and consequently the whole Country, which had been absolutely lost had I been kill'd, and Lectoure taken: for that being sur∣priz'd, there had been no place of safety, but within the Gates of Tholouze and Bourde∣aux: and when all France had heard that Guienne was lost, I leave men of understand∣ing to judge how the Kings affairs would have been discountenanced, and the ardour of those who stood for him cool'd at the news. I believe the greatest part of them would have closed with the Enemy. Therefore do not you who are the Kings Lieutenants pro∣pose to your selves; I must stay for the Nobless, I must go well attended; for if you be such as you ought to be, that is to say, fear'd, and belov'd, you your self alone are worth a hundred. Every one that sees you march will come in to your assistance, and take courage by your example, and your Enemies for one man that you have will say you have a hundred. It is no time to dally, and stand upon punctillio's in such affairs, for whilest yo deferre time, to Lord it in greater state, you lose your place. And take warn∣ing by the error I had like to have committed in permitting the Seneschal to go again in∣to the Castle upon his word; we live in a time wherein it is the fashion with many to dispence with the breach of their faith; and a man shall excuse himself that his promise was extracted from him by force, and in the mean time you are shut out of your Fort. Never deferre that till to morrow that you can do to day, for it failed but very little that I was not lost; and had I not set those people without, the Succours had entred, and the Seneschal had had good reason to laugh at my easiness. This was the Enterprize upon Guienne; and I dare be bold to say, that Bourdeaux it self had not been very secure had my throat been cut: for a Country without a head is in very great danger, and the Hu∣gonots had very great intelligence, and a very strong party in that City. After I had left order with Monsieur de la Cassaigne about Lectoure; the same Tues∣day (being Michaelmas day) I went in all diligence to Agen, where so soon as I arriv'd, I immediately sent for the Sieurs de Nort the Kings Counsellor, and Delas the Kings Advocate to come to me, who were assisting to me in all my dispatches, and were ever my Counsel in all affairs.Diligence of the Sieur de Montluc. We sent then for two Clerks of the Town, and two Secreta∣ries of mine, and of all night long we did nothing but write Letters to all the Lords and Gentlemen of the Country, and I do believe amongst us we writ above two hundred. The Elder Brother of the Counsellor call'd de Navy was Consul, who did nothing all night long but run up and down to seek out Messengers to send every way. I gave no∣tice in my Letters to every one, as well of the attempt upon Lectoure, as of the words the Seneschal had cast out, and of the other who had confirmed them. I gave them likewise to understand, that now the Kings good and faithful Subjects would be known, as also who were good Frenchmen, and that since there had been a King in France, so fair an occasion had never presented it self, wherein to manifest the fidelity we owe to the Crown of France; for at that very time the life of the King was in apparent dan∣ger, if not already taken from him, which should it prove so, we were all bound by the Law of God, Nature, and Nations to revenge his death: or at the least he was threatned with Captivity, and in such an extremity, those who should sit at home, ought to be branded for disloyalty, and mark'd for Traitors to their Prince and his Crown for ever: that the Gascons had never hitherto been branded, with those Characters, and that therefore I begged of them we might not leave such an obloquy upon our own Posterity, nor our Childrens Children, that should succeed them. In short I omitted nothing I could think of that might excite or encline them to betake themselves to arms,
and to succour the King; assigning them all to meet at Agen by the tenth of October fol∣lowing. The foremenioned persons and I continued five dayes and five nights, sending away dispatches to al parts, insomuch that I do not think any one of us had ever of all that while an hour in four and twenty to sleep in, which put all three of us into so great a dstemper,The Sieur de Moluc's hu∣mour. that we verily believ'd we should fall sick. I have all my life hated writing, having ever much rather pass over a whole night with my arms on my back, than to spend half so much time in writing; for I was never cut out for that employment, though per∣haps there might be some fault in my self, as I have observ'd in some others, who have been on the contrary so over-addicted to it, that they had rather be in their Cabinets, than in the Trenches. News came to me from every side, that every one prepar'd to march, and I dispatch'd forty Captains of Foot, four Companies of Gens-d'arms, which had been those of the Sieurs de Gondrin, de Masses, d' Arne, and de Bardozan, and eight or ten Cornets of Harquebuzeers on horseback. Of these I gave the Command of the Foot to Monsieur de Sainctorens, who was Colonel of the Legionaries, that is to say, fifteen En∣ns for him, and fifteen for my Son the Knight of Malta, who was in Piedmont, and to hom I writ to come away to the Army. After I had heard what had past at the fine business of Meaux, I sent him to the King, besieching his Majesty to conferre upon him the Command of the fifteen Ensigns; which also he did with a very good will. The ninth day after la Sainct Michel, as I was walking upon the Sands of Agen to see the Horse and Foot come in from all parts, which I quarter'd on both sides the River Garonne, there came to me Captain Burée, who had been eight dayes in coming, and scap'd narrowly four or five times of being taken, having come most part of the way on foot, not daring to shew himself at the Post-houses, most of the Post-masters being Hugonots. He brought me a Letter from the King, and another from the Queen, wherein their Ma∣jesties acquainted me with their fortunes,The King sends to the Sieur de Montluc. and how they had been very near being taken, his Majesty exhorting me once more to preserve for him the Province of Guienne, as I had done in the former troubles. His Majesty in these Letters did not send to me for any Succours, fearing I should have enough to do to secure the Country with all the forces I could make in it. The said Captain de Burie staid but two hours with me, I sending him back in all diligence (for so I was to proceed, and had alwayes done so) to assure their Majesties of the Succours I was about to send into France, and to tell them that I hoped to secure Guienne with the Gentlemen only who were Natives of the Province, and the Peo∣ple of the Country. But I did not fail to write to the Queen, that she should no more be so incredulous, nor deaf to my advertisements; and that had she pleased to have be∣gun the game, and got the start of her Enemies, she had put them quite out of their play. I then presently dispatch'd away new Messengers to Tholouze and Bourdeaux, and to all the Gentlemen of that part of the Country, with Copies of the King and Queens Letters, desiring them to march with all possible expedition to relieve the King, whom the Enemy had besieg'd in Paris, and one thing I can affirm with truth, that I never in my life either saw, or read in any History of so wonderful a diligence, as every one made both Horse and Foot to this effect.The People of France very good and loy∣al. There is not in the whole world so good a People, nor a Gentry so affectionate to their Prince, had not this new Religion corrupted them; for in truth that has spoil'd all; I do not know who will salve it. I was in Limoges in nine and twenty dayes (accounting from the thirtieth of September, that I wrote my dis∣patches) with a thousand or twelve hundred Horse, and thirty Ensigns of Foot, whom I there muster'd together with the Gens-d'armes, the Treasurer-General de la Gourgues ha∣ving brought along some money he had taken up for that purpose; for I for my own part was never accustomed to finger the Kings money. Being at Limoges I assembled all the Lords and Captains of Gens-d'armes in my Chamber, and there deliver'd my self to them after this manner. Gentlemen and fellows in arms,The Sieur de Montluc's Ha∣rangue to the Lords and Gentlemen of Gascony at their going to the King. of all the good fortunes I have had since I came into the world (and I have been blest with as many perhaps as any Captain in France) nor of all the services I have perform'd for the Crown (which have been no inconsiderable ones, as you your selves know, and have also therein had all of you a part, and sak't your lives and fortunes in the Quarrel) I never met with any that gave me so great satisfaction as this occasion that now presents it self, of manifesting our loyalty and courage. And you ought to feel the same joy in your bosoms that I do: for what greater blessing could God Almighty have conferr'd upon you, than to see your selves assembled together in so brave and so spritely a body in so short a time on horse-back to go to the relief of your Prince, for whose defence God has given you life, and made you men, and me also; I say for the defence of his Person: for, as you very well know, the Masque is now taken
away, and there i no more question of the Mass, or theSo they use to call the Hu∣gonot Assem∣blies. Presche, but it is immedi∣ately and directly against his person, that this Rebellion is set on foot, and those who were engag'd in the wicked Enterprize of Meaux, as you your selves very well know, directed the attempt immediately against his Majesties sacred person. How great a good fortune is it then to see, that God has reserv'd you to revenge so great an injury, and to assist your King, and natural Prince in so great a necessity? O my Companions! how much ought you to esteem your selves happy, how highly ought you to be satis∣fied with your fortune? How will the King be ravisht with joy to see such a Nobless from the extreamest part of his Kingdom, in so short a time, and in so brave an equi∣page come in to his relief? He will never forget so great, and so timely a service, but for ever acknowledge it to you and yours. Believe me Gentlemen, though I am infinitely pleased to think, that I have some share in this service, yet I am very sensibly afflicted, that I am like to have no hand in the main stroke of the business, and that I cannot have the honor to lead you to this glorious work, that we might go together to lay down our lives at his Majesties feet for the defence of his life and Crown. May God never prosper me, if I do not desire it more than ever I did any thing in this world, but you see it cannot be without putting the whole Province into manifest hazard, which I hope to preserve with those few Forces are left me in despite of the Enemies practices. It only then, Gentlemen, remains that you make the haste requir'd, remember what you have seen me do, and how often you have heard me say, that diligence is the best part of a Soldier. You know not what condition the Kings affairs may be in, nor how pressing his danger may be; therefore do not delay time I beseech you. I know there are ma∣ny amongst you, not only worthy to lead a Troop, but to command an Army: but let me inrea you to approve the choice I have made in the person of Monsieur de Terride for the leading of this, to whom Monsieur de Gondrin shall be assisting. He is the old∣est Captain, and of greatest experience amongst you, and will, I am confident, acquit himself worthy of his charge; and rest you assur'd, that I will remember to have a care to preserve your Houses in your absence. Do me the favour also to think of me when you come to the work we have often been employ'd in together, and then make it known that you are Gentlemen, and Gascons, and that there is not a Nation in the world to be compar'd to ours for feats of arms. I have been conversant with all the Soldiers of the world, but have never seen the like to ours, and in all engagements and exploits of war, whether little or great, that I have been an eye-witness of, the Gascons have ever carried away the Prize. Maintain I beseech you this reputation, you will never have such an opportunity again wherein to manifest your valour, and the zeal and affection you bear to your natural King and Soveraign. They all return'd me thanks, assuring me, that they would not stay longer than was necessary to bait, in any place till they came to the King, and Monsieur de Terride made me a particular acknowledgment for the honor I had done him. After, they fell into con∣sultation, which way they should go, where every one advised what he thought best, for in matter of Counsel, it has evermore been my custom, to make every one deliver his opi∣nion; I have found advantages by it: but after many disputes, it was at last determin'd that they should take the way directly to Moulins. For me, Monsieur de Monsalles had like to have made me a little angry; for he would needs have been going before, as if he had had more desire, and a greater affection than the rest: but I told him, that it was neither safe nor fit to leave the Party; and it was after such a manner that he saw very well he had displeased me.Monsieur de Monsales lead the Vnguard of the Gascon Succours. I deliver'd to him the leading of the Vant-Guard, and to Monsieur de Sainctorens the Command of the Foot, and before my departure from Limoges, I saw them all march away. I shall say nothing of this Enterprize of St. Michel, it was so foul and unworthy a Frenchman, and worse than the business of Amboise, where∣in I perfectly discern'd the effects of the League, or Counter-league I had heard whis∣per'd at Montd Mrsan. I know not what use was made of those Succours I sent, but I dare be bold to say, that never any Lieutenant of Guinne drew so many Gentlemen, and so great a number of Foot, all on a sudden out of the Country as I did: nor so many men of singular note for their parts and valour; of whom I had so good an opinion, that had I met the Prince of Condé without the Traitors, I would not have given our Vi∣ctory for his; and as I return'd back I still met several parties who were coming in to joyn with the rest. Neither shall I meddle to set down how these Succours behav'd them∣selves in the occasions presented, forasmuch as the Monsieur himself was there, and all the Princes and great Captains of France.
Now when I thought to have this great diligence of mine very kindly taken, and ex∣pected to receive a return of thanks from their Majestis for so opportune a service, I was quite contrary presented with a Patent, that on Dragon, Deputy to the receiver of Guienne brought from Court, and that was sent by the King to Monsieur de Candalle, by virtue whereof his Majesty made the said Sieur de Candalle his Lieutenant General in the City of Bourdeaux and Bourdillois, with as ample commission, and full power, as if I was there. I was very much surpriz'd at this, and knew very well that some one or another had gi∣ven me a Traverse at Court, and that the King and Queen would never have put such a trick upon me, had it not been for some back friend of mine; and thanks be to God the Kings of France have ever such kind of Vermin to spare, who have evermore lent their Cha∣rities to the best and most faithful servants our Kings have had, which made me not so much wonder at this last kindness of theirs. It was not the first office of that kind I had receiv'd at their hands, Monsieur de la Malassize, who is yet living, did me one in Ro∣mania to Monsieur de Guise, endeavouring by that means to make me be put out of the Go∣vernment of Tuscany, to make way for Monsieur de la Molle, making the Duke believe that I had spoke unhandsomely of him, which the said Duke gave credit to, and for a time bore me ill will upon that account. Since in the presence of Monsieur d'Aumale, Monsieur de Montpezat, Messieurs de Cipierre and de Randan (which two first are dead, and the other two living) at Macherate, I acquitted my self; yet could I not so far dis∣possess him of his ill conceiv'd opinion, but that some seeds of it remain'd, so that he was never absolutely reconcil'd till the business of Thionville. At my return to Montalsin it faild but very little that I did not cut the throat of him that was the cause, and therefore 'tis no wonder if he continue to do me all the ill offices he can: yet I will not here insert the reasons for several considerations. I shall still let him proceed to do as he has hitherto done, managing the Queen, though I hope her Majesty will one day alter her opinion, as did Monsieur de Guise. I had another good office done me when King Henry sent me into Piedmont after my re∣turn from Sienna,Of the Siege of Vulpian. at the taking of Vlpian, only because I kept about Monsieur d' Aumale, not sparing my life no more than the meanest Soldier in the Army, and I think they had no mind that Monsieur d' Aumale should have the honor to take it, nor other places that he took; I had there a Letter brought me from the Constable, wherein he writ me word, that the King had commanded him to write to me, that I should retire to my own house till further order, charging me, that I had said I would not obey Monsieur de Termes, as if I had not alwayes been accustomed to obey him; for I have all my life preferr'd him before my self in all things; and he did deserve it. Not long before, some body had done him such another courtesie, saying, that by reason of his Marriage in Piedmont, and the friendship he had contracted with the Biragues,Charity lent to Monsieur de Termes, and to Monsieur d' Aumale. he might easily seize Piedmont into his own hands; as if either the one or the other had ever so much as thought of any such thing: however this was sufficient to make him to be call'd back out of Piedmont: but he was too honest a man, and that was not a fit recompence for so many services as he had done. Monsieur d' Aumale also had the same piece of service done him, it being reported to the King, that the Princes would not obey him, and that therefore his Majesty must send Monsieur de Termes to command; as if Monsieur d' Aumale was not of a beter Family than Monsieur de Termes, and that the Princes would sooner obey a private Gentleman, than one who was a Prince, though he was not of the Royal blood; I can affirm, as having been an eye-witness, and no man can give a better testimony than my self, that the said Princes no more spar'd themselves than the meanest Gentleman in the Army, and perform'd a piece of bravery worthy the noble Families from whence they descended; for they went on in their own persons to the assault, and mounted the breach at Vlpian, scrambling up with the help of their Pikes, and some few Ladders of Ropes, for the Breach was not reasonable, as I have said elsewhere before. And since I am entred upon the discouse of the good offices honest men have done them at Court, I will reckon up some others that I have seen in my time, as also some that I have read of in the Roman Histories. And of these I will first mention that which had like to have cost Monsieur de Lautrec so dear; which was, that a certain person detein'd from him a hundred thousand Crowns, which the King had commanded St. Blanzay to send him, wherewith to pay the Swiss, which summe had it accordingly been sent, the Swiss had not retir'd into their own Country; for they only return'd for want of pay, and by that means the Dutchy of Millan was lost. Upon which occasion this poor Lord Monsieur de Lautrec was hardly thought good enough for the Dogs, for a certain time, and could never obtein the favour to be heard to justifie himself: but in the end the King was pleased to hear him,St. Blanzay hang'd. and thereupon caused St. Blanzay to be hang'd, though the fault
was none of his; but the poor man paid for't. I know who was the cause of all this dis∣order: but I have nothing to do to write it. Oh 'is a tickle thing to serve these great ones, and the paths are very slppery men are to walk in, but we must thorough. God has ordein'd them to command, and us to obey, and others also obey us, and yet we are all of one Father and Mother; but it is too cold fled to derive our Pedegrees. I saw also the trick that was playd Monsieur de Bourbon,Monsieur d Bourbon. by which he was reduc'd to that despair, that he was constrain'd to do many things unworthy of a Prince; for they would take his Estate from him, and reduce him to his Childs part only of the inheri∣tance of the House of Bourbon, of which he was a younger Bother. At the Camp of Messieres, and in the Expedition of Valntienne, they made him swallow two injuries at once;Monsieur de Bonivet. if Monsieur Bonivet, who was Admiral, was or no the cause I am not able to say, but it was so reported; some one or other must alwayes bear the blame. I think had not the King of himself been dispos'd to use him ill, neither his Majesty, nor the Queen his Mother would have driven this brave Prince into such extremes. However it was, the foul play that was offer'd him was the cause of a great mischief to Frnce, and the King repented him of it more than once afterward.The Prince of Aurange. The Prince of Aurange, who commanded the Emperors Amy after the death of the said Seigneur de Bourbon, had also a little before quitted the King's service by reason his Majesty had commanded the Mares∣chal de Logis to dislodge him for the King of Poland's Embassador. The occasio was very light, but it is nevertheless very true, that a brave heart disdains to be de∣spis'd. There was another good office also done to Andrea Aura,Prince Auria. who was Admiral of his Majesties Glleys, at the time when he accounted the Kingdom of Naples as good as sure; and that was by giving the Gallies to Monsieur de Barbezieux, which for any default on his part could not justly be done, for Count Philippin d' Auria his Nephew had won the Battel by Naples, which I have already writ of, against the Vceroy Don Hugues de Moncalde, who was there slain, and the Marquis de Guast, with several other great per∣sons taken prisoners. The said Count was so careful and vigilant, that so much as a Cat could not enter into the City of Naples; those within were reduc'd to the last extremity, the Viceroy dead, many of the Grandees prisoners, and the rest revolted to the King; it must therefore of necessity be confest, that the Kingdom had been the Kings in despite of all the world, when the just spite and indignation of the said Andrea Auria depriv'd him of it. When the King was taken prisoner at the Battel of Pavie, and that they carried him by Sea into Spain, Andrea Auria went out to meet the Galleys that convoy'd him, to fight them to deliver the King out of their hands; which he had done, and put it to ha∣zard; but the King sent to advise him not to do it, for if he did he was a dead man; and they had determin'd to put him to death, should Andrea Auria present himself to fight them; which was the reason that the said Andrea Auria returned to Genoa, which at that time was the Kings.Of how grea importance it was to the Kingdom of Frnc to dis∣content Andrea as one who a∣lone run'd the Kings affairs, See here another great misfortune, and an unfortunate Traverse, which brought as great an inconvenience along with it, as that of Monsieur de Bourbon; upon which occasion we not only lost all we had got in the Kingdom of Naples, but Ge∣noa also; for all the losses as well of the Kingdom of Naples, as of Genoa, hapned by rea∣son of the revolt of the said Andrea Auria, who took offence at the wrong and dishonor had been done him, in taking from him the Command of the Galleys to give it to another, without having any way misdemean'd himself, or having receiv'd any disadvantage in his Charge, and also for that they would make him give up his Prisoners of war without any recompence. Now the said Andrea Auria kept the sea in so great awe, that the King durst never offer to pass into Itly till such time as he had won him into is own service; and the Emperor having heard how he had been used, sent him a Blank to write his own conditions, provided he would come over to his service. After which the said Andrea Auria sent to Count Philippin his Nephew to retire from before Naples, and abandon∣ing the Kings service to come to him at Gajetta, which he did, and before he went, put all the provision he suddenly could into the City, that it might not be lost, and so he that had done them the mischief did them the good, without which they must within eight dayes have been necessitated to capitulate. O that such a man as this ought to have been husbanded, for I think that he alone ruin'd the affairs of King Francis. Kings and Princes ought not to use Strangers at that rate; nor their own Subjects neither, when they know them to be men of service: and if our Master was ill advised, the Emperor was very discreet to put in in time, to win the said Auria over to his side, that the King might not have leisure to reconcile himself to him, and to reestablish him in his service. Wherein Princes ought to take good example, and learn to be wise at anothers expence, and should have a care of disobliging a generous heart, and a man of employment, espe∣cially
when you have no such tye upon him, as upon a natural Subject of your own, who has his Wife and Children and Estate at your mercy. The King had none of all these ties upon Andrea Auria, and it was one of the greatest incongruities I have seen in my time, and also of far greater importance than that of the Duke of Bourbon. I saw another done to the Prior of Capua,The Prior of Capu. who was one of the bravest men that these hundred years has put to sea, and as much feared both by Turks and Christians, whom they unjustly accus'd of Piracy, so that he was constrain'd to go put himself and his two Galleys into the protection of the Malteses. O how invincible a wrong did the King there do this worthy person, to be so facile of belief to the prejudice of his honor▪ how great a disadvantage was it to himself, and how great a loss to the Kingdom of France? for this Signior was a man of service, and one that very well understood his Trade, for he was a very able Seaman.The Maescal de Bes. I saw another trick also put upon the Mareschal de Bies. I dare pawn my soul that the Gentleman never thought of doing any unhandsome act against the King, and yet he was highly slander'd a little after the death of King Francis the Great, it being laid to his charge, that he was the cause that Monsieur de Vervin his Son in Law had surrendred Bullen, and one Cortel appointed to try him, the most infamous Judge that ever was in France. Was it ever seen, or heard of, that one man should be punisht for the treachery or cowardize of another? When he came to his tryal they con∣fronted him with three great Rogues, who all of them depos'd, that the day he had the Encounter with the English he was mounted upon a great Courser, bearing a plume of white Feathers for a mark, that the English might not fall upon him, as if it had been an easie mark to be discern'd: when men are mixt in a Battel, the dust, the smoak and the cries confound a man's judgment; and besides 'tis usual with gallant men to appear in their greatest bravery, that they may be known in a day of Battel, especially in a War with Strangers, which is for honor, and not upon the account of animosity: but in a Civil War 'tis not so proper, Monsieur de Guise being very much endanger'd by so distinguish∣ing his person at the Battel of Dreux. Thus did they calumniate this poor Lord, though he that very day defeated eight hundred English: I do believe had the King sent such a Judge, and that he would have hearkned to the Hugonots, he would have found Wit∣nesses enow that would have been depos'd. I had promised Guienne to the King of Spain, though I never lov'd that Nation, nor ever shall, I am too good a Frenchman for that. But to return to the said Mareschal, when those who had given him this Traverse, saw that they could no way ensare him, and that he was likely to be set at liberty, to the great dishonor of those who had brought this trouble upon him; they then accused him, that he made certain Skip-Jack hirelings pass muster in his Company of Gens-d'armes, to get so many Pays, which (as it was said) was prov'd to be true, but it was to pay men withal he had in Flanders, to send him continual intelligence of all that passed in the Enemies Country; for we are sometimes necessitated to make use of such shifts for the Kings ser∣vice: but I leave any one to judg, if this was sufficient to bring him upon a Scaffold, and to degrade him from his Nobility, his Arms, and Mareschalsy, and to condemn him to the loss of his head. Nevertheless as they were proceeding to execution, King Henry cal∣ling to mind, that he had made him Knight of the Order, sent him his pardon, so that five or six moneths after, what of old age, and what of grief, he died a natural death, and who would have liv'd after such an injury and disgrace? The Judicature of France is not with∣out Cortels, for there are enow, who should the King put into their hands the honestest man of his Kingdom, would find out enough against him, as Cortel boasted, who said, that deliver up to him the most upright Liutenant in the Kingdom of France (provided he had been but a year or two in that employment) and he doubted not, but to find matter enough to put him to death. This poor Lord had perform'd a Soldier-like action if ever man did, at the Fort of Montrean, when the English allied out of Bullen to give him Battel; he had with him the Count Rhingraves Regiment (and as I think the Count himself was there) that of the French commanded by Monsieur de Tais, and seven Ensigns of Italians. So soon as the Enemy charg'd our Horse, they were immediately put to rout, and fled, when the said Sieur seeing the disorder of the Cavalry, he ran to the Battaillon of Foot, and said, Oh my friends, it was not with the Horse that I expected to win the Battel, but it is with you, and thereupon alighted, where taking a Pike from one of the Soldiers, to whom he deliver'd his Horse, and causing his Spurs to be pull'd off, he began his retreat towards Andelot. The Enemy after they had a great way pusued the Cavalry, return'd upon him,A brave Re∣at. who was four hours or more upon his retreat, having the Enemies horse, sometimes in his Front, and sometimes in his Flancks, and their Foot continually in his Rear, with∣out their ever daring to break into him, and I was told by the Captains who were present in the Action, that he never advanc'd fifty paces without facing about upon the Enemy;
by which ths may be call'd one of the bravest rereats that has been made these hundred years. I should be glad any one could name me such another, having upon him the whole power both of Foot and Horse, and his own Cavalry all run off the Field. Behold what this poor Lord did for a parting blow, at above threescore and ten years of age, and yet he was used after this manner. Let any one ask the Cardinal of Lorrain, who it was that did him this courtesie, for at the Assembly of the Knights of the Order before King Francis the second, he reproach'd him with this busines, and they grew into very high words upon it; for my part I am too little a Companion to name it, though I was present there, and also there were some Ladies who had a hand in the business. A year after I saw another pranck plaid Monsieur de Tais,Monsieur de Tais banisht the Court. wherein he was accused to have spoken unhandsomely of a Court Lady; 'tis a misfortune France has ever had, that they meddle too much in all affairs, and have too great credit and interest: for upon this the command of the Arillery was taken from him, and he never after return'd into fa∣vour. The King of Navarre entreated the King not to take it ill, if he made use of him in the taking of Hdin,He is slin. which his Majesty gave him leave to do, and he was kill'd in the Trenches of the said Hedin, doing service for him to whom his service was not accep∣table, which is a geat heart-breaking, and the greatest of all vexations, to die for a Prince that has no regard for a mans service: wherein our condition is of all others most misera∣ble: notwithstanding I believe the King would in the end have made use of him again, for in truth he was a man of service: and I moreover believe that his Majesty was sorry he had banisht him the Court: but very often those of both Sexes, who govern Princes, make them do things against their own natures and inclinations, and afterwards they are sorry for it; but it is too late to repent, when their Traverses have brought upon a Prince such an inconvenience as is irreparable, and those who would afterwards seem to excuse them, endeavour to make the matter worse by contriving new accusations, and laying o∣ther aspersions upon them. I shall not mention the Constables business, which drave him also from Court, and all, as it was said, about women; nor that of the late Monsieur de Guise, we have seen them sometimes out, and sometimes in. The King would do well to stop the mouths of such Ladies as tattle in his Court; for thence proceed all the re∣ports and slanders;The death of Monsieur de la Chastaigneray. a prating Gossip was cause of the death of Monsieur de la Chastaigneray, who would he have taken my advice, and that of five or six more of his friends, he had done his business with Monsieur dr Iarnac after another manner; for he fought against his conscience, and lost both his honor and his life. The King ought therefore to com∣mand them to meddle with their own affairs (I except those that are to be excepted) for their tittle tattle has done a great deal of mischief, and after, as I said, it is too late. These are the good offices that in my time I have seen done several great persons, and also such poor Gentlemen as my self, all which proceed from the jealousie and envy they bear to one another, who are near unto the persons of Princes. In the time that I have been at Court I have seen great dissimulations, and several carry it very fair to one another in shew, who would have eaten one another if they could, and yet outwardly who so great as they,Dissimulation at Court. embracing and caressing one another, as if they had been the greatest friends in the world. I was never skill'd in that Trade, for every one might read my heart in my face. By this one may judg, that the misfortune into which this Kingdom is fallen, is not come upon it through any default of courage, or wisdom in our Kings, nor for want of valiant Captains and Soldiers; for never Kings of France had so many both of Horse and Foot, as Francis, Henry, and Charles; who had they been employed in forreign Con∣quests would have carried the War far enough from our own doors, and it was a great misfortune both to them and the whole Kingdome, that they were not so employed, and yet can we not lay the blame thereof, either to the Church, or the third Estate, for all that have by the Kings been demanded of them, have been freely granted. Every Child then may judg where the fault lay, and from whence sprung the Civil Wars; I mean from the great ones; for they are not wont to make themselves parties for the word of God, If the Queen ad the Admiral were together in a Cabine, and the late Prince of Condé, and Monsieur de Guise together with them, I could make them confess, that something else than Religion mov'd them to make three hundred thousand men cut one anothers throats, and I know not if we have yet made an end; for I have heard there is a Pro∣phecy (I know not whether in Nostradamus or no) that their Children shall shew their Mothers as a wonder when they see a man, so few shall be left, having kill'd one another. But let us say no more of it, it goers my heart to think on't, mine who have the least inte∣rest, and who am shorly going into the other world.
Should I repeat all the Traverses and Charities that I have read of in the Roman Hi∣stories, I should never have done; which Histories I have formerly delighted to read, wondring why, and what should be the reason, that we are not as valiant as they. I shall only eckon one or two, and begin with that I have read in I know not what Book, of Camillus a great Roman Captain, who after he had won many Battels, and enlarg'd the Roman Empire, with the addition of a larg extent of Dominion, was in the end call'd to judgment, for having dedicated the spoil of his Conquests to the foundation of Temples, wherein to sacrifice to their Gods, of which spoil the one half belong'd of right to the Soldier: but that the Gods might assist them in their Battels and Conquests, he presented them this gift, saying, That the Soldiers stood as much in need of the assistance of the Gods as he. So that upon his return to Rome, for the reward of the great services he had per∣form'd, and the famous Victories he had obtain'd for the Common-wealth, they brought him to his Tryal: yet did they not nevertheless put him to death, but sent him into ex∣ile to a City the name whereof I do not remember, for it is long ago since I read Livie, not in Latin (of which I have no more than my Pater Noster) but in French. Now when he had remain'd sometime in this City, there came two or three Gaulish Kings with a mighty Army, and took Rome, killing almost all the Citizens, saving some few who re∣tir'd into the Capitol, and there held out for some time. Livie reports, that one night those who were thus retir'd into the Capitol were all asleep, and the Enemy had already gain'd a part of the Capitol, when a Goose begining to cackle awak'd the Guards, who there∣upon enter'd into a combat with the Enemy, and repell'd them. At this time the said Camillus, gathering together all the men he could, took the field, where the Enemy finding nothing more to plunder, nor provisions to maintain their pleasures in Rome, having di∣spersed themselves all over the Country ten or twelve leagues distant from the City, he lew in the fields seven or eight thousand of them. (when I was at Rome in the time of Pope Marcellinus, I caused those fields to be shew'd me, taking great delight in viewing the ground where so many brave Battels had been fought; for me-thought I saw before my eyes the things I had heard of, and read; but notwithsanding I saw nothing, either like, or any way resembling the great Camillus.) The rumour of this defeat having run tho∣rough all the neighbouring Cities, caused several gallant men to repair to Camillus's Camp; by which means finding himself strong enough he march'd directly to Rome, possessed by an infinite number of Gauls, whom he defeated, and sav'd a vast summe of money, which those who were retir'd into the Capitol had promised to give, and was af∣terward call'd the second Founder of Rome. The Historians can give a better account of this story than I, who perhaps mistake it; it being above thirty years since I have so much as taken a book in hand; and much less dare to read now by reason of my ill eyes, and the wound in my face. In Spain the two Scipio's were defeated by Asdrubal in thirty dayes time,The two Scipio's. and with∣in thirty leagues of one another, to wit Pub. Scipio the first, and his Brother Cornelius Scipio afterwards, and of both the one Army, and the other some escap'd away, who all retir'd to the Garrisons where they had lain all Winter, where being come they found that all their Colonels were slain, and were therefore necessitated to choose one, whom they call'd the New Captain. Asdrubal having intelligence that this new General had rallied the Roman Soldiers who were escap'd from the two defeats, went immediately to assault them; but was stoutly repus'd, and constrain'd to retire himself to a certain place, where this valiant Captain fell upon him by night, and not only defeated the Army he had there with him but another also that lay in another place hard by; insomuch, that by his valour he not only sav'd those few Romans who were escaped from the two lost Bat∣tails, but moreover both the Spaynes for the people of Rome, which but for him had been lost to Rome for ever. Now the Senate in the mean time continued a great while with∣out hearing any news of the Scipioes,His name was Lucius Marcius. or of their affaires: but had at length intelligence brought of the loss of the two Scipio's, together with the victories of this new Captaine (I do not remember his name before he was created, and call'd the new Captain, the Historians will better remember it than I who have not seen the book of so many years) which so soon as the Senate had notice of, they sent away Scipio the younger to com∣mand the the Army (I think son to the first Scipio who had been slain) and withall com∣manded the new Captain to Rome, whom, so soon as he came, instead of rewarding his service, they call'd to judgment, accusing him that he had accepted the Soldiers Election, and taken upon him the command of the Army from them, and not by Commission from the Senate, and I think put him to death, at least I find no more mention of him in Livy.
Oh how many other great Captains have been recompenced with such rewards in the time of the Roman, the Hstorians are full of such exemples, and the Judicature of France being rul'd and govern'd by the Laws of the Romans, 'tis to be expected that the Kings of France shuld govern themselves by their Customs. Would to God the King would perpetuate his own glory, and leave such a mmorial of his prudence as should for ever be commended; that i, that he would burn all the Books of the Laws by which his Judica∣ture determines of affairs, and erect a new, equal, and upright Judicature (for I dare be bold to say, thre is not a Monarch in Chrstendom, who is govern'd by his Laws, the Kings of France excepted, all the rest have Laws made by themselves to cut off all edious Suits; so much as even in Bearn and Lorrain, which are in two Corners of the Kingdom) that no Suit might be above two years depending. If his Mjesty would please to do this he might boast to have a world of Soldiers, who would be ncssiated to take arms, ha∣ving nothing to do in theCourts of Law. Palace: for this Profession being taken away, to what would you that a bave and generous heart should apply it self, but to arms? what is it that so much encreases the Power,The greatness of the Tuk. and enlarges the Empire of the Grand Signior but this, he thinks of nothing but arms? O how many brave Captains would this Kingdom then supply the world withal, whereas I do believe that two Thirds of the Nation are taken up in these Courts, and pleadings, and in the mean time, though they are naturally brave, by degrees degenerate into Poltrons and Rascals. This Kingdom would then be formidable to Strangers, and besides how rich and opulent? for the whole ruine of the Gentry proceeds from no other cause, but those pestiferous Counsels wherewith the Advocates seduce their Clients; and set them together by the ears. I remember I once read in the window of a house at Tholouze, which one of the most eminent Advocates of that Court call'd Mainery, had cau∣sed to be written there these words, Faux conseils, & mauvaises Testes, M'ont fait bastir ces Fenestres. Evil advice, and idle brains Have helpt me to erect these pains. and since they themselves record it, I may well say after them, that we are very great fools to destroy one another to enrich them: it being equally ruinous to him that prevails, with him that is baffell'd, for they spin out the Suits in such length, that when he who has got the better of his adversary comes to reckon the money he has spent, he will find himself still a great deal out of purse, besides the loss of his time. And if the King would do this perhaps the custom of Traverses, and ill offices men now practice upon one another would be laid aside with the Laws; and his Majesties good Subjects, who meditate no other thing, but how lyally and faithfully to serve him, would either be maintain'd about his Ma∣jesties person, or elsewhere employ'd in his service. Now seeing I have the honor in my disgraces to be rancked with so many great Person∣ages, both of former ages, and those whom I my self have known in my own time, I shall the better enjoy my retirement, and be proud of being associated with so many illustrious persons, being assur'd of two things, one whereof is my fidelity, which no one can by any means deprive me of, and the other that I have to do with a gracious King, who in time will (I doubt not) acknowledg the services I have perform'd for him, and for his Crown. And if I am retir'd into my own house, it is with no great regret, it being a thing I have long desir'd, provided it might be with the good favour of the King and Queen, which also they cannot justly take from me, for which I praise God, who has guided me so well through all my several Employments, that I never gave them any just cause of of∣fence, and am in this privacy of mine more happy, and better satisfied, than they who have given me these Traverses: for I laugh at the anxiey they are in, both how to wound and defend themselves from one another. I think the Souls in Purgatory are not in so great pain, whilst I live here in repose in my Family, with my kindred and friends about me, passing away my time, in causing to be writ down before me the things that I have seen; so that were it not for the great Harquebuz shot in my face, which I am constrain'd to keep open, I should be very well content, and think my self exceeding happy. For con∣cerning the loss of my Sons, I comfort my self that they all died like men of honor with their swords in their hands for the service of my Prince, and as to the rest, I should be a man void of sense and understanding, if I did not look upon them as tricks that are com∣monly practised in the world, and consider my self in a happy estate, who have no more occasion to do harm to any one, which continuing in such, and so great an employment, as that wherein I was before, I could not sometimes possibly avoid▪
But I shall leave this discourse, which has half made me angry, to return to what became of me afer I had taken my leave of all those Lords and Captains who wen into France. I return'd thorough Perigueux, where I gave the Seneschal of Perigrd Commission to make head against whatever Insurrection should stir on that side: and so soon as I came to Agen, I sent a Patent to Monsieur de Bellegarde at Tholouze, in my absence to command in the Country of Cominge and Bigorre, and as far as the Frontiers of Bearn: another to Monsieur de Ngrepelice to command in the Jurisdictions of Verdun and Riviere, and a third to Monsieur de Cornusson the Elder to command in Roüergue; which being done, I left yet fourteen or fifteen Ensigns more of Foo, whereof part I quarter'd in Quecy to make head against the Vicounts (who never stirr'd out of the Country, and were evermore stirring new Commotions) and the rest towards Bourdelois, and not long after the King sent me a Command to go and besiege Rochelle, in order whereunto he would send me a Commission to raise money wherewith to defray the expence of the War. First he would that those of Tholouze should deliver me twenty thousand Frances of the money rais'd upon the Confiscation of the Hugonots Goods, wherewith to pay the Foot, and for the chage of the Artillery that I should take fifteen thousand Francs upon some Revenues the King has in Xaintonge, whereof his Majesty never himself made above nine thousand, and that his said Majesty would send order to the Governor of Nantes to send me four pieces of Canon, and some Culverine. These were my assignments, wonderful certain, and very proper for such an Enterprize, which seem'd rather a Mockery, and a Farce than any thing else; and that they would send me before Rochelle,Peparation for the Siege of Rochelle. either to be thrown away, or o suffer some notable disgrace. However I would try alwayes to execute his Ma∣jesties Command, to which end I immediately dispatcht away a Courrier with his Maje∣sties Letters to the Parliament, and Capitouls of Tholouze, to which they return'd me an∣swer, that the few goods of the Hugonots which had been found in their City had long a∣go been sold, and the money dispos'd of for the charge they had been at in several occasions. Upon this answer I went forhwith to Bourdeaux to try if I could perswade the Court of Parliament, and the Jurats there to furnish me with some money for the Enerprize, but could never prevail with them to advance one Denier, they telling me, that they would re∣serve the Stock they had to employ it for the defence of their City, if occasion should be, and not lay it cut upon Rochelle, which was no member of their Iurisdiction. I then dispatcht away to their Majesties to give them an account of the answers I had receiv'd; but notwithstand∣ing did not for all that forbear to march into Xaintonge, beseeching them to send me other more certain assignments, or that otherwise I could not engage my self before Rochelle, without losing their Majesties reputation, and my own, and peradventure the whole Army: for to besiege a place of that importance without paying the Soldiers to keep them in their Trenches, were to force them abroad to pillage, and to leave my Artillery in the mean time engag'd; neither was I to learn in those affairs. I writ moreover to his Majesty that he would please to command the Governor of Nantes to send me the Artillery with all posible speed, and cause it to be brought to Broüage, hoping that I should soon gain the Isles. Having sent away this dispatch, I return'd into Agenois to march away twelve or thirteen Ensigns, as also to take the Gentlemen of the Country along with me, when being come to St. Macaire, I there found Monsieur de Lauzun, and the Muster-Masters, who was mustring his Company, whom I entreated that immediately after the Muster he would send away Monsieur de Madaillan, who carried his Ensign directly to Xaintes to which Sieur de Madaillan I gave a Cornet of Argoulets belonging to the Sieur de Ver∣duzan Seneschal of Bazadois my Kinsman, together with the Companies of Mabrun, Thodias, and la Mothe Mongauzy, giving him in charge to make extreme haste without staying till he came to Xaintes, and that in case the Marennois should be at St. Seurin, so soon as ever he had baited his men, he should immediately go to fight them, and if they got the victory be sure to ply their hands, for they were only a pack of Rascals, and when the others should hear of the defeat of their Companions, they would take such a fright at the news, that they would never make head again, and that the fear would run as far as Rochelle: but that he must above all things be sure to make a great slaughter to strike a terror into the whole Party. I writ also to Monsieur de Pons an account of the whole de∣sign, ordering him to send some of his Forces to Xaintes, to the end they might jointly fall upon this execution. I had already sent to the Ensigns that they should move towards A∣genois, and to the Gentry also, and the said Seneschal de Bazadois took upon him the Charge of our Mareschal de Camp of Gens-d'armes. I had no more but the Company of Monsieur de Lauzun, my own, and that of Monsieur de Merville Grand Seneschal of Guien, for of that of Monsieur de Iarnac, which the King had appointed to come to me, the fourth part was not to be found, most of them being with the Prince of Condé: nowithstanding
which, I staid three daies only at Agen: but return'd straight into Bourdelois with the few Forces I could get together, giving the Command of the Foot to my Nephew the Sieur de Leberon. In my second dayes march from Agen I receiv'd letters from Monsieur de Madaillan, wherein he gave me to understand, that he had made so good haste, as that the third night after I departed from them they arriv'd at Xaintes, where having intelli∣gence that there were three Ensigns of Foot at St. Seurin, who had there lodg'd and for∣tified themselves, they had fallen upon them, and brought away three Colours. Five or six daies after I came to Marennes, where I found Monsieur de Pons, to whom his Majesty had written, as also to Monsieur de Iarnac, to come to me to the Siege of Rochelle, Soon af∣ter I received a letter from the Governor of Nantes, wherein he sent me word, that I was not to wait in expectation of his Artillery, for that he had one piece of Canon only mounted upon an old rotten Carriage, and that all the rest were on ground, without pos∣sibility of being made ready in less than three months time. See how our Frontier Cities and places of importance were provided and fortified! Rochelle was not so. I then fell to spinning out the time about St. Iean and Xaintes, in expectation of an answer from their Majesties, and money to bring the Artillery from Bourdeaux, very sorry that I had advanc'd so far. Day by day I sent new dispatches to them to that effect; but could ne∣ver obtain any answer. The last I sent to Court was Dragon, who had retir'd himself to Monsieur de Pons, and in the mean time Monsieur de Lude came near unto St. Iean, where at a privat Gentlemans house we had some conference. He there shewed me the letters the King had writ to him, wherein his Majesty commanded him to joyn with me in the Enterprize of Rochelle, telling me that he would as cheerfully obey me as the proper per∣son of the King himself, as being the oldest Captain in France, that he would bring me six or seven Ensigns of Foot, and three or four hundred horse. It did not then stick at me, nor at those Gentlemen the King had commanded to assist me, neither at the Forces of Foot or Horse; but only at the want of means to bring up the Artillery, and a little money to pay the Foot, that this Siege of Rochelle did not succeed. I will not say I should have car∣ried it, but I should have frighted them at the least, and perhaps have done them no good. In this interval Monsieur de Pons had reduc'd the Isles of Oleron and Alvert;The taking of the Isles. for they are for the most part his own, and Captain Gombaudiere was in them, having his house there▪ and commanded as well in Alvert as Oleron. There only then remain'd the Isle of Ré, where they had erected a Fort near unto a Church, and several others at the places of landing. I caused five hundred Harquebuzeers to be chosen out of all our Companies, with all the Captains, Lieutenants, and Ensigns, the one half of Mongauzy the elders Company excepted, who staid ashore to command those that were left behind, making my Nephew de Leberon with the said five hundred to embark at the Port of Broüage. Guillet, the Kings receiver in those parts took great pains to victual and prepare the Vessels, whom the Queen of Navarre put to death in the late troubles, but I could never learn for what, I ever knew him to be a good servant of the Kings, and believe his diligence upon this occasion of our mens putting to sea did him more harm than good, and perhaps might be the cause of his death, for the Queen of Navarre did by no menas love those people. My said Nephew was a day and a night hindred by foul weather from landing, as also the Enemy defended the landing places from the Forts they had made: but in the end he unbethought him in the night to send away all the lesser boats he had brought a∣long with him full of Soldiers to land amongst the Rocks on the back of the Island, where the Enemy kept no Guard, who so soon as part of them were got on shore, the Enemy discovering the stratagem, ran to that part, and fought them; but ours remain'd Masters of the place. My Nephew who was one that was engag'd in the fight, thereupon present∣ly dispatcht a Skiff to the Captains and Soldiers who were aboard the greater Vessels, to bid them come away, which being suddenly done, so soon as they were all landed, they marcht directly to the great Fort by the Church, a long league and a half from thence, which they assaulted on two or three sides at once; so that they carried the place, putting all they found within it to the sword, whilst the rest who guarded the landings put them∣selves into little boats, and fled away towards Rochelle. We imagin'd them to be the peo∣ple inhabitants of the Island, who escaped away, and that our people had gotten the victory, and two dayes after my said Nephew sent me an account of the whole action, which sooner he could not do, the wind being so contrary that they could not possibly get to Marennes, where the aforesaid Sieur and I lay: upon which news we call'd back my said Nephew, leaving two Foot Companies in the Isle. I then left Monsieur de Pons at Marennes, and went away to St. Iean, where Monsieur de Iarnac came to me, to take order for all things necessary for me in order to the Siege. I caused great provision of vi∣ctuals
to be made ready, wherein the Providore of the late Monsieur de Burie was very to me, for he was of that Country. In the mean time I still expected to hear from the King, but could never obtein the fa∣ur of one syallable, neither did any of my Messengers ever return; and in truth there very great danger by the way, the Enemy being possest of all the great Roads, by which they were to return into Xaintonge. The first that came was Dragon, who brought news that the Peace was as good as concluded, and that the King would suddenly send me wod hat I was to do. I think that having seen the Prince and the Admiral with their Forces at the Gates of Paris, ready to sight a Battel, and afterwards at liberty to over∣ all France, they more thought of that than they conside'd the affairs of Guienne. This was the success of my expedition into Xaintonge; and seeing I have been reproacht, that for three years I had done nothing considerable, I could wish that such as propose Enterprizes to the King would be as prompt to provide things necessary for such designs, as they are ready to give assignments that signifie nothing, like those they sent me, and then perhaps some good might be done: but as they order it, a man must be a God to work iacles. Oh the happy time that these men have who are about the Kings person, and never come within danger of a Battel! they cut out work, and very good cheap for others, that the King may think them wise and politick; but they never care to offer his Majesty, that if Montluc or another shall refuse to go upon such an Enterprize, they themselves will undertake it. It is enough for them that they can talk well, and such perhaps there are, who propound a design which they would be glad should miscarry, for geneally there is nothing but dissimulation, jealousie, and treachery amongst them, and this is to betray ones Master like a good Frenchman. I am confident by the chearfulness I saw in the Gentlemen who were with me, and by the astonishment I discover'd in the people we had to do withal, that had I been supplied with necessaries requisite for such an Enterprize,The impor∣tance of Ro∣chelle. I should have set hard to have carried this City, which has since so forti∣fied it self, that if the King permit them to take surer footing, 'tis to be fear'd they will withdraw themselves from his obedience: but I was at this time so ill assisted, and his Majesty so ill serv'd, that I could do no more than I did. A few dayes after the King sent me the Peace to cause it to be proclaim'd at Bourdeaux, commanding me to disband the Foot, and to dismiss them every man to his own house; which I accordingly did, and sent the Proclamation to the Court of Parliament, and the Jurats to cause it to be publisht: but for my own part I would not be present at it, know∣ing very well, that it was only a Truce to get breath, and a Peace to gain time to provide themselves better for a War to come, and not intended to be kept, for the King who had been taken unprovided I was confident would never put up the affront had been put up∣on him, who though he was very young, was notwithstanding a Prince of great spirit, and that bore this audatious Enterprize with very great impatience, as I have since been told by some who were then about him.The Sieur de Monucs judg∣ment of the Commotion of St. Michel. He gave sufficient testimony of a generous cou∣rage, and truly worthy of a King, when he put himself in the head of the Swiss to escape to Paris; and do you think, Gentlemen, you who were the Leaders of those mutinous Troops, that he will ever forget that insolence? you would hardly endure it from your equal, what then would you do with a Servant? for my part I never saw, nor ever read of so strange a thing, which made me alwayes think it would stick in the Kings stomack. The Prince and the Admiral committed a great oversight in this Peace; for they had by much the better of the Game, and might doubtless have carried Chartres, so that those who mediated, and procur'd this accommodation, perform'd a very signal service for the King and Kingdom. This was all I did in the second Troubles, and me thinks it was no contemptible service, to send the King a recruit of eleven or twelve hundred Horse, thirty Ensigns of Foot, and to preserve for him the Province of Guienne, conquer him the Isles, and not to be wanting on my part, that I did not try my fortune at Rochelle, and send him all the money the Rebels had amassed together in that part of his Kingdom. But I must do miracles forsooth, those who are about the Kings person have ever done me one good office or another, and on my conscience would his Majesty hearken to them now, that I have nothing at all to do, they would find out one thing or another to lay to my charge; for the customs of the Court must not be lost, which is to do all ill offices, and invent slanders against those who have a desire to do well. Was I near them I could quickly give some of them their answer, but the distance is too great betwixt Gascony and Paris; besides I have lost my Children, and an old Beast has no resourse. This accommodation of the Second Troubles concluded at Charres continued but eight or nie moneths at most,The short Peace, 1567. and was therefore called the Short Peace. In this interval I went
to Bourdeaux in the begnning of May to see how all things went, where, by the news that was ordinarily brought from Court, by such as came from thence, I very well perceiv'd that this Peace would not long continue: For one while I was told, that the Prince of Cond. and the Admiral liv'd contentedly in their own houses; but for the most part was assur'd to the contrary, and also that the King had sent no order to disband his own Forces, as at the Peace of the former Troubles, and that those of the new Religion went and came to and fro from place to place, and frequently met at Conventicles. It was moreover bruited that Rochelle would not surrender, nor Montaban, Milla, and other places, insomuch that it seem'd to be rather a Truce, than a Peace concluded. On the other side I was entred into some jealousie of the Governor of Blaye call'd Des-Rois, wherefore I went to Blaye, taking the Atturney General of the Parliament, called Laket along with me, where being come, Des-Rois began to fall into a long discourse of the Court of Parliament, and the Jurats of Bourdeaux, complaining to me, that they had conceiv'd an unjust suspicion a∣gainst him, which made him afraid to go into the City. To which I made answer, that this jealusie did not originally proceed from any disffction that either the Court of Parliament, or the Iurats had to his person, but that himself was the cause he was suspected, forasmuch as all those of his Garrison were Hugonots, whom he protected and favour'd in the City, and who not far from thence had defac'd a Church in his own presence: but that if he desir'd no one should suspect or censure him, he would do wll to new-model his Garrison, and form (the greater part of it at least) of Catholick Soldiers: That notwithstanding I very well knew the contrary, and thereupon like a true friend remonstrated to him, that he should call to mind from what Father he de∣scended, and remember that in recompence of the good services he had perform'd for the Kings Francis and Henry, they had first given him the Command of that place, and since continued it to him his Son; with several other Remonstrances, which I thought Proper to wean him from an ill-conceiv'd opinion, in case he should peradventure really have entertain'd any such thing in his fancy. I had formerly evermore taken his part, and having ever known him (as I thought at least) very affectionate to the King's service, had writ to his Majesty, that if I was to be responsible for any man, it should be for him (see how a man may be deceiv'd in judging of men by their own fair speeches) but so soon as I was return'd to Bourdeaux, and saw some signs that did not much please me, I had no more the same o∣pinion of him that before; of which I also gave their Majesties present notice; but it was seven or eight dayes after I had parted from him.The practices of the Hugo∣nots to win Des-Rois over to their Party. I heard since that a few dayes after I had been with him he had been at Estauers to conferre with Monsieur Mirmebeau, and the Baron de Pardaillan, where they had been five or six hours shut up together in a Cham∣ber, that they had another meeting three dayes after that, and I had further intelligence, that he was determin'd to go to Court to present himself to the King, to give his Majesty more ample assurance of his faith. Whereupon I dispatched away to the King, giving him an account of all I had heard, and telling him that I had formerly given his Majesty assu∣rance of the said Des-Rois, bu that I would now revoke that engagement, and no more stand caution for him, considering the conference he had held at Estauliers, and that if his Majesty would please to take my humble advice, he should remove him from his Go∣vernment, substtuting some one of his Majesties own Religion, which if his Majesty should be pleased to think fit to do,The Sieur de Montluc's ad∣vice to the King. it would then be convenient to detein the said Des-Rois till such time as I should have put in him whom his Majesty should appoint into his place, and chang'd the Garrison. Humbly beseeching his Majesty, that he would please to take my poor advice in this affair, or that otherwise himself would be the first that should repet it. Des-Rois fail'd not to begin his Journey the same day that I sent away my dispatch to the King, which was upon a Monday, and being come to Court, as I was told, addressed himself to Monsieur de Lansac, to whom I believe he made his complaint, perswading the said Sieur de Lansac that all these jealousies proceeded from no other cause than the desire I had to preferre some Gentleman who was at my devotion, to the Command of that place, which how true it was God then knew, and time has since discover'd: but I con∣ceive that the said Siur de Lansac, as well upon the account of neighbourhood, as out of consideration of the good repute of the Father and Family of the said Des-Rois, was wil∣ling to embrace his interest, and consequently spoke to his Majesty in his behalf, wherein he was himself first deceiv'd, and afterward asham'd of his mediation. It was however hard to judg a man who had never been blemisht before, nor ever committed any fault, but rather behav'd himself well than ill, as this Gentleman had done. Men are not to be discover'd by the sight, like counterfeit money; and God alone can dive into the hearts of men. So it was, that he return'd back very well satisfied with the King, to whom, that he might be more affectionate to his service, his Majesty gave a thousand Crowns, where∣in
his Majesty did not perhaps consider, that he was of an ill hair, of which there are very few good men; but, however it was, another might have been as well deceiv'd as he, for he had a smooth tongue, and knew very well how to disguise the rancour of his heart. See here how cautious a Prince ought to be,Advice to Princes. whether the King ought not to have taken more notice of this conference of one of his Governors with the Hugonots, and in a case of suspition like this, to have enclined to the safest counsels. There are wayes to satisfie such as we would rid our hands of, without driving them to despair, whereas we run a very great hazard in leaving a place of importance in the hands of a suspected person, as his Majesty did in the power of Des-Rois, and a very good place too. When a woman once hearkens to unlawful licitation farewel vertue, and also when a Governor of a Town enters into such secret Parlies as these, there is some knavery a brewing, and in such a cae the King or Prince ought to be as jealous as the Husband, that knows his Wife has an ear open to Courtship,A discouse touching the designes of the Prince of Co∣de. if at the same time he who engages in such conferences, do not un∣derhand give his Majesty or his Lieutenant notice of it; in which case there is still some danger, and it is hard to be subtle enough for a Traitor. Before I departed from Bourdeaux I in the morning assembled the Attorney General, the General de Gourgues, Captain Verre, and my Nephew the Siur de Leberon, to whom I would communicate what I had fancied with my self upon the news that daily came from Court of the diidence and discontent the Prince of Condé was in, and what I should do if I were in his place. In which discourse they may remember I told them, that if the Prince could pass, he would infallibly come into Xaintonge, having Rochelle, and almost all the Country at his devotion; that the Isles when they should see Forces in Xaintonge, and at Rochelle, and Monsieur de la Rochefoucault so near them, would presently revolt, and that then the said Prince and the Hugonots would resolutely turn all their designs this way; for in France Roan was no longer theirs, which being gone, they had not one Port-Town at their devotion;rouage the fairest Haven in France. and that it would be in them a ridiculous and a senseless thing, to begin a third War, without first having a Sea-Port in their power. Now they could not possibly make choice of one of greater advantage to them, than that of Rochelle, on which depends that of Brouage, which is absolutely the fairest, and the most commodious Haven in all the Kingdom; for being there they might have succours out of Germany, Flanders, England, Scotland, Brittany, and Normandy, all of them Countries abounding in people of their own Religion, so that in truth should the King give them their choice to Canton themselves in any Port of the Kingdom, they could not possibly choose a more advantageous nor a more commodious place. They all approv'd of my discourse as being near the truth, which I had fram'd in the Night as I lay considering the state of our affairs, for so I used to pass part of the time in bed; and this waking fancy of mine seem'd to presage almost as much disaster and mis∣fortune, as the dreams I had dreamt of King Henry and King Charles. Having entertain'd them with this discourse, I then proceeded to tell them, that it would be convenient to find out some fit remedies against the evil before it should arrive; for to com∣municate this conceipt to their Majesties, without proposing at the same time some way to frustrate the Enemies designs, were, I thought, to make them neglect my intelligence, and to slight my advice. We therefore fell to considering, that to prevent the mishaps which seem'd to threaten us, there was no other way, than by making Forts upon the sea, and betimes to secure the Ports, which with four Ships, and as many Shalops to lie at Chedebois, la Palice, and the mouth of the Harbour at Broüage, might sufficiently be provided for; and that the Ports being once our own, neither English, nor any other of their Party, could or would attempt to come into their assistance, knowing they were to land at places where they are almost always certain to meet with very tempestuous weather; and that Seamen will never venture out to sea to go to any place, unless they are first sure of a free and a secure Harbour to lie in: and on the other side, that our Ships lying about the Isles would so awe the Inhabitants, that they would never dare to revolt, and our men of War would so keep Rochelle, as it were besieged, that it must of necessity in a little time either wholly submit to the Kings devotion,The design of a Naval Army. or at least contein themselves quiet, without attempting any thing of commotion. All which being remonstrated to them we unanimously concluded, that I ought to send an account thereof to the King and Queen. Now the next thing we were to consider of, was, which way the money was to be raised to equip these Vessels, and to pay the men; and as to that we made account that with ten thousand Francs, and two thousand sacks of Corn, which I offer'd of my own for the making of Biscuit, we should set them out to sea. General Gorgues would undertake also to cause Cattel to be sent from the upper Country upon the account of his own credit, and all upon the confidence we had, that his Majesty would in time reinburse us: The
Attorey General then dealt very earnestly with the said Sieur de Gorgues to perswade the Jurats monethly to advance something towards the charge, and moreover to levy the Cu∣stom (which the present Teasurer had obtein'd from the Privy Council, and snipt from the Kings Revenue, though the Graunt had not yet been executed, by reason that the Re∣ceiver of Bourdeaux had oppos'd him in his claim, pretending it to be a Member of his Farm, insomuch that the Treasurer out of spite had forborn to execute his Warrant) which when the Jurats should see was to be laid out for the publick good, not only in the behalf of his Majesties particular interest, but moreover for the benefit of their own City, every one would lay to his helping hand, so that what with this, and what with the foremen∣tion'd advance, it would not for the future cost the King a penny. The Attorney Gene∣ral, and the said Sieur de Gorgues then with Captain Verre cast up the account before me, which being done, we concluded that the Sieur de Leberon should go carry an account of all to the Queen, very well knowing that her Majesty would better understand the business than any of the Council; whereupon I accordingly dispatcht away the said Sieur de Lebe∣ron post to Court. The Queen hearkned to all my said Nephew had to deliver with very great patience, re∣turning him answer thereupon, that she would propound is to the Council, which she did, and three dayes after told him, that the Council did by no means approve of the motion, which I believe was occasion'd by some ones buzzing into their ears, that I made this Proposition more out of a desire to range along the Coast, than out of any reason there was to suspect any such thing, as I fancied should fall out. I remember very well that I gave my said Nephew further in charge to tell the Queen, that I had been so unfortunate in all the ad∣vices I had presum'd to offer to her Majesty, that she had never been pleased to give any credit to any of them, notwithstanding that her Majesty had so often been convinc'd, that they had been alwayes good, and my intelligences continually true: but that I did most humbly beseech her to give credit to me once in her life only, which if she did not, she would I doubted repent it, and that it would be too late to be remedied, when the misfortune should be once arriv'd▪ but all these remonstrances signified nothing, and she sent me back my said Nephew with∣out any other answer but this, that the Kings Council had not approv'd of the thing. Which prov'd very ill; I believe had her Majesty been pleased to follow my counsel the Hugonots affairs would not have been in so good a condition as they now are: but God disposes all things as best pleases him. I know very well, that had I wrought every day a miracle, the Court would never have believed me to be a Sait, especially those about the Kings per∣son, who would be sorry their Majesties should believe that any in the Nation should be so vigilant, so intent upon the affairs of the Kingdom, or so wise as they, and yet I have often heard that those who presume so much upon their own wisdom, are often the veriest fools of all. Oh how vigilant ought a wise and prudent King to be, to discover these Court Cheats, I was too far off to dispute it with them face to face, and letters have no reply; one Ene∣my also in the Kings Council is able to do a man more mischief, than thirty friends can do him good, of which I have had woful experience, and in the mean time all things go backwards, without any hopes of amendment, for any thing we can do or say. I may here aptly enough bring in the story of Marco de Bresse an Italian, who had perform'd some signal services for the Signiory of Venice, for which having long sollicited a recom∣pence, but still in vain; it hapned at last that the Duke of Venice died, which so soon as ever Signior Marco heard of, he presently preferr'd a Petition to the Senate, wherein he entreated the Signiory to choose him Duke for the reward of his service. The Senate equally astonisht, and scandaliz'd at the ridiculous, and yet the audacious pretence of this man, sent some of their Senators to him to check him for his insolence, and to remonstrate to him the offence he had given to, and the affront he had put upon the Republique by his impu∣dent demand; which being accordingly laid home to him, he return'd this answer, Pardon me, you have done so many ridi∣culous thing, that I thought you would have done this also: but 'tis suffici∣ent, I am satis∣fied. Pardonate mi, voi havete fatto tante coionerie, che io pensave che faretti anchora questa, ma basta son contento. And so may we say to those Getlemen that govern all, that we ought not to wonder at any thing they do, nor hope for any better from them. The Kingdom at the long run will find the effects of their doings. In the mean time I return to my Subject. I then return'd towards Agenois,The Sieur de Monluc fal sick. where upon my arrival at Agen, I so bruised one of my legs, that it constrain'd me three moneths to keep my bed, after which when I thought my self cur'd, I was surpriz'd with so sharp and violent a Catharre, as I thought verly would have cut my throat, which had it not vented it self at one of my ears, the Physitians told me would inallibly have done my business. So soon as I was a little recover'd, I re∣mov'd my self to Cssign for change of air, which was about the end of Iuly. I had
there intelligence sent me out of Bearn, that the Queen of Navarre was departed from Pa to go into Foix, to take some order about her affairs: soon after I receiv'd news that she staid at Vic Bigorre, and immediately after I had another advertisement, that on Wednes∣day night there was a Gentleman came to her from Monsieur de la Rochefoucault, who had above four hours been shut up with her in her Cabinet. What Peace soever had been con∣cluded I was evermore at watch, and alwayes maintain'd spies to give me an account of what they did in Bearn, for I very well knew, that no goodness was hatching there. I had further notice given me,The Queen of Navare de∣parteth out of . that upon Thursday she was departed from Vic Bigorre in all haste, and was gone towards Nerac, as it was true, for she arrived there upon Sunday morning. Her arrival at this place filled many with expectation of novelty, and possest the wiser sort with an opinion that the Peace would not long continue. The next day I sent my Nephew de Leberon to wait upon her, by whom I did humbly beseech her, tht her coming into these parts might turn to our advantage, and produce some good effects for the better esta∣blishment of the Peace concluded, assuring her upon my honor, that I on my part would take such care, that it should not e violated on the Catholicks side: in answer whereunto she sent me word, that she was come to Nerac to no other end, but to see the Peace inviolably observ'd, and to suppress any evi inclinations that some of her Church might unadvisedly nourish to the perturbation of the publick quiet, as very well knowing that there were some both of the one Per∣swasion and the other, who desired nothing but war: and that seeing I was so well disposed to the conservation of the publick repose, I should soon see that her desire and intention was the same; in concurrence to which common benefit I was only to communicate to her such things as I should hear, and that she would take order concerning all things that depended upon those of her Religion. Two things oblig'd me to believe that this Queen spoke from her heart, although the Court was pleased to censure me for that credulity, of which the first was, that the King had never given her occasion to act any thing against him, but on the contrary both formerly maintain'd her interest against the Pope, and more lately against her own Sub∣jects of Bearn, which I conceived ought in reason to oblige her: and the other the great promises which both by Lettes and express Messengers she ordinarily made to the King never to be against him, of which I do believe his Majesty has no less than a whole hundred to produce. All which consider'd, together with the near relation she has to the King, what must he have been, who durst have manifested a suspicion against her. Had I done i she would have said, and have accused me to have been the cause that she had altered the good inclination she had ever had to his Majesties service. Wherein she would have wanted no seconds at Court against me, to load me with the Pack instead of the Saddle. I am much better satisfied that she has persecuted me as she has done without any cause then that she had done it with any just pretence: but the weakest alwayes goes to the walls. If the King or Queen had a mind to have had me done otherwise, why did they not order me to do it; I should then have fear'd nothing; but I must be a Prophe. I had evermore an eye to what they did in Bearn, because it is a Country very much infected with the new Religion, that is crept in amongst them I know not how, nor I know not who will root it out. They had amongst them, 'tis true, a pack of Godly Ministers, who with all their seeming humility, and pretended sanctity, breath'd nothing in their Pulpits but War and Rebellion: but as to the Queen of Navarre, I could never have imagin'd that she would have committed such an error, and have hazarded her State, which the King had maintain'd her in, as she did. But I think those virtuous Ministers under shew of holiness inveigled her over to their pary; for to that end they would omit nothing, and would promise wonders to whoever would hearken to them.The Queen of Navarre de∣parts from Ne∣rac. The Queen departed from Nerac on Sunday morning, the very same day that my Wife intended to have gone thither to have kissed her hand, and Monsieur de Sainctorens and my Sons were to have gone along with her, to run at the Ring, and to divert the Prince where they made account to have stayed eight or ten dayes. I sent my Wife thither on purpose to entertain the Queen with reiterated assurances of me and the Catholicks, that we would not offer so much as once to think of taking arms, but the same Sunday morning by break of day came a Comptroller of hers, by whom she sent me word, that my Wife should not come thither, for that she was going away to Castelgeloux, upon some intelligence she had receiv'd, that certain incendia∣ries of her Religion had a mind to raise some commotion; but that she would not fail to prevent them. I then perceiv'd that it was something else than to suppress those pretended Mutineers that carried her away; for had that been all, she might have done the business at Nera without going to Castelgeloux: yet could I not penetrate into the bottom of her designe. The next morning I went to Agen, from thence I dispatcht away to Monsieur de Madaillan, that he should in all secrecy gather together those of my Company on the
other side the River Garonne, at la Savetat, where his own house was: I sent another dispatch also to the Chevalier my Son, who was a Colonel in Guenne, that he should give notice to all his Captains that day and night, in all diligence they should march to Port St, Marie with fifteen or twenty Harquebuzeers on horseback each, without staying for any more. I likewise sent to Monsieur de Fontenilles, who lay in Garrison at Moissac to do the same, and to send to those of his Company who were not in the Garrison with him to follow after with all possible speed. The Queen of Navarre staid two daies only at Castelgeloux, but took her way thence di∣rectly to Thonens and Aymett. Her departure was so sudden, that the Chevalier my Son fell four hours short of being able to joyn with Monsieur de Madaillon, by reason of the pas∣sage over the River of Aiguillon, where there were no more than two little Boats only, and yet when our people came to Aymett, it was not above three or four hours that she had been parted thence, and gone in all haste straight to Bergerac; where the Sieur de Piles with three or fourscore Hrse was come out to meet her, and so she passed over the Dordogne. I had taken s extraordinary pains night and day to send away my dispatches to give  to all the Capains and Gentlemen of the Country to betake themselves to arms, that being not yet perfectly cur'd of my Catharre I relaps'd into an extreme and dangerous sickn. Every one concluded I could not possibly escape it, and I my self though no less; for I  made my will, which before for any sickness I had had, or for any wounds I had receiv'd, I had never done. In all the sicknesses and wounds I had lain under before, I had never had other care than of my arms, and my horses; but at this time,The Sieur de Montluc again dangerously sick. believing I should certainly die, I thought of every thing, though that which most afflicted me, was to leave my Prince and Country in so critical a time, and in so dan∣gerous a condition. However during the time of my sickness I made the Knight my Son raise thirty Ensigns of Foot, wherein the Levy was so sudden, that the Captains could not get Soldiers to make up a third part of their Companies, by reason that almost all those that Monsieur de Sainctorens had carried to the King in the second troubles were left be∣hind in France, and had listed themselves into the old standing Regiments there, and also some of the Captains. Being yet in the extremity of my sickness,Monsieur de Ioyese sends the Sieur de Montluc intel∣ligence of the coming of the Provenals. Monsieur de Ioyeuse, who was about Mont∣pellier, sent me word that the Proveals had passed the Rosne, and that Monsieur d' Acier was gone towards Usez to meet and receive them; that they were only five or six thou∣sand Ragamuian Rascals (which was his own expression) who carried their Wives and Children along with them, and that I might easily hinder their passage into Xaintonge, whether they were going to offer their service to the Prince, and the Admiral, who were already arriv'd in those parts. The Queen of Navarre had also taken the same way, as to a place of the greatest safety, where they had so many advantages to prosecute the War, and the whole Country at their devotion. I had likewise news sent me from Court, that the King had sent away Monsieur de Montpensier to come head the Forces of Guienne and Poictou; of which I was exceeding glad, being assur'd that if we were to serve under him, we should be sure to fight. The very day therefore that I first got out of my bed from my dangerous sickness I went towards Cahors, taking a Physician and a Litter along with me, of which I had more need than of a Spanish Horse, and after that manner made a shift to crawl as far as Castelnau de Monratter within five leagues of Cahors, there to as∣semble our Forces together. To this place came Messieurs de Gondrin, de la Valette, de Sainct Colombe (who brought five and twenty men at Arms of the Monsieurs Company that were of this Country) the Lieutenant, and Ensign of Monsieur de Montpezat (who had some of the Marquis de Vil∣lars his men) and Monsieur du Masses with his own Company, and mine, which at that time consisted of threescore men at Arms. I stayd four or five dayes at Castelna, where I began to gather a little strength, and there received Letters from Monsieur d' Escars, that he was coming to joyn with me with his own Company, and a Company of Light-horse that he had newly raised,Number of the Catholic Forces. as also the Vicount de Limevil with his Company, and another of Light-horse, together with some Gentlemen of Lemosin and Perigord he had with him, and I also had some. What betwixt the Forces that Monsieur d' Escars was to bring, and those of ours, we made account by the report of our Mareschal de Camp, which was Mon∣sieur de la Chappelle Lousieres, Lieutenant to Monsieur de Biron, that we might be in all four hundred Light-horse, and as to the Foot in all the thirty Ensigns there was not good and bad above eighteen hundred fighting men; for my Son having taken a review of them at his passing over the Bridge at Cahors, had casheer'd three or four hundred that were good for nothing but to pilfer and rob the Country, s that in all his ensigns he had no more remaining but eighteen hundred men. 'Tis true he had daiy some or other still
coming in to him, for the Captains had left their Lieutenants behind, who every day pickt up some. With these then we marcht directly to Cahors, where I lay twelve dayes, and the Camp in the adjacent places, and there again receiv'd letters from Monsieur d'Escars, who staid for me about Soillac, and also from Monsieur de Ioyuse, wherein he adver∣ised me, that the Enemy still march't on along the Mountain toward Rhodes, and so we departed thence, and in two dayes came to Soillac. At Souillac I receiv'd letters from the Bishop of Rodes, and from Messieurs de l' Estang (eldest Son of Monsieur de Cornusson) and de Saint Bensa, all of one and the same tenor, which was, that they had discover'd the Enemy, who were no other than five or six thousand Rascls with their Wives and Children with them, exactly after the same manner that Mon∣sieur de Iyuse had describ'd them before. Now seeing this account of the Enemy came from men of honor, especially from Monsieur de Ioyeuse, who sent me word he had caused them to be discover'd by men of worth and understanding in those affairs, and that the others had themselves view'd them in person, we all concluded it to be so. See here the difference betwixt causing an Enemy to be dscover'd, and discovering a mans self in his own person the posture of an Enemy; for this advertisement had like to have been the ruine of us all: and we were so near being all lost, that it was the work of God, and not of men that preserv'd us; and yet we were all of us of one opinion, and could hardly let it sink into our heads, that Mssieurs the Count de Tande, de Gordes, de Maugiron, and de Suze having all the Forces of Provence and Dauphiné with them (for they were all joyn'd together,The Sieur de Montluc's dis∣course touching the coming of the Proven∣aux. as Monsieur de Ioyeuse had writ me word) would have suffer'd so few people in so evil equipage to pass the Rosne without fighting them; or the said Sieur de Ioyeuse himself, who had a Force sufficient in Languedoc to hinder them from passing the River on his side: neither could I imagine that such a handful of men should be so hardy, as to march thorough the Kingdom of France; which made me alwayes cry, these are brave bold Rascals, we must see them, if they be such as we are made to believe they are, we shall have a good bargain of them. On the other side the desire we had to fight them made us more apt to believe, that the intelligence had been sent us was true, for oftentimes men are apt to deceive themselves, and enclin'd to believe what they desire. In this reso∣lution we made account to go and fight them so soon as ever they should approach the River of Dordegne; to which purpose being remov'd to Gourdon, Monsieur de Monsales arriv'd at our Camp, who brought me Letters from the King, and to Monsieur d' Escars also, wherein his Majesty commanded us forthwith to repair to Monsieur de Montpensier (who was about Poicto) to fight with the Prince of Condé, and the Admiral. He came in a very great heat to make us instantly depart, which made us immediately enter into Councel upon the place, in which was Messieurs d' Escars, and de Bories, St. Genies the elder, with two or three other Knights of the order, who were come with Monsieur d' Escars, and on our side Messieurs de Gondrin, de la Vallette, du Masses, de Fontenilles, de Giversc, de Saint Colmbe, de Cançon, de Brassac, de la Chapelle Losieres, Cassaneuil, and my self, with some other Knights of the Order. I had sent back Monsieur de Sainctorens toward Moissac (forasmuch as I had been enformed that the Vicomptes were gathering to∣gether to go joyn with Monsieur d' Acier, and the Provençals) to the end that I might have continual intelligence, making account to fight these fellows with so many of us as we were together, seeing they were no more than five or six thousand pitiful Rascals, as we had been made to believe.Consulation concerning the Commission of the Sieu de Monsales. There was not one Captain, nor Knight of the Order, who was present at the Council that did not concur in the same opinion, which was, that the Prince of Condé and the Admiral were no such Novices in War, nor so young Captains, but that they very well knew how to avoid fighting, unless when themselves thought fit to do it, wherein also they would find the less difficulty now, considering that they had already a River in their favour, which was the Charante, and over that the Bridges of Xaintes and Congnac in their own hands: and on the other side they would never venture to fight without Foot, which they had not, being come thither naked, with no more than thirty or forty Horse: but that doubtless before they took the field to fight, they would stay for the Proveçals which Monsieur d' Acier was bringing up to them, who since they were coming upon us, it would be much better to fight them our selves, than to go joyn with Monsieur de Montpensier, who was a great way off, and leave the Proveçals behind at full liberty to march in all security along the banks of the Dor∣dogne directly to Congnac, now that there remain'd no Forces in Gienne to oppose their way. So then we all resolv'd, that it was necessary to stay and fight them, hoping in God that the Victory would be our own, seeing they were so few, and so inconsiderable people. It was moreover alledg'd in the Council, that the said Proveçals, when they should see themselves at large, would take their way towards the Vicontes, for all the Rivers were
fordable, and that the Prince and the Admiral would come and joyn with them about Libourne and Fronsac, forasmuch as at Bourdeaux there would be none to hinder them: and others said, that whilst we were meditating to defend the Cities of Xaintonge we should lose our own. In fine there was not one Captain, or Knight of the Order, that was of any other opinion, but tht e ought to sight, Monsieur de Monsales excepted, who was almost at his wis end, seeing he could not carry away the Succours, as he promised to him∣self he should do; so that seeing our resolution to be otherwise he departed from us. Whether he went I am not able to say, but one thing I know, that he went away in very great wrah. He immediately dispatcht away his Brother to the King, and, as I have since been told, said my rrand to their Majesties, saying, that I had perswaded all the Cap∣tains to return this answer, an answer that in truth went very much against his stomack; for he had a mghty ambition to have shew'd the King and Qeen what a wonderful au∣thority he had in Guienne, that could carry in so considerable succours, and wherein were so many brave Captains; only to gain still more favour and esteem with their Majesties, to the end they might grant him his demands, which came so thick, that the King never fill'd him one hand, but that at the same time he pt out the other to beg something more. And this I dare be bld to aim, that never any King of France conferr'd so many bene∣fits upon any one Gentleman of Guienne as the King had bestowed upon him: for he gave him two Bishopricks, two Abbies, and above a hundred thousand Francs in money at one time, and yet notwithstanding he was never content. And I will be bold to say another thing, that alhough upon this debate all the Captains had concluded to go to Monsieur de Montpensr, the Devil a one of them would have gone along with him, as they afterwards made it sufficiently appear, for no body would follow him when he was with the Monsieur, but chose to follow Monsieur de la Vallette, who was not half so much a Favourite as he; but he was by much a better Soldier. Yet will I not say but that the Sieur de Monsles was a very brave Gentleman in his own person, but a man ought to take measure of his own abilities, to moderate his ambition and to sweat a long while under his arms, before he take upon him to play the great Captain, and to Lord it in Command. After this Consultation held at Gourdon the said Sieur de Monsales being departed from us, there came news from the Bishop of Cahors his Uncle, who sent us word, that the Provençals Camp was come within three or fours leagues of Cahors, and that therefore he conjur'd us for the honor of God to come speedily and relieve the City; for they expected the Enemy the next morning; and before we departed from Souillac there past by one whom I will forbear to name, lest should he be yet living, it might cause him to be kill'd, who brought a Letter from the Queen to Monsieur d' Escars, wherein she writ to him to let the bearer pass with all the secrecy he could, for that she had sent him to the Proven∣çals Camp to discover what number they might be. Monsieur d' Escars thereupon came to acquaint me with the business, and carried me to his Lodging, and there into a Cabinet, where he had conceal'd this man, who, so soon as I came in to him acquainted me with the Command he had from the Queen, telling me, that if I would give him a man in whom I durst confide, and that was good at the numbring of men, he would undertake to shew him all the Army; for he himself was not to stand upon computing of men, be∣ing to play another kind of person; but that he would nevertheless order it so, that the man I shoud send should view the whole Army at his ease. Whereupon I deliver'd a Soldier to him, whom I knew I might trust, who also was to counterfeit himself a Hugo∣not, and so they went away together. Now to return to the advertisement vve had from the Bishop of Cahors, upon his Letter we immediately turn'd that vvay to go fight vvith the Enemy. Monsieur de la Vallette vvent before vvith his ovvn Company, and took Monsieur de Fontenilles along vvith him, vvho at that time vvas my Lieutenant, vvith the one half of mine. I every day expected an ansvver from the King, to a request I had made to him to give the one half of my Com∣pany to the said Monsieur de Fontenilles, and the other half to the Knight my Son, be∣lieving I should not live long, both by reason of the long sickness I had had, of vvhich I vvas not yet recover'd, and also by reason of the violence vvherevvith I daily forc'd my self to do more than I vvas able. Monsieur de la Valette made so long a march to go to discover these people, that of tvvo dayes vve could not meet again, their horses being almost all unshod. He vvas as dili∣gent a Captain as any I ever knevv, but by this means he vvas constrain'd to stay a day at Cahors to get his horses nevv shoos, for the vvay they had gone vvas so stony, as had left half his party barefoot; and Monsieur d' Escars having heard that the Enemy took the vvay tovvards Limosin, vvould needs go to defend his ovvn Government: but he vvas not
long before he repented his so doing; for the Enemy marcht towards Acir and Gramat, which the said Sieur d' Escars having understood, and that they were got before him, he return'd back to us in all diligence, and we rallied at Gourdon, a Town belonging to Mon∣sieur de Saint Supplice. I then dispatcht away in all haste to my Son, who was advanc'd a great way towards Chrs, that he should immediately face about towards us, and to Monsieur de la Vallette, to advance with all possible speed, and not fail to come the next day to Gramat, that we might fight that day; or however the next morning. Monsieur d' Escars and I, Monsieur de Gondrin, Messieurs le Vcompe de Lemivil, and du Msses, so soon as ever we had baited, immediately departed, and marcht straight towards Gramat, sending Monsieur du Msses, and the Vicount de Limevil with the Company of Light-horse, and the Mareschal de Camp before directly to Gramat; when being advanc'd as far as the Gallows of Gramat, within betwixt three and four Harquebuz shot of the Town, we there made a halt to say for Monsieur de la Valette and his Party, in which he had Monsieur de Saint Colombe, and the rst before-nam'd, and also for our Foot. I divided our thirty Ensigns into three Regiments, although the Chevalier my Son commanded them all, of which Monsieur de Lebron commanded ten, and Captain Sendat other ten, besides the third ten, which was immediately to be commanded by my Son himself. Which because the Country thereabout was very barren, we were constrain'd to quarter at some distance from one another, by which means, what by reason of the long way they had to return back, as also that the Quarters of the thirty Ensigns were separated, and that Monsieur de la Vallette could not come up to Gramat that day, we there stayd till it was so late, that the Sun was almost going down, where still from hour to hour Monsieur du Masses sent continually word that the Enemy still marcht towards the Dor∣dogne, and intended to take up their Quarters in certain Villages betwixit Gramat and the Dordogne. Monsieur d' Acier very well knew whereabouts we lay, insomuch that it was put to the question, whether or no they should come to attaque us, and their intelligence was so good, that they knew how many we were almost to fifty men. All his Captains were of opinion that he ought to do it; but he shewed them a Letter from the Prince of Condé, wheein the Prince conjur'd him by no means to engage, if he coud possibly avoid it, for∣asmuch as upon those Forces he had with him, he said, depended his good or evil for∣tune. Now as we thus sta'd in expectation of our own people to come up to us, Captain Pierre Moreau the Enemies Mareschal de Camp hapned to come to Gramat, to view the Quarters,The Sieur d' A∣cier's Mares∣chal de Camp taken prisoner. no thinking that we were so near, where by three or four Light-horse belong∣ing to the Vicount de Limevil, he was taken, and brought prisoner to us to the foremen∣tion'd Gallows, where we all were. Immediately upon his being brought before us, being I was well acquainted with the said Captain Moreau, he having been formerly of my Company in Piedmont, Monsieur d' Escars and I took him aside, where I bid him to tell me the truth upon pain of death how many men they were; for you know Captain Moreau, said I, that I am not a man to be dallied withall, and you must not tell me a le. To which he made answer, that he would forfeit his head if he did not tell the truth. We very well perceiv'd that he was damably afraid, for at the very first he had desir'd me to remember, that he had once been of my Company, and had serv'd me upon several very good occasions, wherein I had ever seen him behave himself like a man of honor. I then gave him assurance of his life; whereupon he told us, that they were betwixt sixteen and eighteen thousand Foo, and betwixt five and six thousand Horse, of which there might be three hundred Cuirassiers well am'd, and well mounted; and the other two or three hundred Harque∣buzeers and Argoulets,The number of the Proven∣çals. of which they made no very great account. And as to the Foot, that there were six thousand Harquebuzeers old Soldiers all, of which he had never seen so great a number in any Army of the Kings, that they had other six thousand, of whom they did not make altogether so much reckoning as of the first, but that nevertheless there was good men amongst them, and such as he believ'd, under favour of the first six thou∣sand, would fight tollerably well, and that the remainder to seventeen or eighteen thou∣sand were for the most part Harquebuzeers also, and the rest Halberteers, and some Pikes▪ Monsieur d' Escars and I lookt upon one another, very much astonisht at the account had been given us; whereupon Monsieur d'Escars said to him these words, Captain Morea instead of sving your life you will throw it away, for you are oblig'd to speak the truth upon pain o hanging, and Monsieur de Monluc has very good intelligence, that you are not above five or six thousand, and of those the greater part are women, children, and servants. He then made answer, Sir, we know very well you have been told so, but let me die if I lie to you fifty men, but said I, we are advertised by Monsieur de Joyeuse, who has caused you to be discover'd to a man, that you are no more than five or six thousand, as also by several Gentlemen. wh
have all taken a view of yu ner unto Rodes;Captain Mo∣reau's answer. we know very well, said he, that Monsieur de Joyeuse, the Bishop of Rodes, and othr have advertis'd you so: but seeing we were so few, why did they not then intercept us, and hinder us from passing the Rsne? let me perish if they ever gave us so much as any one Alarm, judg you then how they could come to discover us. Monsieur de Montluc, my life lies at stk, I will not deceive you, and since you are pleased to secure it if I speak the truth, I will not forfit it by telling a lye: of which to give you fur∣ther proof, see here the Muster Roll of our whole Army, Rgiment by Rgiment, for unworthy at I am, they have made me their Mareschal de Camp. Monsieur d' Escars then took the Rolles, and read them before me, when seeing the Sun was about to go down, we were of advice not to quarter at Gramt, but to retire from thence to the Quarters from whence we rose in the morning, and there to receive Monsieur de la Vallette, and our Foot, and all of us together to delibeate what we had to do. We accordingly then began to put our selves upon our march, entreating Monsieur de Cassaneueil to go draw off Monsieur du Masses, and our Mareschal de Camp; for from Gramat to the place where the Enemy were sitting down in their Quarters, was at the farthest not above a quarter of a league, and it was well for the Sieur du Masses that we did so; for as he was intentively observing the order of their Camp to see if he could muster their Forces, and dismounted with two others only with him loking upon them against the Sun, which was then just upon set∣ting, the said de Cassanueil was aware of all their Cavalry coming full drive to intercept their retreat, which made him gallop upon the spur to give them notice of their danger, who thereupon, as time it was, reti'd in all haste towards us. Thus then we began to retreat toward Gourdon, when being about the mid way, the Queens Spye overtook us, who knew nothing of the taking of Captain Mrean, and drawing Monsieur d' Escars, Mon∣sieur de Gondrin,The Spy's re∣port. and me apart, the Soldier there told us, that the said Spy had given him opporunity to see, and to number all the Enemies Camp in the Plain of Figere, where they were all drawn up into Battalia to give an assault to the Town; but that the Inha∣bitants had sent Monsieur d' Acier a Present, which had qualified their fury, and prevail'd with them to forbear. He told us that he had there counted a hundred, fifty, and two Ensigns of Foot, and being the Cavalry were a little at a distance, he could not so exactly number them, as he had done the Foot: but that he thought they might be betwixt six and seven hundred Horse, and that he had numbred the Foot to be betwixt three and and four and twenty thousand men. Monsieur d' Escars and I then took the Spy aside by himself, who gave us the same account that the Soldier had done; the Spy was in bo∣dily fear lest Captain Moreau should peradventure have discover'd him, for so soon as ever he saw him he slunk out of the Troop, and before we were settled every man in his quarters, it was after midnight. The next day we all met together again, and all the Cap∣tains came to my lodging to consult what we had to do, having found that we had to deal with other kind of people than with five or six thousand scoundrils with their wives and children. At night the aforesaid Captain Moreau told me in private, that in case we should attempt to fight them in the place where they were encampt, we should infallibly be defeated, were we four times as many Horse and Foot as we were, by reason that Mon∣sieur d' Acier who was of this Country, had purposely chosen this place not to stir from thence of eight or ten dayes, but there to lie in expectation of the return of a Messenger he had sent to the Prince and the Admiral, to tell them, that he would go no farther; and that they all humbly entreated the Prince to come and make Guienne the Scean of the War, which they were confidently assur'd they should make their own, before the King could draw sufficient Forces together to fight them: that to this end they would march before him towards Libourne, and would try to carry Bourdeaux, for they fear'd nothing but our Horse, and therefore it was that they had made choice of those Quarters, it being a stony Country, and the stones so sharp that they cut like knives, insomuch that a horse dares not gallop, or indeed almost tread upon them, and moreover all the Country, and all High-wayes are enclosed with dry stone walls of the height of a man, and the lowest as high as a mans girdle, under favour of which they made account to enclose all their Har∣quebuzeers, and the Horse in their Rear, so that we could not possibly go to fight them, without exposing our selves to the mercy of their shot. All these things consider'd, as also the situation of the place, and the number of men, made us matuely to deliberate of the condition we were in, and with the best discretion we had to provide against the odds against us, and to supply the weakness of our Forces with the best resolutions founded upon the best rules of War. Upon which consultation it was in the end agreed, that Monsieur d' Escars should send a Gens-d'arme of his, an intelligent person, to found the Pass of the Dordogne leading to Figeac, wherein if the Foad should prove to be good, we should then encamp our selves there, and cause our
provisions to b brought in to us from the said Figeac, for that there we should be out of the stones, where the Cavaly could not come to fight, and that finding the Foards such as we believ'd they were, we might at any time pass over, either to ight the fist that should attempt the Foad from the other side, or the last that were to pass, we being no more than a little league from one another. With this resolution we dispatcht away the said Gens-d'arms to go sound the Foard, and the Commissaries to make ready the provisions, concluding to depart the day following, and not before, because we would give the Com∣missaries time to prepare the provisions, and the Gentlemen leasure to sound the Foard. The next day about ten of the clock in the morning there arriv'd the Brother of Mon∣sieur de Villagie (who had been no more than six or seven dayes at most in posting too and again frm Court) bringing a Letter from the King,A second com∣mand from the King. wherein his Majesty commanded us, that whether we had already fought, or were upon the point of fighting, immediate∣ly upon ight thereof, leaving all things in order, or disorder as to the affairs of the place, we should march away to Mnsieur de Montpensier. We very well understood by the stile, that these Letters were of Monsieur de Monsales his contriving; forasmuch as he had told us at his coming to call us away, that the King and Queen did not care though Gui∣enne was lst, provided we fought with the Prince of Condé; for he being once defeated, all the rest would be recover'd of course: at which time I remember there were some who in my presence reproacht him, that he talk'd at his ase; for although his house should be burnt, he was very well assur'd the King and Queen would give him three times as much as he could possibly lose, and that hitherto it had never been known, that ever the King had conferr'd so many benfits upon all the Captains of Guienne, put them all together, as up∣on him alone: and this was the thing that made us believe he had sent this Letter ready drawn to the King, that his Majesty might write to us after that manner. For in the Cabinets of Princes such tricks have been usually playd, and such extraordinary favours granted, with much less difficulty than men of our trade can obtein the leat justice. The above-named Captains who were present at the Consultation are able to testifie what a dis∣pute there was amongst us, before we began to march, as seeing the apparent loss and ruine of the Country, should the Prince transfer the Scean of the War into Guienne, as we did confidently believe he would, seeing these people refuse to advance any further, and also knowing Monsieur d' Acier to be of that opinion; and that the Queen of Navarre being with the Prince would eternally solicite him so to do, if but to secure her own estate: for having once Guienne at her devotion, she might very well assure the State of her Son, and moreover pretend to a great deal more. But after all the disputes that have been concerning that affair, I call all the Captains to witness, whether I did not propose to obey the Kings pleasure, and to march away to Monsieur de Montpensier in what pat soever he might be; telling them withal, that in∣deed by reason of my indisposition I could not engage my self in field service in the beginning of a turbulent winter, as being altogether useless in an Army: but that they might boldly proceed, without fearing their houses should be burnt: for that with the Gentlemen and the Common people who would be left in the Country, I did not doubt to secure them, or at least to cut out so much work for the Enemy, that they should pay dear for what they got. There was then a debate about marching the Infantry, all the Captains saying, that it was to send them to the slaughter they being no way able to match the Enemies Foot, and were therefore generally of opinion, that I ought to place them in Garrison to∣wards St. Foy, Libourne, and Bergerac along the River Dordogne, and that in the mean time they should see which way the Enemy would take;Resolution. who should they march into Xaintonge, the Chevalier my Son might afterwards go thorough Limousin, and joyn himself with the King. Thus then I return'd towards Cahors, and to Castelnau de Monrartier, expecting news of the Enemies march, where at the said Castelnau I was surpriz'd with a Dissentery, that put my Physitian almost to the end of his lesson, and me of my life: and seeing there are some, who to do me a good office, have said, that I might have fought the Enemy if I would; and others, that seeing I would not fight them, I ought speedily to have sent a∣way the Forces to Monsieur de Montpensier, I have here to a syllable set down the truth of the story, from the beginning to the end, and all upon the testimony of the Captains who were present, excepting those who are since dead; and I think they are all, saving Monsieur du Masses, yet alive: so that if there was a fault any where, it ought to be charg'd upon the Governors, who first of all suffer'd them to assemble in their Governments, and afterwards to pass the Rivers without offering to oppose them; and truly as to them, if any one have a mind to accuse them, that they did not do well, I think they may do it
with colour enough. But they must evermore lay the blame pon me, who would never depend upon the favour of any but the King and Queen alone; and because I had no Idol that I ador'd at Court, (which I never had, nor never will have) to defend me from the charities of those vertuous Court-worms. It has not been my custom to avoid fighting, I have been too much bred to that from my childhood; neither was I ever in place where we were near the Enemy, that I vvas not evermore of opinion vve ought to fight; and if I commanded in chief have ever fought, though almost alwayes the weaker; and had I at this time had my own will, I had tried a better or a worse, and would have brought a∣way a leg or a wing, either from Front or Rear; by which means we might have given Monsieur de Montpensier time to have come and have joyn'd with us: but these Letters of Monsales his invention must carry it against what we saw with our own eyes was best to be done. To hear these men talk who are pleased to accuse me, a man would say I ought to kill all before me with my nails, and take Rochelle and Montauban with my teeth: but I am no such fool as to throw stones against the wind, and in a disadvantagious Coun∣try with three thousand to fight with twenty thousand men, and by my overthrow to draw after me the ruine of the Country. But I shall leave this discourse, as not willing to enter into excuses, for I was not in fault in the least, and shall not learn my Trade of those Musk-Cats that prate by the fire-side, far enough from blows, and the while we are engag'd in action, give the King (about whose person they have the honor to be) unpro∣fitable counsels. But it is the business of a Lieutenant of the King, to take his own way, and do as he himself bst fees cause: for it is not alwayes necessary to do as the King com∣mands, he is far off, and relies upon your conduct: it is therefore your part, if you have any discretion at all, to judg what is best to be done. No man living can deny but that had I fought a Battel, I had manifestly expos'd the Province of Guienne to ruine, for I must have fought against the odds of ten to one; and had I done as the King, at the importunity of the Sieur de Monsales, commanded me, I had left all the Country at the Enemies dispose, as I refer to any indifferent person to judg. I then return'd back to Agen, where I recover'd a little health, and upon that reco∣very immediately resolv'd to go seek out Monsieur de Montpensier; which determination I signified accordingly to Monsieur de Terride, and to Monsieur de Gondrin, who was come back from Gourdon by reason of a sickness that had there seiz'd him; and we had enough to do to perswade him to return, for sick as he was he would have gone along with his Company, in case they were to go with me. We appointed to meet at Ville-neuf d' Age∣nois, to which place I brought ten Ensigns of Foot conducted by the Knight my Son, leaving the other two Tertias of his Regiment to be commanded by the aforenamed Captains, when, as we were all joyn'd together ready to march, I receiv'd a Letter from Monsieur de Montpensier, wherein he sent me word, that all affairs set apart I should forthwith put my self into Bourdeaux, if I was not already there; for he had intelligence that the Enemy had a design upon that City, and was afraid I could hardly come time enough to save it. At the same time also there came to me one of the Ushers of the Court of Par∣liament of Bourdeaux, by whom the Court desir'd me to make haste to their succour, and that they gave the City for lost, if I did not put my self immediately into it. I was strangely astonisht whence these enterprizes should proceed, and was constrain'd to send to Messieurs de Terride and de Gondrin to Castillon, to gather together the said Companies of Horse and Foot that came along with us, and there stay to expect my further order, for I hop'd soon to provide against the present danger, and taking fifteen or twenty Gentle∣men only along with me, went away in all diligence, causing our great horses and arms to follow after. Being come betwixt Marmanda, and la Reoll, I there met with Monsieur de Lignerolles returning from Spain, and Monsieur de Lansac the younger, who both of them entreated me to make all the haste I could, for that they doubted the next day (being Wednesday) the City would be taken,Divisions  Bourdeaux. which they had left so strangely divided, that they did not confide in one another. The said Sieur de Lansac had receiv'd two Letters, by which it was evident enough that there was some conspiracy in the City it self. I scarce stayd to embrace them, but went away to lie all night at Langon, and the next day by noon came to Bourdeaux, having first sent away the Usher post before, to give the Parliament notice of my coming, to the end, that if there was really a design in hand that might hold them a little in suspence: I was there constrain'd to stay five or six dayes. The next morning I enter'd into the Court, where I made them a speech the best I could to assure them, and put them out of all doubt; which the Parliament took exceeding kind∣ly from me, and return'd me their thanks. After dinner I went to the Town-house, where I made another to the Jurats, in conclusion whereof I gave them order the next day to put all the City into armes; which was accordingly done, and I found them to
amount to two thousand and four or five hundred men, well arm'd. I found also that the two Companies of Monsieur de Tilladet (who as yet was Governor) were there, and three others. The next day I again went to the Court of Parliament, where I gave them an account of the Forces I had found in the City, remonstrating to them the little occasi∣on they had to apprehend any danger, and the good disposition I had observ'd, as well in the Citizens as the Soldiers, exhorting them to do their endeavour in the defence of their City: after which having made them all hold up their hands to live and die together in the defence of their City, and that if they should discover any one who should go about to betray it they would all fall upon him, they all swore to me so to do, which greatly rejoyc'd the whole Assembly, to whom I further remonstrated, That themselves also ought to take up arms,The Sieur de Montluc's Speech to the Parliament of Bourdeaux. if occasion should so require, and remember that the most vali∣ant Captains the Romans had were men of Letters, who had they not been qualified with learning would have been lookt upon as unworthy of great commands, and that their knowledge ought by no means to hinder them from the use of arms, and from fighting, but rather encourage them to do like those antient Romans, being men as well as they, who had no more than two arms, and one heart, as they had. Gentlemen, said I, I see by your countenances, that you are not men that will suffer your selves to be beaten, those who have gray beard and heads shall be for the Councel, but a good number that I see here are fit to trail a pike, and how much think you will it encou∣rage the people, when they shall see those who have power over their lives and estates take arms for their defence? Not a man will dare to mutter, and your Enemies will tremble when they shall hear, that the Parliament it self is taking arms to suppress them, by which they will understand you are in earnest; and moreover all the young men whom I have seen enter this place, and who are more fit for a Corslet than a Gown, will then do the same. To this end I entreated them to shut up the Palace for eight dayes, that in those eight dayes time every one of them might be aquainted with the arms he intended to make use of in time of need, and that they might divide themselves into two and two, to stand at the Gates with their arms, that in so doing the whole City would take exemple; and on the other side should there be any Treason in the said City, this good order would be a means to put a stop to their proceeding, and put them out of hopes of executing their design; wherefore seeing so great a good was to be expected from this prudent order in affairs, as the preservation of their City, their lives and fortunes, they ought to spare nothing to that end. After which I told them for the conclusion of all: Gentlemen, consider I beseech you what I have said to you, and I make you here a tender of my own life, and the lives of these Gentlemen my friends to do you service, and to establish you in the peace and security you your selves desire. The President Rossignac, who at that time had the Chair (for Monsieur de Legabaston was retir'd, his service not being agreeable to this King) made answer in the behalf of the whole Court, giving me very many thanks for the Remonstrance I had made to them, for which they would for ever be my servants, and telling me withall, that there was not a man amongst them young or old who would not take arms for his Majesties service in the defence of the City.Commendati∣on of the two Parliaments of Tholouze and Bourdeaux. In earnest the King owes a great deal to this Society, as also to that of Tholouze, for if either the one or the other had fail'd Guienne had had much to suffer; forasmuch as the loss of one of these two Cities carries a long train after it, to wit the ruine of the whole Province. In four dayes time I had clear'd all the jealousie and apprehension that was before in the City. You Gentlemen that are Governors, it is a fine thing to know the humour and com∣plexion of the Nation over which you command, and one thing I will say for this people, that if their Governor have once gain'd a reputation among them, and can so pertinently deliver himself, as to demonstrate to them any kind of probability in the thing he would perswade, he shall not only engage the Gentry, the Soldiery, and the Magistrates them∣selves, but also the Monks, Priests, Labourers, and even the very women to fight. For they are a Nation that want no courage, but a good Chief, that knows how to command; and you ought to believe, that seeing the Antients made so much use of Orations before all their Battels, and found so great a benefit to accrue thereby, that we in these times should not lay aside that kind of encouragement. They found it of so considerable ad∣vantage, that they have not thought fit to omit the several Orations in their Histories and Records, and we likewise ought to believe that in using the same means, and in fol∣lowing their exemple, we shall find as great advantage by it as they did, and I look upon it as a great and necessary quality in a Captain to speak well. I was not brought up to this, and yet have ever been so happy as in Soldierlike terms to express what I had to say tollerably well, though with a vehemency a little relishing of the Country from whence I came. I would therefore advise all persons of condition, who have the means to do it,
and design to advance their Children by Arms, the rather to bestow some Learning upon them, for if they be call'd to Commands, they will often stand in need of it, and will find it of infinite use to them; and I believe a man who has read much, and retein'd what he has read, is much more capable of executing great and noble Enterprizes than another. Had I made the best out of my little reading, it had been much better for me; and yet I have naturally enough to perswade the Soldiers to fight. The fifth day then I return'd, and being that Monsieur de Merville, Grand Seneschal of Guienne, by reason of a late sickness, was not able to go carry his Company to the Army, we came together as far as St. Foy, where I receiv'd Letters from Monsieur de Montpensier, wherein he sent me order, that I should lie about the Dordogne, and above all things have an eye to Beurdeaux and Libourne, for that he was not yet able to guess, whether the Enemy would fall back again into Guienne, or continue on their march. Which was the reason that I stayd about St. Foy, and Monsieur de Terride at Castillonnes, expecting what the Enemy would do, and also further orders from Monsieur de Mont∣pensier, being certain that in two or three dayes march we should at any time be able to joyn with him from thence. Soon after we heard that he was gone in all haste towards Poictiers, to meet the Monsieur Brother to the King, and that the Enemy marcht along the River Loire towards la Charité, there to meet and joyn with the Duke of Deuxponts: so that seeing it impossible to overake the Army, that we might ease the Country along the Banks of the Dordogne, I left two Ensigns of Foot only at Castillonnes, and three at St. Foy, and sent away the Sieur de Sainctorens with his Company of Gens-d'arms into Libourne, and the Sieur de Leberon remain'd at St. Foy, having three Companies with him, with whom I left order that in case the Enemy should approach Guienne, he with the said three Foot Companies should go put himself into Libourne. The remainder of our Forces the Chevalier my Son kept together about Quercy and Agenois, and we others retir'd every one to his own Quarter. This was all that was done hitherto, from the beginning of these troubles in these parts of Guienne. So soon as the Monsieur came up to the Army he spun out the time for a certain space a∣bout Poictiers, and along the River Loire. In the mean time nothing stirr'd in our parts; for the Vicomtes kept about Castres, Pay-Laurens, Millau, St. Antonin, and Montauban, making only some slight inroads to pilfer and steal, which I did not think considerable enough, that therefore I should set an Army on foot, for the little harm they were able to do; and besides I was willing to save money, for no other end but only to send it to the Monsieur, which made me averse to all kind of unnecessary expence. The Cap∣tains of the Gens d'armes, and some Captains of foot belonging to the Royal Army came, or else sent their ifeiour Officers to raise men in our parts to fill up their Companies, and others only to refresh themelves, and immediately to return; when after a little space I receiv'd Letters from the Monsieur, wherein he commanded me to go into Ro∣ergue to fight the Vicomtes, if possibly I could. Whereupon I sent away for my Nephew de Lberon at St. Foy with his three Companies; and although I was certain before hand that I should do no good, immediately began to march. That which made me doubt my expedition would signifie very little, was that I knew so soon as ever the Vicomtes should hear I had taken the field, they would certainly retire into the holds and lurking holes they held by the right of War, where they were so wise as to save themselves upon every rumour of an enemy; and the least place that was dispos'd to resist me had been sufficient to stop my progress, and for any hopes to find them in the field I had none: So that I knew I should do nothing but eat upon the Publick, and devour the people, should I stay long about Towns and Castles, to bolt them out of their Burrows; especially considering that I could take no Artillery along with me, which I could not do for want of money to defray the harge: neither indeed did I raise much, because I would have it all go to the Monsieurs & for there it was that the main Game was to be play'd, and there∣fore it was reason that the main provision should be reserv'd for that use, all the rest of the War being nothing but petty skirmishes in comparison of what was done, and was ex∣pected to be done there. As I was preparing for my expedition there arrived Monsieur de Pilles, and with hm the Sieurs de Bonneval, de Monens, and a great number of o∣ther Gentlemen, who were come from the Enemies Camp, either to levy men, or in re∣ference to the design they had upon Libourne; which nevertheless they fail'd in; after which the said de Pilles put himself into St. Foy, which he made his place of Rendez∣vouz, forasmuch as I had drawn from thence my Nephew de Leberon with the three Com∣panes, to take them along with me into Roergue. So soon as I came to Cahors I sent my said Nephew before with five Ensigns of Foot, and part of the Company of Gens-d'armes belonging to Monsieur de Gramont, which
Captain Mausan Quarter-master to the said Company commanded, and made him depart in all haste to surprize some of the Enemy that lay about Ville-Franche de Roü∣ergue, who accordingly made so good haste, that they marcht eight long leagues, and came to the place by one of the Clock in the night, thinking an hour before day in the morn∣ing to surprize them: but they were no sooner in the Town but that the Enemy had im∣mediate intelligence sent them, and were all retir'd into their Forts. Neither is it to be thought strange; for I wonder that either the Monsieur himself, or any other who commanded the Kings Armies, did any thing of moment, by reason the Ordonnance and Edict his Majesty had made, that no one was to demand any thing of the Hugonots, provided they abstain'd from arms, and liv'd peaceably in their own houses. From whence prceded the ruine of the King, of his Armies, and all his Affairs, and of the People also: for those furnisht out money, and were the occasion that the women who had their husbands in the Prince of Condé's Army, by their means and intelligence could at all times furnish their Husbands or Sons with money, and so serv'd for spies to the Enemy, that they needed not be at the charge of maintaining intelligence, nor trouble themselves to know what we did, those people giving them continual notice when and where any of our men were at any time to be surpriz'd and taken, and dividing the spoil when it was accordingly effected; which made me evermore maintain before the King,The inconve∣niences insuing the Edict in favour of the Hugnots who liv'd peaceably at home. that that Edict alone was the cause his Majesty was not victorious, and that this new Religion was not totally rooted out. It had been a hundred times better, that they hd all been with the Prince, than at home in their own houses; for being with him in his Army, they could have done no great matters that would have been of any signifi∣cant advantage to them, your Town-bred people being men of no great performance in War, but on the contrary would soon have famisht his Camp; and then we might have prosecued the War without being spied, or without their being advertised of our designs; neither could they have been able to get money, or any other necessaries; nay we should have made our advantage of their Estates, by which means they must of necessity either have etir'd with the pardon the King was pleas'd to grant them, or have been starv'd for want of bread. I am sure that in this Province of Guienne there would not one of them have been left alive, unless they had abju'd this new Religion, as they did in the first Troubles; for I knew very well how to handle them, and seeing I had found the way to do it o cheap, as with two yards of Match in the first troubles, I should not have been much to seek in these last. But by means of this vertuous Edict no one durst speak to them, but we were oblig'd to endure them amongst us. It is not therefore (as I said) to b wondred at, if they have perform'd so many notable exploits, considering that at all hours they were continually advertis'd of what we did, and design'd to do. 'Tis very well known that an Army can do no great matters without good Spies; for it is upon their report that a Council of War is to detemine what they have to do; but we had none amongst those people, for there was not a Catholick, let him be otherwise as brave as brave could be, that durst venture his person amongst them, it being to throw away himself, no man escaping that fell into their hands; thorough which defect we could know nothing of their affairs, and they were enform'd of all ours. O poor King how have you been gull'd and abus'd, and are yet daily impos'd upon in the Edicts that you have, and do publish in these mens fa∣vour? I will not deny but that in some occasions you have not been so well serv'd by your Soldiers and Captains as you ought to have been:Oversights in the King. but whoever will look narrowly into it, will find that the Edicts and Ordonnances you have been made to sign, have been more the cause of your Majesties and our misfortunes, than any defect in your Soldiers or Gover∣nors. Believe me (Sir) believe me, with this clemency and moderation you will never re∣claim these people. The best man amongst them would be glad to kiss you dead, and yet you forbid us doing them any harm. It is better then to be of their party than of yours; for being in their houses, let what reports will be abroad they shall be secure at home. Sir, Sir, there are some about you, who corrupted by these people, perswade you to sign these Edicts in their favour. Severity makes them tremble. At the time when without the Ceremony of Tryal, or Indictment I brancht them upon every Tree in the high-ways, and truss'd them up wherever I found them, not a man of them durst quitch. Consider then, Sir, I beseech you of what importance these fine Edicts are to your Majesties affairs; and yet they have moreover made you sign an Ordonnance to send Commissioners through∣out the whole Kingdom, to compel us to make restitution to the Hugonots of all whate∣ver we have taken from them, and not to cause them to restore that they have pilfer'd and purloin'd from us. Which, under correction Sir, is a Law imprudently made, and with∣out consideration of the mischiefs will ensue; or else by clandstine malice contriv'd to make you hated by us who are faithful to you, who acknowledge you for our lawful Sove∣raign,
and have ever maintain'd your cause, to the end that wen another War shall hereafter break out, you may not find one Catholick who will take up arms in your quar∣rel. But had your Majesty and the Queen call'd to mind what I propounded to your Majesties before your Council at Tholouze, you would never have consented to send Com∣missioners to cause restitution to the Hugonos, till first you had sent others to do us right also, for the plunders and rapines they have made upon your Catholick Subjects. They have a great excuse. The Commissioners say, that we do not complain as the Hugonots do. How should we complain, for in the first place they say, that those of theirs who were in arms only, plunderd us who were in arms also; but that we plunder'd those who never sti'd from their own houses. A pretty pretence, when there was not one Hugonot who went into arms, that did not first secure his goods in the Houses of those who stayd at home. And on the other side by the peace the King has granted them, he has given them an Indemnity for whatsoever they have done, not only against himself, but against us also, who have born arms for his Majesties service. Seeing then that his Majesty has been so gra∣cious to them as to pardon them all, is it not reasonable that the same Indemnity should extend to us also? Notwithstanding it is quite contrary. What they have acted against us is approv'd, and what we have done against them censur'd and condemn'd, yea, and moreover we are deliver'd up into the hands of justice. To counsel the King then to make a Law for the one, and not for the other, I do say, and will affirm it whilst I live, that it was barbarously done, and that it is the most unjust Law that ever Prince in the world was advis'd to make, All this was disputed at Tholouze, and the Commissioners, and Commissioners, Ordon∣nances, and Edicts were all revok'd, and his Majesty pardon'd all in general, as knowing very well that those Commissioners would do no other good, but ruine both the one and the other, to beget a perpetual hated amongst us, which would prompt us eternally to distrust, and invade one another, from whence a new War would infallbly proceed. His Majesty found the benefit of this prudent Act, for the Peace has connued five years since. I know not whom to accuse for the cause that it is again rene'd; but I kn very well, that I am no way glty of it. Of whom shall a man demand satisfaction for the houses of Monsieur de Sarlabous, Monsieur de Sainctorens, the Captains Parron, Cam∣pagnes, Lartigue, and an infinite number of others; all which have been burnt to the ground, whilst they were abroad in the Kings service, and their Wives forc'd to retire into the houses of their kindred and friends; and to this day neither they, nor their Husbands have a house to put their heads in of their own; and when satisfaction is demanded, they say the men are beggars, and worth nothing. They say true, for the rich men never stirr'd from their houses, and so preserv'd them; and yet we must be call'd to an account, and not they, because those who committed the outrage are beggars, and have nothing: but if his Majesty would have approv'd our doings,Complaints of the Catholicks. those who continue of their Religion should another time have taken heed how any of their Party had done any injury to any of ours: But I return to my Subject. I dispatcht away another Courrier to Monsieur de Leberon, and to Monsieur de Gra∣monts Company, that they should return in as great diligence as they went, especially if they desir'd to be present at the fight. The Courrier found that they were risen and de∣parted from their Quarters an hour before day, thinking yet to find the Enemy, and not meeting with them for the aforenamed reasons, burnt all the Boats in which they had passed the River, wherein they did a great mischief to the Country. So soon as ever they receiv'd my letters, they turn'd immediately back, and made more haste in their return, than when they went; for they came before St. Foy as soon as we; so that had Monsieur de Savignac and his companions made half the haste they did, we had trapt Captain Pilles, and not a man of them had escap'd. Monsieur de Chemeraut saw all the dispatches I writ. I came with the fie Companies that remain'd with the Knight my Son, my own Com∣pany, and some forty or fifty Gentlemen that rode under my Cornet, in two dayes to Monlanquin, where I receiv'd an answer from Messieurs de Terride and de Bellegarde da∣ted at Moissac, wherein they advertis'd me of the difficulty they had found in passing the Rivers, and the ill wayes the Infantry had met withal in their march, and that they could not abandon their Foot, telling me withal, that I ought not to engage the Enemy till we had all our Forces of Horse and Foot together; but that they would make all the haste they possibly could. Immediately after my arrival at Monflanquin, which might be a∣bout two of the clock in the afternoon, I sent away three Messengers, one to Monsieur de Lauzun, entreating him to send me word night and day where Monsieur de Pilles and his Forces were; for that I was resolv'd to go and attaque him. I sent another to Monsieur de Sainctorens, that he should not fail to be with me by Sun-rise at a Village call'd Monbahus,
belonging to Monsieur de Lauzun, and in the last place I sent away the Sieur de Las the Kings Advocate at Agen, to hasten away the Sieurs de Bellegarde and de Trride, who were yet three lagues behind, and could not perswade their Foot to march till break of day; and being come to Vill-neufue, which was after one of the clock in the afternoon, could by no means prevail to go any further, by reason of the extraordinary foulness of the ayes, wherein though there was I confess some excuse, and that they had reason on their side, I did not nevertheless take it for current pay; for methought every one ought to march as I would have them. After all these dispatches, having baited our horses, and the five Foot Ensigns, I macht directly towards the Vllage where I had appointed Mon∣sieur de Sainctrns to mee me, and by the way found Monsieur de Fontenilles, and Cap∣tain Montluc my Son lodg'd in four or five houses they had met with there, where I told them thy would do well to bait their horses (for they had made a very long march in the night to overtake me) and that I would go bait at the forementioned Village. I thought I should there find Monsieur de Sainctorens, and that they might follow after, and there∣fore commanded Monsieur de Madaillan my Lieutenant, that he should stay and bait my Company with thm, and after follow me to the Village: to which I went, but at my com∣ing thither heard no news either of Monsieur de Sainctrens, or of Monsieur de Lauzun; for the Mssengers I had sent to them, and who had been recommended to me by the Consuls of Monflanquin for the most trusty fellows they had in their Town, did not go away with my Letters y night as they had promised, so that it was past Noon before the said Sieurs de Sainctorens and de Lauzun eceiv'd my Letters, as they told me after; and to mend the matter, so soon as ever we were alghted, thinking to bait, we had an Alarm that came fromwads Miremont, which made us remount to horse, and advance a good quarter of a league upon the Road towards the said Mirmont, from whence the Alarm came, wherein I committed a grat folly in advancing so far with so few men with me, I having no more than five and forty Genlemen only in the Party, for my own Foot Com∣pany was not yet come up. I could not there learn any certain news, where either Mon∣sieur de Pilles, or any of his Forces were, only I was told by the honest people that he was on the other side the River Lot towards St. Vensa and Aymett, Marmanda and Toneins, and that they wee all Horse. After I had staid about two hours upon the Road, Messieurs de ontenilles, and de Madaillan, and the young Montluc my Son came up to me, where I gave them order that Monsieur de Madaillan should go with my Company before, that Monsieur de Fontenilles and Captain Montluc should follow after at a convenient distance to be ready to second him, and that I with my Gentlemen would sustein them; and that after this manner they should march till they came within half a league of Miremont, whee they should send out Scouts to enquire where the Enemy was, which should they happen to be in Miremont, that then they should give the word back from Party to Party, for I would immediately put my self upon the Trot to come up to them, which they ac∣cordingly did. Now I had caus'd my Foot to march without beat of Drum to avoid be∣ing discover'd, who after that silent manner arriv'd at Monbahus, where my Son finding me departed thence, marcht after, and Monsieur de Madaillan being advanc'd within half a league of Miremont made a halt according to the order he had receiv'd, and sent out to discover, where it was told him, that the Enemy were all on the other side of the Lot, and that there was not any one at Miremont, of which he gave notice to Monsieur de Fon∣tenilles, desiring him to acquaint me with it, that he might know what I would further command him to do. Monsieur de Fontenilles accordingly dispatcht away an Archer to me, by whom hearing there was no Enemy on this side the Lot, I sent back word, that Monsieur de Madaillan should further advance as far as Miremont, to enform himself more certainly of the place where the Enemy was, to the end that the next morning Messieurs de Terride, de Bellegarde, and I being united together might go to attaque them, and that in the mean time I would fall back to Monbahus, where we had left our Baggage to bait and refresh my men. I accordingly did so, having first plac'd my Son and his five Compa∣nies in five or six houses near unto the place from whence I retreated, sending an account of all to Monsieur de Fontenilles, to the end that should they receive an unexpected charge from the Enemy,The Sieur de Montluc's dili∣genc to fight with Monsieur de Pilles. they might know where our Foot lay. So soon as I alighted from my horse, and before I entred into my Lodging, I dispatcht away to Messieurs de Terride and de Bellegarde, entreating them not to fail to be with the Cavalry at Monbahus by mid∣night; for that Monsieur de Pilles had nothing but Horse, of which there were not above three hundred that were good, the rest to the number of fifteen or sixteen hundred, being all mounted upon pitiful Jades that were worth nothing. The Messenger was with them within an hour and a half after day-light, for it is no more than two leagues from Mon∣bahus to Villeneufue, by whom they return'd me answer, and assur'd me that by break of
day they would not fail to be with me. But I must return to Messieurs de Fontenilles and de Madaillan, and Captain Montluc, and must here in the first place set down Monsieur de Pilles his design. Immediately upon my arrival at Monflanquin, which might be about two of the clock in the afternoon, the Hugonots of the said Monflanquin advertis'd Mon∣sieur de Pilles, who was newly departed from Cahors, that the next day I was determin'd to draw nearer to him, expecting in the mean time Messieurs de Terride and de Bellegarde to come up to me, which notwithstanding they could not do yet these two dayes, and that I had not above fifty or threescore good Horse with me in all. Upon this intelli∣gence the said Sieur de Pilles dispatcht away all night to six Cornets he had about Mar∣manda and Thoneins, that they should not fail to be the next day (which was the same that I arriv'd at St. Pstour) at a place the name whereof I have forgot; and that he would come and bring the rest of his Forces to joyn with them, before I could be rallied with Messieurs de Terride and de Bellegarde. They who had sent him this intelligence believ'd that I would stay the next day at Monflanquin, or at least if I departed thence, I would no march above a leage or two at most. Monsieur de Pilles had appointed his General Rendezvouz at a convenient distance from their Quarters, and immediately the six Conets departed one after the other, by reason they were quarter'd in several places, and the Rendezvouz for those six was appointed to be at Miremont, there to refresh them∣selves till midnight only, and after to go to the other Rendezvouz to Monsieur de Pilles. In the mean time Monsieur de Madaillan went directly to Miremont, when being come within view of the entrance into the Village where there was no wall, he was aware of a great number of white Cassacks going to and fro in the great street: whereupon he im∣mediately dispatcht away to Mnsieur de Fontenilles, and my Son Captain Montluc, that they should with all speed advance, for that he was so engag'd he must of necessity fight, and that they should give me speedy notice of it also. It is a good league from Mremont to Monbahus, and the Sieur de Fontenilles sent me word with all imaginable diligence. There were at Miremont two Cornets, who were first come, and already alighed, and their horses in the Stables, and th other two which were yet on horseback were but just arriv'd, and seeking for accommodation to bait and refresh themselves. Monsieur de Ma∣daillan, who saw himself discover'd, charg'd these two Cornets that were on horseback, and beat them out of the Village in rout and confusion,Four Cornets of Horse of de Pilles defeated. so that they fled with might and main towards la Sauvetat, the other two that were already lodg'd, hereupon run to their horses, and just as they were mounting, Monsieur de Fontenilles and Captain Montluc ar∣riv'd, and charg'd them, and they fled as many as escap'd towards Aymet. In less than half a quarter of an hour arriv'd the other two Cornets, who seeing their fellows defeated fac'd about towards Ponens from whence they came. It was ill luck; for had not Mon∣sieur de Madaillan sent me word that he could hear no news of the Enemy, I had still marcht on in the same order we began, and had not turn'd back again to bait. I came up at the same time that the last two Cornets did arrive, where I thought to have had as good a prize of them, as the rest of our people had had of the other four; but when I came up to our Foot, an Archer came to tell me they had fought, and pursued the Enemy half a league, and that some prisoners they had taken assur'd them, that Pilles and all his For∣ces were at St. Bensa and Aymet, not above a league and a half from thence: where∣fore they were retreating towards me, not being strong enough to withstand the Enemies Forces should they come upon them. This is the truth of what passed in this Engagement. They brought me two Cornets, but in running away they had torn off the Colours. Could we thus keep spies amongst them,The Retreat of Monsieur de Pilles. as they do amongst us of such as the King has given liberty to live quietly in their own houses, our affairs would prosper better than they do; and if I had been advertiz'd by some friends of ours, as they were by theirs of Monsieur de Pilles his retreat, I had easily defeated him; for Monsieur de Sain∣ctorens had been joyn'd with me, who was coming very well accompanied to seek me out the very same way the Enemy fled, when seeing night coming upon him he drew into Monsegur, to expect further intelligence which way I was gone, and in pursuing them by night I had means to send a man or two to him to give him an account of all that had pass'd. We lay upon our Guard, and kept very strict watch, suspecting lest the said de Pilles should come upon us for his revenge: but he was quite otherwise dispos'd, for he marcht all the night as fast as ever he could directly to St. Foy, where he arriv'd, as we were enform'd by break of day, though it be the worst way imaginable, for the Country is marvelously dirty, and the night was so dark, that men could not discern a yard from one another. Thus we see how the affairs of War do oft miscarry for want of good in∣telligence, for Monsieur de Sainctorens his answer came not to our hands till the next day,
nor that of Monsieur de Lauzun; and the Messengers they sent to me had like to have fall'n in amongst the Enemy, which put them into such a fright, that they hid themselves till the day appear'd. In the morning by Sun-rise Messieurs de Terride and de Bellegarde came up to us, who, when they heard of the Engagement had pass'd, were ready to tear their own flesh, cursing the Foot to all the Devils of Hell, and the hour that ever they came from about Tholouze; for they might easily have been at Monbahus as soon as we, had it not been for the Foot, the staying for them being the only reason they came up so late, and the belief they had we would not offer to fight till we were first joyn'd all together, had made them carful not to leave the Foot behind them, and I heard Monsieur de Bellegarde say a notable thing upon this occasion,A saying of Monsieur de Bellegarde. That he now perceiv'd it was not alwayes good to proceed with too much disretion in matters of warre. He said very true; for who ever will alwayes confine himself to the ordinary Rules of war, oft-times loses more than he gets. We marcht straight to Miremont, and by the way met with one of Monsieur de Ma∣daillan's Archers, who came to bring us news of the disorder of Monsieur de Pilles his people, that the news of their defeat had reacht as far as his head Quarter, that thereupon the said Monsieur de Pilles, and the remainder of his Forces had taken their way directly to St. Foy; that twelve Soldiers Monsieur de Madaillan kept in his house near unto la Sau∣vetat, had kill'd two and twenty of them at the Gates of the said house being mounted upon pittiful Jades: that the Inhabitants of la Sauvetat had also sallied out upon them, and had kill'd three or fourscore, and taken their horses; and had Monsieur de Saincto∣rens staid a quarter of an hour only in one place by which he pass'd, the most of them had fall'n into his hands; which alass he knew not till the next day no more than I, and had then his share of vexation as well as the rest of us. But a man cannot prophecy things, which makes the Italian say Fa me indivino Ti daro denari. We were constrain'd to lodg at la Sauvetat, St. Vensa, and Aymet, from whence the E∣nemy wese departed, by reason there were no Quarters to be had from la Sauvetat till one comes to St. Foy, and left Monsieur de Sauignac with his two Ensigns at Miremont, because there were no Quaters for him beyond it, for the Cavalry took up all; and at the said Miremont there were above twenty men found hid in the houses, whom they kill'd every Mothers Son, and got some fifteen or sixteen horses; for none of us ever stayd to alight, but passed on forwards. The next morning very early we marcht directly for St. Foy, and I dare be bold to say, that of a long time I had not seen such a Cavalry, for the number, as those we had with us; and when we came within sight of St. Foy, Messieurs de Fonte∣nilles, de Madaillan, and Captain Montluc with his six companies put themselves before, and marcht directly towards the Town. Monsieur de Terride with his own Company, and that of Monsieur de Negrepelice marcht after to sustain them; Monsieur de Bellegarde, Monsieur de Sainctorens, and I sustein'd Monsieur de Terride; and there Monsieur de Gra∣monts Company came up to us, and Monsieur de Leberon with his five Ensigns. I think the best Curtel in all our Troops could not have made more haste than they had done, for they were no more than two dayes only in coming betwixt Ville-Franche de Roüergue to St. Foy. Monsieur de Lauzun, and the Vicount his Son were come up to us in the morn∣ing with some Gentlemen only, for I think their Companies were in the Camp, and both of them assur'd us that Monsieur de Pilles had eighteen hundred Horse,Monsieur de Pilles his For∣ces. three or four hundred of which were well mounted, and in very good equipage and order, the rest were Harquebuzeers on Horse-back, and very ill hors'd. The Chevalier then alighted, and taking an hundred Harquebuzeers, put himself right before the Town, the rest fol∣lowed him, and Messieurs de Fontenilles de Madaillan, and Captain Montluc after; when so soon as they approacht the Gate, fifteen or twenty Harquebuzeers sallied out to skirmish. The Knight pressed still forwards notwithstanding, and those of the Enemy retir'd, and shut themselves again within the Town. Monsieur de Pilles had all night long been pas∣sing his men over the Dordogne in great hurry and disorder, and himself at Sun-rise pas∣sing over also had left these fifteen or twenty Harquebuzeers in the Town to amuze us, and a great Boat, and a lesser to bring them over also, for there were no more but these left be∣hind, who so soon as they were retreated into the Town, ran presently to the Boats, and passed over in an instant; so that at the same time the Chevalier came to the Bank of the River, (having passed thorough the Town, where he saw no body but women) they landed on the other side.Why the Sieur de Montluc is so particular, and has writ an account at length of this Action. This is the truth of all that passed upon this occasion, wherein I have been necessitated to give so precise and particular an account of this action as may perhaps seem tedious to the Reader; forasmuch as I have been told that some reported to the King, the Queen, and the Monsieur, that it only stuck at me we did not fight with Pilles: but whoever will have
the patience to read this Narration will see the truth of all as it passed, by the testimony of all the Captains who were present upon the place, of which two only namely Messieurs de Terride and de Bellegarde are dead, and by that it will appear whether I was in fault or no: neither in truth can I justly tax, or lay the blame upon any one, but only the ill wayes that Monsieur de Savignacs Company met withal: for as to the said Sieurs de Terride and de Bellegarde, they govern'd themselves more by the rule of War, than that they were hindred by any want of good will they had to the cause, or any want of courage and desire they had to be at the fight. Monsieur de Chemeraut who had brought me letters from the Monsieur was privy to all my dispatches; for he would make one, and to that end entreated me to furnish him with horse and arms, which I did, and of fifteen dayes never left me. I am confident that he will always bear me witness, that every Title I have writ of this Action s litterally true, and that he was as glad of the occasion of being there as any one of the Army whatever, hoping to have carried the Monsieur better news than he did. Such as are men of judgment in matters of War have often found by experience how hard a thing it is to fasten a Battel upon a man that has no mind to fight, espcially an old Soldier, and a circumspect Commander, as the Sieur de Pilles was, who I think was by much the best, none excepted the Hugonots had. He knew he should gain nothing by us but blows, which made him that he would not long abide in those parts. Two dayes after we came into St. Foy,Monsieur de Terride sent the King's Lieute∣nant into Bearn. Monsieur de Terridde received a Commission his Majesty sent him to go into Bearn, and departed from me. A Command wherewith he was highly pleased, as I also was out of the affection I bore unto him, and moreover I had an opinion that affairs would better succeed. Monsieur de Bellegarde left me also car∣rying away his own Company, and Monsieur de Svignac's ten Ensigns along with him, as Monsieur de Terride carried away his, and that of Monsieur de Negrepelice. Monsieur de Sainctorens and I remain'd behind. The Knight my Son went with his ten Ensigns straight into Limousin, to joyn with the Monsieurs Army, and five dayes after the Mon∣sieur won the Battel of Iarnac,The Battel of Iarnac, and the death of the Prince of Con∣de. in which the Prince of Condé was slain. Many have thought that that his death has prolong'd our Wars; but I for my part am of opinion that had he liv'd we should have seen our affairs in a far worse condition: For a Prince of the Blood as he was, having already so great a Party of the Hugonots, would have had much more credit and authority amongst them than the Admiral. This unfortunate Prince lov'd his Country, and had compassion for the people, I was long conversant with him, which had like to have been my ruine, I ever found him an affable and a gene∣rous Prince: but he lost his life in Battel, maintaining a quarrel that was unjust in the sight of God and man. It was great pitty, for had he been elsewhere employed, he might have been serviceable to the Kingdom. The unadvised Peace that some perswaded King Henry to make has been the cause of all these mischiefs we have seen: for to have so many Princes of the blood, and so many others of the same Nation, and to keep them unemployed in some forreign War, is very ill advis'd. We must either fight with others, or fall together by the ears amongst our selves. Could we always continue in peace, so that every one would intend his own illage, as the Romans did in their vacations from war, I do confess it would be very well: but that cannot be. And therefore, Sir, I do say and affirm, that it is a very vain opinion,The Sieur de Montluc's ad∣vice to the King. and fruitless, to think of making peace at home, if at the same time you do not meditate a War abroad. You are not to renew the War of the Holy Land, for we are not so devou now adayes as our Religious Ancestors were in those better times; it were better to do as the King of Spain does, and send your men into the new discover'd worlds, and so to separate those unruly Princes, still sending the young ones to be brought up at the School of Malta; for if they do not bustle every one will sit still. But if your Mjesty have a mind to quarrel your Neighbours, you may renew your claim to the Dtchy of Millan, that of right appertains to you by descent. For it is not to be found in any Records that the King of Spain has any right at all to it, which by the Females you have. The King of Spain holds it by no other Title but by right of Conquest, and the power of the Sword. Your Majesty will also find that a Duke of Anjou descended from the House of France, and of your own proper Race, was once King of Naples, which the King of Spain has also in his pssession. The King your Grandfather would never lay down this claim, but seiz'd of the Territories of Monsieur de Savoy, although his Uncle, to have a secure passage whereby to enter into the Dutchy of Millan. Your Royal Father took upon him the protection of the Duke of Parma, and the Siennois to no other end, but in order to a Pass for the recovery of Naples. You, Sir, are descended from these Heroick Princes, and you have their right and title; if God therefore send you peace at home, you may send a Tempest into the King of Spains Dominions, and shall have a better ac∣count of it than you are aware of; for the King of Spain is a Prince more addicted to
Negotiations than to War: he is not like his Father, in five or six years he will be old, and you in the flower of your age. He will leave his Children very young, and since the Father was not generous in his youth, it is not to be expected he should be so in his old Age. Besides if you know how to manage the Princes of Italy, you will find them all at your devotion, even the Duke of Florence himself, for something that I know, and some reasons that I could give, as having felt his pulse whilst I was the Kings Lieutenant in Tuscany. The Duke himself I am confident will not say the contrary, nor deny but that he is more French than Spanish. England will not hinder you, for that has a Woman at the Helm, and Scotland a Child. To be short nothing ought to deterre you: but I leave this discourse to another time. The death of the Prince of Condé was the occasion of my entring into it, for I am a Frenchman, and lament the death of those brave Princes slain by our own hands, who might elsewhere be serviceable to us, and help to enlarge the French Dominions. But to return to my Subject,A command to dismantle Ber∣gerac. I remain'd five or six weeks at the said St. Foy, having yet with me six Ensigns of Foot, commanded by my Nephew de Leberon. Of these I sent four together with my said Nephew himself to Bergerac to dismanle the Town, as the King and the Monsieur had commanded me, but it was ill executed. Some dayes after the Monsieur drew near, and came to Montmoreau, where followed by a noble Train of Gentlemen of very good quality, I went to kiss his hand; and where his Highness re∣ceiv'd me with very great demonstrations of favour, commanding me not to depart from him, of which God knows if I was glad. I therefore sent presently home for Wagons, Tents, and money, as also did all the rest of the Gentlemen that came along with me, ma∣king account we should no more depart from the Army, as also there was not in all Gui∣enne a man that durst so much as mutter, nor a place that stood for the Hugonots but Montauban only. The Monsieur departed from Mont-morea, and went to Ville∣bois. He had not been above five or six dayes there,alse intelli∣gence sent to the Monsieur. all which time we spent in consultation about the means to carry on the War, when there came a Gentlmen sent post from Mon∣sieur de Montferran, Governor of Bourdeaux, to my said Lord the Monsieur, to give him notice that a great part of the Admirals Army, both Foot and Horse were come into Medoc, and that two foot Companies he had planted there had been constrained to quit the Pass, and to escape away by night. The Monsieur was not over-hastly to believe this news; for we discoursed about the Pass, where I represented to him the vast breadth of the River at that place, which requir'd a whole Tide, and an infinite number of Boats to pass it: for an Army carried a mighty Train along with it: and that on the other side, it was not very likely that the Admiral who was a Soldier would engage himself in the Landes, a barren Country, and beyond Rivers, he could not well expect ever to repass. The night following there came a Courrier with like intelligence from the Court of Par∣liament, and the said Monsieur de Montferran, in yet much greater heat than the former, and making the number of the Enemy much greater than before. It is true that he also writ to my Lord the Monsieur, that he was just taking Horse himself to go and discover them. And accordingly, as I have heard, he did go, but he had no horse with him sa∣ving some few Harquebuzeers on horseback only, and when he came within half a league of the Pass, those he had sent before to discover, came back, and brought him word, that already a great number of the Horse were got over, and that the Foot began to follow after; so that being so slenderly accompanied, the said Sieur de Montferran was necessi∣tated to retire; and on the other side the people all led towards Bourdeaux. The said Sieur de Montferran dispatcht away another Courrier to the Monsieur, assuring him that the intelligence was most certainly true, which was the reason that his Highness sent me back to my great misfortune, for since that time I have never had any thing but trouble and vexation, whereas had I still continued about his person, all the mischief that has since befall'n me had never come to pass, for I had either died in doing him some brave piece of service, or had never been wounded, as I am, to live in a perpetual languishing condition, without possibility of ever being cur'd. All which misfortune befel me for want of five and twenty good horse only, which had Monsieur de Montferran had with him he had himself discover'd the Enemy, for he wanted no courage, and had then di∣cover'd that they were no other than three or four-score Bearnois, and some others belong∣ing to the Queen of Navarre, who were going over Barn to help to defend the Country, whereof the one half were defeated by the way about Mont de Marsan. His Highness may please to remember, that standing by his Bed-side I told him, that upon my life and honour it was impossible this intelligence could any way be true, for I knew the Country, and it could be nothing but some small party going ever into Bearn, or Chalesse, for a great Party
could not,The Monsieurs words to the Sieur de Mont∣luc. nor durst not adventure to pass for they must pass over as it were in file. Whereupon his Highness said to me these very words, I perceive very well, my good man, that the desire you hve to be with me makes you to say this: ut believe me in what part soever you shall be, I will ever love you. The reason of war may perhaps draw me into Guienne, and I should be glad to spend my Prentice-age in so good a School as yours. Whereupon I took my leave of his High∣ness. Behold of what importance it is to discover an Enemy very well, before a man takes the Alarm. Captains, my friends and companions, you must rather hazard your selves to be taken, and discover the truth, than rely upon the report of inferiour fellows, for their fear makes so strange an impression upon them, that they take Bushes for Squadrons, and will swear it: you may trust to them if you will. 'Tis just the same as when they see a hundred Crowns they think them to be a thousand: send alwayes some bold Soldier, some fellow that has not his heart in his Breeches, and let him venture his Carcass to bring you a true account: but if you wll do better, go your selves; I have alwayes done so, and found an advantage by it. So soon as I cam to St. Foy I was advertis'd of the truth of the business, and sent my said Lord the Monsieur an immediate account of it, very angry at the said Sieur de Mont∣ferran, and being there was nothing at present to do, I still continued at St. Foy, to be near my said Lord the Monsieur, to the end hat when he should please to send for me, I might in two or three dayes be with him. I have heard since that one of the principal persons about his Highness should tell him, that he had done well to rid his hands of me for that I was cross-grain'd and wilful, and would evermore command in all places where∣ever I came. His Highness himself told me the story at the Siege of Rochelle. I have never been so obstinate, but that I would alwayes submit to reason; but to speak the truth, I have ever found my own counsel better than that of any other. It is reasonable then that those Monsieurs, who are only pretty fellows at running the Ring, should learn of those who have studied under the greatst Doctors of Europe: but they will still be prating, no body must controul them, and they will govern all. Having nothing to do, but lying idle at St. Foy, I went thence to Age, where Mon∣sieur de Montferran sent me word, that the Sieur de la Roche-Chalais, and Captain Chaa∣teyrac were in la Roche, with a hundred or sixscore Hugonot Soldiers, that over-ran all the Country, committing innumerable outrages, insomuch that no one could pass from Xaintonge to Bourdeaux, and that if I would go to la Roche, we should be enow to do the work; he sent me word likewise that Monsieur de la Vaugion was about Montpont, and Mussidan with Monsieur de Sarlabus his Regiment, and three Companies of Gens-d'arms, to whom if I would send to invite him, he would willingly be of the party. Upon this intelligence I went immediately to Bourdeaux; and by an express Messenger a Gentleman gave Monsieur de la Vauguyon private notice of the designe, who presently return'd me an∣swer, that he would willingly joyn in the Enterprize, and that I should therefore send him word what day I would have him to march, and appoint him the Rendezvous, to which he should come. I therefore sent to entreat him to be at Liboure the third day after (which was upon a Saturday) in the morning, where Monsieur de Montferran and I would meet him, to determine upon that we had to do, which he accordingly observ'd, and I also. The said Sieur de Montferran staid to take order about the Artillery, for we were to carry it by water as far as Coutras. We were in dispute which way to go to work, for Monsieur de la Noüe was about St. Alvare,Commendati∣on of Monsieur de la Ne. a Territory belonging to the Sieur de Iarnac, and lay betwixt the two Rivers with twelve Ensigns of Foot, and four or five hundred Horse, who being an old Soldier, and a valiant man as any that ever was in France, would never suf∣fer la Roche to be lost, without attempting to relieve it, to do which he had only the River of St. Alvere to pass, which in many places was to be foarded by the Horse, and which the Foot also would boat over in four hours time; and as to the River that was un∣der la Roche, they had the Bridge of Parcou in their own possession, Town and all, and had a Garrison in it; wherefore we must either resolve to attaque both the one and the o∣ther; or not to make any attempt at all. In the end we concluded to attaque la Roche, and to fight Monsieur de la Noüe in case he should offer to relieve it, all of us who were present at the deliberation taking an oath not to discover the designe. Monsieur de Mont∣ferran then stayed with Commissary Fredeville to see the two pieces of Canon embark'd, and I departed the Saturday morning very early, and came to Libourne, where I found Monsieur de la Vaugyon, who was come thither upon the Friday night. Now whilst we were busie at Bourdeaux about this Enterprize upon la Roche, I plotted another of as great importance as that of la Roche, which was this. A Hugonot Captain had seiz'd upon the Castle of Levignac appertaining to Monsieur la Marquis de Trans,
and had three or fourscore Soldiers within it, had there enclosed the Streets of the Bourg, which is a large one, with Rampiers of earth, and in the night all retir'd into the Castle: which was the very place where Pilles had surpriz'd la Mothe Mongauzy the elder, kill'd him, and defeated almost all his whole Company. Monsieur de Madaillan had come a∣long with me to Bourdeaux, my Company lying at Cleyrac and Thonen, and was pre∣sent at the deliberation about the Enterprize of la Roche, whom I made to return in all diligence, writing to Monsieur de Leberon, that they two should joyn together with four Companies of Foot, and make so long a march, that in one night they should shut them in, at what price soever should take the Castle, and put them all to the sword; and that from thence in one night more they should present themselves before the Castle of Bridoire, apperteing to Monsieur de la Mothe Gondrin, where there were fourscore or a hundred Hugonots more, commanded by one Labaume, which was the place into which Geffre that notorious Thief, who has committed so many villainies, used to retire him∣self. By the things this Villain has done, he gave proof of a great heart and courage, and manifested himself to be a man of execution. I gave them charge that they should begird and besiege the Castle so close, that nothing could escape away: for that so soon as I had done at la Roche, I would turn with the Canon suddenly to them, but that in case Monsieur de la Noüe should come to fight us, they must then leave all, and march day and night to come up to the Battel. These were the instructions I gave to Messieurs de Leberon, and de Madaillan, who accordingly did carry the Castle. The place was strong enough to resist any force of hand, so that they could that way do no good, and the Enemy defended themselves very well, as it stood them upon; for they knew they were to expect no quarter, by reason of the many insolencies and great cruelties they had committed all about Levignac. Monsieur de Lazun therefore lent them a Culverine, with which they made a hole thorough the wall wide enough for two men to pass, which they had no sooner done, but they immediately fell on to the Assault,Levignac taken by assault. and storming at once by the breach, and giving a Scalado by Lad∣ders at the same time to the Basse-Court, they carried the place. There was but three pri∣soners sav'd, all the rest were cut in pieces, and the night following those who had seiz'd the Castle of Taillecabat belonging to Monsieur de Mereville, Grand Seneschal of Guienne, hearing how those of Levignac had been handled, stole away in the dark, and our people marcht before the Castle of Bridoire, where they found that those fellows also were upon the point of going to shift for themselves, and clapt close Siege to them. But by misfor∣tun, and by reason of the haste they were in, our people having either forgot, or not been able to carry along provision wherewith to refresh the Soldiers, the Foot began in the night to disperse themselves to go seek out for victual, and the Horse retir'd into a certain Vil∣lage to bait their horses till midnight; so that few being left before the Castle, those with∣in seeing their opportunity made a desperate Sally in the night, and got away. Our peo∣ple mounted to horse to pursue them, but so soon as ever they were out they separated like a Covey of flown Partridges, and by several paths retir'd every man to his own house. The night was exceeding dark, which so much favour'd their flight, that not above three or four of them were slain. God knows when I heard it whether I was not ready to tear the hair off my head, and writ them word, that they very well manifested they had not retein'd what I had so often taught them. Now as to our Enterprize upon la Roche-Chalaise,Enterprize of la Roche-Cha∣lais. Monsieur de Montferran upon Sun∣day night came with the Artillery to Coutras, and I came thither also. Monsieur de la Vau∣guyon was to take his way directly to Parcon, where the Bridge was, to try if he could take the Town upon his first arrival, and make himself Master of the Bridge, which if he should do, he was then to send over some Horse, who were to scoure the Country towards St. Alvere, to enquire after Monsieur de la Noüe, and to learn if he made any shew or pre∣paration of coming towards us. Now from la Roche to the said Parcon it was no more than two leagues, so that we made account once in two hous to meet together again, the wayes betwixt them being very good. When Monsieur de Vauguyon and I parted, upon the same Saturday he went to make his people immediately advance, marching night and day, and I came upon Sunday morning very early to Coutras, where I found Monsieur de Gironde the Governor of Fronsac, who was also of the Enterprise and Council that I had held about it at Bourdeaux. Having there made ready as many Carriages as we stood in need of, Monsieur de Montferran being come up upon Sunday in the Evening, I let him rest but three hours only, and sent him away all night that he might be before day a la Roche to shut them up, which he accordingly did, and Monsieur de Gironde and I stayed to see the Cattle yok'd to the Artillery, which so soon as ever I had done, and made them set forwards, I there left the said Sieur de Gironde with Fredeville, and about a hundred
Poneer the said Seur de Gironde had lent me to take care for the rest. In the mean time, and about midnight I depared thence, and by break of day came within a quarter of a league of la Roche, where I found Monsieur de la Vauguyon, who was got thither by mid∣night, and had sent fifteen or sixteen of his Horse before the Castle. Those Horse soon came back to the place where we were, and told us that they had found the Enemies Horse with∣out, and had charg'd them, of which Chanteyrac refus'd to shut himself within the Castle, but going along the Wall of the Base-Court recover'd the Pass at the Mill, where putting himself into a Boat, under favour of ten or twelve Soldiers that made good the Mill, he passed the River, making his horses follow by the Bridles. Monsieur de la Roche did not take the same way, but with six or seven Horse return'd into the Castle, when seeing those Avan Courreurs of Monsieur de la Vauguyon gone away, and that Chanteyrac had forsaken him, he thought to sally out, and make his escape; in order whereunto the most of them were already come down into the Base-Court, but Monsieur de Montferran came up just in the nick, and charg'd them, forcing them to retire into the Castle. In doing which he gain'd the Base-Court, and put a great many men into it: which being done he went to attaque the Mlls, which made a very stout resistance, but in the end he took them, and put all those within to the sword. He sent me present word of all just at the time when Monsieur de la Vauguyon and I were at Breakfast, whereupon the said Sieur de la Vau∣guyon immediately went, and put himself in the head of his men to march directly to the Town, he and I concluding together, that he should send me three Companies of Monsieur de Sarlabous his Regiment to assist me at the assault of the Castle; and so he went to his Enterprize of Prcou, and I marcht before la Roche, having already notice that the Artil∣lery was already within half a league of us, which could not however arrive at la Roche till noon, by eason of the ill way they had met withall. Monsieur de la Vauguyon entred the Town, for the Enemy were all retir'd into the Mills upon the Bridg; his men forc'd and gain'd the Bridg, and so all was wonne, and in the night I made my approaches, and planted my Canon in Battery. At break of day Monsieur de la Roche desir'd to par∣ley with Monsiur de Montferran, who being he was his Kinsman, and a young Gentle∣man, would not let him go in again, but detein'd him, and the others when they saw the Artillery ready to play began to cry out, that they would surrender, who seeing no one give ear to them, they cried out again, that they would surrender to our discretion. The Governor of Fronsac,The Castle of la Roche-Cha∣lais surrenders to dicretion. and even the Hugonots themselves who were of Courtras, and were come along with us, cried out, that we should by no means receive them to mercy, for that they were Libertines, and men of no Religion, especially one of them call'd Brusquin who had kill'd above fourscore men with his own hands, the most of them Labourers and Country-men. It then came to the question of marching out, whereupon the said Sieur de la Roche en∣treated of me a certain Lacquay of his, his Valet de Chambre, and his Cook, which I granted him, and we cull'd them out from the rest. Monsieur de Montferran put himself in∣to the Castle with ten or twelve men to preserve it from being rifled, and the men that came out of it I recommended to the Soldiers dispose, who were handled according to the life they had lead, for not one of them escap'd, excepting those I have mentioned before. That very Brusquin the Hugonots so exclaim'd against to have him kill'd, caught hold of my leg, for I was on horse-back, having five or six upon him, and held me in such sort, that I had enough to do to disingage my self from him, and narrowly escap'd being hurt my self.Great and bloody cruelty of a Hugonot Soldier. They found in his pocket a List of a hundred and seventeen men that he had murthered, he having there writ them down, such a one Priest, such a one Labourer, such a one Monk, such a one Merchant, setting down after that manner of what Trade or calling every one was: which was no sooner read, but that the Soldiers return'd to him, and gave him above two hundred cuts and thrusts, although he was already dead. Monsieur de la Vaguyon came in just upon the execution, where one of them endeavour∣ing to fly away gave him and his horse so rude a shock, as almost turn'd him out of the way, but he was so close pursued, that he went not far. I was enform'd that these people were newly return'd from St. Aulaye, and that they had spoken with Monsieur de Iarnac, who had told them, that Monsieur de la Noüe was retiring towards la Roche-Chalais; which was the reason that we concluded Monsieur de la Vauguyon should return to the place from whence he came, and that Monsieur de Montferran and I would go carry the Artillery directly to Bridoiere: but before we parted I told them, that although Monsieur de la Roche did properly belong to , and of right was my particular prisoner, I being head of the Enterprize; I was nevertheless content that we should all three share in his Ransome, which we did, so that his Ransome being set at six thousand Crowns, the Divi∣dend came to two thousand Crowns a piece.
Being come to Libourne I sent the Artllery up the River, which went day and night, for we had a great many men to draw the rope of the Bat, which was no sooner come to Castillon, belonging to the Marquis de Villars, but that there came a Messenger sent from Monsieur de Madaillan to tell me, that the Enemy of Bridoire were escap'd away, and led: at which I was as much troubled as at any news almost could have been brought me, for my purpose was to have dealt no better with them, than I had done with the rest, and so we return'd the Artillery down the River directly to Bourdeaux, and leaving Cap∣tain Mabrun wih three Companies to guard it, Monsieur de Monsferran and I went be∣fore to the City. The next day after I came thither I went to the Palace to take my leave of the Court of Parliament, being resolv'd to return to my old Quarters, that I might be nearer to the Monsieur, in case he should be pleas'd to send for me. There Mnsieur la President Rossignac in a short speech return'd me thanks in the behalf of the whole Assem∣bly for the service I had done, forasmuch as by this little war he said we had so secur'd the Rodes towards Xaintonge, that every one might now safely come and go betwixt France and Burdeax. That I had also secu'd them on that side towards the Dordogne, having reduc'd the Castle of Bridoire, and on that side towards the Garonne, by having taken Le∣vignac, Taillecabat, and Pardaillac, by reason that before neither provisions nor men could come by those wayes to Bourdeaux, or by any other, saving out of Gascony. These were the successes of these Enterprizes perform'd in five or six dayes, without put∣ting the King to the expence of a Tston, and the Parliament less; and had these Messieurs of the City of Bourdeaux kept their words with me▪ I would have laid my head, that I had turn'd Blay topsyturvy: neither would I have askt any more than eight dayes time to do it in, provided I might have had the Baron de la Garde along with me to have at∣taqu'd them by sea,The Sieur de Montlu offers to attaque Blaye. and would have engag'd to have paid them back the thirty thousand Fancs I demanded of them wherewith to pay the Foot, and to defray the charge of the Artillery and Pioneers if I did not carry the place. Nay seeing they would not relish that motion, I offer'd to lend them twelve thousand Francs for a year without interest, and Monsieur de Vaence my Brother would lend them two thousand more: in short the Court of Parliament was very hot upon the Enterprize; but when they saw it was requir'd that every one should lay to his helping hand there was no more talk of the business. These men of the Long Robe are a dry hide-bound sort of people, and still pop us in the mouth with their Priviledges. I will maintain, and that by the testimony of the best and honestest men of Bourdeaux, that they were the cause this Enterprize was not executed: for when the Citizens saw they would part with no money, they would part with none neither, saying that the Court of Parliament had as much or more wealth than half the City besides, and twice they made me come to them, assuring me that so soon as ever they should see my face all things should be done; but when I came I still found them put me off with so many delayes, that I was forc'd to return as wise as I came. I think they had a mind to have had me done it at my own expence, and that the advantage and the profit should only have accru'd to them; and in truth by the offers I made, any one might plainly see I was willing to advance something of my own; for I defray'd all the Gentle∣men that did me the honor to go along with me at my own charge, without putting the City to the expence of a Hen. This in truth was the reason why the Enterprize upon Bly was not put into execution. I am very sure there was nothing in Guienne could have hindred me from effecting my design. At the time when Des Rois besieg'd it I had ta∣ken an exact survey of the place, and it is no such choak-pear as they make it. Besides at that time the Hugonots scarce shew'd their heads, and Guienne was quiet enough: for all those who were able to bear arms went into the main body to the Admiral, who after the death of the Prince of Condé caus'd himself to be declar'd Head of the Faction,The Admiral declar'd Head of the Hug∣nots, the Prince serving him only for a shadow. It was that nevertheless that so much upheld the said Admiral and his Party, for a Prince of the Blood can do much, and the Son of the said Prince of Condé, though he was very young, was a great support to him also; for without them and their authority he had never been able to have maintain'd the War so long. The End of the Sixth Book.
THE COMMENTARIES OF Messire Blaize de Montluc, MARESCHAL of FRANCE. The Seventh Book. SEeing I have taken in hand to leave to posterity an account of my life, and to give a true relation whether good or bad, of all that ever I have done in so many years that I have born arms for the Kings my Masters;Why the Au∣thor writes these particu∣larities. I am unwilling to omit any thing of action how little and inconsiderable soever; and although the last little Victories I gave an account of were neither the Conquests of Naples, nor Mil∣lan; I have not however thought it it to leave them wholly out, for (inconsiderable as they are) such may read them, as they may be useful to, and Captains and Soldiers may begin their Prentice∣age with such little feats of arms as those; it being by such that they first take Lesson: and even those who have the Government of Provinces committed to their charge, may by what I have perform'd take exemple of what was well, if there be any such thing, and avoid the evil. I had so lipt the wings of the Hugonots that they were capable of doing no great mat∣ters in Guienne, nor of attempting any other than very slight Enterprizes; neither conse∣quently was I in any capacity of performing any notable exploits; both because there was not much of that nature in the Province left to do, and also by reason I had on the other side, sent away most of the Forces to the Monsieurs Army, and did reserve all the money for his use. I have moreover another reason why I am thus particular in my writing; which is to the end, that if the King shall vouchsafe the pains to read my Book (and I think he reads some worse) his Majesty may then see how much they have spoken against the truth, who have said that I had now no other care, nor meditated on any other thing but how to live quietly and at ease in my own house. God knows these people under∣stood me very ill. Had I had the means I desir'd, and that some might have supply'd me withall, and that I might have had my own swing, without being curb'd by those peri∣cious Edicts, I should have prevented the Hugonots from reigning in Guienne, and per∣haps have rooted out the whole Race. But to pursue the thread of my discourse▪ and give a tre account of what has been the ruine of this poor Province, I shall proceed to tell you, that some time after the exe∣cution of these Enterprizes, the Monsieur sent me a Letter containing these words. Monsieur de Montluc,The Monsieurs letter to the Sieur de Mo∣luc. Monsieur the Mareschal d' Anville has been here, and is going into his Government to put some designs he has thre into execution; if therefore e shall stand in need of any thing in your Government, let me entreat you to assist him the best you can. This letter was delver'd to me at St. Foy, and with it there came another to Monsieur de Sainctrens, wherein he was commanded to come and bring his Company along with him to the Army; which was because his Highness had given Monsieur de Fontenilles leave to return home to refresh himself, and to recruit his Company, his said Highness send∣ing
me word not long after, that I should keep Monsieur de Fontenilles with me, without suffering them to stir out of the Country; and that I should have a special regard to Bourde∣aux, assisting Monsieur de Terride with what I could in order to his Conquest of Bearn; and that as to himself he was going down into Poictou. This was heavy news to me, al∣though I was very glad of the coming of the Mareschal d'Anville, and may I perish if I was not really as glad of it, as if almost the Monsieur himself had come, for I fancied that the Hugonots in Langutdoc and Guienne would not be able to stand two moneths before us. The said Mareschal staid some dayes by the way, and being arriv'd in Avergne, dis∣patcht a Courrier to me to give me notice he was come,The Mareschal d' Anville coms to prosecue the War in Guien. and to tell me that he was glad of his Commission to come to make war in those parts, as well for the satisfaction he should have in seeing me, as out of the hopes he had we should do something to the purpose in these Countries of Languedoc and Guienne, and that he was going through Albigeois di∣rectly to Tholouze. I sent him back his Messenger in all haste, desiring him by no means to go that way, but that he would come to Rhodes and into Quercy, and that I would come to meet him at Cahors; for the Court de Montgomery was arriv'd about Castres, where he was drawing a Party together, so that he could not pass that way but he must be in danger of falling into the midst of the Enemy. I had no answer from him till he came to Tholouze, from whence he dispatcht a Courrier to me to advertize me of his arrival, sending me word that he had past in the very beard of the Enemy; but that none of them had presented themselves to oppose his way. I was very glad to hear of his safe arrival, and in his letter he entreaed me that we might meet and see one another, to the end that being together we might take a good resolution to do the King some signal piece of service, and that he would do nothing without my advice. I had at that time a dluxion fall'n upon one of my paps, so that I was constrain'd to have it launc'd in two places, and to put in two tents, which made my breast so soar that I was hardly able to endure my shirt; but the fury of the dolor being a little asswag'd, and the Fever occasion'd by it a little over, I put my self upon my way, though I was able to ride no more than three leagues a day at the most, and that with intolerable pain. Such as shall please to read my life may take notice with how many sorts of maladies I have been aflicted, and yet notwithstanding I have never been idle or resty to the com∣mands of my Masters, or negligent in my charge. 'Tis unbecoming a Soldier to lye grunt∣ing a Bed for a little sickness. Now you must know that neither the King nor the Queen had writ to me that I was to obey the Mareschal, neither did he in his own Letter take up∣on him to command me, nevertheless out of respect of the friendship I bore unto him, and the affection that of my own voluntary inclination I had vow'd to him all the dayes of my life, I went of my own accord to offer my obedience to him, and to make him a tender of all the service lay in my power in reference to his own particular person. I found him in a little feverish distemper, and stai'd two dayes with him at Tholouze, and there I was at that time better accompanied than he; for I had no less than threescore or three∣score and ten Gentlemen in my Train. We concluded together that I should return to Agen, there to assemble the Estates of the Province to see how many men the Country was able to furnish out, and maintain for the prosecution of the War. I assur'd him that Guienne would furnish money to pay a thousand or twelve hundred Harquebuzeers; alwayes provided that when he should have won a Town in Languedoc, he would come to attaque annother in Guienne, which I also engaged to them in the Mareschal's behalf that he should do; but I reckon'd without mine Host. I immediatley however set afoot the Companies of a thousand Harquebuzeers, and made choice of the best Captains that were then in the Country to command them. The Estates gave the charge of receiving the money to de Naux, one of the House of Nort of Agen, and we concluded to be ready the first of August to take the field. Two or three moneths were passed over in these transactions, during which Monsieur de Terride was still at the Leaguer he had laid before Navarreins, and for my part I gave the Town for taken; for we had still news that no more provision was enter'd into it, and that they began to suffer. On the other side I consider'd, that all the Forces the Count de Mont-gommery had brought with him were but threescore and ten Horse,Considerations upon the com∣ing of the Count de Montgommery. and that he had no other Forces but only those of the Vicomptes, which I did not much ap∣prehend, forasmuch as with a very few men I had kept them in such aw, that they had not dar'd to stir. In Quercy Monsieur de la Chappelle Lozieres made head against them, in Rovergue Monsieur de Cornusson and his Sons, and Monsieur de St. Vensa did the same, as also Monsieur de Bellegarde on that side towards Tholouze; in brief they were held so short as nothing more. I then consider'd that we had several Companies of Gens-d'arms in the Country; so that I never imagin'd Montgommery could gather toge∣ther
a power sufficient to elieve Navarreins; for he must of necessity cross the River at Verdun, where in two dayes I should be upon the Pass to oppose him: and I had so good Spies, that I was very sure to be immediately advertis'd should he come to Montauban, or offer to pass where he did, which was at St. Gaudens. I again consider'd that in that Quarter there were seven or eight Companies of Gens-d'arms, which were those of the two Bellegardes, d' Arne, de Gramont, de Sarlebous, that of the Count de Candalle, and of Monsieur de Lauzun, and the ten Companies of Monsieur de Savignac; so that all the Earth could never have made it sink into my head that the Count de Montgommery should come to relieve Bearn. Thus do men sometimes deceive themselves with reasons; for I made account his coming into those parts had been only to defend those places they pos∣sessed in the Provinces of Languedoc and Guienne; and also I heard the Vicompts refus'd to obey one another, which made me rather think he came to moderate that affair, than for any thing of Bearn, and in truth there was greater likelihood in it; but the Hugo∣nots have ever had that quality to conceal their designs better than we. They are a people that very rarely discover their counsels, and that's the reason why their Enterprizes sel∣dom fail of taking effect. The Count de Montgommery also herein manifested himself to be a circumspect and prudent Captain. It was he who was the occasion of the great∣est mishap that these five hundred years has befall'n this poor Kingdom, for he kill'd King Henry my good Master in the flower of his age, running against him in Lists; and this man was the ruine of Guienne, by setting the Hugonots again on foot, as shall be declar'd in its due place. You who are the Kings Lieutenants upon whose care the whole Province does rely, consider the oversight that I have committed, and not I alone, but some far better than I, upon this coming of the Count de Montgommery: look better about you when you shall happen to be in the like occasion, and ever suspect the worst, that you may provide better a∣gainst such inconveniencies than we did. The Mareschal d'Anville very well knows, that when we were together at Tholouze, we were generally of opinion that the Count was not come for the end that he afterwards discovered. We had very good arguments to ex∣cuse this error, especially I, as the following discourse will make appear to such as have a mind to be further satisfied in that particular: but this man, although a stranger, and in a Country where he had never been before, made it seen that he had very good friends there, and perhaps amongst us our selves; the Hugonots have ever been more cautelous and subtile than we; I must confess that of all the oversights have ever been committed in all our wars, this was the greatest; I know it has been variously descated upon, and that the Queen of Navarre set people on to raise strange reports: but I know also that I was not in fault; and I am sure Monsieur d' Anville is so good a servant to the Crown, that he can say as much for himself as I. At my departure from Tholouze I had some private conference with two of the principal Capitouls of the City,A fault in the French Gen∣try. where I gave them many things in charge to deliver to the body of their Corporation concerning the carrying on of the War. These men were very well dispos'd, but that is not all; and I must here by the way insert a thing that I have ever said, and shall do so long as I live, that the Gentry are very much to blame so much to disdain City Employments, principally of Capital Cities, such as Tholouze and Bourde∣aux. I am sure when I was a boy I have heard that both Gentlemen and Lords of very great birth and quality accepted of the charge of Capitouls at Tholouze, and of Jurats at Bourdeaux; but especially at Tholouze; whereas now refusing these offices, or suffering them to be conferr'd upon others, the Citizens have got the power into their hands, so that when we come we must cap and cringe to them. It was ill advised of those who first were the cause. Would to God that (as they do in Spain) we had made our con∣stant abode in the good Towns, we had then both had more riches and more authority. We have the keys of the Field, and they of the Towns, and in the mean time we must pass thorough their hands, and for the least affair trot up and down with great trouble from City to City to beg their favour and esteem. But to return to my two Ca∣pitouls, had they been men who had rightly understood the instructions I gave them, they might have given me seasonable notice. Neither is it in this thing only that I have observ'd this fault, but in several other things also, and if the Catholick Gentlemen would introduce this custom of taking City Employments upon them, they would find advantage by it, and would in a short time see all things in a much better posture. But let us make an end of the business in hand. I had intelligence from that side towards Tholouze, that the said Count reinforc'd himself both with Horse and Foot and that he made his Levies about Castress, and at Gaillac, but that did nothing ater my former opinion of his design (I confess that God
depriv'd us of our understanding) ill that within eight or ten dayes before he took the Field. Monsieur de St. Germain coming to give me a visit at Agen about some private bu∣siness betwixt us, told and assur'd me, that the preparation Montgommery was making was to go over into Bearn. I disputed the contrary with him, telling him that the said Mont∣gommery vey well knew, that the Mareschal d'anvilles Forces were almost ready, and that in eight or tn dayes time I should also be ready to march, hoping in twelve dayes to be with him. To which the said Sieur de St. Germain made answer, that let me never more repue him a good Servant of the Kings, if the Count de Montgommery did not go over into Bearn; and that he would cross the River at Verdun, or else higher towards the Sourse. The confident assurance he gave me made me think to advertize Monsieur de Terride, which by an xpress Courrier I did, and having well weigh'd and consider'd all things with my self, began to apprehend there might be some apparence in the thing. In the mean time I entreated the said Sieur de St. Germain to go to Tholouze to acquint the Mareschal with it; to which he return'd me answer, that he could not imagine but that the Mareschal must needs know of it, considering that Montgommeries Levies were making within seven or eight leagues of Tholouze: but I was so importunate with him to go, that in the end he consented, though he was at that time very much troubled with the stone, which yet continues with him; which made me write to the Mareschal (not naming the said Sieur de St. Germain otherwise than that a Gentleman and a Knight of the Order, whom he very well knew, and who was a very loyal Subject of the Kings) was coming towards him, to acquaint him with something that concern'd his Majesties ser∣vice, beseeching him that he would please to give credit to what he had to deliver to him. The said Sieur de St. Germain was not come to Tholouze when my Messenger came away, for the Mareschal writ me word back that the Knight of the Order who I said was coming to speak with him, was not yet arriv'd, but that if he came he would give ear to what he had to say, and would signifie his opinion to me concerning what he should deliver to him. Four or five dayes after Monsieur de St. Germain writ me word, that he had been with the Maeschal, who it seem'd had intelligence from other hands then his, to which he conceiv'd he gave greater credit then to him: but that I should remember what he told me, and should in a short time see it come to pass. I gave continual notice of all to Monsieur de St. Girou who was at Mas de Verdun, and Governor of the place, brother to the Sieur de la Garde, and who at this time is a Knight of the Order, and one of his Majesties House∣hold, that he should look well about him, and that in case the Enemy should offer to pass the River, he should send me present word, and in a day and a half I would not fail to be with him. To which he return'd me answer, that he would give me three daies warn∣ing, and that those of Grenade, and du Mas de Verdun had command to assist one another to guad the Foards and Ferries, which command had been given them at the said Mas de Verdun at the time when the said Mareschal was there. Now I had deliver'd the charge of the Country of Comenge, as far as the Pyrrhenean Mountains to Monsieur de Bellegarde, to whom I had given as ample Commission to Command in those parts as if I my self was there, he having ever behav'd himself gallantly and well, upon all occasions beaten and repell'd the Enemy, with Monsieur de Savgnac's People, his own Company, and the Gentlemen of Comenge, amongst whom he had a very great reputation, and was well serv'd by the Gentry, they knowing him to be a very brave Gentleman and an old Captain. I receiv'd an answer from Monsieur de Terride,Monsieur de Terride despi∣ses his Enemy. wherein he sent me word that he had no great apprehension of the Count de Montgommery or of his Forces, and that he was able to fight him. The Messenger that I had sent to him was a Soldier, who told me by the by, that Monsieur de Terride had not so many men as he thought he should have had, and moreover he heard the Captains and Soldiers say that the Enemy scarce ever made a sally but that our people were beaten. And i was not above three dayes at the most be∣fore I receiv'd a Letter from Monsieur de Fonteilles containing these words. I send you enclosed a Letter I receiv'd from my Lievtenant Monsieur de Noe, by which you will see that the Count de Montgommery is already upon the Save, and that he takes the way toward St. Gaudens, where he makes account with his Army to pass the Garonne. The said Sieur de Noe's Letter was this: Monsieur, I Give you nitice that the Count de Montgommery has past the Save,The Count de Montgommery  over into Bearn. and the Rige, and dines to day at the house of the Vicount de Caumont my Brother-in-Law. In all these parts not a man presents himself to dispute with him his passage over the Garonne. I pray give Monsieur de Montluc speedy notice of it.
I was never in my life so surpriz'd at any thing as at this unexpected news, and began to think with my self, that this was some misadventure that was destin'd against us, knowing, as I did, the Mareschal d' Anville, Messieurs de Ioyuse and de Bellegarde, who were hard by him, and several other Captains who wanted neither courage, experience, nor affection; wherefore we were to conclude that God would lay a misfortune upon Monsieur de Terride. I had the Company of Monsieur de Gondrin at Montsegur en Bezadois, the one half of my own at Nera, and the other at Monsanquin, and that of Monsieur de Fontenilles at Moissac; which de Fontenilles ran in all haste to the said Moissc, being very certain that I would speedily send for him. I immediately then writ four dispaches, one to Monsieur de Terride,The Seu de Montluc gives Mnsieur de Terride notice of his coming. wherein I entreated him to rise from before Navarreins, and to retire towards Orthez and St. Sever, for that the Enemy was upon him, entreating him in so doing to call to mind the diligence we had several times used when we were together in Piedmont; that I feared the Mareschal's Forces were not yet ready suddenly to releve him, and did also fear that the nemy would be upon him before my Letter could come to his hands; that therefore he ought not to engage himself to a precipious Rereat, and much less in a Battel, considering that his men were harass'd out with labour and watch∣ing, and tht the Enemy came freh and in good plight to attaque him. I sent another to Monsieur de Fontenlles to bid him march, another to the Baron de Gondrin at Montsegar, and another to my Lieutenant Monsieur de Madaillan, that I was going before towards l' ss en Iordan, if the Eenemy had not yet passed the River; but in case they should already be passed over, I would then take the way of Aire, and that he should follow afer me day and night. It was almost night when I received the news, and in the morning by break of day, so soon as I had sent away my Messengers I departed and went to Lectoure; from whence I sent another dispatch to Monsieur le Mareschal to give him notice that I was coming directly to him with five Ensigns of Foot: but that notwithstanding should the Enemy already have passed the River, I was of opinion we were to follow after them, and that then if I should find they were marcht toward Bearn, I for my part would take my was directly to Aire, beseeching him not to stay for any one, for that so soon as ever he should be out of the Gates of Tholouze every one would follow after him, so well was I acquainted with the nature of the Gentlemen of that Country. I had tried them of enough, and am very confident it would have fall'n out so: for many a time have I set out with thirty men only, and the next day have had all the Gentlemen of the Country about me. I stay'd but that day at Lectoure, and as God shall help me, when I departed from Agen, I had but one old Gentlmen with me call'd Monsieur de Lizac, and my own Servants; but the next morning I had above thirty came in to me, with whom I marcht that night to Cauze, and the next day went no further than to Nogarol to stay for the Companies of Gens-d'arms and five Ensigns of Foot I had near unto me, and they were commanded by Captain Castella, by reason that I had sent my Nephew de Leberon to Li∣bourne; the King having writ to me to put my self into it, his Majesty having had intel∣ligence that the Enemy had a design upon that place. Which Command I receiv'd at the time when I sent the advertizement to Monsieur de Terride, and would not my self go to the said Libourne, that I might be near the Mareschal to go relieve the said Sieur de Ter∣ride; or fight Montgommery by the way. Being come to Aire we found that we were above sixscore Gentlemen, and the five Foot Companies came thither as soon as we. In the morning my whole Company came in on the one side, and by the way of the Landes at the same time came the Baron de Gondrin, who the day before had marched nine leagues, and my Company seven, and at night came Monsieur de Fontenilles. As I was mounting to horse to depart from Nogarol, the Messenger I had sent to the Mareschal from Lectoure return'd and brought me his answer, which was, that since Montgommery was already passed the Garonne, he conceiv'd it would be to no purpose to follow him, and that he had given Monsieur de Terride notice from the time that the Count had first made towards the Rivers, to look to himself, for that the said Montgommery was coming to attaque him; who had reurn'd him answer, that he was strong enough to fight Montgommery, and that he would not leave the Siege, which was the same answer the said Sieur de Terride had sent to me. The said Mareschal sent me further word that he was going to batter a Castle near unto Lavaur called Frigeac, till the Foot who were coming out of Languedoc com∣manded by the Sieur de St. Geran de la Guiche should come up to him. So soon as ever I alighted at Aire I dispatcht away Captain Mausan (who had been Quarter-master to Monsieur Gramont's Company, and was lately come into mine) to the said Mareschal by whom I begg'd of him, that setting all other Enterprizes apart, he would please to apply himself to the grand Concern; for having once fought Montgommery he would have no more to do either in Languedoc or Guienne, being that all the Forces of two
Provinces were united with the said Count, which being once defeated there would not be any one left to make head against us.The Sieur de Montluc sends to the Mares∣chal d'Anville. I had at my coming to Nogarol sent away a dis∣patch to Monsieur de Terride, entreating him, that if he was not already retir'd he would speedily retire, and disincumber himself of his Artillery; and if he saw himself hard laid to, rather to throw them into theA River so called. Gave, than engage in a Battel; for that I had sent to the Mareschal from Lectoure, hoping he would suddenly come away; and that though he should lose his Canon, so soon as we should be drawn together we should pre∣snly recover it. In the mean time it ran in my head, that although Montgommery had a very considerable and sprightly Army, he would hardly notwithstanding adventure to attaque Monsieur de Terride, seeing we were coming up towards him: but I think he had intelligence that neither the Mareschal nor I would enter the Country, and that we were not ready to joyn, which made him pursue his determination. The same night that I came to Aire after I had sent away Captain Mausan came Captain Montaut from Mon∣sieur de Terride,The Sieur de Terride retires to Orthz. by whom he sent me word that he was retir'd to Orthez, entreating me with all speed to come up to him; whereupon I immediately sent back the said Captain Montaut to tell him, that I would not stir from Aire, or at least would advance no fur∣ther than St. Sever, untill the Mareschal should first come, for I had but three Compa∣nies of Gens-d'arms, and five Ensigns of Foot; and that Captain Montaut had told me, that in eighteen Ensigns of Foot which he had with him there was not eighteen hun∣dred men; and on the other side, should I come to Orthez, and that we should be forc'd to fight, and should lose the Battel, the King might justly cut off my head for not staying for the Mareschal, and the said Mareschal himself might justly say, that I had pr∣cipitated the Battel that he might not be there, to engross to my self the reputation of a Victory; that therefore I would be cautious of entring into such a dispute either with his Majsty, or the Mareschal: but that I entreated him to retire to St. Sever, leaving a suf∣ficient Garrison in Orthez, and till the Mareschal should come I would be drawing to∣wards him. That heretofore I had given him timely advertizement of the Count's com∣ing, which he had dispis'd, and that now he would have me repair that so great an over∣sight at the hazard of my own honor, which I could by no means do. The said Captain Montat rid all night directly to Orthez, telling him all that I had given him in charge, to which he return'd me answer, that he could not stir from Orthez, and that should he go out of the Country of Bearn the Bearnos would take heart at it; entreating me there∣fore to come up to him, with which message he would again have return'd the said Cap∣tain Montaut, who would by no means accept of the Commission, but frankly told him, that he was confident I would not enter into Bearn; and had given him so many reasons for that resolution, that not a man about me would offer to advise me to it, and accord∣ingly I sent him word by his Messenger that I would do no other but what I had told him by Captain Montaut. I communicated all the Letters I writ whether to the Mareschal or Monsieur de Terride, to Monsieur d' Aire Brother to Monsieur de Candalle, and to all the Knights of the Order, and evermore consulted their advice; for the occasion requir'd it. The Lieutenant of Castel-Sarrazin, who was with Monsieur de Terride, has since told me, that he kept all the Letters I had writ to the said Sieur de Terride, and that would he have been perswaded by any of his Captains, he had retir'd to St. Sever according to my advice: but he chose rather to be govern'd by three or four Gentlemen of Bear he had about him, than any of his own Officers and Servants, Monsieur de Bellegarde was within six leagues of Aire to∣wards Bigorre, to whom I dispatcht away a Messenger, entreating him to come the next day to Proian, a House belonging to the Baron de Campagne, and to bring Captain Arne, and the Baron de Arbous, Lieutenant to Monsieur de Gramont, along with him, I having earnest business to communicate unto him, which accordingly they all three did. He had with him four Companies of Gens-d'arms, namely his own, and those of Messieurs de Gra∣mont, d' Arne, and de Sarlebous; and there I laid down before them all that I writ to Monsieur de Terride, with the answers he had return'd me back, and that he tempted me to come to Orthez, telling them withal the foregoing reasons why I conceiv'd I ought not to do it; which they all approv'd of, saying, that the Mareschal would have just cause to take it exceedingly ill if I should not stay for him; although they well enough under∣stood by several Letters he had writ to them, that he had a mind to make war in Langue∣doc, and not in Guienne; for all those of his Council, and even they of Tholouze, (as they had been enform'd) advis'd him so to do, and that upon that condition they would sup∣ply him with money for the expence of the war, perswading him to expend it in Langue∣doc, and not in Guienne; which was a thing easie enough to be believ'd, for every one strives to draw the water to his own Mill. Monsieur de Bellegarde then told us, that he
would write to the Mareschal, and tell him that he ought to march towards us, and after the Enemy: but that nevertheless he believ'd he would not do it, for the forenamd rea∣sons, and also because those who were for his transferring the Scene of the war into Lan∣guedoc, would be sure to possess him, that the reason why we invited him to come to us, was for the fear we were in of losing our own Houses. We concludd however that he should send a Gentleman to him to beseech him to come, and I promis'd Monsieur de Bel∣legarde to acquaint him with what answer Captain Mausan should bring me back; who was but three dayes in going and coming, and afterwards went to Monsieur de Bellgrde, carrying him the Mareschal's answer to my Letter; which was to this effect. Monsieur de Montluc, I Have receiv'd yours, by which I perceive that Monsieur de Terride is retir'd to Orthz, who being now out of danger I shud do no great feats in Bearn, and am very unwilling to squander away my time: for in these parts I am confient I shall soon recover what is lost of my Government; at your instance nevertheless I am content to come with my Army as far as I'Isle de Jordan, there to stay some few dayes to see if any occasion shall offer it sf of fight∣ing Montgommery in the Field; which in case I fail of, I am resolv'd to pusu my begin∣ning, which is hopeful; for I have taken Figeac where Captain Mausan hs found m, and to morrow morning I will march directly to the Isle, where in two dayes I hope to arrive. These were the contents of the Letter which pleas'd us all exceedingly well, and immedi∣ately upon the receipt thereof I went to St. Sever with all the horse and foot I had; and from thence so soon as ever I came thither dispatcht away Captain Montaut, who from Or∣thez was but newly alighted there (for from St. Sevir to the said Orthez is no mre than four leagues and a half only) back to Monsieur de Terride, entreating him that he would come in the morning to Agetau, that we might conferre together an hour to re∣solve upon what we had to do. I made no manner of question but he would come, which made me send to Monsieur de Gramont's people to provide us something for dinner, for Agetmau is his in right of his Daughter-in-Law d' Andois Countess of Guichen, and gave the Letter the Mareschal had sent me by Captain Mausan to the said Captain Montaut, to shew him. I made this assignation purposely to remonstrate to him, that the Mareschal would hardly be drawn so far as into Bearn, by reason he was im∣portun'd by all the Estates of Languedoc, and all the Lords of that Countrey to make war in Languedoc, and not in Gulenne, which he must in the end be necessitated to do, or they would give him no money; that therefore he ought to retire to St. Sever, leaving a few men in the Castle of Orthez, and that when we should be all together we should make up the body of an Army, entreating the Mareschal to leave us Monsieur de Belle∣garde with the four Companies of Gens-d'arms, which I hoped he would easily grant us, he having enow besides to be Master of the Field, and that in five or six dayes I doubted not but we should have a thousand Foot, or more to those we already had: for Monsieur de Bellegarde had two Companies with him, and that Captain Musan should go into Bigorre, from whence he hand his Brother would bring a considerable number of men, and that the Count de Labatut would do the same. This was what I had premeditated to say to him, not doubting but by those arguments to overcome his Council that hindred him from retiring; and besides I believ'd the Mareschal would be very glad of this resolution, by which means he would be at full liberty to pursue his own designs. Yet did I not do this of my own head only, but communicated all to the Knights of the Order, and the Captains who were with me. Now when I in the morning expe∣cted he should come to Agetmau (it being but two leagues only from Orthez) to conclude of such things as should be most proper for his safety and honor, he sent me word that he could not come to Agetmau,Dispute be∣twixt the Sieurs de Montluc and de Terride. his Council not conceiving it fit for him to go out of his Government, because Agetmau was not in Bearn, but that I should come to him. See here the vanity of this world! a man weak, beaten, and upon the matter defeated, stands upon his punctillio's, and moreover with a man who came only to save his life, and who in re∣gard to his own quality might challenge some respect. For God's sake (fellow Captains) leave this pride behind your Beds-head, when necessi∣ty shall press upon you; for it is to be devoyd of all sense and understanding, seeing that a man does miserably and ridiculously lose himself. Had he been of greater quality than I, he ought notwithstanding to have accepted my invitation, and to have come so far to confer and consult with me about an affair whereupon his own safety and that of his Army wholly depended. His evil Angel govern'd him. He neither knew before nor after which way to
go about either to escape, or defend himself. Yet was it not thorough any default of cou∣rage, for he had ever manifested himself to be bave enough; but God deprives us of our judgments when he is dispos'd to chastize us. To return to our Embassies. I sent him word roundly, That I would not budg a foo, and that I would not engage my self in a place where I should be enfor'd to fight till I should first see his Forces and mine together, to know if they were sufficient to match the Enemy: that I had seen too many caught in the Trap for that; that I would not buy a Pig in a Poak, but would see both without and within, that I was come thither to relieve him withu any command from any person living; that it seem'd he stood upon his punctillio's of honor, but that it was not time to insist upon such niceties; and that he appear'd to me like a man who is in necessity, and yet thinks he does the person too much honor to borrow money of him of whom he desires it. All this I writ to him in my anger, when I saw I could not make him come to a place where I had a mind to tell him by word of mouth what had been concluded, as well by Monsieur de Bellegarde and the Captains nar unto him, as by those that I had with me: and when they saw that I was resolv'd not to go, they sent to me Messieurs d' Audaux, and de Damasan to perswade me to it. The question was not whether I ought to carry the five Ensigns of Foot, and my three Companies of Gens-d'arms into Orthez, for they not had 3 daies provision for themselves: but I must go as one neighbour goes to another's house when he makes a visit. I do not use to go after that manner in a time of War, especially when the Enemy is so near. The said Sieurs d' Audaux and de Damasan spar'd for no arguments to induce me to it, and I was not to seek for reasons (and such as were much more evident than theirs, as any child mght discern) to excuse my self. In the end, seeing I would not go, they told me, either that Monsieur de Gramont had a picque to some of their Council, or else that they had a quar∣rl to him (I know not which it was, for I did not commit it to memory, forasmuch as it was not their an mositis that had brought me thither) and that therefore Agetmau was by no means a proper place for our meeting. Whereupon we concluded that the next day about Noon we should meet at a Gentlemans House, which was not in Monsieur de Gra∣mont's Teritories, though I told them withal, That all animositis ought to cease where a Liutenant of the Kings is in place. In the close of the Evening then they all mounted to horse to return to Orthez, when at their going away Monsieur de Madaillan entreated leave of me to go along with him; and to stay two dayes there to try if he could not in that time find an opportunity to do something with fourty Cuirassiers of my Company, whom I accordingly permitted to go, and so they departed altogether. About eleven of the clock at night as they were go a little beyond Agetmu▪Monsieur de Teride sur∣priz'd. they met with a Merchant of Orthez of their acquaintance who was running away, and told them that they were all defeated, and that Monsieur de Ter∣ride and some Captains with him were escap'd into the Castle; which nevertheless they dd not believe; for our people were eighteen Ensigns of Foot, and the Enemy were no more than two and twenty; which made it seem impossible, considering that ours had the advantage of the Town. For this therefore they did not forbear to go forward, and a quarter of a league further met with Captain Fleurdelis, who had also escap'd away, and told them the same thing that the Merchant had done before. Whereupon they made a halt to rally such as should be flying away from the defeat. The Merchant held on his way, and coming to St. Sever, found me in bed. His news was so unexpected, and so strnge, that I could by no means give any credit to it, not being able to imagine that two and twenty Ensigns could take eighteen in a Town that was none of the weakest; but Captain Fleurdelis coming within a quarter of an hour after, and confirming the same, I was constrain'd to believe it, not without making above three times the sign of the Cross. I have thought fit to give an account at large of the truth how all things passed in this business, by reason that all the Kingdom cried out, that if Monsieur le Mareschal d' Anville and Montluc had perform'd their duties Montgommery had been defeated, and the Princes after the rout at Moncontour would not have known which way to turn them, having no other refuge but to throw themselves into the arms of the Count de Montgommery, who was fresh, victorious and full of Crowns (all which was laid in our dish) and Guienne had not then been in mourning as it now is. And yet I think the Hugonots had not passed thorough Limosin and Perigort: for we should have gone out to meet them to bid them good-morrow: but the account that I have truely set down will discover who was in fault. In the mean time they who shall follow after us may learn that an oversight in War is irreparable. There are several persons of honor yet living, who will testifie the truth of what I write, for I did not make any Dispatches in secret, but in the presence of all the
Captains and Knights of the Order who were with me. I do not write to accuse either the Mareschal or Monsieur de Terride, I say nothing but the truth, to manifest my dili∣gence to such as have said, that if I would I might have reliev'd Monsieur de Terride. The few men I had, the daily advertisements I gave him, and the resolution taken amongst us, are all evidences whether I was in fault or no. I must needs say that had he retir'd, that had he sooner believ'd my intelligence, and would have hearkned to my advice, and not have been so overrul'd by his own Council, that then in eight dayes time we should have been strong enough to have fought Montgommery, and either to have driven him out of Bearn, or have shut him up in Navarreins, where they would not have receiv'd him neither, forasmuch as there had not been provision to have nourisht his Army four days; by which means he must have been necessitated either to fight, or to turn back to the place from whence he came, which he would have found a matter of great difficulty for him to do; for the very Peasants would have defeated him, knowing us to be in his Rear. Monsieur de Terride had yet all the other Towns, and had this Enerprize of his succeeded the Ma∣reschal had not needed to have been troubled with our war, but had been left at liberty to pursue his own designs, provided he would have left us Monsieur de Bellegarde, and the four Companies of Gens-d'armes, which I believe he would have done having himself no need of them. It is then Monsieur de Terride's Council that is to be blam'd, and not I; and that all the world may see how unlikely Montgommery'sMontgommery's▪ Forces. design was to take effect▪ it is most certain, that he never had at the most above five and twenty hundred Foot, and betwixt five and six hundred Horse, good and bad together; and when he went to meet the Princes, he had not above a hundred Horse, and but very few Foot, by the testimony of Monsieur de Terride's Ensigne and Guidon, and of Monsieur de St. Felix, Lieutenant to Monsieur de Negrepelisse, and Captain St. Projets Ensigne, who were prisoners, and went every day at liberty upon their parole up and down their Camp; and since the Peace I have alkt with above fifty of the Enemy who have all confirm'd the same; by which any one may judge if there was any reason to apprehend the said Count, or suspect the said Monsiur de Terride (considering the Forces he had with him) should suffer him∣self to be surpriz'd, especially he being himself a good Soldier, and having good Officers about him: but they lost their understanding in a time of the greatest need. This is the truth of the beginning and source of all the miseries of Guienne. Had not Monsieur le Mreschal d' Anville come into this Country, I am assur'd that most of the Lords and Gentlemen who went in to him would have done me the honor to have come to me, and I think we should have play'd our Game a little better. It was but reason they should pay that great respect to him, he being a great Lord, Son to a Connestable and Ma∣reschal of France, and moreover a brave Cavalier in his own person, rather than to me, who am a poor Gentleman, old, a Cripple, and out of favour: but notwithstanding be∣lov'd both by the Gentry and the People. You Lieutenants of Provinces who shall come after me, if peradventure my Memoires shall fall into your hands, make your advantage of this oversight of Monsieur de Terride, to the end that you may not occasion the ruin of your Masters affairs. I will not blame nor accuse him either of cowardise or treachery, for he was an admirable good Field-Officer: but other qualities are requir'd in a Lieutenant of a Province; upon your head∣piece, your prodence and circumspection all the rest depend. Had he credited the adver∣tisements we gave him of the Count de Montgommery's coming to raise the Siege, he had made an honorable Retreat, and had sav'd his Canon, which had he not had leisure to draw off, he might have thrown them into the Gave, which is a River full of great pre∣cipices, so that it would not have been in the power of Montgommery to retrieve them; and we should have been with them in the time that such a work would have requir'd. But setting this aside, having been routed in his Siege, and after that being retir'd into a Town sufficiently strong, he ought to have considered of the means, either of retreating further, or of fortifying himself there; and yet the last fault was worse than the first, which was, that their fear depriv'd them of their judgment; for he escap'd with a good number of Gentlemen into the Castle, which is a very strong one, without having ever thought of putting provisions into it wherewith to sustain him;The fault of Monsieur de Terride. and in all these disgraces to stand upon his punctillio's of honour, without deining to condescend so far as to come three steps out of his Government to confer with a friend who came meerly to do him service, and to preserve him, was a most inexcuseable folly. Leave, leave these punctillio's in a time of necessity, I have never done so, but oftentimes with ten Horse only have put my self into the Field. I am confident that had he come to speak with me he had not fall'n into the misfortune, which cost him both his honor▪ and his life. For my part so oft as I have call'd this action to remembrance, I have ever lookt upon it as a meer Judgment of
God. For to raise a Siege against equal Forces, to conquer, and force a Town, and to take the Kings Lieutenant in a sufficient place in three dayes time, as it were in the sight of a Mareschal of France, and a Lieutenant of the Kings, as I was, and in short, in three dayes to conquer a whole Province seems to be a Dream. It must needs be confest that in all our Warrs there was never perform'd a more notable exploit. But who (Fellow Captains) ob∣ein'd this glory for the Count de Montgommery? truly no other but his own diligence, which was such as scarce gave leisure to Monsieur de Terride to look before him, and con∣sider what he had to do. It is one of the best pieces in a Soldiers Harness. And what lost Monsieur de Terride? the little diligence he employ'd in his most pressing concern. For my part I did what lay in me to do; for to enter further into a County, without first knowing from him in what posture it stood, and to fight a victorious Enemy without sufficient Forces, and with a baed Army; I was not so ill advis'd as to shuffle all things into confusion only to bear him company in his ruine. I had been too long possessed of the honor of having never been defeated, to hazard my reputation for the relief of a man who would throw himself away in despite of all the world. Let no one wonder that I insist so long upon this subject:The impor∣tance of Mont∣gommery's vi∣ctory. for I believe that from this one fal (which many ill enform'd have indiscreetly and unjustly laid to my charge) the ruine not only of Guienne, but moreover of the whole Kingdom since has been deriv'd. I am assur'd that the affairs of the Hugonots had otherwise been reduc'd to such an extre∣mity, that it had been impossible ever to have repair'd them again. For in the first place, had the Mareschal and I follow'd him, there is no doubt but Montgommery had been de∣feated, and consequently all Bearn reduc'd, which had been no contemptible thing, and I think the King would then have been beter advis'd, than to have surrendred it upon the accommodation, having nough besides wherewith to recompence the Queen of Navarre within the Kingdom, to keep her more in his obedience. For a King ought alwayes to covet that those who ae his Subjects, if they be great and powerful, should be in the heart, and not in the extremities of his Kingdom; for then they dare not shew their horns: And besides the King wanted no good title to Bearn, for it is said that the Sove∣raignty of right belongs to him. I once heard Monsieur de Lagebaston the first President of Bourdeaux lay open that tile, who said he had seen the Evidences thereof in the Consta∣blery of Bourdeaux; but I have nothing to do to revive that antiquated quarrel. He told us also that at the time when they began to fortifie Navarreins, the Court of Parlia∣ment sent to King Francis to remonstrate to him, how much it imported his Crown to hinder that Fortification: but the King sent them word, that he was not offended at it; which was ill advis'd of the King; for a Prince ought as much as in him lies to hinder neighbouring Forresses; and had it not been for this all the whole Province had been his. But 'tis done and past, and there is now no remedy; For to a done thing the Council is already taken. Besides all this had Montgommery been defeated, the Admiral who in the interim lost the Battel of Moncontour would have been at his wis end, and not have known to what Saint to devote himself. I think he would have been wiser than to have engag'd himself in Gienne, where he would easily have been defeated, the relicks of his Army being in a very poor and forlorn condition, wthout Bggage, their horses unshod, and without a penny of money. And it was well for him that he came to throw him∣self into the armes of the Count de Montgommery, who set him up again, supplying him with money that he had gain'd at the Sack of divers Cities, insomuch that the said Ad∣miral had the commodity of raversing the whole Kingdom, whilest the King amuz'd him∣self at the Siege of St. Iean in the heart of Winter, which was very unadvisedly done: but God opens and shts our eyes when it pleases him. Let us now return to our Subject. Peradventure there may be some who would have been glad I should have writ more at large after what manner Monsieur de Terride was defeated; which I would not do; for I have heard that Of ill flesh a man can never make good Pottage. I leave that to those who were present at the business, and who gave me relation of it, and to the Historians who talk of all the world, and very often unseasonably, and from the purpose, like ignorant fellows in feas of Arms as they are. These postings to and fro betwixt Monsieur de Terride and me continued three whole dayes, after which Montgommery came to attaque him. After his defeat I remain'd a St. Sever, until such time as he was taken in the Castle of Orthez, and afterwards re∣tir'd to Aire, where I staid nine dayes after the taking of the said Sieur de Terride, send∣ing the Mareschal an account of all that had passed,The Mareschl d'ville's an∣swer to the Sieur de Mont∣luc. and again solliciting him withal to come up to us. To which by way of answer he demanded of me to what end he should come, or what his coming would signifie, Monsieur de Terride being defeated and taken. Which made me dispach away Monsieur de Leberon to remonstrate to him, that in case he should
pass the River towards Languedoc, Montgommery would infallibly fall into the Kings Country, seeing there was no body to make head against him; but that if he would please yet for a few dayes o deferre his expedition, one might then see what Montgommery would do; for being puft up with so glorious a Victory, he would not there stp the progress of his Arms. The Mareschal was contented so to do, but sent me word withal, that he would lose no more time than a months pay only, which the City of Tholouze had given his Army, but would employ the remainder in reducing the places in his Go∣vernment. Now to say the truth from the time of Monsieur de Terride's defeat, affairs were in so strange a confusion, that a man had much ado to divine what course was best to take, unless the Province of Languedoc would have been contented to have paid the Mareschal's Army for the service of Guienne, which however perhaps he would not have done, neither indeed had he any reason to do it. During the nine dayes that I stayd at Aire, we made a new appointment to meet at a Village, the name whereof I have forgot, and there all those who were at Proian accordingly met, where we fell to debating of what remedies might be found out (which was a matter of great difficulty for the aforegoing reasons) for the present evil, and in the end concluded together, that I should write un∣to the Mareschal to tell him, that if he would be pleas'd to come so far as Viques, I would there wait upon him, to resolve upon what he should think we were best to do for the de∣fence of Guienne. I accordingly writ, and in answer thereunto had word from him back again, that upon a certain day, which he nam'd, he would not fail to be there, which was two or three dayes after. I will here in the mean time give an account of what I did at Aire within five leagues of the Enemy, and in an open Town, having no more but the five Companies commanded by Captain Castella, and one of Vicount de Labatut, who was also come thither; which because it may be of use to some one in time to come I will here set down, and peradvenure some Apprentice in our Trade may learn something out of it, that hereafter may be of some advantage to him. The three Companies of Gens-d'arms were in a Village on this side the Dou towards Gasony. I discover'd my design to Messieurs de Gondrin, de Fontenilles, and de Madaillan, telling them that I would try my fortune, and see i I could order it so as to fight Mont∣gommery at my own advantage with those few that we were; that to this end I would send away all the Gentlemens Baggage that we had with us to Nogarol, so that nothing should be left behind but our Horses and Arms; I would then that every night they should come an hour after midnight with the three Companies before Aire, on that side the River towards Gascony. I had, besides those, four Companies of Argoulets, which in all might be about three hundred Harquebuzeers, who in like manner were to come at the same time to Millas a Village on the brink of the River. Our six Ensigns of Foot were quarter'd at Mas d' Aire, which lies above Aire on that side towards the Enemy, who were every night at the same hour to present themselves in Battalia upon the Banks of the River without the Village, and in case of an Alarm without Drum or Trumpe, were to retire by Aire, and pass over the Bridg, at which time we who were quarter'd at the said Aire were to foard it over (for the River was foardable) and that in the mean time twenty Horse should every night go the Patrouille upon the three Highwayes by which the Enemy could only come to us, which Horse should have intelligence one with another, to give one another notice if they came, that so they might all at once retire to Aire, without giving any Alarm, and might come and tell our Foot, and consecutively us; and that the said twenty Horse should advance a long league, or a league and a half upon those Highwayes, to the end, that we might not be constrain'd to draw off our men in disorder, but might have time to have made half a league towards our place or retreat, which was to Noguarol, before the Enemy could be arriv'd at Aire. I then calculated the length of the night, for I fear'd not their coming by day, by reason that I kept a Gentleman call'd Captain Bahu in an enclosed Village, a league and a half distant from Aire towards Morlas, who kept Scouts all the day upon all the wayes by which the Enemy could come to us, and had three or fourscore Soldiers with him, with twenty or five and twenty Argoulets. I also repre∣sented to them, that when the Enemy should have marcht five long leagues of that Coun∣try, chiefly the Foot, and especially in the night, the Foot must of necessity stay to eat and drink at Aire; to which place also they could not come till almost day, when men are the most enclin'd to sleep, especially Foot who have marcht all night, so that they would ne∣ver be able to get one Foot Soldier out of Town, and that the most of the Harquebuzeers on horseback would stay with them, and that then by the Rule of War the Horse would pass on forwards after us, supposing that we retreated for fear, and that I design'd our En∣counter to be half a league from Aire, which as I had computed the time, would happen to be betwixt break of day and sunrise: that so soon as we should see them approach us,
we should cover all our Foot with our Cavalry, and give them a swinging Charge, and that in so doing I made no doubt but we should defeat them. They all approv'd of my dsign, concluding with me that we should defeat and break them, for our horses would be resh, and their weary, and our Foot coming up a good round rot after us, seeing the victory ours, and that their Foot were yet in Aire sleeping or eating, would also fall in upon them, who seeing their Cavalry defeated, and put to rout, there was no question to be made, but that every one would shift for himself the best he could, and endeavour to escape without offering to fight. Thus are we to represent things to our selves when we are to undertake an Enterprize, and to hear one anothers reasons and opinions upon the same. We lay nine dayes at Aire in reference to this Stratagem, during which time we were everynight in Battalia after this manner, expecting when the Enemy should fall into our Quarters thinking to susprize us, but I think had we stayd till they had come we had been there till now. The tenth day having receiv'd an answer from the Mareschal, that he would in three dayes be at Auch, we reti'd towards Marsiac, to rally with Monsieur de Bellegarde, to whom I gave all the men I had, and with twenty horse only went away to Auch, marching nine long leagues that day (which are as much as twenty French leages) the next morning being the time appointed by the Mareschal for our meeting. In my life I was never so weary, for it was excessively hot, and I there found Monsieur de Negrepe∣lisse, who was come thither the day before, having heard that the Mareschal would be there, as also to rally what was left of his Company, which had been with Monsieur de Terride. The next morning instead of coming himself the Mareschal sent thither Monsieur de Ioyeuse, and we held the Consultation at Monsieur de Negrepelice his house, he being ill of the Gout. There Monsieur de Ioyeuse acquainted us with the Mareschal's intention, which was, that he was going to repass the Garonne, and to employ his time in his own Government, considering the charge the Country was at of defraying the expence of the War. We controverted this determination of his, arguing that the Enemy were in Gui∣enne, and that he having the charge of Dauphiné, Provence, Languedoc, and Guienne, was equally obliged to preserve the one as well as the other; that we were all the Kings Sub∣jects and Servants, and that the Country was the Kings, and that therefore he ought to go there where the Enemy was, and to endeavour to repair the great oversight we had com∣mitted. In answer whereunto Monsieur de Ioyeuse laid before us, that the Country of Languedoc would not pay the Mareschal's Army, unless they should see that he employ'd their money in recovering the places of their own Province, and as I have already said, he had reason.Conention a∣mong the Chiefs about the War of Guinne. But in the mean time we who were of Guienne expected no other but the total ruine of it, and consequently of all our houses; for which considerations we should have been very glad that the Mareschal would have resolv'd upon the defence of Guienne, and not to have return'd into Languedoc. In conclusion he told us that he must be gone, for he was to be that night with the Mareschal at the Isle, and that the next morning the said Sieur would cross the Garonne towards Languedoc; at which we were very much confounded, as knowing very well that Montgommery could not long subsist in Bearn, and would therefore fall into the Kings Country; whereupon I told Monsieur de Ioyeuse, that seeing I had no Forces left for the defence of Guienne, I had nothing left to do but to retire to Libourne, where the King had commanded me to be, and so return'd to find out Monsieur de Bellegarde at Marsiac, who was as much confounded as I, he being in no less fear of the ruine of his houses than I, and the rest of us whose Estates lay in those parts. I left the Vicount de Labatut with his two Companies in Marsiac, leaving it to his own discretion to do as he saw cause, for Forces I had none to relieve him. Monsieur de Bellegarde also retir'd a little further towards Comage, expecting Or∣ders from the Mareschal what he was to do, and the Baron de Gondrin went towards Euse, there with his Company to do the best service he could. We were all like strayed sheep. I with my Foot Companies went to pass the River Garonne, placing them at Port St. Mary and at Aguillon, to see if I could yet raise any more men, and issued out three or foar Commissions to that effect. There only remain'd with me ive and thirty Horse of Mon∣sieur de Fontenilles his Company, and fourscore of my own, for Monsieur de Madaillan, who was gone to bury his Wife, had taken one part along with him: Of those who were his Neighbours, his Brother who carried my Ensign was also gone sick to his own house, and had in like manner taken along with him some others that liv'd there abouts, and my Guidon was gone to Tholouze to a Tryal he had depending in that Court, which was the reason that I was thus left alone. It is true that I was assur'd they would be back with me again in eight dayes. As for the Gentlemen of Armagnac they w all retir'd to their own houses, to take order about the removing of their Goods into  thinking no
less but that the same scourge of God was amongst us; for every one thought of saving his Goods, and not of defending himself, nor of making head against the Enemy, by which you may see the fruits of our evil intelligence amongst our selves. I had not been four dayes at Agen before I was advertiz'd that Monsieur de Marcha∣stel (he same who at this present is the Lord de Peyre) was come to Thoneins with three hundred Horse,Succours going to joyn with Mongommery. amongst which there might be threescore that were very good, the rest were Harquebuzeers on horseback ill mounted; with vvhich he vvas going over in∣to Bearn, to joyn vvith the Count de Montgommery; vvhereupon I departed and vvent to Aguillon. Of my five Foot Comapnies I had sent tvvo to quarter at Ville-neufue to ease the Country; and in the other three that remain'd, and that lay at Port St. Mary and Aguillon, if there vvere a hundred men in a Company that vvas all; for every one vvas gone to his ovvn house, as vvell as the Horse, and even the Captains themselves. I had given two Commissions to Captain Plex, and Captain Pommies, two Gentlemen of Condmmi, to raise each of them a Foot Company, to whom I sent that they should ad∣vance towards Buzet, for that I would try to pass the River Garonne, and in case they should hear that the Enemy offer'd to hinder my passage, they should then give them Alams bind. The sid Siur de Peyre made no stay at Thonens, but crost the River ad∣vancing towards Monhurt, Montluc, and Dmasan. The same night that I arriv'd at Agullon, I made shew as if I would pass the River, whereupon they presented them∣selves to oppose me; but there was nothing done but some few Harqubuz shot fir'd a∣hwart the River. The next morning I caus'd two Boats to fall down towards Port St. Mary, in the one whereof three horses might pass at once, and in the other two, and pre∣sented my self at the passage of Port de Pascau, sending over five and twenty Harquebu∣zeers in the two Boats▪ and when I expected they should come to defend the Pass, they did quite contrary, for they quitted Damasn, Montluc, and Monhurt, and retreated towards la Gruere, and le Mas-d' Agenois, leaving me the passage free; so that I went to quarter at Damasan, where I found the Captains du Plex and Pommies newly arriv'd, having but fourscore Foot only betwixt them; for they had not had time to fill their Com∣panies, and about fourscore Harquebuzeers on horseback came with them also. Captain Lauba a Kinsman of mine, who might have about threescore Harquebuzeers on horseback, came thther likewise about four a clock in the afternoon, by which time we were all got over the River. At my coming to Damasan there met me two men from Castel-geloux, whom the Con∣suls and Inhabiants of the Cities had sent to me to demand relief; for that Calonges had been before the Town to summon it, to whom they had return'd answer, that in case they heard no news of me by the next morning they would deliver up the Town. It was a strange thing that Cities, which were in no manner of danger of being forc'd, should so tremble for fear. They had condition'd that none but the Captains should enter, in consideration of a certain sum of money they were to give them; but that was but a juggle, for they were resolv'd to make themselves Masters of the Town, and to leave a Garrison there, the Captains being very well assur'd, that being once within, they, with the Hugo∣nots of the place should be able to master the Catholicks. I immediately hereupon order'd Captain Ne, and Captain Bengue the Lieutenant and Guidon of Monsieur de Fontenilles his Company, that they should bait their horses, and Captain Plex and Pommies to bait their Harquebuzeers on horseback; and that in the close of the Evening Monsieur de No should depart with five Gens-d'arms, and the said du Plex and Pommies with their Har∣quebuzeers on horseback with him, taking one of the Messengers in their Party, and the rest of the Light-horse, which might be about ten; and the fourteen of my Company should go with the said Captain Bengue and Captain Lauba with him, and should stay at a place appointed within a quarter of a league of the Town: where if Monsieur de Noé could enter in, he should give notice to Captain Bengue, if not he should retreat to him; and I with fourteen or fifteen Gentlemen who were with me, and some fourscore Har∣quebuzeers on foot, would hal about half a quarter of a league short of the said Captain Bengue, at a Gentlemans house call'd Monsieur de Ganet, where they were to send me in∣telligence of all that passed. I order'd it thus, to the end that in case the Enemy should come to hinder Captain Noé from entring the Town, Captain Bengue and he might rally together, and I also would shew my self in the field to amuze the Enemy, and to make them think that we were three Parties in the field. I knew very well that they would soon have intelligence from those who playd the good Subjects, by staying at home in their own houses, under the protection of the Kings Edict: and therefore caus'd all the three Par∣ties to go away by night, to defeat those Intelligencers of the knowledge of how few men we were. Monsieur de Noé came an hour after midnight to the Gates of Castel-geloux,
where there arose a great dispute amongst those of the Town, wheher or no they should let him in; some said I, and some said no, insomuch that they made him wait two long hours before they could conclude, but in the end the Catholicks ran to the Gate of the Town, and made themselves Masters of it, and offer'd it to him; who so soon as he was got in, advertiz'd Captain Bengue thereof, sending him word to retreat to me, as it had been order'd he should, which he accordingly did, and by this time it was sun-rise. About break of day two Hugonots, Towns-born Brats, came before Castel-geloux, to en∣quire if their relief was at hand, and whether they were determin'd to let the Captains enter according to their Capitulation, telling them that the said Sieur de Peyre was with his forcs within a quarter of a league of the Town, where he had made a hal, and wait∣ed in expectaion of their return. When as some of those within held them in discourse, some Horse sallied out and took one of them, but the other made his escape, and carried news to Monsieur de Peyre, that his Companion was taken, and that they that took him were Gens-d'arms in yellow Cassocks. Monsieur de Peyre then perceiv'd that I was got up before him, and retreated to Mas. Monsieur de Fontenilles was come in the night at the pecise time appointed to Buset, a quarter of a league from Damasan, to which place I was retir'd after I had given order for them to march away by night, telling me by the way as we went, that the Mareschal was not pass'd over the River Garonne, to go over into Languedoc, as Monsiur de Ioyeuse had assur'd us he would, but was marching towards Muret to ease the Country; so that I receiv'd that night two great satisfactions, the first and the chiefest, that the Mareschal had thought better with himself, and was not cross'd the River, by which means I hop'd we should be able to do some good for the Kings ser∣vice, and for the defence of the Country; and the other, that I had reliev'd Castel-gelox, which was of singular advantage to us, as well in Bourdelois as in Bazadois. Which I thought fit to commit to writing, to shew that with the little power I had, I did all I was able to do, without lying idle at home, and suffering all things to go at ran∣dom. Captains, although these be no great Conquests, nor famous Battels, you may yet by them, as well as in other places of my Book learn what a great diligence can effect, (I am alwayes touching upon this string, and I cannot too often repeat it) and that it is good to run a hazard sometimes in a case of necessity. When I crost the River twenty men might have hindred my passage, had they stayd in the Houses of the Port de Pascau; for I must of necessity land betwixt the two great Houses: and if I would have stood to consult a∣bout the reason of my passage, not a man with me would have been of opinion, that I ought to adventure to pass. By which you may note that the necessity of war will have it so, tha a man must sometimes venture when the affair is of great importance, and not alwayes go by the reason of war: but I must also tell you, that if you are long in design∣ing, and tedious in making preparation for the execution of your design, you may then lose more in venturing, than you are likely to win: for a man that is resolv'd to hazard must keep his design very close, and his execution must be sudden, that the Enemy may have no inkling of what you intend to do, till you come just to the push; for if you give him time to discover your intention, or to prevent your design, you must imagine he has understanding and judgment as you have, and will so well provide for you, that instead of surprizing him, you your selves will be surpriz'd, and defeated. Do not alwayes choose the easiest way, but deceive your Enemy, making a shew to put your selves into one place, to get convenience of going into another. As to what concerns diligence, Monsieur de Noé stay'd not two hours to bait at Damasan, but the night was upon him; nevertheless he departed at the first word without making any dispute of the business. How many Captains are there who would have given their Horse time to bai, and rest that night, at least till within an hour or two of day, considering that they had been all day on horse∣back at the passage of the River in excessive heat? Which had I order'd it so here, Monsieur de Noé would then have found the Enemy in the Town, as they did him, wherefore I would alwayes advise you to remember the Motto of Alexander the Great. Leave not that till to-morrow, which you may do to day. After a long march you shall repose at your ase and acquire honor. You must oft-times make your horses quail under their bur∣then; you will get more horses enow, but your honor once lost is never to be regain'd. 'Tis a thing that is not to be found by the high-way, but to be acquir'd by valour, and for which you wear your swords by your sides. So soon as I return'd back to Damasan I presently retir'd to Buset, a house belonging to the Signieur de Caumont my Kinsman, and thence immediately mounted to horse, and with about thirty Gens-d'arms I had, and Captain Lauba's Argoules, went directly to Pech, belonging in part to the Queen of Navarre, and wherein I had also a propriety.
The Seur de Peyre was wih all his people retir'd into Mas, which is a good league from Peuch, and when I came thither it was three a clock in the afernoon. The news was car∣ried to him that I was marching directly to Mas, which was the reason that he immedi∣ately departed thence, and macht all night. Laua put himself in pursuit of him, and had he overtaken him would have brought away either Fowl or Feathers, for he is n ad∣venturous Gentleman, and so were the two Captains who were with him; but he knw nothing of de Peyre's retreat till the next morning at sun-rise, and would then have follow'd the track, but that the people told him he was already as far as Mont de Marsan. The next morning I drew off the Sieur de Noé and his Cavalry from the said Castel-geloux, and left the Captains du Plex and Pommies in his room, who there perfected their Com∣panies, which were alwayes good, they having ordinarily fourscore Harquebuzeers on horse∣back at least, keeping almost continually together, and oft-times going out as far as Mont de Marsan, where they had frequent skirmishes. I then return'd back to Agen, where the same day that I arriv'd a Courrier came to me with leers from Monsieur le Mareschal, wherein he writ me word, that he had heard both by Monsieur de Ioyuse and others, that I was resolv'd to go and put my self into Liourne, in order to a Command the King had sent me to that effect: but that at the time when the King writ to me to go thiher, his Majesty did not understand that the af∣fas o Guinne were in so ill a condition; that therefore he entreated me to consider well of it; for if I should abandon the open Contry in so critical a time, neither the King nor the Monsieur would be satisfied with my doing. To which I writ him answer back, that whaever I might have said, it had never been my intention to shut my self up in Li∣bourne, and that he might assure himself I was not a Champman to be taken at the fist word: but that I was exceeding glad that he would yet continue some longer time in Gui∣enne, to see what resolution the Enemy would take, (for so he had writ me word in his letter) and that if it pleased him, whilst his Army had nothing else to do, to march to∣wards Nguarol, and le Mont de Marsan, to try if the Enemy would take courage to come out of Bearn to fight us; we might peradventure do some thing, and that it was my opinion it would be of advantage to us, to the end that if Montgommery should dare to enter the King's Territories, he might see that we were ready to fight him. He writ word back again that he was content, and that in five dayes he should be at Auch, where he desi'd me to meet him. I would not suffer the five Ensigns commanded by my Ne∣phew Leberon to stir from Libourne and St. Foy,Libourn in ex∣pectation of a Siege. though the two Companies that quarter'd at St. Foy were placed there upon no other account but only to save the Provisions of Li∣bourne: but in case of a Siege they had Orders, that immediately upon Monsieur de Le∣brons sending for them they should retire to Libourne, where the Chevaer Horloge com∣manded, who was casting up Trenches within, as if he daily expected a Siege. I took the five Ensigns that Captain Castella commanded in the absence of the Chevlier and of my Nephew, my own Company, those of Messieurs de Gondrin, and de Fontenilles, and sent Post to Monsieur de la Chppelle Lawzeres, (who lay at Cahors, and was evermore in readiness to bring in the Gentlemen of Quercy) that he should march away in all dili∣gence, and that the Mareschal was upon his march to go directly into Chalosse; which he suddenly did, and brought threescore and ten Gentlemen under his Cornet. All those of Agenis went along with me, not a man being left at home, excepting Captain Paulic the lder, whm I made peforce to return back to Villeneufue, of which he was Gover∣nor, as well to preserve the said Ville-neufue, as to assist Libourne with what he could, in case the Enemy should come and sit down before it. Monsieur de Cassaneuil was Mares∣chal de Camp to this party of ours, and lodg'd, according to his own Muster-Roll, an hundred thirty five Gentlemen under my Cornet, and threescore under that of Monsieur de la Chappelle Lauzieres the forenamed Companies of Gens-d'arms, and six Corners of Har∣quebuzeers on horse back; this was the Party that I had. Under the Mareschal's own Cornet were near upon three hundred Gentlemen (as the Mareschal himself told me at Grenade in the presence of his Mareschal de Camp Monsieur de la Croissette) what of Co∣menge and Languedoc.The Mareschal d' ville's Forces. He had two and twenty Ensignes of Foot commanded by Monsieur de St. Giron de la Guiche, and ten of Monsieur de Savignac. His Companies of Gens-d'armes, and those of Messieurs le Compte d' Esterac, de Lauzun, de Terride, de Negre∣pelice, those of the two Bellegardes, the Father and Son, de Gramont, those of the Mres∣chal de la Foy, de Ioyeuse, d' Aubigeon, d' Arn, de Sarlabo, which, with the three that I had, made up the number of fifteen Cornets of Gens-d'armes, and his own which we rec∣kon'd for two, which in all made seventeen. We joyn'd with him at Auch, and marcht thence to Noguarol, where the said Monsieur le Mareschal stay'd two dayes. The Enemy had already passed the Dou, and quarter'd at Mont de Marsan, Granade, and Cazeres. I commanded the vaunt-Guard.
The next day after the Camp came to Noguarol the Mareschal call'd a Council, where I mov'd that we should march away the same day, hoping that we might surprize those of Cazres and Grenade, but the Mareschal was by no means willing to it, it being objected by some, that so soon as the Enemy should her of our coming, they would immediate∣ly passover the Rver Do into Bearn, being at that time very low and foardable in many places. The Maeschal then propounded in this Council, that seeing he had no great Ar∣tllry wherewith to batter Towns (having four Field-pieces onely) he conceiv'd it was to no purpose to go any further, but to return into his own Government, there to fall in hand with the work he had to do, and to recover the places the Enemy had there in their pos∣sssion: with several other Arguments he made use of to fortifie this determination. This urvey tune was alwayes ringing in our ears: and although the reasons were good enough, I could notwithstanding by no means rellish them, forasmuch as I evidently foresaw that would happen in Guienne, which aferwards fll out, as also did all the rest who were intersted in the welfare of that Province, as I my self was; which made us grow so hot in dispute, that at last I could not forbear to tell the Mareschal, That he was responsible to the King for Guienne as well as for Languedoc, and that if he pleased to consult his Ptent, he would find that he had taken upon him the Command of the four Provinces, which were Daup é Provence, and Guienne, as well as Languedoc alone, though that was his parti∣cular Government, and that I entreated him to consider of it. To which he return'd me answer, That all the three Provinces had respective Governors of their own, and therfre let every one look to his own business, as he would do to his. I very well knew by this brk re∣ply, that he was nettled at what I had said to him; for these people expect their Wll should be a Law, and are impatient of being contradicted; and yet what I told him was true, for he had undertaken all that; however seeing the Mareschal angry, and the Coun∣cil irresolute, I withdrew, having first entreated Messieurs de Ioyeuse and de Bellegarde to lay things home to him, for I saw very well that I had displeas'd him, and therefore would give him no more trouble. Which they having promised me to do, I left a Gentleman with them to bring me an account of his determination. Presently after the said Sies sent me word that he was resolv'd to go to Granade, of which I was infinitely glad, and so were all the rest, and I thereupon immediately went to him, to know if I should go away in the night before, to try to shut up those who were in Granade, and trap them; to which he return'd me answer, That he should be well pleased with it, and that he had already sent away l' Estang de Cornusson with his four Cornets of Cavalry, to put himself into Cazieres, which four were, that of the said l' Estang, and those of St. Pourget, du Sendat, and Cle∣rac. I parted then in the beginning of the night with the Gentlemen, and my own Com∣pany of Gens-d'arms, and had it not been for the rain that fell upon us in the night (the geatest that I think I ever saw) I had snapt fourscore or an hundred Horse at Granade that were there, and who were my Neighbours at Thonens and Cleyrac, which I had ra∣ther have met withal than three hundred others, and I think I should have handled them so, that there would hardly have been any more fear of them; for that is the very Den of Rogues. But one mischief seldome comes alone, for the rain beat me into Gaube, belong∣ing to my Brother Monsieur de Valence, which continu'd above three long hours, and yet had they not escap'd me, had it not been that so soon as ever Monsieur de l' Estang came to Cazieres, he sent away Captain Porget's Ensign in the beginning of the night with twelve Gens-d'arms to scoure the Road as far as beyond Granade towards Mont de Marsan, who passing close by Granade did not enter into it, neither did he think that any of the Enemy were there, and therefore would not discover himself, but went on above a league further towards Mont de Marsan, and seeing no sign of an Enemy, return'd back the same way he came, when being before the Gates of Granade, he sent in his Guide to discover if there was any Body in the Town, who coming to the Gate saw Horse going towards the Market-place, and up and down the streets, and thereupon return'd to the Ensign, telling him what he had seen; and that though the night was very dark, he thought they had white Cassocks. The Ensign then alighted and went all alone to the Gate, and enter'd into it although he very well saw the Horse; but he had an opinion it was I, because he had heard that I was to be there by break of day, as I had been and two hours before, if the rain had not hindred me. He could not very well discover if they had white Cassocks or no, and therefore stept four or five paces into the Town, which as he was doing, those who quarter'd near unto the Gate came out to mount to horse; the Ensign who saw them was so near, that he perceiv'd they had white Cassocks, and had then thought to have recover'd the Gate, but he was enclosed behind, and taken, where they made him tell them all he knew, and mounting him behind one of their Troopers, carried him away a good round gallop. The Count de Montgommery who lay about Montaut and Nugron was soon
advertiz'd of what the Ensign had told his people; at which he took such an Alarm, that he immediately mounted to horse, and never aligted till he came to Orthez, leaving his Artillery by the way, abandoned by all, saving some thirty who were bolder than the rest, by the report of the honest people of the Country, and also by the confession of those who were taken prisoners. A little after sunrise the Mareschal came to Granade; my Quarter with the Vaunt-guard was at St. Maurice, which appertains to Monsieur de Bar∣sac of Quercy, and the Mareschal would that Monsieur de Savignac should also be of the Vaunt guard, with the Companies of Messieurs de Gramont, d' Arne, and Monsieur de la Chappelle Lauzires, together with my three Companies of Gens-d'arms, and thus we came all to Granade within three leagues of Mont de Marsan. Two dayes after our arrival the Mareschal was again talking of returning back, for that was evermore the burthen of his song, asking me what I would that he should do in Bearn, seeing that all the Garri∣sons were surrendred, and that the King had neither Towns nor Castles there; that he should only lose so much time; that on the other side provisions would fail him, and that already the Soldiers cried out of hunger, and besides he had no Artillery to batter the Towns. He had in truth reason on his side for what concern'd Provisions, by reason that our Carriages were not yet come up: and yet I had taken such care, that so soon as ever he had sent me word he would march, I immediately sent to tax Condommois, Ar∣magnac, Esterac, Commenge, and Bigrre, so that in two dayes we had as much victuals as we could wish. In the end I perceiv'd very well that his inclination would not be apt to continue him long in this service,Division a∣mong the Chiefs. neither were those of his Council any better enclin'd than he; for my part I never was present at any consultation▪ but only that at Noguarol, for I was never call'd, and I never offe'd my self, because I knew they had a prejudice against me, for saying we ought to make war in Guienne the Enemy being there; and I knew also that all the consultations that should be call'd without me would never do Guienne any god; so that we who were Gascons kept together by our selves. Seeing this humour of returning to continue,Th Enterprise of Mont de Marsan. I entreated the Mareschal to give me leave to go attaque Mnt de Marsan, hoping I should carry the place; who thereupon demand∣ed of me how I could think to take a walled Town, a good one, and not only one, but three, all enclosed with exceeding good walls, which was very true: to which nevertheless I made answer, that I had taken others that had been stronger, and mann'd with much better Soldiers than that was, by surprize (for I remembred Pance, which was another kind of place than Mont de Marsan, though that was strong enough) I told him more∣over that Monsieur de Terride had been snap't after the same manner at Orthez; and that therefore seeing our Enmies had done it, I doubted not but to do the same, and perad∣venture pay them in their own kind. At last after much importunity he told me he was content I should try my fortune; whereupon I entreated him to let me have Monsieur de Savignac with his ten Ensigns along with me, which he also granted. I could not go the next day, which was the 13th, for it rain'd all day long, and yet I would notwithstand∣ing go with forty or fifty Horse to view the Town, but could go but half a league, where in three or four houses I found Captain Arne, and Monsieur de l'Arbos, Leutenant to Monsieur de Gramont, who told me they had been there all night, (as also Moneur de la Chappelle Lauzieres) where we discoursed a great while of the resolution the Mareschal had taken to return, and how all those who adher'd to his opinion of returning to make war in Languedoc, and to abandon Guiene to the inroads of the Enemy, thought they were likely to meet with no great resistance in executing their designs in Languedoc, consi∣dering that the Enemies Forces were in Bearn, from whence I believe they conceiv'd they would hardly stir. But we of Guienne knew very well that Montgommery could not long subsist in Bearn, and that of necessity, although he should have no mind to do it, he must fall into the Kings Country, and upon our Houses. I moreover very well knew, that those who followed the Mareschal's opinion, thought that in retaking the Towns of Langue∣doc, they should do the King so considerable a service as would obtein grea honor to them∣selves, and moreover put their own houses in safety. I was not angry that those of Ln∣guedoc should be of this opinion, and should endeavour to draw the Mareschal into Ln∣guedoc for these considerations, for I have ever heard that The Shirt is nearer than the Robe, and that Charity begins at home, which is sufficient for their excuse, seeing there was no dishonour in the case, as there was not: but I was angry at those others who main∣tained the same opinion, and yet were of Guienne, because they only did it to  fa∣vour with the Mareschal, and heartily wisht the Enemy might burn their Houses, because they stood so stffely for the relief of Languedoc where they had nothing to lose, and seem'd to endeavour the ruine of their own Houses and Families. On the other side I know ve∣ry well that I was told some of those of Guienne should possess the Mareschal; that all
the importunity, and all the arguments I used to perswade him to make war in Guienne, was for no other end, but that in case the said Mareschal should perform any brave action, the glory thereof might redound to me, and the success be wholly attributed to my va∣lour and conduct, as in the time of the first troubles, when Monsieur de Burie and I were together; but if I ever entertained any such thought, may God never have mercy on my soul, or other design or desire, but that he might do some great thing, and that I might be with him to lay to my helping hand in some brave Enterprize for his Majesties service, that the King might esteem and love him for ever,Jealousie be∣twixt the Chies. and that the Mareschal might be so sensible of the service I had done him, as to take my Children into his protection, and to assist them in the obteining some advantages from the King; for as for my own part I was resolv'd, if I should live to see an end of the War to retire to my own house, feeling my self old and decay'd both in body and mind; and besides I bless God I had acquir'd honour enough, without needing to deprive another: but it is impossible to eradicate ma∣lice out of the mindes of men, when it has once taken root. They make us think what we never thought, and say what we never said: but I shall wave this discourse to return to my Enterprize upon Mont de Marsan. The same night being returned to St. Maurice, the Mareschal sent to remonstrate to me, that I ought by no means to go to Mont de Marsan; for should I be baffled in the Enterprize, it would be a great disepute to his Army, that I could expect to reap no o∣ther fruit but disgrace from the attempt, and that also he was resolv'd within two dayes to return. I was ready to burst my hoops for spite when I heard this language. I then sent to him Messiers le Vicompte de Labatut, the Chevalier de Romegas, Monsieur de Sa∣vignac, who was one of his own Officers, d' Arblade, and la Mothe Gondrin to remonstrate to, and in my behalf to entreat him not to be angry, and to have patience yet a few days; for as for provisions he saw he had more than they knew what to do withal, and besides he needed but to pass over the Dou to five Hugonots houses that were within the Kings Pale, where we should find victuals sufficient to nourish his Camp a month abou, both the Hugonots and all the Catholicks of those parts having carried all their provisions in thi∣ther; that therefore he would onely be pleased to permit me to go to Mont de Mrsan, and that in order to that Enterprize I would ask no more but two of his Field-pieces only, wherewith to batter the Centry-houses, and little Defences that serv'd the Enemy for Flanckers. They return'd back, and told me, that notwithstanding any thing they could say to him he was resolute to return, but that he was content to lend me the two pieces. In the morning then so soon as every one had got something into his belly, we began to march, Monsieur de Montastrue being come with the two Guns, who had in Commission from the Mareschal to tell me, that he should be very glad I would alter my design, and return back to the Army. I think he did it that in case I should miscarry in the business, he might have that advantage of me, as to say, I told him as much. Nevertheless we set forward, I marching with the Cavalry, and a hundred or sixscore Argoules before, and the five Ensigns after me, and after all Monsieur de Savignac with the two Field-pieces. I met two Letters by the way, writ to me by a Gentlewoman of the Town, in the first whereof she desir'd me by no means to come, for that the Enemy had intelligence of my de∣sign, and that Captain FavasCaptain Fa∣vas. (who is of St. Maurice) was come thither with a hundred or sixscore Horse, and another Captain with some Foot. The second letter met me within half a quarter of a League of the Town, wherein she sent me word, That the Enemy had made a review, and found themselves to be five hundred fighting men compleat, the Inhabitants of the Town compriz'd, so that if I went I should reap nothing but certain disgrace. All which notwithstanding, and that the Gentlewoman and her Husband were Catholicks, and my very good friends; yet being they were not themselves in the City, I could not give credit to what they writ, but march'd on into the sight of the Town which is seated in a Bottom. Being there I caus'd a hundred or sixscore Argoulets to alight to go, and gain the houses that were near unto the Gate, bidding them withal to run on as fast as they could, that they might prevent the Enemy from setting them on fire, which otherwise they had done, some of them being already sallyed out to that intent, and having already apply'd the fire, but being by our Argoulets constrain'd to retire into the Town, they began to play upon them from the Walls. In the mean time whilst we stayed for the coming up of our Foot and the Artillery, I went to pass the River with a Troop of Horse below Mont de Marsan, on that side towards Dacqs, and within Harquebuz shot of the Wall, to go dis∣cover the other side of the Town, and to view the Ditch to see if there were any water in it, that I might pass over the Sieur de Savignac's Ensigns, and give a Scalado on both sides at once.
The River was deep almost to the Sadle-skirts,Mont de Mar∣san discover'd. and we passed over, when being on the further side, we perceiv'd four or five Horse, who were coming to put themselves into the place; but they turn'd short, without it being in our power to take them. I thereupon drew up all my Horse into Battalia, which being done I alighted; and causing Captain Fieux who was of Miradeux only to alight with me, went directly up to the Ditch of the Town. The heat was excessive, and my arms were exceeding heavy, so that I was con∣strain'd to put my self into a little Ditch being able to go no further by reason of the weight of my Arms, and that I was to climb the Ditch, and therefore made Monsieur de Fieux to go on alone, who accordingly went all along by the Graffe of the Town, and in going found a woman squat down behind a little hedge close by the Graffe, whom he made to rise, still going on, for they shot furiously at him, as they did also at me; for from the place where I was it was not above ten paces to the Graffe. At last Captain Fieux rturn'd to me, bringing the Woman along with him, who told us that there was water in the Graffe a Pike deep, as Captain Fieux also assu'd me according to his judgment, by what he had been able to discover, and the Woman told u moreover that it was very deep of mud. I then lost all hope of doing any thing on that side, and knew that we were to fall on all at one place, and leaving Messieurs de Fontenilles and de Madaillan there, re∣turn'd with the Gentleman to repass the River; which as I was foarding over I thought I saw some Ensigns in the Town, and very near the Bridg, which on a sudden I lost sight of, and thought they were the Enemy. I had at my setting out from St. Maurice en∣treated Monsieur de Tilldes that he would go speak to the Mareschal about what Mon∣sieur de Montastruc had told me from him, and to assure him that we had good hopes of carrying the Town; and withal to try if he could perswade him to consent that we should cross the River, and to make him alr his resolution of returning. The said Sieur de Tilladet accordingly went, and immdiately return'd to his own misfortune; for at his return he found me already gone to pass the River, and saw me upon the passage, and on the other side saw our Argoulers who were alighted, ducking and playing at Bo-peep behind the Houses, which made him come down full speed to draw them from behind the Houses, which he did, bringing them out into open view, and making them shoot at the Battle∣ments, which as he was doing, and gallopping along the side of the Ditch to encourage them to shoot: as he was returning back by the same way he had gone by the edge of the Graffe, the Enemy pour'd so violent a storm of shot upon him, that in the end one of them took him in the belly, so that his horse falling at the same time he got away on foot, and wounded as he was, above a hundred paces out of the reach of the Harquebuz shot. He did not at first feel himself wounded,The Sieur de Tilladet mor∣tally wounded. but was afterwards carried into a House without the Town, where two dayes after he died of his wound. I had seen nothing of all this, for I was at that time viewing the other side of the Town; in the mean time the Cap∣tains, Arne, the Baron d' Arbous, l' Estang, with the four Companies of Light-horse, and Monsieur de la Chappelle Lauzieres were on the right hand up the River, within a Harque∣buz shot of the Town. I must now give an account how the Town was taken. Captain Castella with the five Companies who marcht after me, so soon as he came within sight of the Town, which is within Harquebuz shot, seeing that our Argoulets did not behave themselves very well, (for they were evermore creeping behind the houses) he made five or six Ladders which I had caused to be brought in a Cart, to be taken off the Carriage, and to be carried by the Soldiers, when without staying for me, Monsieur de Savignac, the Artillery, or any o∣ther Command, he ran full drive directly up to the Wall; where though the Enemy plyed them very well with shot, they notwithstanding never stopt nor stayd till they came up to the very foot of it, where being come they immediately clapt to three Lad∣ders which were long enough to reach up to the top of the Wall, all the rest being too short, upon which the Captains without more ceremony, having Targets upon their arms, presently began to mount, and what rattle of shot soever the Enemy pour'd upon then never desisted mouning till they were got upon the said Wall, and then the Enemy fled. Our people pursued them by the same way they endeavoured to retire, and ran down af∣ter them, when as they thought to have recover'd the Gate of the other Town to shut it after them, ours were in with them, and fell in pel-mel amongst them. The Enemy then made directly towards the Bridg, all along a great street where they had made a Barricado, which all of thm could not recover, for a great many were cut off by the way. Now as they were making head at the Barricado, Monsieur de Savignac and his people arriv'd, vvho at the same instant that the last of ours vvere got up by the Ladders, ran up thither mounting by the same Ladders first come first serv'd, and so soon as they vvere got in, all ran directly tovvards the Bridg, vvhere upon his arrival one of his Captains
cal'd Escaours vvas slain, vvho vvas one of the bravest men I ever knevv; for I had long been acquainted vvith him. In the end the Enemy abandoned the Barricado, and put themselves into the other Tovvn by the Wicket, my five Ensigns follovved them, and fail'd but very little of entring pel-mel amongst them: but the Enemy made shift to clap to the Wicket, by vvhich means our five Ensigns vvere constrain'd to put them∣selves into a little house close adjoyning to the Gate of the City, vvhere one of the five Captains call'd Mossaron vvas slain. The Enemy shot very fast from the Tovver of the Portal, and ours also from the little house threvv Fagots and Plancks before the Gate, and there it vvas that Captain Mosseron vvas slain, vvhere for all the infinite number of stnes, as well as Harqubuz shot that the Enemy shoured upon them, they forbare not to set fire to the Gate of the said Tovvn. I had (as I have said) seen these Ensigns as I vvas re∣passing the River; but I thought they had been the Enemy, vvhen vve vvere no sooner got over, but an Harquebuzeer on horseback came full speed to tell me, that our five Ensigns vvere in the Tovvn, vvhereupon vvithout staying to see vvhat Monsieur de Savignac vvould do, we set spurs to our horses, and gallopt immediately up to the Gate: (for it was not above four hundred paces.) I there found Monsieur de Savignac's people, some vvith∣in, and some vvithout the Gate, vvho had already made a hole vvide enough to pass one by one underneath. We then all alighted and passed thorough this hole; I had brought with me some Peasants of St. Maurice, who came along with the Artillery, and falling to work upon the Gate, immediately forced it open, but we were all got in before. Our Camp-master Monsieur de Castaneul did not enter with me, for I found him at the end of the Bridg, in a street on the right hand, where he told me that he had been to dis∣cover a house or two that looked into the other Town. There was not a man that durst abide in the great street, for the Tower of the Gate commanded it, he carried me to the two Houses which were close by the water side, and where in one of them I mounted a pair of stairs into a Chamber that looked upon the River, and there caused seven or eight holes to be suddenly made thorough the Wall, on the other side of the Room that looked towards the Town, from whence the Enemy shot so fast; which being done I descended again into the Street, and went into the other House adjoyning to it, and of that into a low Parlour, which had a door out of it, thorough which by five or six steps there was a passage down to the River. The Enemy shot at this door with great fury, and thorough the corner of a little Window I perceiv'd that they were filling some Barrels they had placed upon a Breach of the Wall. Monsieur de Savignac, Monsieur d' Andosielle his Camp∣master, Captain St. Aubin, and another Captain of his (whose name I have forgot) were in the Parlour with me. Monsieur de Cassaneuil was entred into another House, where he found a Tanner a very tall man, and brought him to me, who assur'd me that the water was not above middle deep. I then offer'd this fellow ten Crowns, if he would lead the Soldiers the way over the River, telling him moreover that I would give him a Target of proof for his defence, which he undertook to do. I therefore deliver'd him a Target, but the Rascal presently threw it down, telling me that it was too heavy, and that though he was big and strong, he found himself encumbred with it, and therefore would venture to pass over without. Monsieur de Montastruc who was Master of the Ordnance was also present with me. I saw we must make haste to pass over; for should the Ene∣my once have filled their Barrels, it would be a matter of great difficulty to enter by this Breach; which made me speak to Monsieur de Savignac to call in three or four of his Ensignes; whereupon Monsieur d' Andosielle, St. Aubin, and the other Captain ran into the Street, and fetcht in their Ensigns, for my five were in the little House by the Gate, and so soon as the three Ensigns were come into the Parlour, and a great many of their Soldiers who crowded in after them, I commanded the Ensigns boldly to follow this man, who would lead them the way, telling them that they were by no means to stop till they came to the other side of the River close up to the breach, sending at the same time to the Haquebuzeers who were in the Chamber, that they should ply their shot, to favour the passage of our men; which being done, I suddenly threw open the door, and put out this Tanner, together with a good Soldier, who offered himself to go hand in hand with him, and after these two the three Ensigns, and the three Captains followed after. I put out five or six Harquebuzeers after these, and my self also, with all the Gentlemen who were with me went out after them. We were to go down the formention'd five or six steps, and the Enemy shot with great fury on that side, but my Harquebuzeers in the Chamber held them so short, that they durst not shew their heads. Still more Soldiers ran after down the stairs, and I stood upon the brink of the River, making them believe I would pass over with them, when Monsieur de Montastruc seeing me in that posture, ran into the Street, crying out, O Soldiers, Monsieur de Montluc himself is passing the River; at
which cry the Soldiers who were busie about their plunder,The courage of the Catho∣licks. and those who were in the Street left all, and entred in a crowd into the Parlour, where such as could not come to the stairs leapt down by the sides, and without any manner of regard plung'd into the River, like as one forces in a flock of sheep, insomuch that the River was so cover'd over with men from the one side to the other, that there was no water to be seen. I still stept in to the mid leg into the River, making a shew as if I meant to pass it, as also did Messieurs de Brassac, the Chevalier de Romegas, and the rest of the Gentlemen who were with me. Monsieur de Savignac was there also, and it was no good wading for him, for the tallest Soldier was up to the armpits, and I believe had he gone in it would have taken him up to the chin: for every one knows that he was not of the stature of a Giant: and we were in danger to have lost a great many Soldiers who were little men: but I still call'd out to them to help one another, which they did; and I do verily believe, and have rea∣son to believe so, that had I not unbethought me to make those loop-holes in the Cham∣ber, and to have placed a good many Harquebuzeers there, as I had done, so that their shot continually rattled without intermission, and that they had moreover open'd a win∣dow, through which two or three might fire at once, we had lost above a hundred men: for from the Walls, and from the Barrels, from whence they fir'd at us, it was not a∣bove six paces to the Bank of the River, vvhere our people landed. The Ensigns and Cap∣tains entred the Barrels, which so soon as I pereiv'd, I immediately sent to those in the Chamber to give over shooting, by reason they might as well kill our own people as the Enemy. To supply which our Harquebuzeers who follovved the Ensigns shot at those vvithin, as vvell as they at them, and being cme up to the Barrels, our Captains laid hold on the brims of them, vvhich vvere not half full of earth, the Enemy not having had time to fill them, and presently I savv them all tumbled dovvn on our side, and the En∣signs and Captains leapt into the Tovvn, vvhereupon the Enemy vvere suddenly put to rout,The Town a∣ken. and fled directly to the Castle. Our people pursued and kill'd a great number of them by the vvay, vvhen so soon as I savv them enter'd I return'd into the Street, so vveary as in my life I never felt my self in such a condition, by vvhich I very vvell savv that I vvas no more to think of bearing arms, for I thought above ten times that I should have fainted, and falln dovvn in the street. There is no remedy, vve cannot be tvvice. The Chevalier de Romegas and Captain Fabian my Son supported me by the arms to Ion∣ca's House, where I found his Wife, who presently made me a Bed ready and put me in∣to it. I found that I had sweat through my Buffe Collar, insomuch that my very arms were wet with it; we had brought no Baggage with us, but had left it at St. Maurice, forasmuch as I my self had no very great hopes of bringing about my design, neither had I any great reason to hope it; wherefore my servants were fain to dry my Shirt that I had on, and all my other cloaths, which were almost in as bad a pickle, and so soon as the Che∣valier Romegas, my Son, and the other Gentleman had left me in the hands of my Ser∣vants, they departed to go fall upon the Castle; when at their going away I said to this brave Chevalier,Monsieur de Montluc's words to the Chevalier de Romegas. I have seen the time when for such a dayes work as this I should not have quitted either Cask or Corslet, and had there been any appearance of danger, I might perhaps have passed over the night in this Estate; but there is no remedy, you young men must do what we old men cannot. Having been in bed about half an hour, and all my cloaths being dry, I got up again, and fell to dressing my self, which as I was doing there came in Monsieur de Savignac, Captain Fabian, and some other Gentlemen with them, to tell me that those of the Castle would surrender, and to know if I would consent, that they should upon the Capitulation receive them to Quarter. Perceiving therefore that Monsieur de Sa∣vignac and Captain Fabian had a great desire to save Favas, and to give him fair quarter, because he had the reputation of a good Soldier, and a gallant man; I told them they might grant them what conditions they should think fi, and that I would sign the Ca∣pitulation; though inwardly I had a mind to make a dispatch: which was the reason, that so soon as they were gone from me, I sent a Gentleman after to speak secretly to the Soldiers,The Sieur de Montluc causes them to be all slain. and some of the Captains, that during the Parly they should take their opportu∣nity to enter in on one side or another, and to kill them all: for that we must revenge the death of the Gentlemen who had been so barbarously massacred at Navarreins, being that contrary to Article, and the publick faith they had stab'd the Sieur de St. Colombe, and seven or eight others, who had surrendred upon conditions of Quarter at Orthez at the time when Monsieur de Terride was taken. The Enemy did this execution under pre∣text, that they were the Queen of Navarre's Subjects; but if the King offer to touch any one of her Subjects, they presently say he cannot do it; all things must be allowed to these people, and nothing to us; but I hope the time will come when the Dice shall turn, that we may pay them in their own Coin.
I could not have committed this execution to a better hand than to this Genleman, he being Cousin-German to the Baron de Pordeac, who was one of those that were massacred; and he had no sooner spoken to two or three of the Captains, and to the Soldiers, but that they presently ran to seek out for Ladders, which clapping to a Canton of the Base-Court on the left hand by the Galleries, whilst the others were capitulating at the Gate, they there entred and kill'd all they found within,Captain Favas aved. Captain Favas who was making con∣ditions for them only excepted, whom Monsieur de Savignac and my Son Fabian, so soon as they saw the disorder pulled to them, which was well for him, who had otherwise in∣fallibly gon to pot with the rest. Our Horse likewise who were on the right hand per∣ceiving that our people were within the Town, gallopped a little up the River, where they found a Foard, which though it was very deep they notwithstanding passed over, and ran directly to the Castle, on that side by the Religieux, where coming up just at the time when five and twenty or thirty threw themselves out at the Windows, they sav'd those also, otherwise there had hardly been any one left to carry the news, but Captain Favas only. And thus the Town was taken; of which I immediately sent an account to the Mareschal, and in the morning went my self to vvait upon him, vvhere he promised me to come up the next day vvith all the Army, and I presently return'd back to Mont de Marsan. Accordingly in the morning the Mareschal came at the time when I was taking the best order I could to preserve the Town from being further sackt, but I could do little good in it; and as I was going out at one Gate to meet him, he enterd by the other; for I had much ado to get out, by reason all his Army were got into the Streets, especially the Horse, by whom I was told that he was gone directly to the place where our people had entred, where having seen all, and heard how all things had passed, he said, Here was more of fortune than reason. Many there were also who made a shew of rejoycing at our success, that in their hearts would have been glad I had receiv'd a baffle. At last with much a∣do I was no sooner got out, but that I was told he was already entred in: which made me return, where I was again above half an hour so enclosed amongst the Carriages, that I could not possibly get out, but in the end I made shift to get to his lodging. His Mares∣chal de Camp quarter'd all the Cavalry in the Villages without the Town beyond the River, the Infantry in the Suburbs, and the Gentlemen in the Town. I thought this success would perswade both him,Monsieur d' Anville's re∣solution to re∣turn. and his Council also, to pass the River, and enter into Bearn, which we had infallibly carried, and compell'd the Count either to fight, or to shut himself up in Navarreins; but he positively told me, That he would return to look after his own business, in his own Government, and that he would not go to engage himself before Towns in Bearn, having no Artillery to bater withal; and that he would not that either the King or any other should reproach him, that he had spent his time in other Enterprizes than his own: that he had told the King at his departure what he intended to do,The Sieur de Montluc's ad∣vice to the Mareschal. which he would also put in execution, considering that here he was only to fight with the Walls of the Towns of Bearn. I then remonstrated to him, that the Count would infallibly take one of these wayes, either to hazard a Battel, which I thought he would never dare to do, or to leave the Country so soon as he should hear of our coming, or else would shut up himself in his Fortress; the last of which courses I conceiv'd he would not willingly take, but would rather choose to retire: and that also we might easily have Canon from Dacqs and Tholouze, and that this being done, the Province of Guienne would be at peace, that of Bearn reduc'd, and all those in Languedoc would tremble at the report of our arms: that if on the other side, should we follow in the said Montgommery's Rear, we should certainly trap him in one place or another, in case we should determine to pursue him where ever he should go to that effect. All this I represented to the said Mareschal: but he, half angry, and im∣portun'd by those Gentlemen about him, objected difficulty upon difficulty, and would by no means give ear to my advice. Now he had sent the Baron de l' Arbous towards A∣getmau to enquire news of the Enemy, which Baron sent him word by a Gentleman call'd Repeyre of Monsieur de Gramont's Company, of the disorder in which the Count de Mont∣gommery had retreated into Bearn, and how his Artillery had for almost two dayes toge∣gether been abandoned upon the road to Orthez; and the Mareschal himself was the first from whom I heard it, and afterwards from others, as I said before. The day before he intended to depart in order to his return, I had notice given me that he had dispatched away the Sieur de Lussan towards the King, without saying a word to me; which Lussan was my Enemy, because I would not suffer him to be Governour of Lectoure. I thought it very strange that he would say nothing to me of it, and pre∣sently apprehended that he had not made choice of this person to report any good of me;
for I knew he was not very well satisfied with me, forasmuch as he alwayes held his Consultations apart, calling no one to his Counsels but Mosieur de Ioyeuse, Messieurs de Bellegarde, the Father and the Son, and Monsieur de la Croissette his Mareschal de Camp. It is not therefore to be wondred at if I took it very ill that I was not admitted to the Council, and that nothing was communicated to me, considering that I commanded the Vaunt-guard, and was the second person in the Army. But it was so carried, and I had reason to be highly offended at it, very well discerning that these Consultations were held at our expence. When I saw then that the resolution was taken to return, I went in the Evening to the Mareschal's Lodging, where I gave him to understand in the gentlest terms I could, (for after that manner I was to proceed) That I would send my Son to surrender up the Government to the King;The Sieur de Montluc offers to lay down his Government of Guienn. for that seeing he went away I very well saw, that all the fu∣ry of the War would fall upon me, and that I had not forces to resist and hinder the Enemy from doing what he pleased in the King's Territories, by which means all the honor and reputation I had acqui'd in the precedent troubles, in preserving the Pro∣vince of Guienne, would be lost and forfeited in this; that therefore I had much ra∣ther another should bear the blame than I, who never had other design than to end my dayes with honour, and nothing more. To which he return'd me answer, That I ought not to do it, neither ought I either to stomack any thing from the King, or to be angry with my self; and that I knew very well, that although the King had con∣ferr'd upon him the Command of Guienne, as well as the other Provinces, he did not nevertheless meddle with it at all, but permitted me to govern as before, and should be very unwilling to usurp upon my Authority. I made answer, That this was an effect of his own generosity, and good nature, but that his Parent was so large, as did mani∣festly derrogate from mine, and that whenever he would he might command as pleased him, without leaving me the least power at all, no more than the poorest Cadet in Gas∣cony. To which he replyed, That it was true, but that my valour and experience were so considerable, as would ever make me sought after and courted. From this light foun∣dation it arose, that I quitted my Government because I would not obey him; and after this manner it was reported to the King by the fore-named Captain Lussan, or another that was sent to Court presently after him:The Kiing dis∣satisfied with the Sieur de Montluc. and this was it that made the King so angry with me for quitting my Government, they having possest him, that it was only upon this account, which I no more thought of than of cutting my own throat: but I was born under a Planet to be evermore subject to calumny. I gave the Mareschal an account to the contrary, when, as sick as I was, I went to him to Tholouze, so soon as I heard he was come thither, to make him a voluntary and free tender of all obedience, and that with∣out any letter or command from the King, the Queen, or the Monsieur. By this it is easie to judg whether the difference that grew betwixt us arose from thence. So it was that I suspected some foul play, forasmuch as a certain person had sent to Mon∣sieur de Noé Lieutenant to Monsieur de Fontenilles,The Sieur de Montluc threat∣ned with a stab. to come and speak with him about an affair that concern'd my life. Whereupon the said Sieur de Noé departed from Panjas, or else from Noguarol, posting away in all hast, without telling any one but Monsieur de Fontenilles onely; and at his return finding us in Mont de Marsan, told Monsieur de Fon∣tenilles and me, that a man who never stir'd out of the Mareschal's Chamber, and might hear all that was spoken, had said to a friend of his these words; Montluc does nothing but eternally vex and importune the Mareschal, but he will one day be laid dead upon the floor with a stab. Immediately hereupon this person came to the House of him who sent for Monsieur de Noé, and told it him, that he might acquaint me vvith it, vvhich vvas the occasion that Monsieur de Noé had been sent unto to go vvhere he did. Monsieur de Va∣lence my Brother was at this time at Gaure, a place of his own within three leagues of Mont de Marsan, to whom I sent twice to beg of him with joyned hands that he would come to me; but he would by no means be entreated to it, what excuses he made I have now forgot. My design was to have had him discourse this affair with the Mareschal in private betwixt them two only, where I intended to have dealt so candidly with him, as to have nam'd the man who had spoke it; and that was one of his own people: but it rested there, for I would not intrust the secret to any other: and although I took no notice of it, yet it stuck damnably in my stomack, and I have since wondred how I could command my self,Fear the con∣comitant of old age. by which I learn to know, that Age deprives a man of his heat: for in my younger dayes the greatest Prince upon earth could not have made me swallow such a pill. The older we grow, the more our blood steals from our heart, and it appears that the nearer we ap∣proach to death, the more we fear it. It may be notwithstanding that this person might make this story of his own head, and that the Mareschal never thought of any such thing.
The next morning I attended him at his rising. I had before day heard the Drums beat in the fields, by break of day they began to march, and so soon as the sun was up I went and knokt at his Chamber door, where a Valet de Chambre came out and told me he was not yet awake, though I had been told below, that Messieurs de Ioycuse, the youn∣ger Bellegarde, and la Croisette were all gone in before. Nevertheless I waied half an hour or more at the door, and in that time knockt three or four times, but no body would speak, though the Valet de Chambre, who came out to me, was gone in again, and that I had intreated him if the Mareschal was awake to tell him that I was there. At last being ashamed to wait so long at his door, which never a Prince in Christendom would have suffered me to do, I was constrain'd to go walk in a little Garden of the House, not so slendely attended however, but that I had with me two hundred Gentlemen or more of the best Families of the Country, who were as sensible of the affront, or more than I, and said a great many passionate things to me; which though I knew very well to be spoken out of the affection and respect they bore to me, yet as I was the oldest, I conceiv'd I ought to be the most discreet, and to consider that I should put many things in hazard, should I come to an absolute rupture with him. I waited above a long hour, what at his Chamber door, and in the Garden, and in the end came Monsieur de Bellegarde, who seeing the Gentlemen asked them where I was: They told him I was in the Garden thorough which he was to go to enter into the Hall; he then came to me, and asked me why I did not go into the Mareschal's Chamber, to which I made answer, That I had been there, and had knocked several times, but that no body would speak. He then told me, that Monsieur de Ioycuse, his Son, and Captain Croisette had been there above an hour; whereupon I told him, That I did not understand why the Mareschal should make me dance attendance at his Chamber door, that I had never given him occasion to use me after that manner, and that I had the honor from the King, the Queen, and the Monsieur all the while they stayed in Guienne, that their Chamer doors were never refused me, that I was not of a condition to be so treated, but that since their Majesties service was interested in it I would make no breach. He was very much troubled at it, for he and I had been good companions and friends, and there had never been the least division betwixt us till death made the separa∣tion. He then went and knocked at the Chamber door, which was immediately open'd to him, and as suddenly clapt to again upon me, at which all the Gentlemen advised me to return to my Lodging, and to come up no more; but I was resolved to have pati∣ence, for which I have since a hundred times wondred at my self. The said Mareschal stayed yet above a quarter of an hour before he came out, after Monsieur de Bellegarde went in, and at last he came, where I forced my self to give him the good-morrow, and attend∣ed him to Mass, where by the way I intreated him to leave me one of the Companies of Monsieur de Savignac's Regiment, or two hundred Harquebuzeers, till such time as I had remov'd the grain that was in the Town, that the Enemy might not make their ad∣vantage of it, therewith to victual Navarreins, there being by computation of Monsieur de Cumies, and of those he had employed to examine it, twelve hundred Wagon loads of all sorts of grain in the Town, as also by the account of the Providores, who had been joyn'd with his Officers to look into that affair. For this City serves as a Granary to all the Landes, and the Basques Country, from whence, to the detriment of France, they trans∣port their grain into Spain, and it is said to be one of the best Corn-Markets in the King∣dom. He then mounted to horse,Mont de Mar∣san the Gra∣nary of Gasco∣y and I went to wait upon him out of Town, and in so doing found my self alone, not one of the Gentlemen that were with me once offering to mount, to pass that Complement upon him; but whether they did it because their Horses were not ready, or that they had no great mind to go, I know not, and so he departed. Immediately after his departure I dispatcht away Captain Fabian my Son with letters to the King, to surrender the Government into his Majesties hands, but when he came to Bourg de Dieu, he was taken by the Enemy, and there lost his Leters, which was the cause that he could not deliver his Majesty the reasons that mov'd me to quit my Govern∣ment, which made his Majesty exceedingly offended with me, thinking it was because I would not obey the Mareschal d' Anville, as Captain Lussan had given him to understand. A thing that never entred into my thought; but I foresaw the Tempest, and would therefore retire to give others leave to do better. The thing was evident enough by the report of several as well of the one as the other Religion,A discourse up∣on the retreat of the Mares∣chal d'Anville. that had the Mareschal passed the River the Count de Montgommery had infal∣libly return'd from whence he came; for to have put his Army into Nvarreins he could not do it, by reason there was no provision, and in the other places of Bearn yet much less. For which reason it would necessarily have followed, that necessity and famine would have compell'd him to return headlong to the place from whence he came, and to aban∣don
the Country to us; when it would have been a thing of no manner of difficulty for us to have defeated him either in front or rear, nay the very Peasants would have disor∣der'd him, who would have taken heart seeing us so near, and never have suffer'd him to pass the River. And if he himself will confess the truth, as others who were with him have done, he ever gave himself for lost, till he heard that the Mareschal retir'd: and to think of fighting a Battel he could never do it, considering the odds of Forces we had against him. He alwayes said, that he had two great Mastifs at his breech, and that there∣fore it would be strange he should escape, but that he would sell his skin as dear as he could. On the other side, that I should imagine the Mareschal retreated out of cowardize, no man living can say that; for to this hour that was never reported of him; he is of two brave a Race, and has ever given proof to the contrary, and I esteem him a great Captain, who is able to do a great deal of good, and a great deal of harm whenever he pleases, and although some have censur'd and aspest him, because he was so near the Admiral, I, for my part, had never any such opinion of him. I know not what he may do hereafter, I never knew him other than a faithful servant of the Kings: but he ought not to have u∣sed me after this manner. I had seen too much boyl'd and rost in my time. It was not then fear that made him to retire, for his Forces were so much greater than those of the Enemy, that we had defeated the Count de Montgommery with our Cavalry alone, and our Argoulets, which we would have dismounted, without ever engaging our Foot in the business. For at the Battel of Ver Monsieur de Duras had thrice as many Foot as the Count de Montgommery, and a great many more Horse, better men, and better Officers, and we were not so many Horse by two thirds as we were here, and yet we defeated them and won the Battel. It cannot therefore be said that he did it out of fear of being beaten, considering he had so little reason: but it was our misfortune that it was fixt in the Ma∣reschal's fancy, and more in that of his Council, that he should ruine himself before the Towns of Bearn, and do no good, not knowing the sterility of the Country, as we did, and that Monsieur de Terride had so devour'd all the provisions of those parts, that there could be none left for the Count de Montgommery had he stayed there. Had it pleased God that the Mareschal had not been so bent upon returning into Languedoc, to pursue his own designs in those parts, or that his Council had been of an opinion contrary to him, and that he had resolv'd to pass the River, it had been a happy thing, and of infinite ad∣vantage to us: and on the contrary turn'd very much to our prejudice; for he went and engag'd himself before Mazeres,The Siege of Mazeres. where he lost a great number of the best Soldiers he had, and almost ruin'd his Army, without being able to make any other attempt. By which means there was nothing done of any moment either in Languedoc or Guienne, but utterly undoing the people, our own Forces having in all parts done as much mischief, as the Ene∣my themselves. Neither was it possible to be avoided, by reason of the great number of Gens d'arms, Light-horse, Argoulets, and Foot that we had, who must all of necessity live upon free quarter. Thus did all the Mareschal's Forces, which were sufficient both to defeat Montgommery, and afterwards to make head against the Admiral, moulder away and vanish without performing any thing worthy to be repeated. I have ever observ'd, that when Almighty God is not pleased that matters shall succeed as men desire, he infatuates their Councels, and turns the will of the Chief, and of his Counsellors quite contrary to what they ought to do. His name be praised for all, since it was his Divine pleasure to have things go as they did. There is no one, after the people, that smarts for it but I, because I incur'd the Mareschal's disfavour by speaking the truth. He ought in reason to have lov'd me more than those that counsell'd him to do contrary to what I advis'd him; but 'tis the Law of Bearn,Law of Bearn. The beaten must bear the blame; for the King has approv'd, and ratified all that the Mareschal did, and disallowed and con∣demned all my doings, and indeed I declin'd towards my setting, and was no more a∣dor'd like a rising Sun, and yet I am as innocent and unblameable of that fault (if fault there was) as I had never been born into the world, of which I desire no other testimo∣ny than the three Estates of Guienne, and Languedoc which is neighbour to it, who know how all things passed, and have smarted for the miseries of Guienne, and dare moreover stand to the depositions of all the Captains, three or four excepted, who were of the Council, for those were the cause of the evil. I am not the first who for well doing have been paid with this Coin, of which I have given Exemples enow in this Book, and find it a good matter to be a great Lord; for a little Companion as I am must alvvayes bear the burthen, and is evermore subject to the forementioned Lavv of Bearn. The said Mares∣chal had reason, I confess, to have a mind to employ his men and his money in Langue∣doc, and I had also reason to desire him in Guienne. If he vvas not able to undertake for them both, vvhy did he cause Guienne to be inserted in his Patent? That vvhich vve
might have done in fifteen dayes, to wit, the defeating or driving away Montgommery would have been of greater advantage, than the taking of three or four paltry Towns in Lnguedoc. But I have said enough of this dispute, which rin'd the Kings affairs in those parts; I shall therefore pursue my discourse to tell you what hapned after. The departure of the said Mareschal pu our affairs into very great disorder, and very much encourag'd our Enemies. As for my own part, in five Companies that I had there was not left two hundred men, by reason they were stoln away, with what booty they had got, every man to his own house.The inconve∣nience of ma∣king war with Soldiers, Na∣tives of the same Country where the Scene of war lies. This is the inconvenience of making war with the people of the Country. They must go see Wife, they must go carry home their Baggage, and be∣sides every one has a Cousin, a Brother, or a Friend with the Enemy, to whom he has a regard, and of whom he has care. And as to the Cavary we had, they could not sub∣sist in lss than five or six leagues of the Town, by reason the Enemy had devour'd one par of the provisions of the Country, and our own people the other, and the Country of it self was barren. However I stayed four or five dayes after the Mareschals departure, causing three or four hundred Waggon loads of grain to be remov'd from thence, which I carried to Euse, and other adjacent places, that the Enemy might not therewith vi∣ctual their Towns in Bearn: but I must have carried away fifteen hundred load or more to have remov'd it all; and had my five Ensigns been compleat, as at my coming thither, I would have engag'd my self in it, though I was certain not to be reliev'd, for I have committed as great follies in my life as that, and hitherto (blessed be God) never met with any misadventure; nor did his Majesties affairs ever suffer by those hazards. I then ret'd towards Agenois, leaving the Seur de Montespn, Son to the Baron de Gondrin, with his Father's Company of Gens-d'arms in Euse, together with another new Com∣pany of Foot, that was then raising in those parts, not to endure a Siege, for the Town was naught; but only a litle to favour the Country, and that we might not seem total∣ly to abandon it, though we knew very well that his staying there would signifie little or nothing.Monsieur de Montespan in Euse. I sent Monsieur de Fontenilles also into the Country of Bigorre, to see if he could do any thing on that side to amuze the Enemy, but all this was no remedy for so great a discase. I shall not here take upon me to give a particular account of the defeat of Captain Arne, and the Baron de l' Arbous, for as much as I did not place them there, where they were defeated; but so it was, that I sent however to Captain Arne to tell him, That he was a Soldier, and must needs know that in the place where he was he could expect nothing but disaster, and that therefore I conceiv'd he would do well to retire to Auch, which was an enclosed Town;Captain Arne flain, but he sent me word, that he was placed there, and was there∣fore resolved rather to dye than to stir a foot from thence. It was not above four dayes af∣ter I had given him this advice that news was brought me of his defeat, and two dayes after that of his death, which was a great damage to the Kings service, and a great loss to his Country; for he was a fine Gentleman, and a valiant man, and one of whom we had as great an esteem, as of any Captain whatever of Guienne. Now soon after the Mareschal being about Mazers, and I in Agenois, the Count de Montgommery did like the Wolves whom hunger forces out of the Woods, and came into Armagnac, by little and little moving towards Condommois. He had caused three pieces of Canon to be brought, and two Culverines to batter Euse, knowing very well that there was no body in it but Monsieur de Montespan with his Father's Company of Gens-d' arms, and the new-rais'd Company of Foot that I had sent him. So soon therefore as the Ar∣tillery was come to Noguarol, that he had sent to discover the Enemy, and that the Hu∣gonot Kindred and Friends he had, had given him notice of the preparation against him, he sent me word of it. I had no body to send to reinforce him, and less power of my self to relieve him, neither was there any relief to be expected; for the Mareschal was either lying before Mazeres, or else retir'd to Tholouze. I therefore sent him word, That I would not he should follow the exemple of Captain Arne, and that it was enough we had lost one brave and valiant Captain, and one Company of Gens-d'arms, without losing two; that therefore he should retire and take along with him all the Priests and Religious people of the Town, together with all the rich Catholick Merchants, and escape to Lectoure. which he accordingly did; for although I had sent to surrender my Goverment, I did not for all that forbear to do all that lay in my power for the service of my King and Country, but raised five or six Companies about Ville-neufue and Florence, leaving one old and two new Companies at the said Florence, and four (with that of the Governnor Monsieur de Panjas) at Lectoure, which were enow, by reason that all the Gentry of Armagnac with their Families were retir'd into that place, which made the Town so full that no more could lodg there: and these things being done I came to Agen, where I heartned the Inhabitants the best I could, and stayed there for some dayes. The Count de Montgommery
then came to Euse, where so soon as he was arriv'd the Hugonots of Candom (who had liv'd at home under protection of the Kings Edict, having evermore hypocritically profest not to take arms, relying upon his Majesties Royal word, and had been used with greater humanity than the Catholicks themselves) betook themselves to arms, and went to seek out the Count de Montgmmery at Euse, who durst advance no further, nor had not done, had I had but four Companies onely to put into Condom.The Count de Montgommery at Condom. But they all assur'd him that I had no men, nor means to raise any to make head against him, and that therefore he might securely come, and so they allur'd him to Condom. These were the fine fruits of the fine Edict they perswaded the King to make, that provided the Hugonots stirr'd not from their Houses, no one should demand any thing of them. I have spoken of this suffici∣ently elsewhere; though, if I would, I have a great deal more to say, and of greater im∣portance, but it would do no good, for the King would take no order in it, since those a∣bout him will have it as it is. A few dayes after we heard news of the Victory God had given the King, thorough the valour and conduct of the Monsieur, Brother to the King, and the Captains he had a∣bout him, and that the Princes and the Admiral, with the remains of the Battail of Mon∣contourThe Victory of Moncontour. were moving towards Limosi; every one that came, telling us that they marcht directly to la Charité, which was the reason that I sent for Monsieur de Leberon at Li∣bourne, to come with four Companies he had there and at St. Foy, to port St. Maries and Aguillon. He had before sent me one, which I had left at St. Sever, before it was lost under Captain Espiemont d' Avila, and I had also sent another to Dacqs under Cap∣tain Teyssander de Florance, and the said Espiemont was constrain'd to retire to Dacq after the fine piece of work the Captain of the Castle had made, who would have dis∣charg'd himself upon Captain Montaut, and was upheld by some about the Mareschal, who were related to him. But I referre it to the truth, which those of the Town did no wayes conceal, and never after receive him. The City of Agen and the Clergy there, had set a foot a Company of two hundred Strangers at their own charge, commanded by one Captain Raphaël an Italian, who was married in the Town. The said Count de Montgommery remained six or seven weeks at Condom, wherein he committed an error; for had he followed his blow he had put a great many to their trumps: but who is it that is never mistaken? The Mareschal's Camp was at Tholouze, Granade, and thereabouts; they had no great fancy to bite one another, for they never so much as gave one another an Alarm. The Mareschal had put out Monsieur de Fonte∣nilles from the place to which I had sent him, and taken from him the Command I had given him in those parts, and order'd me to be about Beaumont de Lomagne, openly u∣surping upon my Government, according to his Patent. He sent likewise to the Barn de Gondrin, Signicur de Montespan (whose Father lay sick at Lectoure) to come to him, giving orders every where that none should obey me in the least; for that I was no more the Kings Lieutenant, but that he was the man. He writ twice also to Monsieur de Ma∣daillan, that he should not fail to bring his Company to him, who both times returned him answer, That the Company was mine, and none of his, and that it was not in his power to bring it to him; and all the affronts he could put upon me, he did. This nothing con∣cern'd me in my own particular, for what I did was in order to his Majesties service, and for the conservation of the Country. Behold how particular animosities occasion a gene∣ral ruine! notwithstanding I did not for all this forbear to act, as if I had still been the King's Lieutenant; and it was requisite for the poor Country's interest, that I should not regard the injuries he put upon me; for my despite might have done a great deal of mischief. Being the Son of a Constable of France, and himself a Mareschal, I did by no means disdain to be commanded by him, had he been pleased to command me, and that he would have done his duty.Division be∣twixt the Ma∣reschal d' An∣ville and the Sieur de Mont∣luc. But so it was, that he as much as in him lay traverst all my designs for the conservation of Guienne, which stood in much greater need than Lan∣guedoc. In the mean time news was brought us, that the Princes and the Admiral were in Perigord, and took the way of Quercy to retire to Montauban, by which I very well understood, that they came to take MontgommeryThe Princes move towards Montgommery. along with them, to reinforce them∣selves with his power, without which it would be a matter of very great difficulty for them to march thorough so many leagues of the Country. I have since a hundred and a hun∣dred times wondred, that so many great and prudent Leaders, as were in the Monsieurs Army, should pitch upon so ill a resolution, as to fall to the besieging of places, in stead of pursuing the Princes, who were routed, and reduc'd to that exremity, that they had no possible means to set themselves up again, insomuch that had the people had Forces to pur∣sue them,Soldiers use to spin out a war. they had with great facility been all cut to pieces. 'Tis said that we our selves who bear arms, spin out wars in length, and stretch the thong to the utmost, as men of
the lon Robe do Suits in Law at the Palace. Let the Devil take all such. I for my part had never any such inention, and can say with truth, that never a Kings Lieutenant in France has made more Hugono's pass the Knife and the Halter than I have done: which was not the way to prolong the war. But to reurn to my subject, having heard which way the Princes took, without de∣claring my intention to any one, being in Monsieur de Gondrin's Lodging at Lctoure, I sent for Mnsieur de Panjas, the Chevalier de Romegas, and the Chevalier my Son, Mon∣sieur de Gondrin was sick, and there told them That I was old, and not able to undergo the labour, in case we should be besig'd; that therefore to ease my self, I would remit the care to govern the Town, as to the Civil Rgiment thereof, to Monsieur de Panjas, and as to what concrn'd the defence of it, and what should be necessary thereunto, I would transfer the Charge thereof to the said Chevalier de Romega, and the Chevalier my Son, who had both een engag'd in the Sige of Mala, the mst furius Siege that ever was since Artillery was ist known in the world; by which they must needs better know what belong'd to defence, and what was fit to be done, than I my self; and being Companions and Brothers of the Order of St. Jhn's of Hierusalem, would also agree so much the better together. That herein the Che∣valier my Son should obey that of Romegas, both in regard he was the elder, and also by reason he had commanded at sea, in three or four Naval Engagements, where my Son had been with him (in truth he was a man of as much curage and bravery as any I ever knew) and that in the mean time I would go to Agen,The Commen∣dation of the Chevair de Romegas. to take the best Order I could for the defence of that City. They all approv'd of my determination, and the two Chevaliers would not make the Quarters but hand in hand together, beginning from the very instant to redouble the work of the Fortification, and Mnsieur de Panjas as Governor provided them all things they requi'd. The next morning I went to Agen, Monsieur de Valence my Brother being retir'd into Lctoure. I had a day or two before sent my Wife and my two Daughters to Bordeaux, and when I came to Agen Monsieur de Cassaneuil to whom I had committed the Charge of Ville-neufue and the adjacent Country, (although I had conferr'd the Go∣vernment of it upon Captain Paulhac the elder, yet they agreed very well together) sent me word joyntly with Captain Paulhac, that the Princes were come to Montauban, and were resolv'd immediately to fall upon Ville-neufue. Whereupon I immediately sent les Peroux his Company and another, to two new Companies they had already within the place, with about a hundred Haquebuzeers belonging to the said Captain Paulhac the Governor, and some thirty or fourty Gentlemen of those parts, who were retir'd with them into the Town. I then return'd to Lectoure, where I did not stay above three or four dayes; for neither my age, nor my indisposition would permit me to stay long in a place;The City of Agen in fear. where news was brought me, that the City of Agen was entred into a sudden fear, and that every one began to truss up their Baggage to be gne, so that the Town was in danger to be wholly abandoned. This news was brought me overnight, which I commu∣nicated to all the Gentlemen in the Town, telling them that I would go in the morning, which they were all contented I should, provided I would return back to the said Le∣ctoure; for to engage my self in Agen would, they said, be the greatest folly that was ever committed by man, it being plainly to be discern'd by every one, that the two Armies of the Enemy would infallibly attaque that place. I then assur'd them, that I would not engage my self there: whereupon they asked me, if I thought it convenient that they should write a Letter to the Mareschal in the behalf of all the Gentry of Armagnac, to en∣treat him to come with his whole Army to fight Montgommery at Condom, before the Ar∣mies should joyn, assuring him that the said Montgommery would never engage himself in the Town, which was not tenable, and to be entred in several places at pleasure, and to make him an offer every man to die with him for his Majesties service, and the resettlement of every one in his own house.The Gentle∣men of Gascony send an Envoy to the Mares∣chal d' Anville. To which I return'd them answer, that I did highly approve of it, and that they could do no less, than to send a Gentleman to him to implore his assistance; who therefore made choice of Monsieur de la Mothe Gondrin for their Envoy. I would bait in the morning before I went, because it was five long leagues from thence to Agen, and the worst way in Winter in the world. Being we were at this time in fear, I had writ to Monsieur de Montferran of Agen, who liv'd out of Town, that he must needs make all the means he possibly could, to bring us four or five hundred Harquebuzeers; to which he return'd me answer that in eight dayes he would bring a thousand before Agen;Monsieur de Montferran's ofer. which made me, though I knew very well, that the Mares∣chal took no delight in my Letters, however to write to him (for a man must wave a par∣ticular in a great concern) sending Monsieur de Montferran's Letter enclosed within mine, and assuring him upon my honor to bring another thousand to brush Montgommery, for I had a very good mind to be at him.
During these postings to and fro,The Princes at Montauban. the Princes sojourn'd at Montauban and the adjoyn∣ing Country, as they had good need to do; for they had not a horse that was able to set one foot before another, as several who were with them have confessed to me since, having been constrain'd to leave above four hundred by the wayes as they came, by reason they had no means to get them shod. And just as I had din'd there came another Messenger to me from Agen, who had set out from thence at midnight, to give me notice that the Merchants began to talk of getting their wares out of Town, but that the Sieur de Lande and the Consuls would keep them from doing it, till such time as they should receive an answer to the Letter they had sent me, and as I was taking horse, some body, I cannot tell who, came and read me the Letter the Gentlemen had writ to the Mareschal, which I did not much mind, my thoughts being wholly taken up with the concern of Agen: but I told them, That I thought it was well, but that nevertheless they should shew it to Monsieur de Valence, to see if there was nothing in it that might give the Mareschal offence; and so got on horseback, making all the haste I could to Agen. Being come thither I found every one in the greatest fear imaginable; the Church men, the Counsellors, all the Pre∣sidial Court, and the Merchans busie, packing up to be gone. I was no sooner alighted but that immediately the Sieurs de la Lande, de Nort, their Sons, and several others came and told me that all the whole City were at their wits end. I thereupon bad them forth∣with to repair to the Town Hall, and to call thither all the Chief men of the City, the Clergy, and Magistracy, and to give me notice so soon as ever they were met together, for I would go speak with them. They accordingly did so, neither did they need to use many entreaties, for rich and poor, every one ran to see me, and to hear what I would ad∣vise them to do. When so soon as I came into the Hall (which was so full that five or six Gentlemen I had brought along with me had much ado to crowd in) I plac'd my self in the middest of them, to the end that every one might hear me, and spake to them to this effect. Gentlemen, YOu have twice in one day advertiz'd me,The Sieur de Montluc's Ha∣rangue to those of Agen. that the greatest part of the Inhabitants of this City are upon the point to forsake it, and to retire themselves to Bordeaux, Tholouze, and other places of safety; and in short, that your whole City was in fear. I see very well that this apprehension has seiz'd you upon a conceit you have taken that I would abandon you in such a necessity, and that I had retir'd my self to Lectoure, because it is a good place: which I have reason to take very unkindly at your hands, forasmuch as you have never heard that either in Italy, or in any other place I have ever done act which ought to render me suspected, that fear ever made me betake my self to strong places; but, on the contrary, have ever engag'd my person in the weakest and least tenable to make head against the Enemy. My renown is not so little in the World, nor confin'd to Guienne alone: I am reputed for such throughout all Italy, and through all France. And now that I am going down into the Grave, can you imagine my good friends) that I would at one clap lose what I have with so much sweat and blood been one and fifty years, that I have born arm, in gaining? You must re∣resolve upon three things; First, to throw away all apprehension that may have surpriz'd you, and tread it under foot, that it may never rise again: Secondly, to agree amongst your selves to be all of one mind and will, and not to spare your Estates in what I shall direct you, speedily and diligently to provide all that shall be necessary for the defence of your City: and thirdly, to pay an absolute obedience to six or eight of your Corpo∣ration whom I shall choose for you, or that you shall make choice of your selves, to take care as well for the fortifying, as furnishing provisions, and all things necessary for your defence. Which three things, if you shall think fit to grant me, I do swear to you by Almighty God, holding up my hand, That I will live and die with you; and moreover do engage (such is the hope and confidence I have in his Divine aid) that I will secure your Town from the Two Armies of the Enemy: for in my life, thorough Gods assi∣stance, I have done greater miracles than this. As therefore you see my Countenance full of resolution to defend you; I desire also to see the same in yours, that I may know you will accomplish these three things I request at you hands. I know there will be some who will grumble at the charge and expence they must necessarily be at; but let such consider what will become of them if the Enemy make themselves masters of the Town, as doubless they will if you put-not-to you utmost force and endeavour to pre∣vent them. What will then becme of your Goods, your Estates, your Houses, and your Wives and Children, if they fll once into their hands, who ruine all that they subdue? All things will be turn'd topsi-urvy; 'tis for this you fight, and also and principally
for the honour of Gd, and the conservation of your Churches, which in the fist Toules were sratcht only by these people your Enemies; but if they enter now, will be raz'd and levell'd with the foundations, as you see they have done at Condom. Since I am with you, believe me Gentlemen, they will think on' thrice before they will come to attaque us; and if they come, though this City be none of the strongest, I will make them know, that I know both how to assault, and to defend. Grant me then this that I request of you, which is in your power to do, and believe that I will lay down my life for your preservation. If you are not resolv'd to employ the wet and the dry, that is to say, to do what good Citizens ought to do, never engage your selves and me too, but rather let such as ae afraid retire in good time, and let me deal it with the rest who ready and willing to die for their Country. The Sieus de Blazimond,The nhabi∣tants of Agen take . then, and de la Lande speaking for all the Clergy, told me in few words, That all the Clergy will lay down their lives and fortunes in the common defence, would sve me in what ever I would demand of them, and every one take arms and be as ready as the Soldiers themselves. The Lawyers promis'd the same; after whom the good old man de Nort spake in the behalf of the whole City, that they would do the same that the Clergy, and those of the Long Robe had engag'd to do; nay more (for it was not fit for them to be at continual labour) but that all those of the City, both Rich and Poor, Women and Children, without exempting any one, should put their hands to the work. Now before I would suffer Messieurs de Blazimond, and de la Lande to speak, I entreated them, that all those who should answer, would speak so loud that every one might hear them; which they also did, and when all the three Orders had made an end of speaking, I strain'd my voice, and said, Have you all heard what these Gentlemen have propos'd who have spoken in the behalf of the whole City? to which they cried out that they had; whereupon as I had held up my hand, I made them hold up theirs, and take the same Oath I had taken; which being done, I desir'd them every one to withdraw to provide all sorts of Instruments, and that I would retire to my Lodging with the principal men of the City, to make election of the eight who were to govern over them: but being it was already almost night they entreated me, that seeing they were all together, I would give them leave to make election of the eight, that I would please in the mean time, to retire to warm my self, and to get my Boots off, and that the next morning they would bring me a List of their Burgers names, of them to make election which eight I should think fit. And so I withdrew to my Lodging, where after supper there came to me Mssieurs de Blazimond and de la Lande, the good man de Nort and his Sons, with so great joy, as more could not be exprest; telling me that the Merchants who had pack'd up their Mer∣chandize, and a good many of them already loaded them in Waggons had unloaded all, and that they thought never City was overjoy'd as theirs was, and that so much as to the very Women and Children there was no other talk but of fighting, knowing the resolu∣tion that I had taken to tarry amongst them. Companions, you who shall take the pains to read my life, you may take fair exem∣ples by me. This people, who were all their wits end, and ready to over-run the City, immediately at my word only reassum'd such courage, that I will be bold to say with truth, no man ever after discover'd the least apprehension in them; though to say the truth they had no great reason to be so secure, the Town being of two great a circuit well to be defended, commanded moreover by a Mountain, and too Armies ready to fall upon us at once. Believe me, Companions, when I tell you, that upon your resolution depends that of all the people, who take courage, as they see you do. And how great a good shall you do, besides the honour you acquire to your selves, to save a poor City from the Sack? so many Families stand eternally oblig'd to you, and not only the City it self, but the whole Country also: for the taking of the Capital City of a Province ordinarily draws after it the loss of a whole Seneschalsie. I, but you will say, a man must then shut himself up in a place where he can acquire honour: and where will you have that to be, in a Castle of Millan? it cannot be there; for there it is the strength of the walls that defends you; but it must be in a place that you see to be of publick concern, let it be never so weak. A good heart is a good Fortress. I could have stayd at Lectoure, and have hearkned how the squares went. I had nothing to lose at Agen, and could justly have laid all the blame upon the Mareschal, who had shoulders broad enough to bear it, but this good City being taken, I saw all the Country was lost. In a time of need and dan∣ger therefore shew that you have a heart to drive fear out of others; and in so doing you will alwayes appear to be what you are; and assure your selves that the Enemy seeing such a man engag'd in a place, will think on't thrice before he will once come to
attaque you. I have (as you may have observ'd before) ever had that good fortune, the Spaniards, Italians, Germans, and French Hugonots have been afraid either to abide, or to attaque me. Get then this priviledge over you Enemy, as you will do in doing well, and giving testimony of a good heart, and an undaunted courage. Three or four dayes after I writ to the Gentlemen who had the charge of Lectoure, and principally to the Chevalier de Romegas, and the Chevalier my Son, exhorting them to employ all they had learnt at the Siege of Malta, and to do as well as they had done there; for that their honour would be without comparison much greater in serving their own Prince and Country, than in a forreign Soyl. I also conju'd every one to obey them, con∣sidering that there was not a man in the Town that had ever been in a Siege but they two: for as for my part I was resolv'd not to stir from Agen, but would die in the defence thereof. They were very much astonisht when they read my I , which they communicated to one another, and immediately return'd me another back, subscrib'd by the Sieurs de Gondrin, de Pangas, de la Mothe Gondrin, de Romegas, de Maigas, and the Chevalier my Son, where∣in they writ me word, That they did all very much wonder that I would so far forget my self, as to engage my person in so weak a Town as Agen, and so commanded by Moun∣tains as it was. That for certain the Artillery was set out from Navarreins, and that the five pieces which were at Noguarol had not stir'd from thence, but had stayd for the coming of the rest; that therefore they did beg of me to come to Lectoure, and that the Che∣valier de Romgas and my Son would go put themselves into Agen, who being young and resolute, if they should miscarry, the loss would not be so great; and that on the other side, should I abandon the field, all the rest of the Country would be ruin'd and lost. I return'd them answer, That I gave them many thanks for the admonitions they had given me, which though I did acknowledge to be rational and true; yet I knew ve∣ry well also that they gave them out of compassion and fear I should lose my self;Resolution of the Sieur de Monluc. but that I did assure them, before they should hear I was lost, the Enemy should have payd very dear for the taking of Agen. That if the Mareschal would come to fight them, he would have a good match of it; that I was determin'd not to budg from thence, but let them do their duty in case the Enemy should sit down before them, for as for my part I was resolute to do mine, and never to let the Enemy enter but over my belly. At the same time there arrived Monsieur de la Bruille, Steward of the Mareschal d' An∣ville's Household, whom the said Mareschal sent to me to know if Monsieur de Montfer∣ran was come with the thousand Harquebuzeers, as I had sent him word, and also with what Forces I on my part could assist him. I then reckon'd to him, that what from Ville∣nufue, Lectoure, Agen, and Florence, I could make a thousand Harquebuzeers, and the thousand of Monsieur de Montferran, shewing him the Letters that the said Sieur de Mont∣ferran had sent me from St. Macaire. He could not find in his heart to lose so much time as to bait his horses, before he return'd to carry back this news to the Mareschal, when being just about to take horse to return, there came a letter from Monsieur de Montferran, dated from Marmande,The Sieur de Monterran come with Suc∣cours. conteining these words. Monsieur, At this instant I am set∣ting out with my Troops, which are a thousand Harquebuzeers, and threescore Light-horse, and shall this day pass part of my men over the River at Aguillon, the rest must stay till to morrow morning, but to morrow night they shall all be at Port St. Marie. The said de la Bruille took a Copy of the Letter, saying to me these words, I am going to carry the Marschal the best news can possibly be brought him, and assure your self upon my life and honor, that so soon as ever I shall be return'd he will begin to march; and so ran to his horse. At the end of three dayes, the Troops being at Port St. Marie and Aguillon, I had word sent me from Lectoure, that the Mareschal was return'd from Grenade to Tho∣louze, out of despite at the Letter the Gentlemen of Armagnac had written to him, which I have made mention of before, and that for one clause that was in it, which ran thus; That in case he should not please to march to come to help to re-establish thm in their houses, they should be constrain'd to go apply themselves to the King in their own persons, humbly to beg assistance from him. This was the ground of all his discontent, and he discharg'd his anger upon me, accusing me that I had caused the said Letter to be writ: I will not deny but that the first draught was read to me as I was mounting to horse; but, so God help me, I could not have repeated six words of it, for my affection hurried me away to Agen, to take care that the Town should not be forsaken, and took horse that very minute it was read to me, as I have said before. However I leave it to any man of understanding to judg if these words were of such importance, that the said Mareschal ought reasonably to have taken such offence at them. It was at the King that he took offence, and not at us. He is the Kings Subject as well as we. O! would I have taken pet after this manner, how ma∣ny times have I had occasion given me to quit all! I have perhaps been but too passinate,
not as to what concern'd my self, but for the Country and the People, who have missed me since I quitted my Government. Now when Monsieur de Montferran, who staid with me thre dayes at Agen, his men in the mean time lying at Port St. Mare, heard that the Mareschal was return'd in discontent to Tholouze, and that he would hardly be pre∣vail'd upon to come, he told me that he would return to Bourdeaux, forasmuch as he did not know but that the Princes might turn their designs that way, hearing there was no body in it. Which he accordingly did, as there was good reason, by which means I was left naked, without hope of being reliev'd by any person whatsoever. Thus for te mis∣construction of a word, for one insignificant picque, the whole Country ran a dangerous fortune. You Princes, Mareschals, and Lieutenants of Provinces, who command Armies, never sacrifice the publick interest to a private distaste. The Mareschal ought to have consider'd, that these were Gascons exil'd from their own houses, who writ in passion: he ought nei∣ther to have been offended at me, nor them; but to have excus'd their sensibility, and not for such a trifle to have abandoned the Country. Our Proverb says,Who loses his substance loses his understand∣ing. Qui perd le sien, perd le sns. I have often askt advice of, and been my self assisting to those that I knew had no great kindness for me. Never suffer your private picques, and particular animosi∣ties to endanger the publick concern. I have often observ'd some, and those no little ones, who could have eaten one another, agree ey well for their Master's service, talk and confer together like Brothers, and after some handsome service, or good success, open their hearts to one another, and become good friends. I have since been told by some who had the good fortune to be there, that most of the Chiefs who were at the great Battel that was obtain'd over the Turk, were mortal enemies, but that they agreed out of respect to the common interest, and after the Battel became perfect friends. Would to God the Mareschal would have left the animosity he had against me at Tholouze to have come and claw'd away Mntgommery, he had acquir'd honour, and the Country a singular advan∣tage by it, whereas his peevishness ruin'd all. I thought I had been the most cholerick fellow in the world, but he has made it appear that he is more passionate than I. Never∣theless had he been pleased to come, I would have serv'd him as freely as the meanest Gentleman in the Army. Having understood his resolution I sent twice to Monsieur de Fontenilles to bring his Cmpany, and come put himself into the Town with me; but he could very hardly ob∣tein leave to come, though he came at last. I had the four Companies my Nephew de Leberon had brought me from Libourn, three at Port St. Marie, and another at Aguillon, which immediately upon the departure of Monsieur de Montferran by my order came in thither: and before Monsieur de Fontenilles arriv'd at Agen, a Gentleman called Monsieur de Montazet, came to entreat me to call away the Company that was at Aguillon, and that he would undertake to defend the Town with the Inhabitants only. A promise that although I knew he was not able to make good, and that he only did it to spare the pro∣visions of the Town. I nevertheless granted his request, fearing he would write to Mon∣ieur le Marquis de Villars, that I had made him to consume the fruits of his Estate, and sent the Company to Ville-neufue. Wherein I committed a very great error, for this place had kept the Rivers of Lot and Garonne: but these bawling fellows, who will spare their Masters Houses and Estates, to appear good Stewards, oftentimes lose very considerable places. Therefore you, who have the honour to command, stop your ears against all complaints in such cases, and so pressing necessities. I had done a great deal better, if upon this occasion I had practis'd the Lesson that I now teach you. Now you must know I drave on an Enterprize with Monsieur de Leberon, to go give a Scalado to the Captains Manciet and Chaaudy, two errant Rogues who lay at Monheurt. The said Sieur de Leberon was with eight or ten Harquebuzeers only at Aguillon, that he might the better conceal his design. Viard, Muster-Master to the Mareschals Camp, came at this time to Agen, who was going to Court from the Mareschal, and though I knew very well that the said Mareschal was very much out with me, yet did I not forbear to fa∣vour and pay all respect to all that came from him, being it was for his Majesties service. I therefore writ to Monsieur de Leberon, that he should send a Convoy with him till he was past Toneins, whom he found at Aguillon, in order to the Enterprize they were the next day at night to put into execution; for I was sending him five or six Boats full of Soldiers from Agen, and the three Companies that were at the Port were also to joyn in the business. But, as the fortune of war is sometimes very odd and extravagant, she well appear'd to be so the day that the Muster-Master Viard passed that way; for the said Sieur de Leberon giving him a certain number of Harquebuzeers for his Convoy, and making account that in three hours time they would be back again; whilst he waited in expecta∣tion
of their return there arrived Messieurs de la Caze, de la Loüe, de Guytinieres, de Mo∣neins, and other Captains, with 7 or 8 Cornets of Horse, who were come from Lauserthe, which is nine long leagues, and had not baited above an hour at Haute-faye; to be short they had made a Cavaleade with the diligence of old Soldiers, and environ'd Aguillon. Monsieur de Leberon seeing himself thus trapt alone with but very few Soldiers, and the In∣habitants of the Town, was in a little perplexity what to do in his defence, when Monsieur de Montazet presently came and told him, that he was not able to defend the Town, and that he would not put it to the hazard of being ruin'd and sackt; and accordingly with∣out any more ado made some conditions,Aguillon taken. which was well for the said Leeron, for he fell into the hands of these four, who were all of them my very good friends, by reason that in former times I had done something for them. I was the first Captain that ever shewed Captain Moneins any service, and made him a Soldier; and the rest were every one wil∣ling to acknowledge the several obligations they had to me; and so let him go. These are Civilities amongst Soldiers: but my said Nephew play'd there the part of a Novice, not to reserve to himself men enow for a time of need: he thought the Enemy was too far off to trouble him. Captains, my Companions, this was a ridiculous security of his, he ought to have consider'd the importance of the place, situated upon two Rivers, and that the Enemy could not but covet so sweet a morsl, the vicinity of Cleirac and Toneins consider'd. But I play'd the fool as well as he, in drawing out the Garrison, for fear of offending the Marquis. So soon as ever I heard of his being taken, I drew my three Companies that were at the Port into Agen. Two dayes after the Princes Army came and encampt themselves, their quarters extending from Aguillon, as far as within half a league of Ville-neufue, and up to the great Road, which leads to the said Ville-neufue, all along the valleys which are in that place, where there are very good Villages. Now, as I have already said, I had divided the City into eight parts, and over every division had set two good Chiefs of the Town. It was a delightful thing to see the men and women all work, who came to it constantly by break of day, and never gave over till the night took them off: they were never longer than an hour at dinner, and all the head Burgers of the City were eternally solliciting them to ply their labour, from which no one was exempt, not even the Religious women. One night a man came to tell me, that a Troop of Reiters were come up within a quarter of a League of us, to a Village close by Moubran, which is a Castle belonging to the Bishop of Agen. In the morning therefore I mounted to horse with my Company, and went close up to the Village, where, because two Country fellows told me, that three other Cornets of Reiters were quarter'd very near unto the first, I made the Argoulets that came out with me stay behind, assuring my self that the Reiters would relieve their fellows, being so near, and that consequently we should be put to retreat in haste, where I should be in danger of losing the said Argoulets, by reason they were not very well mounted, and be∣side there was dirt up to the Horse Cambrils. Nevertheles some of the best mounted of them went along with Monsieur de Madaillan, whom I commanded to charge des∣perately quite through the Bourg. He did so, and some few were kill'd in the Streets as they passed, whereupon the Reiters put themselves into two or three houses where their Officers were quarter'd. The other three Cornets who were quarter'd close by, upon the Alarm were immediately on horse back, so that all we could do was to carry away six and thirty of their horses, and I believe had I suffer'd all the Argoulets to go they had not left them one: but Monsieur de Madaillan, seeing the three Cornets coming upon the Gallop to relieve their Companions, retreated to me; but they did not much pursue him, and so we retir'd into the Town. Now Viard was soon back from Court, for he had both the Kings Pass and the Princes; and went to find out the Mareschal. The next morning after we had taken the Horses Monsieur de Fontenilles arriv'd, by which means I had two Companies of Gens d'armes in the City,Monsieur de Laugac at Peymirol. and three of Foot. I had from my first coming placed Monsieur de Laugnac at Peymirol with two Foot Companies, which were those of the Garrison of Port. St. Ma∣rie and Maves, who made very brave skirmishes, and though Monsieur de Laugnac was then sick of the disease that so long has held him, he nevertheless kept the Soldiers night and day abroad, and was evermore making some attempt upon the Enemy. Our Horse went out very often, but they still found the Reiters so barricado'd and bolted up in the Villages,Commendati∣on of the Rei∣ters. that nothing was to be got of them but blows, and they were alwayes mounted in a trice. In truth those people encamp themselves like true men of war, it is very hard to surprize them: they are more careful than we, especially of their horses and arms, and are besides more terrible in war, for a man can see nothing but fire and steel; and not a Goom in their Troops but accouters and trains himself up to the fight, and so in time
become good Sldiers. I could not relieve our Cavalry with foot, by reason of the in∣tolerable foulness of the wayes, and also fearing a mischance, having so few men as I had in the City; which should any sinister accident have fall'n out, might have struck such a terror into the Town, as might have drawn after it the loss of the place. I was only on the defensive part, and et I kept them in awe, giving them to understand that I did not much fear them. The Princes and the Admiral lay five weeks or more where I have said, and Monsieur de Montgommery three or above at Condom, his quarters extending as far as la Plume des Bruilles. We did nothing on either side, forasmuch as I had no men to at∣tempt any thing withall, and they lay quiet, eating and drinking their fill, and making good cheer; for they had so suffer'd ever since the defeat of Moncontour, as nothing could possibly be more; so that I think they had more mind to rest than to meddle with me. As for my part I night and day intended my Fortification. Being upon these terms, and in this posture on both sides, one night arriv'd Monsieur de la Valette, who came from the Monsieurs Camp, and by fortune happen'd to be at Ville-neufue, at the time when the Princes sent a Trumpet to Monsieur de Cassaneuil to summon the Town.The Princes summon Ville∣neufue. The said Sieur de la Valette himself order'd the answer, which was, That the Town was the King's, and none of theirs; that therefore if either Trumpet or Drum should again come on such an errand they would kill him, and that there were too many men of honour in the Town to deliver it up. The said Sieur de la Valette hazarded himself in the night to pass the Enemies Camp in exceeding great danger, and came to me about nine of the clock. He found me in bed; for I was very much reliev'd by Messieurs de Fontenilles, de Madaillan, de Leberon, and the other Captains, by which means I slept at my ease; all things in the mean time going on in marvailous good order, as well by night as by day. Old age must be excus'd. The said Sieur de la Valette told me that I must presently send away a Chief to command over all those who were in Ville-neufue, or that otherwise the Town was about to be lost; yet would by no means tell me the reason, but only that I must make haste immediately to send away a Chief, alwayes telling me, that if I was not sudden I should be the first would repent it, for that it was a place of importance, and a neat Town of War. But he said enough to make me get out of bed, for I would not slight the advice of so good a head∣piece as his; and therefore instantly dispatch't away two men to the Chevalier my Son at Lectoure, that immediately upon the reading my letter he should mount to horse, and come a∣way to me to Agen; thence to put himself into Ville-neufue, and that by the haste he should make I should know if he were my Son.Ville-neufue. I writ also to the Chevalier de Romegas, entreating him to perform alone what they two had joyntly undertaken before. It was day before the two Messengers got to Lectoure, whereupon the Chevalier my Son immediately took leave of all the Gentlemen that were there, and about three in the afternoon come to Agen. Four or five dayes before this Monsieur de Montgommery with all his Camp, both Horse and Foot came to give a Camisado to Captain Codreils, Lieutenant to my Son Captain Fabian's Troop of Light-horse, which I had put into Moyrax, with five and twenty Laun∣ces, and five and twenty Harquebuzeers. Now Moyrax is a little Village enclosed with walls, the highest part whereof might be mounted with a Ladder of twelve staves, and without Flankers, where he arriv'd an hour before day. Of this design news was brought me to Agen, at a time when I had newly taken a Glister, which I had yet in my belly; whereupon without any more ado I put on my arms, mounted to horse, and went to pass the River. The Gentlemen of my two Companies past after one another as fast as they could. Monsieur de Fontenilles came not till the next day, and those that came in the night follow'd after such a manner, that I found my self with no more but four horse only on the other side of the River towards Gacony, where Moyrax is situated, and near unto E∣stillac, which is mine. With these four horses I galloped full-drive directly to Moyrax, it being a League betwixt that and the River: so that in truth had Monsieur de Montgom∣mery sent out ten or twelve horse only upon the Road from Agen, to Moyrax, I had cer∣tainly been kill'd or taken: but a man must sometimes play the Soldier, and tempt for∣tune. Your Enemy knows not what you do. And thus I arriv'd at Moyrax, where I found that the said Montgommery was departed about half an hour before, and had left his lad∣ders at the foot of the wall; where, though they had stayd two long hours, they never had the courage to set them up, which made me, though I had before no great opinion of their Foot, to think much worse of them now; and so I return'd back to Agen; where at my return the Physicians were fain to give me another Glister to bring away the first, which by the pains I had taken was hindred from working, and made me so ill, that I two dayes kept my bed. So soon as the Chevalier my Son was come, I presently sent for Captain Cadreils, sending five and twenty Harquebuzeers in his room, to the end that he might go with my said Son to Ville-neufue. At this time Monsieur de St. Giron, brother
to Monsieur de la Guiche, Colonel of two and twenty Ensigns under the Mareschal d'An∣guen, had caused himself to be brought sick to Agen, having been wounded at the Assault of Mazeres, either in a leg or in a thigh; and would retire himself to his own house for his cure. At one of the clock in the night I put out my Son, his Camrades, and two Guides,The Chevaliet de Montluc at Ville-neufue. bidding them be sure to be the next morning by break of day at Ville-neufue. Every one was exceeding glad of his coming, and I believe their dispute was that they would not obey one another. I would have sent my young Son Captain Fabian thither, but that we gave him over for a dead man, after his return from the Camp; and at this time had no manner of hope of his recovery. Now I had hourly intelligence,A Bridge of Boats made by the Admiral. that the Admiral was making a Bridg of Boats at Port St. Marie, and to that end had gather'd together all the Boats upon the Lot, and the Garonne, as far as Marmanda. I had also hourly intelligence that the Enemy had sent for great Arillery into Bearn. All which made me hasten the Trenches and Fortifications I was making at Agen, believing, as there was very good reason, that all this preparation was intended against me; for Agen was no small prize, as well for the Riches, as in re∣spect to the defeating of so many men of condition, who had shut themselves up in it for my sake. I then call'd a Council in my Lodging, and in a little Cabinet there, where we were no more but eight or nine persons to consult, and contrive which way we might break this Bridg. Now there was a Free Mason of Tholouze in the Town, who had made the Marquis de Villars some Mills at Aguillon, and this fellow upon some discourse with some one or another had said, that if we turn'd one of those Water-mills, which lay an∣chored before the Town afloat, it would break the Bridg: for the River of Garonne was great, and very much out, and every day still rising, because it almost continually rain'd. There was not any one man of his opinion, that a Mill could break the Bridg, foras∣much as we had been assur'd, that the Admiral had caused Cables as thick as a mans leg to be made at Thoneins, and others of the like size to be brought from Montauban also, to∣gether with very great Chains; which was very true, for besides the great Cables, the Bridg was lock't fast together with great and ponderous Chains. To make short of my story, not one of us was of the Masons opinion but Captain Thodeas our Engineer only, who said, that in case the Mill was loaded with great stones he thought it might do the busi∣ness; but not without being loaden; and so we concluded nothing. Two dayes after I had word sent me from Tholouze, that the Mareschal d'Anville was equipping three Boats, which were to be conducted by Captain St. Projet, mann'd with threescore men, which in eight dayes would be ready, and that the said St. Projet within that time was to bring them down by night to break the Bridg. Concerning our design we had debated, that we could not load this Mill, but that the Admiral would have intelligence of it by those of the Religion who liv'd in Agen under the protection of that accursed Edict, (for so I may, and ever shall term it) so that (I know not how) we remain'd distracted in our design, without hope of any other remedy, but only in bravely defending our selves. In the mean time Muster-Master Viard came again to Agen, being sent a second time from the Mareschal to the King,The Mareschal d'Anville's de∣sign to break the Bridg. and bringing along with him a Trumpet of the said Ma∣rescal's, arriv'd on Wednesday betwixt nine and ten a clock in the morning: where he ac∣quainted me in private with the Mareschal's Enterprize to break the Bridg: but that he was afraid the Admiral had intelligence of his design: for which reason he had brought one of the Mareschals Trumpets to go with him as far as Port St. Marie, where if he should, when he came thither, find that the Enemy had any inkling of it, he would send back the Trumpet to let me know so much, that I might stop the said St. Projet from going any further; to which end, and that he might not slip by, I was to keep continual watch upon the River day and night. And so he took his leave of me, and arriv'd a∣bout two in the afternoon at Port St. Marie, where he saw three Cornets of Reiters pass over the Bridg, to come quarter on that side of the River towards Gascony. The Trum∣pet had very good leisure to view the Bridg, and to observe how strongly it was fastned; to be sure those of Clairac and Thoneins had spar'd for no cost nor labour, those good peo∣ple thinking nothing too dear that was laid out to annoy and mischief their Neighbours, and against the King. About nine at night the Trumpet return'd, by whom Viard sent me word, that I should have a care St. Projet proceeded no further to execute his design; for the Enemy had notice of it, aud had planted seven or eight small pieces of Artillery at that end of the Bridg towards Gascony, and that the other end was guarded by a thousand or twelve hundred Harquebuzeers: In short, that I must by no means suffer him to go, for not a man of those that went could possibly escape. So soon as the Trumpet had deliver'd his Message he retir'd to his Lodging, and I, without making any more noise, sent pri∣vately for three persons of the Town to whom I had already discover'd my intention,
which was to set adrift the Mill belonging to President Sevin, by reason the said President had abandoned the Town. I will not here name the three men, because the President would sue them, and the Commissioners, who are now in those parts, would easily give him what damages he would desire, as they do others against the Catholicks. After, ha∣ving a while conferred together, we concluded that they should send out six Soldiers who were Mariners, who should go, and under colour of watching upon the Bank of the Ri∣ver, that Captain St. Projet did not pass by, unloose the Mill. Thus then they all three departed from me, and were not slow in sending out the Soldiers, neither were they idle to unloose the Mill; one whereof was drown'd in loosing the Chain, falling from the little Boat, as the stake broke to which the Chain was fastned. This might be about eleaven of the clock at night, and I have been told since by some of the Enemy, the Mill came to the Bridge about one. Now the Enemy had placed Centinels more than half a league up the River, that they might give them the Alarm when Captain St. Projet should pass by, who no sooner heard the noise of the Mill, but that they immediately gave the Al∣arm, and the Mill immediately after arriv'd at the Port. Every one upon the Alarm ran to the two ends of the Bridge, and began to let fly great volleys of Harpuebuze shot at the poor Mill, that said not a word, but gave such a shock that it carried away all the Bridg, Cables,The Bridg bro∣ken. Chains, and Boats, in such sort, that there was onely one remaining that was chain'd to the Wall of the Prince of Navarre's Lodgings. Two of the Boats went down as far as St. Mcaire, and I have been told, that there were some carried down as far as Bourdeaux. This brave Mill of the Presidents stopt not here, but went still on to break another Hugonot Mill below Thoneins, and at the last stay'd at the Isles about Marmanda. The first who brought us any news of the Bridg being broken, were certain poor people who had been to buy salt at the end of the said Bridg of the Hugonot Soldiers, who had taken seven or eight Boats laden with it; and the Enemy had kill'd several of those poor people, accusing them for the cause that the Bridg▪ was broken. Some of their Soldiers who had leapt upon the Bridg upon the Alarm were carried away by the Current; but it was not till betwixt spring of day, and sun-rise, that the Guards sent me word there were seven or eight of the people arriv'd, who were wont to carry Salt, and said that the Bridg was broken. I then presently went out to talk with those people who had been at the Bridg with those the Enemy had kill'd, and escap't thorough the fields under fa∣vour of the night, who told me the whole story, as also did others who came fromwards the Port, and still one or other was coming in who confirmed the news. I then sent out ten or a dozen Light-horse on that side towards Gascony, who went as far as under Sa∣vgnac, where they took two prisoners, who gave me yet a more perfect account than those poor people had done. In the mean time I presently caused a little Boat with eight Oars to be made ready, and gave the Master of her 25 Crowns to go carry the news to Bor∣deaux: by whom I writ a Letter to Messieurs de Lansac, the Baron de la Garde, and the Bishop of Valence my Brother, wherein I gave them a Narrative how all things had passed, entreating them to communicate it to the Court of Parliament, and the Jurats, that they might all share in the good news. And good news it was; for this very much brake the Ene∣mies designs, whom we might shrewdly have incommodated, taking them thus separated as they were by the breaking of this Bridg, would the Mareschal have been pleased to have laid his anger aside. The said Mareschal's Trumpet before he went away was witness to the joy the whole Town was in for this success, and so departed in all diligence to carry the news to his Master. This was executed upon Wednesday about midnight, and upon Thursday in the beginning of the night the Mariners set out from Agen, who when they come to Port St. Marie, near unto the place where the Bridg had been, they let the Boat glide down at the discretion of the Current, themselves being all squat down in the Boat. The Enemy began to call out, but no body answered, which made them think it was some Boat that had accidentally broken loose, and was adrift; but they were no sooner got past them a Crosbow shot, when they all start up and fell a rowing, and then began to rate and call them after their eloquent manner, plying their Oars so well, that they were the next morning, which was Friday, by sun-rise at Bordeaux, where the joy was was such, that I think never Mariners that came from new-ound-lands brought news that invited so great a Crowd. And yet it seem'd so incredible a thing, that almost all the Gentlemen doubted the intelligence, and every one ran to Monsieur de Lansac's Lodg∣ings, and to those of the Baron de la Garde, and Monsieur de Valence, to be satisfied of the truth, Monsieur de Valence immediately dispatched away his Secretary called Chauny to their Majesties to carry the news, which was quite contrary to what Commissary Viard had brought them. The said Viard, as I was told, arriv'd in the morning, and very much troubled their Majesties, and the Monsieur, at the account of the Bridges being brought
to perfection, with the description of its stucture and strength, being such as great Artil∣lery might pass over at pleasure, and the Horse three a-breast, as it was true, and the man did not lye to them in a ittle;The impor∣tance of the Bridg. and his Majesty had good reason to be concern'd, for the commodity of this Bridg would have given the Enemy leisure to have taken all before them, and to have passed over their Canon at plasure. At night Chauney arriv'd, who brought news that the Bridg was broken; so that if the one brought vexation, the other brought joy, and for a few dayes I was the best man in the world, and a great Soldier: but that good opinion lasted not long, for the Enemies I had at Court disguised all things to the King, who was at that time at St. Iean; so that in the end, let my deserts be what they would, I neither did, nor had ever done any thing worth taking notice of, and the King believ'd it, or I think seem'd to believe so rather, to satisfie their humour. This is the story of the breaking of the Bridg, and the whole and exact truth of it. I am now to tell you of what advantage the breaking of this Bridg was to us,The Admirals Design. and what the Admiral had determin'd in case the Bridg had stood. It was resolv'd and concluded upon in their Council, that they would pass over that part of Winter till harvest in the Quarters where their Camp then lay, and would cause great Artillery to be brought from Navarreins, wherewith to take all the Towns upon the River Gronne, to the very Gates of Bordeaux, that they would attaque Agen, but that they would leave that work for the last, because they would fst take Castle-geloux, Bazas, and all the other places on this side the Garonne, as far as Bordeaux, by which means, and by the communication of this Bridg, both the one Country and the other, which are of the richest of France, would be wholly at their convenience and command. And all this they made account to have taken in less than fifteen dayes, as they would really have done, for they were absolute Masters of the field. They intended also to attaque Libourne, assuring themselves that in all the Cities they should find great store of provisions, by which means nothing could be convey'd in∣to Bourdeaux, neither by the Garonne, nor much less from the Landes, making account that so the City of Bordeaux would in three moneths be reduc't to the last extremes. And for my part I do not think it would have held out so long;The situation of Bordeaux. for already Corn was there at ten Livers the Sack, and by sea nothing could get in by reason of Blaye. The City is good, and rich, and a strong Town of War, but situate in a barren Country; so that who∣ever should deprive it of the Garonne, and the Dordogne, it would presently be reduced to famine, the Inhabitants coninually living from hand to mouth. They had moreover determin'd to bring their Ships up the River to Blaye, which they had in their hands, to keep the Gallies either from coming out, or going in. The Vicomtes also had promised the Admiral to cause threescore thousand Sacks of Corn to be brought him upon the River Garonne, which they meant to take out of Comenge and Loumaigne, the most fertile Countries of all Guienne; and where the greatest store of grain is, there being no less than five hundred Merchants,A Country rich in Con. and as many Gentlemen, who keep three or four years store alwayes by them in expectation of a dear year, when their Corn may go off at greater rates; so that they might with great ease have kept their word with the Ad∣miral; and by that means were certain to bring the King to their own bow, and to make such conditions as themselves should think fit: and had they once got Bourdeaux into their clutches, I know not but that they might have kept it as well as Rochelle; at least having Rochelle and Bordeaux both in their possession, they might have boasted that they had the best and strongest Angle of the Kingdom, both by Land and Sea, commanding five navigable Rivers, comprizing the Charante. And they had once settled betwixt th Rivers of Ile, Dordogne, Lot, and Garonne, the King must have had four Armies at least to have compell'd them to fight; and I will be bold to say, they had the best Country, and two of the best and most capacious Havens of the Kingdom, which are those of Broü∣age and Bordeaux. I wonder any one should be so indiscreet,The impor∣tance of Gui∣enne. as to advise the King, that it would be his best way to coop up the Hugonots in Guienne. 'Tis a dangerous piece to be depriv'd of, and should the King once lose it, it would be a great while in recovering. But these good Counsellors do it for their own ends, and to remove the War far enough from their own doors; and yet we shall sell it them very dear before they have it. In truth the King ought to make more reckoning of this Province, to hinder the Enemy from getting foot∣ing there, and not so to abandon the Country, suffering others to make merry at our mise∣rie, to that degree, as to ask, if we yet have beds to lie in. I cannot believe this word could come out of the Queens mouth, for she has ever had, and yet has a great many very good Servants there; and those Messieurs of France, that jeer at our misfortunes, may have their share in time. The evil is not alwayes at one door. Now this was the result of the Ene∣mies Council; and it was very well design'd. My Brother Monsieur de Valence will bear
witness, that a  person who was assisting at their Councils (when he thought fit) gave us an account of the aforesaid deliberation, which was great; and I believe that had they taken a resolution to drive out all the Catholicks, and to have call'd in all the Hu∣gonots out of France into this Province, which was so much despis'd when they had once made it their own, they would have had possessions enow to have enricht them all; and moreover all the Gentry of those parts would have been constrain'd to turn Hugonots, and to take up arms for them; by which means the King would afterwards have had much a∣do to reduce, and more to reclaim them: for to have made them turn again to our Reli∣gion, would have een no easie task; forasmuch as after a man is once accustomed to a thing, be it good, or bad, he is very unwilling to leave it: but God would not suffer so great a mischief, both for the King and us, who are his Catholick Subjects. This was the advantage that accru'd by the breaking of the Bridg,The impor∣tance of beak∣ing the Bridg. in the judgment of all both Friends and Enemies: and I will be bold to say, that of all the services I ever did for Guienne this was the most remarkable exploit, which proceeded from no other thing, but my resolution to go put my self into Agen; for otherwise the Town had been quitted, and the Admiral had come directly thither, and not to Port St. Marie; nor to Aguillon as he was constrain'd to do. For a consultation being held at Lauserte, it was there concluded, that at their departure from thence, they should go to quarter at Castel-Sagrat, Montjoy, St. Maurin, and Ferussac, and the next day at Agen, making full ac∣count they should meet with no resistance. Which had it so fall'n out, the Admiral would have had elbow-room enough; and betwixt two great Rivers, not only have re∣fresht his Army at great ease, and in great security; but moreover have made the whole Country sure to him. I know very well that it was told the Admiral by two or three persons in his Army, that in case it was true that I was in Agen, they could never get me out but by bits, and that in my life I had committed greater follies than that. And there were who said that they had seen me engage my self in three or four places, the strongest of which was not half so tenable as Agen, and had still come off with honour. These who said this,The Admiral' opinion. might well affirm it with truth, as having been with me in those places. But the Admiral still maintain'd, that he was confident I had not put my self into Agen with any intention to stay there, but that my determination was, so soon as I should hear of his coming to pass the Garonne, and go put my self into Lectoure, saying, he is too old a beaten Soldier to engage himself in so ill a place. The others still affirm'd that they would pawn their lives I would not budg from thence; which made the Admiral in the end to adhere to their opinion, and to alter his course directly to Aguillon, extending his Quarters as far as Port. St. Marie, where if they should see, that upon their approach I abandoned the Town, and retreated towards Lectoure, as they believ'd I would, then ad∣vance to Agen. He found in the end that they who maintain'd I would not stir from thence were better acquainted with my temper, than either he or they, who told him I would retire to Lectoure; and being it was cast in my dish, that for three years I had done nothing to purpose, let every one judg by what I perform'd in these three years, without money, or either Horse or Foot; had I been supply'd with money onely to pay the Sol∣dier, or had the King reliev'd me with the Foot, and Gens-d'armes I desir'd, whether or no I had not done my work. I think I should have kept the Admiral from watering his horses at the Garonne,, and his Reiters from drinking our Bordeaux wine: for the Count de Montgommery would never have had leisure to have call'd them in; and I think I should have dealt pretty well with him. The Bridg being broken the Admiral was four or five dayes in suspence, not knowing which way to turn him, nor what course to take: for besides the Count de Montgommery's Camp, he had moreover the Cornets of Reiters engag'd on that side the River towards Gascony, which were those that had passed the River, and were quartered at Labardac, and which he could not imagine which way to draw off from thece, by reason the Rivole that runs by Paravs, a Monastery of Religious women, was swell'd so high, that not a man either on foot or horseback durst attempt to pass it; and the Count de Montgommery was yet at Condom, and about Nerac, and Bruch. The Admiral then caused a little Bridg upon two Boats to be made, upon which five or six horses could only pass at one time, the Boats being to be hal'd by a rope after the Italian manner. So soon therefore as the water of the Rivolet began to abate, the Reiters began to pass over a stone Bridg there is in that place, and drew near to the passage of the Port, where they began to ferry over upon this Bridg of Boats by six and six, or seven and seven at a time at most. Which they found so troublesome, that with all the diligence the Passengers could use, the Boat was alwaies an hour and an half in going to and again, with which great pains and difficulty these three Cornets passed, and were two dayes in passing over. The Count de Candalle, and Monsieur
de la Valette lay at this tme with eight or ten Cornets of Horse at Staffort, to the first of which, so soon as the Count de Montgommery began to move from Condom, to draw near the River, I writ a Letter, That if his resolution was to fight Montgommery at the Pass, I, with my two Companies of Gens-d'armes, and five hundred Harquebuzeers, would not fail to be at the fight, not to command, but to obey him as much as the meanest Soldier there. He return'd me many thanks, sending me answer back, That if it came to that, both he, and all under his Command would obey me: but nevertheless said nothing of my coming to joyn with them: I understood well enough however by the Letter, that they would have been all glad to have had me with them: but la Croisette who was there, play'd the Dominus fac totum, and govern'd all. I therefore sent again to tell them, That in case they had no mind to have me come in person, I would however, if they pleased, send over the two Com∣panies, and the five hundred Harquebuzeeers to joyn with them. By which any one must discern, that I had not left the Mareschal because I would not obey him, since I offer'd to obey the Count, and Monsieur de la Valette, and even Captain Croisette himself, who was in the greatest authority amongst them. I shall not here take upon me to give an account of what they did upon this occasion, by reason I was not there, neither have I much enquir'd into it, saving that I was told they charg'd some they met with at their marching out of Bruch, and beat them in again, and I have since heard that the Count de Montgommery was himself then in the Town. How true it was I am not able to say, but I believe they did all that lay in their power to do; for they are sufficiently known, and reputed all for very brave Gentlemen. The Count de Montgommery passed over first his Horse, and then his Foot, one after the other. I sent threescore Light-horse pickt out of my own Company, and that of Monsieur de Fontenilles, over the River, with three hundred Harquebuzeers, to make good their retreat, who marcht up to a little Village near unto the Ferry call'd la Rozie, where they kill'd fifteen or sixteen men, and took twelve or thirteen Horses, giving them so hot an Alarm, that I was since told, had our Horse pusht on to the Pass it self, they had caused three or four hun∣dred to be drown'd, for five or six drown'd themselves upon this Alarm for haste. And on the Admiral's side he could no way relieve them, for they could not repass above six or seven horse at a time upon the Bridg of Boats, which made them five or six dayes in fer∣rying over. This was the plunge and quandary the Admiral was in, to draw off the Count de Montgommery, and three Cornets of Reiters, Monsieur de la Chappelle, Vice-Seneschal, and Monsieur de Bouzet had sent me word, that if I would grant a Pass to a certain Hugonot, to whom at their entreaty I had given assurance to live quietly in his own house, he offer'd to go to Port St. Marie, and enquire out, and discover what way the Admiral intended to take, after the Count de Montgom∣mery should be passed over the River, or whether or no he had any thoughts of making another Bridg; which Pass I accordingly sent, and the same day that the Count made an end of ferrying over, this man return'd back to their house, telling and assuring them, that at the Enemies departure from Port St. Marie, which would be within two or three dayes after the Army should be got over the River, they would march towards Tholouze, and go to pass at Montauban,The Admiral's design against the Tholouzi∣ans. with a resolution to burn all the houses within four leagues round of Tholouze, and especially those of the Presidents and Councellors; and moreo∣ver told them that he had learnt from a Captain of Horse, they had particulary given to the said Captain of Horse in charge near unto Tholouze call'd l'Epine, to burn it. To which the forenamed person making answer, that it was one of the most beauful piles in all that Country, the Captain reply'd, That if the Master of that House had no other he would be houseless. The said Sieur de Bouzet himself told me all that this person had said to them; of which I immediately advertiz'd the premier President, for to have ac∣quainted the Mareschal with it had been to no purpose, and I was very certain he would have given no credit to any information of mine, which made me rather choose to advertise the President, sending him word that he ought to call in Monsieur de la Valette, who was already return'd towards Tholouze, and Messieurs de Negrepelice and de Sarlabous; and that they could not have too many good men in the City; for the Enemy talkt strange things, which nevertheless I would not repeat, by reason it was but the discourse of the Rbble of their Camp, to which no credit was to be given. These were the contents of my Letter, I am confident the President has not lost it, and thus all the Enemies Forces departed from Port St. Marie,The Retreat of the Army of the Princes▪ and passed by in the sight of the Castle of Bajaumont, in which was Monsieur de Durfort, Brother to the Sieur de Bajaumont that now is. I fallied out with my two Companies of Gens-d'armes, and saw them all march by within less than a Harquebuze-shot of me, I having no more than eight or ten Horse in my Party, for I had left the Cavaly a little behind, but could not place
them so covertly, but that the Enemy saw them very plain; yet not so much as a man came out to discover what we were, but held on their march, and went to quarter that night about Pont de Casse, and drawing towards St. Maurin, quarter'd themselves about the said St. Maurin, and the adjacent Villages, where they stay'd two or three dayes. Now being the said Sieur de Durfort had seen all their Army, both Horse and Foot pass by, and had had leisure at his ease to number them upon their march, I entreated him to take Post, and to go acquaint his Majesty with the number of their Camp, who amongst other things told me he had discover'd a Troop of five or six hundred Horse, who passed by at a little further distance than the rest; the most of which had no Boots, and could therefore be no other than Grooms and Footmen they had mounted only to make a shew. I did nothing that I did not first communicate to the Bishop of Agen, in whom I did at that time confide as much, or more, than in my own Brother, esteeming him for one of the best friends, and a man of as much integrity and virtue, as any Prelate in France. He is descended from the House of Fregosa of Genoa. I gave instructions to the said Sieur de Durfort, and a Letter of Credence,The Sieur de Montluc sends the King intel∣ligence. which consisted of these heads, That I had sent to his Majesty the Sieur de Durfort, who had had the conveniency exactly to number the Army of the Princes, to deliver a perfect account of all that he had numbred and seen. After which I acquainted his Majesty with the course they steer'd, and the resolution they went withal, to burn all before them; of which I had also given notice to the priemier President of Tholouze, to acquaint therewith all those who had Houses near unto the City, that they might with∣draw their goods, and that they would do well to call in Monsieur de Negrepelice, if he was not already there, together with Messieurs de la Vallette, and de la Sarlabous. In an∣other clause of my Letter to the King I sent word, that the person (I do not here name) of the Religion, who had been in the Enemies Camp, had brought news to the Sieurs de la Chppelle and de Bouzet, that the Captain of Horse with whom he had conferr'd, had told him that they had designs upon Montpelier, and Pont St. Esprit, which were sure to take effect, telling his Majesty that I was very well acquainted with the Governor of Mont∣pelier, Monsieur de Castetnau, for whom I would be responsible with my life, but that I knew not him of Pont St. Esprit: but that if his Majesty would please to give a caution to the said Governors to have an eye to those places, it would be a means to awake their diligence, and to make them provide better for their safety and defence. I likewise gave his Majesty to understand, that the Bishop of Agen, who was lately come from an Abbey of his in Languedoc, near unto Narbonne, had told me that all the lower Languedoc, from Montpelier to Avignon, were in very great anxiety, having no one in those parts to com∣mand them; and had sent to the Mareschal to entreat him to send them Monsieur de Ioyeuse; for provided they had a Chief to head them, they should be enow to defend the Country; and that therefore, if his Majesty thought fit, he might do well to send to the Mareschal, to let Monsieur de Ioyeuse go into the lower Languedoc, he having enow other great Captains about him; for as much as the said Sieur de Ioyeuse would be there better accepted than any other, as the said Bishop had assur'd me. I moreover acquainted his Majesty in my said Letter, that if he would please to command the Monsieur to march with the one half of his Army only, we should be able to fight with greater Forces than those of the Princes; and let his Majesty look upon me as the basest fellow that ever bore arms, in case the Monsieur would come but with the one half of his Army, provided he brought his Reiters along with him, if he did not defeat the Princes, and put an end to the War: that in case his Majesty should not think fit the Monsieur should come, let him then command the Prince Dolphin to march with the Army towards the Country of Rou∣vergue, with whom I would joyn, and we would find means that the Mareschal d'Anville should also joyn with us, and that then about Tholouze, or which way soever they should move, we would find an opportunity to fight them at our best advantage. These were all the heads of my instructions; and to say the truth not a man of them had ever return'd into France, unless they had hid their heads in their strong holds, and we had preserv'd the Country. Had they once been broken, or separated, they would have had much ado ever to have rally'd and piec'd again. This good Bishop of Agen had told me, that he gave Narbonne for lost, and that Monsieur de Rieux the Governor was a Hugonot, that he had driven one of the principal Catholicks, to whom all the rest of the Catholicks ever address'd themselves out of the City; at which the Inhabitants were al∣most in despair, insomuch that the Catholick Citizens had writ to the Mareschal, to be∣seech him to write to Monsieur de Rieux to permit him to return into the Town; which said Sieur de Rieux had sent back many excuses, and that he could not do it; whereupon seeing the Mareschal cold in their behalf, and that he did not enough interest himself in their concern, to cause the Gentleman to be readmitted, the Catholicks had apply'd them∣selves
to the Parliament, that the Parliament had thereupon remonstrated the Citizens grievance to the Maschal, who again at their instance had writ to the said Sieur de Rieux; but still to no effect, which had made the people to give themselves absolutely for lost. I told all this to the Sieur de Durfort; not that I had included it in my instructions, and much less that I gave him in Commission to tell it to the King, because perhaps it might not be true, but telling him, that to be more certain, he would do well to ask the Bishop of it, and if he would give him leave from him to tell it to the King. He therefore accord∣ingly enquir'd of the Bishop touching that affair, who thereupon told him the whole story after the very same manner he had related it to me, and moreover told him, that he would himself write to the King, which he accordingly did; but the said Sieur de Durfort re∣fus'd to receive the Ietter till first he had seen the Contents, which he therefore shew'd him, and then the said Sieur took it, elling me that he had seen what the Bishop had writ to the King, which was word for word as he had related it to me before. This was all that was compriz'd in my instructions; for as to any letter of Credence, the said Durfort carry'd no other from me but onely what was contain'd in those instructions, he telling me freely and plainly, that he would never carry other Letter of Credit, but only Instructions sign'd and seal'd.Monsieur de Durfort sent to the King. And upon this foundation it was, that the Mareschal d' Anville writ that defamatory Letter against me, and had I not been withheld by the respect to those to whom he appertains, and the Rank he held in the Kingdom, I should have tried to have taught him how he gave the Lye, without being first well enform'd of the truth. I might justly have given it him, forasmuch as the testimony of the King himself, and the Instructions themselves, would have manifested the truth: but it is suf∣ficient that the King and the Queen knew the contrary to what he had coucht in his Let∣ter, and that my conscience is absolutely clear. We shall see hereafter whether he or I shall do our Master the best service. He is indeed two advantages over me, he is a great Lord and young, and I am poor and old; I am nevertheless a Gentleman, and a Cava∣lier, who have never yet suffer'd an injury, nor ever will do whilst I wear a sword. I am willing to believe, that the forenamed Bishop at that time knew nothing of the design complotted against me; but his wicked Brother came and stayd with him four or five days, and during that time wrought upon him to consent to this virtuous Conspiracy: of which I shall say no more, for God has begun to shew his miraculous arm in my revenge, and I have that conslence in him, that I hope he will not stay it there. Now the Princes went the same way that I had advertiz'd the President they intended to march, and executed the resolution of burning all the way they wen. I could wish from my heart that my intelligence had not proov'd true; for I have been assur'd by seve∣ral of very good credit of Tholouze, that the Army of the Princes endammag'd them above a million of Livers. I shall not here undertake to give an account of what they did in Languedoc, for I do not pretend to meddle with other mens actions; neither how well the Mareschal perform'd his duty; but shall return to a Letter sent me by the King, that I must go forthwith into Bearn. His Majesty sent me a command, that I should gather together all the Forces I was able to make, and that with all possible expedition; which being done, that I must take Ar∣tillery from Tholouze, Bayonne, and Bordeaux, and elsewhere where it was to be had, and go to invade the Country of Bearn. He writ also to the Capitouls of Tholouze, to fur∣nish me with Artillery and Ammunition; but not a syllable of any money, either to pay the Soldier, or to defray the Equipage of the Canon; and God knows whether in such Enterprizes any thing ought to be wanting. An Army resembles a Clock, if the least wheel or spring be wanting, all the rest goes very false, or stands still. I therefore sent Es∣palanques a Bearnois to Court, with ample instructions of all that was waning, and that would be necessary for me to have before I could begin to march. I was constrain'd to do this, by reason that the Letters his Majesty had sent me about this Expedition were so cold, that it seem'd he that contriv'd them, must either have no great mind to have me go thither, or at least if I went, should be able to do nothing to purpose, or that he was an absolute Ignoramus. However I took no notice of any thing at all to his Majesty, but onely desir'd him to write an Express, and a pressing Letter, and Command to the Capi∣touls to lend me two pieces of Canon, and one great Culverine, with requisite Ammu∣nition, for which I would be responsible to them; for the Artillery and Ammunition are properly their own. They had already sent me word, that they had no Artillery ready, and much less Ammunition, by reason that Monsieur de Bellegarde had spent most of their stock at Carla, and at Puylaurens, and that the Mareschal d'Anville had the rest at Maze∣res. I writ also to his Majesty, that he would please to command Monsieur de Valence to cause a little money to be deliver'd to me for one Muster, or at least for half a one for the
Foot to buy powder, for that of two years this War had lasted, all the Foot that I had rais'd in those parts had had but two Musters payd them, and the most of them but one; and also that he would send to Monsieur de Valence to send a Treasurer along with me to defray the Artillery, and whilst I waited inexpectation of Espalanques return, I would take so good and speedy order for the rest, that at his coming back he should find me ready to march. These were all the demands I made to the King. His answer was, that he did very much wonder I should so long deferre this Expedition, that he had thought I had been already in the Country;The King di∣satisfied with Monsieur de Montluc. that if I would proceed no otherwise than hitherto I had done in this af∣fair, he would appoint some other to undertake it, and that for three years past I had done nothing to purpose. These Letters were ready to break my heart, and withal put me into such a passion, that I was once resolv'd not to go, but to write to the King to send some other, that had formerly serv'd him better than I, and that might do his bu∣siness, as Monsieur de Terride had done. Nevertheless I at last thought better on't, and determin'd not to do it, knowing very well that these Letters proceeded not from his Maje∣sties nature, neither from the Queens, nor the Monsieurs, for they had all three writ to me in the same stile: I knew very well that this came from the counsel of my Enemies at Court, and that neither the King, the Queen, nor the Monsieur ever writ so tart Letters as those were, to the greatest Enemies they had. I shewed them to none but Monsieur de Valence my Brother, for fear lest by my Exemple every one should be frighted from their duty; for all of them generally, of what condition soever, very well knew the con∣trary of what was laid to my charge, and that I had done very well with the little money I had left me. And then it was that I evidently perceiv'd they intended to lay all the miscarriages that had happen'd in those parts at my door; having no friends at Court to take my part, or defend me. I now see that the greatest Error I committed in my whole life, was that I would have no dependance upon any other, after the decease of my old Master, but the King and the Queen; and find that a man in command is much more secure in depending upon a Monsieur, a Madam, a Cardinal, or a Mareschal of France, than either upon the King, the Queen, or the Monsieur; for they will evermore disguise affairs to their Majesties, as they themselves are enclin'd or think fit, and shall certainly be believ'd by them all; for they only hear and see with others ears and eyes. 'Tis an ill thing, but it is impossible to help it, and he that has done best shall by this means be left behind: for which rea∣son if I could return to my former Age, I would never care to depend upon the King or the Queen, but upon those who are in greatest favour with them: for though I should behave my self as ill as a man could do, they would cover and conceal my faults, seeing that I onely depended upon them, for 'tis their chiefest good, and principal honour, to have servants about them whom they may call their Creatures. If the King would him∣self only distribute his benefits, he would pair their nails: but whoever has a mind to be taken notice of, and rewarded, let him address himself to Monsieur or Madam, for the King gives them all, and knows not others but by their report. I am sorry I cannot return to my vigorous age, for I should better know how to govern my self than I have hitherto done, and should no more so much build my hopes upon the King, as others that are about him. But I am now grown old, and cannot be young again, and must therefore be content to follow my old humour; for should I now go about to take up another, I should be to seek at which end to begin. 'Tis too late for me to mend, it may serve others though, that I leave behind me; but if the King would be truly a King, and confer no benefits but at the recommendation of his own judgment, oh, how many would be dor'd in their designs, and frustrated in their expectation! I also committed another oversight, in not having one of my Sons alwayes about the King; they were well enough born to be receiv'd, and well enough qualified to win their Majesties esteem. But God took from me my Mark Anthony too soon, and since Cap∣tain Montluc, who was slain at the Maderes, either of which would quickly have stopt the mouths of those that durst have censur'd or calumniated my Actions. Their lyes so far off could do me no harm; but were we within a Pikes length one of another, old as I am,The Sieur de Montluc's Sons. I would make their hearts quake in their bellies. Neither did I keep my Sons about me to be idle, but to learn my trade; for the first follow'd arms, wherein he bravely signaliz'd himself, and follow'd me in all my Voyages and Expeditions; the second had acquir'd so great a reputation in Guienne, that it was not my interest to part with him du∣ring the War; the third, since his return from Malta, has follow'd me in these late Wars, and the youngest also. But I shall leave this discourse, which puts me into pas∣sion, to return to the Expedition of Bearn. Monsieur de Valence then went to Bordeaux,
to see if there was any money to be got out the Treasury there; from wence he sent me word, that not so much as a singleA Liard is a brass Coin containing  Deniers, the fourth part of a Sol. Liard was to be had from thence; that nevertheless he had preva' so far as to take up fourteen thousand Livers, which he payd into a cer∣tain Commissary that was appointed to attend me, and that in ten dayes time he would procure as much more, but that I was not in any wise to expect a penny more; and that the Receiver had been fain to borrow this. Monsieur de Fontenilles went also to Tholouze with my Letter of Attoney, to bind us both to restore, and pay back the Ammunitios in case the King should refuse to do it; and upon these terms they lent me a Canon, a Culverine, and some Ammunition. I then dispatcht away Messieurs de Montespan, and de Madaillan with a hundred Horse cull'd out of my own Company of Gens-d'armes, and that of Monsieur de Gondrin, directly to Bayonne, to Convoy the Artillery that the Vicount d'Orthe was to send me from thence; and sent Monsieur de Gondrin to Noguarol to begin to form the Army, and with him Monsieur de Sainctorens, to whom I had given the Command of Mareschal de Camp: and I my self stayd four or five dayes behind to set forwards the Foot and Horse, and to give time to the Commissaries of provisions to go thorough the Provinces to execute the Orders I had given them, for the advance of victual for the Army, to which end I delay'd the time but six dayes only, after which I went in two dayes to Nguarol. So soon as I came thither we immediately fell to Counsel to deliberate with what places we should first begin.A Consultation touching the War of Bearn. In which Consultation some were of advice, that it would be best to begin with St. Sver, others said it would be the best course to march directly to Pau: but I was of opinion that I ought in the first place to fall upon Rabasteins, and for these reasons. First, because that beginning with that, I should leave the best Country of Gascony open and free behind me, from thence to be supply'd with victual for the Army; and secondly, that Rabasteins being the stongest Castle, the Queen of Navarre had in her possession, if I should take it by force (which I foresaw I must do, as being confident they would not easily surrender) I would put all to the sword; assuring my self, that that proceeding would strike so great a terror into all the Inhabitants of Bearn, that no place afterwards would dare to abide a Siege, Navarreins only excepted. And on the other side, that those of Tholouze hearing of this good beginning, would not spare to furnish me with any thing I should stand in need of, when they should see that things succeeded well with me; whereas on the contrary, should I begin with St. Sever, I should engage my self in the Lands, a Country only fruitful in sands, where my men would perish for want of bread, and could have no relief from Bordeaux, though I should take the place. That therefore it was much better to begin with the strongest first, and there suddenly to employ my Forces, than with the weakest, and daily to consume my men, and waste my time to little or no effect. This was what I propos'd, which in the end took place in the Council, and was approv'd by all. But I told them, that above all things, to strike a terror into the Enemy, we must kill all before us which made any opposition, which would make the Capitouls of Tholouze to furnish and supply us with all things necessary, seeing that it was Good hand, good hire. This Council was held immediately upon my coming thither, and the next morning before day I took 25 or 30 Horse, and went in all diligence to Dacqs. Monsieur de Gondrin had shew'd me a Letter, that his Son Monsieur de Montespan had sent him from Bayonne, wherein he sent him word, that the Artillery was not so ready as we believ'd, but that the Vicoun d'Orthe was exceedingly diligent to equip, and make them fit; wherefore so soon as I came to Dacqs I dispatcht away two Gentlemen to Monsieur de Montespan, one in the heels of another, to quicken his haste; and writ to the Vicount to entreat him to advance a day or two before, and to try if he could bring Messieurs de Luxe and de Damezan along with him, that we might consult together of what we were best to do: which he accordingly did, bringing the said Sieur de Damazan only in company with him, it being impossible for Monsieur de Luxe to return so soon to Dacqs; where I layd before the said Sieur de Damezan what had been debated amongst us in the Council at Noguarol, and my opinion, which was there also allowed by all to be the best, and par∣ticularly by Monsieur de Damezan; who told me, that should we march directly to St. Sever, it would be impossible to get one Basque out of the Province, by reason they would be necessitated to pass the waters in the Enemies Countrey: but if I went to begin there where I intended, I should no sooner be arriv'd at Nay, but all the Country of the Basques,The Siege of Rabasteins con∣cluded. and the Valleys of Sault and Daspe would infallibly come in to me. I was very glad to find him of my opinion, but I was constrain'd to stay three dayes at Dacqs before the Artillery came up to me. At my departure thence I left two pieces of Canon with the Vicount d'Orthe, with Ammunition proportionable, with which he was to march directly
to Pa, so soon as ever he could hear I had taken Raasteins, it being further concluded, that at the same time I should begin to march, I should send two Companies of Gens∣d'arms to meet him with two others of Foot that were at Mont de Marsan, to joyn with a thousand he had already with him, what of his own Tenants, and those of Labour. I lft him also Monsieur d' Amou to be assisting to him, with some other Gentlemen of the Country about Dacq, which being done, I set forward, marching with the Artillery day and night. Monsieur de Montamat, the Queen of Navarre's Lieutenant in that Country, was put to a very great Dilemma at this preparation, and could not possibly divine which way I would take, whether directly to Pa, or to Rabasteins; for as for St. Sever, he perceiv'd very well by my motion, that I had no thoughts of going that way: but expected I should march ther directly to the said Rabsteins, or else to Pau. I made so good haste, that in two dayes and two nights, with four pieces of Canon, a great Culverine, and two Bastards I arriv'd at Noguarol; where Messieurs de Gondrin and de Sainctorens joyning with me, we marcht directly to Rabasteins, and in three dayes with the greatest part of our Horse and Foot came before the Town. It continually rain'd, insomuch that all the Ri∣vers were full, which was the reason that the Artillery could not come before Rabasteins so soon as the Army; but immediately upon my arrival I took Commissary Fredeville and the Sieur de Lebron, who in the morning before day had been to discover the place, as Captain St. Colmbe, Monsieur de Basillac, and other Gentlemen of the Country had also done, whom I found of contrary opinions, and in great dispute, touching the manner of the Siege, some of them saying that we must first take the Town, and from within to batter the Castle; the others, and especially all those of Bearn maintain'd, that I ought to attaque the Castle from without, and Fredeville himself was of that opinion: but I would see it my self; for in such matters I would never trust to any one, and a good besieger of places ought to proceed after that manner; and to that end, taking onely the before-named Fredeville and de Lebron along with me,The Sieur de Montluc goes to discover Raba∣steins. went my self to discover the place, where though they ply'd me lustly with their shot, they did not hinder me nevertheless from viewing every part at my own leisure, till at last I withdrew my self out of the storm of Harquebuze shot into a little thacht house close by the Castle; and there I made de Fre∣dville confess, that we were first to attaque the Town, and from within, the Castle; after which we return'd one after another running, for it was hot standing still, and went to conclude with Messieurs de Gondrin, de Basillac, de Savigna, de Sainctorens, de Monte∣span, de Maidaillan, and Captain Paucillac Colonel of the Infantry, to attaque the Town. The remainder of the day I employ'd in causing Gabions and Bavins to be made, and by break of day the next morning had the Artillery planted in Battery before the Town, which in a very few volleys made a Breach. The Enemy had no intention to keep the Town, for they had filled all the houses with straw and faggots, which so soon as they saw our people coming on to the Assault, they gave fire to in an instant, and ran away men, women, and children to put themselves into the Castle. Our men did what they could to save the Town from being burnt, but they shot so furiously from the Castle, that it was impossible to hinder the greatest part of it from being consum'd to ashes. The night following I brought the Artillery into the Town, and began to batter some Lodgings on the left hand, at the end of which was a Turret that cover'd the Draw-bridg and the Gate of the Castle; and by Evening the said Buildings were opened, and the Turret beaten down to the Ground. In the morning by break of day we began to batter the great Tower where the Clock was, which whilst we were doing our Soldiers gain'd the Gate of the Town, which was within ten paces or less of that of the Castle, and that lookt a little into their false-Brayes: but there was a great Terrass a Pike height, and as much in thickness, made of Bavins after the manner of a Rampire that cover'd their Draw-bridg, so that our people could not do them so muc harm as they did us; to remedy which inconvenience we made a Blind of some barrels and planks in that place, which something secur'd our men that lay before the said Portal. All day long our Artillery batter'd the face of the Tower, and in the end the said Tower was opened, after which I made them shoot from the other Battery, which play'd into the Castle, till the next day, which was the third, at noon, but could see no issue of the business. At this time Monsieur de Fontenilles and Captain Moret came with the piece of Canon, and the great Culverine from Tholouze; but they did us no service at all, for the Culverine burst in an hundred pieces, and the Ca∣non was crackt. I then caused two pieces of Canon to be remov'd to the left hand close by the Wall of the Town that pointed upon the other Face of the Castle upon the left; wherein my in∣tention was, if I could, to make the Tower fall on our side, which if I could effect, it
would choak up the Ditch that was full of water, and fill the false-Brayes on that side, by which means we might go on to the Assault over the ruine, which I made account would infallbly fill the Graffe, for the Tower was very high. All the fourth day I bat∣ter'd the face of this Tower with these two pieces of Canon, and in the end beat it down, so that nothing remain'd standing, but the right side, and the corners. I then caused them to shoot at the first Corner which lookt towards the Artillery I had first planted on the left hand, and with two pieces that I was all night removing, at the other Corner that look't towards the Town. In ten or twelve shots the Coins was broken, and the Tower fall'n on our side, exacty in the place where I would have it: but how high, or how thick soever the Tower was, it did not so wholly ill the Graffe, but that we were to de∣scend a great way into it. It is true, that the ruines had drunk up the water, and fill'd a good part of the Ditch, but not so that we were not yet to go very low. The fifth day at night the Sieur de Basillac, and the Baron de St. Lary, brought me fifty or threescore Pioneers, for all mine were stoln away, and fled; and they had raised these amongst their own Tenants, upon their own Estates which lay hard by. I gave these fellows to Mon∣sieur de Leberon, and Captain Montaut his Brother-in-law, with thirty or fourty Sol∣diers that the Captains l' Artigue and Solles made to take upon them the office of Pioneers, their Captains themselves assisting them at the work. The service they were employ'd about was to take away the Terrass, that the Artillery might look into the Draw-bridg, and batter the side of it, and that the Ball might pass all along by the Flank, and into the Courtine a∣long the Breach within. The Enemy had also made a Barricado in the Chambers above, so that a man could not pssibly see any thing on one of the two sides. I gave the charge of removing the two pieces of Canon to the place where Monsieur de Leberon drew away the Terrass to the Vicount d'llza, and my self went to take a little repose, for this was the fifth night that I had not had a whole hour of sleep. By break of day I heard the two Canons play, but could not believe it possible that in that one night all the Terrass could be remov'd, at least all that was in our way. Our Artillery began to play its feats all along this Flank, and it cost us a great many shot to break this Barricado, which did us infinite mischief, for they shot desperately into our Canon. I then made the Vicount d'Vza, Monsieur de Lebe∣ron, and Captain Montaut to go to rest, and left Monsieur de Basillac to assist the Artillery. After this we caused a hole to be made in the Wall of the Town close by our Artillery, that we might come to it in security from without, for from within it was impossible with∣out being kill'd or wounded. The fourth day of our Siege I had given to Captain Bahus the charge of causing Gabions to be made, who had accordingly taken great pains, and been very diligent in the execution of his Command; but he had caused them to be made so little, that the wind of the Canon had presently shaked them all to pieces, an error that a man must take care to avoid. Our Cavalry all this while was quarter'd in Villages a league and a half from the Lea∣guer, where there was accommodation of Hay and Oats for the Horses, with instruction and command to be every night all night long in the field, to prevent any relief from get∣ting in: for the very day that we came to Rabasteins, we had taken a great Packet of Let∣ters sent by Monsieur de Montamat,Monsieur de Montamat's Letters taken. to the Vicount de Caumont, Monsieur d' Audax, and several other Gentlemen to the number of thirty or fourty Letters; wherein he sollicited them if ever they desir'd to do an opportune and signal service for the Queen of Navarre, and the Prince, to come succour the Country of Bearn; for that they were not strong e∣nough to defend the Country if they did not come in to their relief: that he had already writ to them twice or thrice, but had received no answer, that therefore he should send him word when they should be ready, and he would in one night make so long a march as to come and joyn with them, immediately to march altogether into Bearn; or that o∣therwise he must be constrain'd to abandon the open Country, wating Forces to make head against us; and that he saw he had not now to do with Monsieur de Terride. The reading of which Letters made us to pitch upon the following resolution. First, To send to the Baron de Larbous, that he should bring Monsieur de Gramont's Company of Gens-d'arms from the higher Comenge, to come and joyn with us, that in so doing, he should make a halt thereabouts where the relief was of necessity to pass, and that night and day he should keep his Horse upon the Avenues, to give us continual adver∣tisement of the Enemies motion; and that he should not offr to hinder their passage, but let them pass by, and only put himself in their Rear. I then dispatcht away Captain Maussan, a Gentleman of my own Company, to go to the Valleys by which the Enemy was to pass, giving him order with theA rude kind of Alarm given to a whole Coun∣try, by ringing and inking of Pots, Keeles and Basons. Basain to raise all the people of the Valleys and Villages, and joyn himself to the Baron de Larbous to fall into their Rear. Thus much for the Recruits we expected to come in to us; now on our side, our Cavalry was every
night on horseback, and we had Scouts out continually as far as Nay, for Monsieur de Montamat was of necessity to pass over the Bridg of the said Nay to go meet his relief, and in case we had not taken the Castle before the said Montamat and his Succours should u∣nite,Order to hin∣der the relief of Rabastins. Monsieur de Gondrin with twenty Light-horse, and four Ensigns of Foot, was to stay with the Artillery, and I with the rest of the Camp, when the news of their approach was brought to us, was to march day and night to go and fight them. This was the Order we had concluded on, had any Forces come to relieve them, making account that in case we defeated their Succours, the whole Country of Bearn was our own. Which I have here set down, and enform'd my reader withal, that others may take exemple by it, when they shall be engaged upon the like occasion; the young Captains I mean, for the old Soldiers know well enough they are to proceed after this manner. My deliberation moreover was, the Castle being taken, to dispatch away a Gentleman who should post it day and night to the King, to carry his Majesty news of the success, to the end that he might send some Gentleman to the Mareschal d' Anville, who was about Montpelier, fol∣lowing the trace of the Enemy, (where I have not heard of any great harm he did) to bid him write to those of Tholouze to send me eight pieces of Canon, of twelve of Nar∣bonne, that were yet at the said Tholouze,Design for the Conquest of Bearn. and order him to direct his Letters to the Parlia∣ment and the Capitouls, to move them forthwith to defray the charge of conveying the said pieces of Canon to me. Which whilst it was in doing we would go attaque another Castle within two little Leagues of Rabasteins, which vvas not very strong, and from thence would go to pass the Gave at a Foard above Nay, very well known to the Bearnois Gentle∣men in our Camp, and take Nay, there to establish our Magazine of victual, and to re∣ceive Messieurs de Luxe, and de Damazan, the Vicount de Chaux, and d' Almabarix, with the Basques they were to bring in to us, and so to march before Pau, where the Vicount d'Orthe was to come with the two pieces of Canon, and the Culverine had been left in his hands at Dacqs; being confident that all the Country, some for good will, and the rest for fear of their lives and estates, would immediately surrender to us. That having taken Pau, and the eight piecs of Canon being come to us from Tholouze, we would then march before Navarrins, and whoever would have put me to my Oath, whether I should have taken it or no, I should rather have sworn I should than I should not, for we had with us Gentlemen of Bearn and Bigorre, and principally Monsieur de Basillac, who had command∣ed at the Siege of Navarreins for Monsieur de Terride, who both then said, and have since affirm'd, that had we assaulted Navarreins as briskly as we did Rabasteins, we should have carried that with less difficulty than the other; every one that knew them both concluding that Rabasteins was by much the stronger place. But as men design, and God disposeth as seemeth best to him the Events of things, he was pleased to order it very much contrary to what we proposed to our selves: for the fifth day of the Siege,1562. the 23, of Iuly, in the year 1562. upon a Sunday about two of the clock in the afternoon, I resolved to give an assault, the Order whereof was after the man∣ner following.Order for the Assault. That Monsieur de Sanctorens Mareschal de Camp should lead the Com∣panies one after the other up to the Breach, which that he might the better do without confusion, I order'd all the Companies to be drawn by four and four together out of the Town, which upon pain of death were not to stir from their places till Monsieur de Sain∣ctorens should come to fetch them, who was to stay three quarters of an hour betwixt every leading up, and in that manner to conduct all the Companies one after another; and it was also order'd, that the two Captains who were upon the Guard by the Breach, which were l' Artigues,The Canon a∣bandoned. and Salles of Bearn should go on first to the Assault. As I was setting down this Order one came in haste to tell me, that the two Canons that batter'd the Flanck, and that had been remov'd in the night, were forsaken, and not a man durst shew him∣self upon the Battery, by reason the Artillery it self had ruin'd all the Gabions. I there∣fore left it to Messieurs de Gondrin and de Sainctorens to conclude the Order of the Fight, that is to say, that the Companies should go on successively one after another, which was to be set down in writing, and my self ran on the outside to the whole of the wall, where I found only ten or twelve Pioneers squat with their bellies close to the ground; for Tibau∣ville the Commissary of the Artillery, who had the charge of those two pieces of Canon, had been constrain'd to quit them, and even Monsieur de Basillac himself. Seeing then this disorder, I unbethought my self of a great number of Bavins I had the day before caused to be brought into the Town, and said to the Gentlemen who were with me these words:The words of the Sieur de Montluc play∣ing the Pio∣neer. I have heard, and alwayes observ'd, that there is no labour, nor danger, that Gentlemen will ever refuse; follow me therefore I beseech you, and do as you shall see me do? They did not stay to be entreated, and so we went in great haste directly to the Bavin that were within the Town, and lay in the middle of a Street there where not a man durst
abide, and there I took a Bavin and laid it upon my shoulder, as also every Gentleman took one, and there were a great many who carried two a-piece; after which manner we return'd out of the Town by the same way we entred in, and thus I marcht before them till we came to the hole. By the way as we were going I had given order, that they should bring me four or five Halbardeers, which at my return I found already arriv'd at the hole, and made them enter into it. We threw them the Bavins into the hole, which they took with the points of their Halberts, and ran to throw them upon the Gabions to raise them. I dare be bold to affirm with truth that we were not above a quarter of an hour about this work, and so soon as ever the Canon was cover'd, Tibauville and the other Canoneers return'd into the Battery, where they began to shoot with greater fury than of all the dayes before, every clap almost overtaking another, every one assisting them with great cheerfulness. If, Captains, you shall do the same, and your selves first put your hands to the work, you will make every one follow your exemple, very shame will push and force them on: and when the service is hot in any place, if the Chief do not go in person, or at least some eminent man, the rest will go very lamely on, and murmur when a man sends them to slaughter. And if you covet honor, you must sometimes tempt danger as much as the meanest Soldier under your Command. I will deprive no man of his due honor; for I think I have assisted at as many Bat∣teries as any man this day alive, and must needs say this, that I never saw Commissaries of the Artillery more diligent and adventurous than both Fredeville and Tibauville shew'd themselves during the whole five dayes that the Battery continued, in my whole life; for they themselves both levell'd, and fir'd, though they had as good Canoneers as ever I saw handle Linstock in my dayes; and I dare be bold to say, that of a thousand Canon shot we made against this place not ten fail'd of their effect, or were spent in vain. In the morning I sent for Monsieur de Gohas, who was at Vic-Bigorre, and the Captains who were set to have an eye to Montamat, and the Succours expected by him, writing to him to come away that he might be with me at the Assault, by reason that Captain Paulliac Colonel of the Infantry was so dangerously wounded,Captain Paul∣liac ot. that we had no hopes of his life. He receiv'd his shot at the time when I went over-night to carry Messieurs de Leberon and de Montaut to cut off the great Counterscarp, which shot went quite through his Body.Fabia de Montluc hot. My Son Fabian was also shot in the chin, and two Soldiers close by my side. I there committed a very great error, for I went in the evening before it was dark, and I believe they were aware that we intended to cut the Counterscarp, for all their Harque∣buzeers were run together to that place; and the reason why I committed this error was, that having computed with my self how many hours the night was long, I found that it was not above seven hours or thereabouts; and on the other side I saw that in half an hour I should lose all that I had done, if the Counterscarp was not pulled down by break of day, and in that case I should think fit to give an assault that day, they would be so strong∣ly rampir'd and fortified, that with as many more Canon shot as I had made against the place, it would be a matter of very great difficulty to enter. This was the reason why I made so much haste to go and begin the work, that I might have it perfected by break of day; where I recommended the care of it to Messieurs de Lberon and de Montaut, and the two Captains upon the Guard, by telling them that in their diligence our victory wholly consisted. And in truth they slept not, as I have already said, for by break of day the Artillery began to play, and the Counterscarp was wholly pulled down. O Camrades, you who shall go to besiege places, you cannot but confess, that both here and in several other places, my Enterprizes and Victories have succeeded more from my vi∣gilancy and prompt execution than my valour, and I on my part am willing to confess, that there was in the Camp braver men than I. But no one can be a Coward that has these three things; for from these three all the Combats and Victories proceed, and all va∣liant men choose to follow Captains that are provided with these three qualities. And on the other side he cannot be call'd hardy, let his heart be never so good, if he be tar∣dy, backward, and slow in execution: for before he has fixt his resolution, he has been so long deliberating about it, that the Enemy is advertiz'd of what he intends to do, and consequently is provided to prevent his design: but if he be quick he shall even sur∣prize himself. So that there is no great confidence to be repos'd in a Chief that is not n∣du'd with these three qualities, vigilancy, promptitude, and valour. If a man examine all the great Warriours that have ever been, he will find that they had all those qualities. Alexander did not in vain bear the Device I have mentioned before. Examine Caesar's Commentaries, and all the Authors that have writ of him, you will find that in his life he fought two and fifty Battels without ever losing any, saving that of Dirachium; but within thirty dayes he had a sufficient revenge against Pompey, for he won a great Battel,
and defeated him. You will not find that in these two and fifty Battels he ever fought three times in his own person, that is, with his own hand, though he was alwayes pre∣sent there; by which you will understand, that all his Victories were the effects of his conduct, for being diligent, vigilant, and a prompt executer of his designs. But for all this, these qualities are rarely found, and I believe we Gascons are better provided of them than any other people of France, or perhaps of Europe, and many good and great Cap∣tains have gone out of it within these fifty years. I shall not compare my self to them, but this I will say of my self, because it is true, that my Master never lost any thing by my sloth or remissness. The Enemy thought me a league off when I came to beat up his Quarters. And if diligence be requir'd in all exploits of war, it is much more in a Siege, for a very little thing will serve to overthrow a great design. If you press your Enemy you redouble his fear, he will not know where he is, nor have leisure to recollect himself. Be sure to wake whilst others sleep, and never leave your Enemy without something to do. I shall now return to the Assault; our Order being set down, I went and placed my self at the Gate of the Town near unto the Breach, where I had all the Gentlemen with me, of which there might be six or seven score, and still more came up to us, for Monsieur de la Chappelle Lauzieres, who came from Query, brought a great Troop of Gentlemen along with him. I shall here relate one thing of my own presage, which is perfectly true, That it was impossible for all the friends I had to dispossess me of an opinion I had, that I should in this Assault be kill'd or wounded by a shot in some part of my head; and out of that conceipt was once half in a mind not to go to the Assault, knowing very well that my death would at this time be of ill consequence, if not to the Enterprize in hand, yet to the general design upon that Country; this fancy therefore still running in my head the morning before the Assault was to be given, I said to Monsieur de Las the Kings Advocate at Agen, who was of our Council, these words. Monsieur de Las, there are some who have exclaim'd, and do yet cry out that I am very rich; you know of all the mo∣ney I have to a Denr, for by my Will, to which you are a witness, you are sufficiently enform'd of my Estate. But seeing the world are not otherwise to be perswaded but I have a great deal of money, and that consequently, if by accident I should die in this Assault, they would demand of my Wife four times as much as I am worth, I have here brought a particular of all the money I have at this day in the whole world, as well abroad at Interests, as at home in the cu∣stody of my Wife. The account is of my Steward Barat's drawing, and sign'd by my own hand. You are my friend, I beseech you therefore if I dye, that you and the Councellor Mon∣siur de Nort will transfer your love and friendship to my Wife and my two Daughters, and that you will have a care of them, especially Charlotte Catherine, who had the honor to be Christned by the King and the Queen his Mother. Which having said, I deliver'd the Scrowl into his hands, and very well perceiv'd that he had much ado to refrain weeping. By this you may judge if I had not the misfortune that befel me before my eyes. I have no fami∣liar spirit, but few misfortunes have befall'n me in the whole course of my life that my mind has not first presag'd. I still endeavour'd to put it out of my fancy, resigning all things to the good will of God, who disposes of us as seems best to his own wisdom, nei∣ther did I ever do otherwise, what ever the Hugonots my Enemies have said or written to the contrary against me. So soon as two of the clock, the hour prefixt for the assault, was come, I caused eight or ten Bottles of wine, that Madam de Panjas had sent me, to be brought out, which I gave the Gentlemen,Monsieur de Montluc's Speech to the Gentlemen go∣ing on to the Assault. saying, Let us drink Camrades: for it must now soon be seen which of us has been nurst with the best milk. God grant that another day we may drink together; but if our last hour be come, we cannot frustrate the decrees of Fate. So soon as they had all drunk, and encourag'd one another, I made them a short Remonstrance in these words, saying, Friends and Companions, we are now ready to fall on to the Assault, and every man is to shew the best he can do. The men who are in this place, are of those who with the Count de Mont∣gommery destroyed your Churches, and ruined your houses; You must make them disgorge what they have swallowed of your Estates. If we carry the place, and put them all to the sword, you will have a good bargain of the rest of Bearn. Believe me they will never dare to stand against you.The Assault. Go on them in the name of God, and I will immediately follow. Which being said I caused the Assault to be sounded, and the two Captains immediately fell on; wheresome of their Soldiers and Ensigns did not behave themselves very well. Seeing then that those were not likely to enter, Monsieur de Sainctorens marcht up with four Ensigns more, and brought them up to the Breach, vvhich did no better than the former, for they stopt four or five paces short of the Counterscarp, by vvhich means our Canon vvas nothing hindred from playing into the Breach, vvhich made those vvithin duck dovvn behind it.
I then presently perceiv'd, that some body else, and other kind of men than the Foot must put their hands to the work; which made me presently forget the conceit I had of being kill'd or wounded, and said to the Gentlemen these words. Camrades, no body knows how to fight but the Nobles, and we are to expect no victory but by our own hands, let us go then, I will lead you the way, and let you see that a good horse will never be resty. Follow boldly, and go on without fear, for we cannot wish for a more honourable death. We deferre the time too long, let us fall on. I then took Monsieur de Gohas by the hand, to whom I said, Monsieur de Gohas, I will that you and I fight together, I pray therefore let us not part; and if I be kill'd or wounded, never take notice of me, but leave me there, and push forward, that the Victory however may remain to the King: and so we went on as cheerfully as ever I saw men go on to an Assault in my life, and looking twice behind me, saw that the Gentlemen almost toucht one another, they came up so close. There was a large Plain of an hundred and fifty paces over, or more, all open, over which we were to march to come up to the Breach, which as we passed over, the Enemy fir'd with great fury upon us all the way, and I had ix Gentlemen shot close by me. One of which was the Sieur de Besoles; his shot was in his arm, and so great a one, that he had like to have died of his wound; the Vicount de La∣batut was another, and his was in his leg: I cannot tell the names of the rest, because I did not know them. Monsieur de Gohas had brought seven or eight along with him, and amongst the rest Captain Savaillan the elder, of which three were slain, and the sad Cap∣tain Savaillan wounded with a Harquebuze shot quite through the face. There were also hurt one Captain du Plex, another Captain la Bastide, both Kinsmen of mine about Ville∣neufue, who had alwayes serv'd under Monsieur de Brissac, one Captain Rantoy of Da∣masan, and Captain Sales of Bearn, who had before been wounded with the thrust of a Pike in the Eye. There were two little Chambers about a Pike height or more from the ground, which Chambers the Enemy so defended both above and below, that not a man of ours could put up his head without being seen; however our people began to assault them with a great shower of stones, which they pour'd in upon them, and they also shot at us, but ours throwing downwards had the advantage of this kind of ight. Now I had cau∣sed three or four Ladders to be brought to the edge of the Graffe, and I as turn'd about to call for two of them to be brought to me,The Sieur de Montluc shot. a Harquebuze-shot clapt into my face, from the corner of a Barricado joyning to the Tower, where I do not think there could be four Harquebuzeers, for all the rest of the Barricado had been beaten down by our two Ca∣non that playd upon the Flanck. I was immediately all over blood, for it gusht out at my mouth, nose, and eyes; whereupon Monsieur de Gohas would have caught me in his arms, thinking I would fall, but I said, Let me alone, I shall not fall, follow your point. Upon this shot of mine almost all the Soldiers and the Gentlemen began to lose courage, and to retire, which made me cry out to them, though I could scarce speak, by reason of the torrent of blood that pasht out at my mouth and nose; Whither will you go? Gentlemen, whither will ye go? will ye be terrified for me? do not flinch nor forsake the sight, for I have no hurt, and let every one return to his place; in the mean time hiding the blood in the best manner I could; and to Monsieur de Gohas I said, Monsieur de Gohas, take care I beseech you that the Soldiers be not discouraged, and renew the Assault. I could no longer stay there, for I began to faint, and therefore said to the Gentlemen, I will go get my self drest, but if you love me, let no one follow, but revenge me: Which having said I took a Gentleman by the hand, I cannot tell his name, for I could scarce see him, and return'd by the same way I caine, where by the way I found a little Horse of a Soldiers, upon which by the Gentlemans assistance I mounted as well as I could, and after that manner was conducted to my Lodging; where I found a Chirurgeon of Monsieur de Gohas, called Maistre Si∣mon, who drest me, and with his fingers (so wide were the Orifices of the wound) pull'd out the bones from my two Cheeks, and cut away a great deal of flesh from my face, which was all bruis'd and torn. Monsieur de Gramond was upon a little Eminence hard by, looking on at his ease, who being of this new Religion, though he had never born arms against the King, had no mind to meddle amongst us. He was aware how upon my hurt all the Soldiers were dishearten'd, and said to those who were with him, There is some eminent person slain, see how the Sol∣diers are discourag'd, I am afraid it is Monsieur de Montluc, and therefore said to one of his Gentlemen call'd Monsieur de Sart, Go run and see who it is, and if it be he, and that he is not dead, tell him that I entreat him to give me leave to come and see him. The said Sieur de Sart is a Catholick, who accordingly came, and at his entring into the Town he heard that it was I that was hurt, and coming to my Lodging found my people weeping for me, and me tumbled upon a Pallet upon the ground; where he told me that Mon∣sieur de Gramont begg'd leave that he might come to see me. To which I made answer,
That there was no unkindness betwixt Monsieur de Gramont and me, and that if he pleased to come, he would find that he had as many friends in our Camp, and peradventure more than in that of their Religion. He was no sooner gone from me, but Monsieur de Madaillan my Lieutenant, who had marcht on the one hand of me when I went on to the Assault, as Monsieur de Gohas did on the other, came to see if I was dead, and said to me; Sir, Cheer up your spirits,Rabasteins ta∣ken by storm and rejoyce, we have entred the Castle, and the Soldiers are laying a∣bout them, who put all to the sword: and assure your self we will revenge your wound. I then said to him, Praised be God that I see the Victory ours before I dye. I now care not for death. I besech you return back, and as you have ever been my friend, so now do me that act of friendship not to suffer so much as one man to escape with life. Whereupon he immediately return'd, and all my servants went along with him, so that I had no body left with me but two Pa∣ges, Monsieur de Las, and the Chirurgeon. They would fain have sav'd the Minister, and the Governor, whose name was Captain Ladon, to have hang'd them before my Lodging, but the Soldiers took them from those who had them in their custody, whom they had also like to have kill'd for offring to save them, and cut them in a thousand pie∣ces. They made also fifty or threescore to leap from the high Tower into the Moat, which were there all drown'd. There were two only saved who were hid, and such there were who offer'd four thousand Crowns to save their lives, but not a man of ours would heark∣en to any Ransom; and most of the women were kill'd, who also did us a great deal of mischief with throwing stones. There was found within a Spanish Merchant whom the Enemy had kept prisoner there, and another Catholick Merchant also, who were both sa∣ved; and these were all that were left alive of the men that we found in the place, namely the two that some one help't away, and the two Catholick Merchants. Do not think, you who shall read this Book, that I caused this slaughter to be made so much out of re∣venge for the wound I had receiv'd, as to strike terror into the Country, that they might not dare to make head against our Army. And in my opinion all Souldiers in the be∣ginning of a Conquest ought to proceed after that manner, with such as are so impudent as to abide Canon; he must bar his ears to all Capitulation and Composition, if he do not see great difficulties in his Enterprize, and that his Enemy have put him to great trouble in making a Breach. And as severity (call it cruelty if you please) is requisite in case of a resolute opposition, so on the other side mercy is very commendable, and fit, if you see that they in good time surrender to your discretion. Monsieur de Gramond then came to visit me, and found me in a very ill condition, for I had much ado to speak to him, by reason of the great quantity of blood that issued from my mouth; Monsieur de Gohas also immediately after him came back from the fight to see me; saying, Take comfort Monsieur, and cheer up, upon my word we have sufficiently reveng'd you, for there is not one man left alive. He thereupon knew Monsieur de Gramond, and saluted him, who after they had embraced, entreated him to carry him to the Castle, which he did,The Fortress of Rabasieins. where Monsieur de Gramond found the taking of it exceeding strange, say∣ing he could never have believ'd this place had been near so strong, and that had I attaqu'd Navarreins it would have been more easily taken. He would then needs see all the re∣moves I had made of the Canon, which having seen, he said, it had not been requisite that we should have omitted any thing of the Battery. About an hour after he return'd, where he offer'd me a House of his hard by, and all other things in his power, and has since told me, that at that time, and in the condition he then saw me, he never thought I could have liv'd till the next day, and believed he had taken his leave of me for ever. All that day, and all that night I bled continually, and the next morning sent to entreat all the Cap∣tains to come and see me, which they did, where having recover'd a little heart, and being able to speak with greater ease than before, I made them the following short Oration. Gentlemen,Monsieur de Montluc's Ha∣rangue to his Officers after his being hurt. my Companions and Friends, I am not so much concern'd at my own misfortune, nor the pain I endure, as I am to see the King's affairs disorder'd by this accident, and my self constrain'd to leave you. I did not conceal from you the design I had in this Execution, you all of you heard it. I beseech you therefore that for me you stop not the Career of your victory, but push your fortune still on, for the execution we have done upon these people will strike a terror into all the Country of Bearn: and I am confident you will meet with no resistance but at Navarreins. Lose not then this op∣portunity that God has given you; for if you do, all the world will say, that your Cou∣rages only depended upon mine, and that you can do nothing without me, which though it would be a singular commendation for me, yet I would be very sorry to have it said, out of the honour and friendship I bear to you, which makes me as jealous of your reputation as my own. Make then I beseech you no more account of me than if I was
already dead. At which word I observ'd most of the Company with tears in their eyes; and having paus'd a little to take breath, pursu'd my discourse in these words. You are here a great many Captains as able to command as I, and you have good and valiant men, who will now redouble their courages to revenge their Chief. I assure my self there is none of you but will give place to Monsieur de ondrin, as well out of deference to his Birth, as also in regard he is the eldest Captain amongst you. And seeing he is a little infirm, I entreat you Monsieur de Sainctorens, and you Messieurs de Goas and de Madaillan to be continually about him, that the Conduct of this Expedition may be order'd by your discretion; for he you see is old, and therefore you who are young must take the pains. And since you are all men of courage, and all aim at one common end, which is his Majsties sevice, and the advancement of his affairs, maintain, I beseech you a strict and inviolable friendship with one another. My wound, if you perform brave exploits, will be the occasion of your acquiring honor for your selves; and for God's sake my beloved Friends, do not give over this Enterprize in the beginning, and at a time when you ought most to pursue it. Follow your blow in this astonishment of the Enemy, and make it manifest that it was not I alone, but every one of you also, who have an honourable share in the victory. Are you not content with the Election I have made for you of Monsieur de Gondrin? and are you not willing to accept him for your Chief? to which they all made answer that they were, and that it was all the reason in the world he should command. Which having all declar'd, I entreated them to see me no more, that they might not encrease my Fever, but all retire themselves to him, and so they sorrowfully departed from me. One thing (Lieutenants of Provinces) I can say, and that without bragging or lying, that never any man in my Command was better belov'd of the Nobless than I, and though I was of a peevish cholerick nature, yet so it was that they bore with my inperfections, knowing that I did nothing out of malice. O 'tis an excellent quality that in a Chief! and believe me what great Lord soever you are, if you do not win the love of the Nobless, the Officers and Soldiers, you will never do any thing to purpose. And if your passion sometimes make you say, or do any thing you should not do, (for we are all men) you must repair it. I would fain see any of those Messieurs of France who censure our actions in governing the Nobless of Gascony, undertake the Government, to see if they could so easily, and at all turns manage those Gentlemen as they pretend. There was yet another thing that has evermore preserv'd me the friendship not of the Gentlemen only, but of all those who serv'd under my command, which was that I never thought any thing too dear for my Captains and Soldiers. I have often when I was but Captain my self given away my arms and my cloaths when I saw any one in need.Liberality a quality neces∣sary in a Chief. For a Pike, a Halbert, a gray Hat and a Feather, I have gain'd the hearts of some to that degree that they would have run into the fire for me; neither was my Purse ever ty'd up in my Companions ne∣cessity, and yet they say I am covetous! He that sayes so of me is nothing acquainted with my nature; and it is the vice, of all others, that I have the least been polluted with∣all I dare say that in this last War onely I have given to the Lords and Gentlemen un∣der my Command eleven Spanish Horses, and two Coursers. Which that no one may think to be a lye, I shall name the persons to whom I gave them; not to reproach them with it nevertheless; for they did me honor in accepting them. First, I gave a Courser to Monsieur de Brassac, who follow'd me in all these Wars at his own charge (a Gentleman of ten thousand Livers a year, but the Enemy ever kept from him all the Estate he had in Xaintonge and Chalosse) for which Courser he would not now take 400 Crowns. I gave another Courser to Captain Cosseil, who bare arms with me twenty years, and was Captain Charry's Lieutenant, after he had first been my Ensign. I gave to Monsieur de Madaillan, who was my Lieutenant, a Spanish Horse he would not part with for 400 Crowns, and another to his Brother he would not now sell for five. I presented the Chevalier de Romegas with a Spanish Horse that co me two hundred threescore and fifteen Crowns. I gave also to Mongieral Sieur de Caelles 200 Crowns to buy him a Horse, because his won had been hurt at St. Foy. He is a poor Gentleman, but very valiant, as Monsieur de Sansac will witness, who is one of the oldest, bravest, and most prudent Captains of this Kingdom. And because he had another Horse that unluckily died, I gave him a Spanish Horse, a tall and strong one to carry Barbs, which after the Peace he sold for 1600 Crowns. Captain de la Bastide had another Spa∣nish Horse of me, and the younger Beauville my Brother-in-law another, by reason his hd been kill'd under him in a Sally he had made upon the Enemy. I gave another to Cap∣tain Mauzan, a Gentleman of my own Company, by reason that in a Rencounter he had near unto Rqefort, his had been kill'd betwixt his legs, and himself, his Brother, and
Brother-in-law all wounded. I gave another to Captain Romain a man at Arms of my Company, a por Gentleman, but a man of extraordinary valour. I gave another to Captain Fabian, he having lost his horse in his return from Court, for which I had often refus'd 500 Crowns. And yet another to Captain Mons my Guidon, a poor Gentle∣man who had layn a whole year in prison at Montauban, which horse cost me three hundred and five and forty Crowns. Being sick in bed, and dismissing my Nephew de Balagny, who I hope will not shame the Family from whence he is descended, I gave him the Spanish Horse that I had ever kept for my own Saddle. Several others I have lost, and three in this last War, particularly one that I design'd for the King, who being swelted, founder'd under me as I was going to relieve Mont de Marsan, which I thought Mon∣sieur de Montamat had been going to besiege; and could I reckon all the horses I have given in my life, I think it would exceed my Estate. If you do the same, you Lords who are the Kings Lieutenants, you shall alwayes be well follow'd, for the Soldier abhorres nothing so much as an avaricious Captain. To return to my Subject all these brave Gentlemen took their leaves of me, and the next morning, which was the third day after my hurt, my Nephew de Leberon caused me to be carried to Marsac,The State of Monsieur de Montluc's Ar∣my after his hurt. which is two leagues from Rabasteins. I was no sooner departed from the Camp, but that the affection all the Soldiers bore unto me did too soon appear, for all the Gentlemen Voluntiers retir'd, and most of the Foot, for which I was exceed∣ingly sorry, and could have been rather content with all my heart they should have totally forgot me. How much (my Companions) did you there prejudice your King and Coun∣try? and how great a wrong did you to your own honor? Had you united and main∣tain'd a good intelligence one with another, as you promis'd me you would, all Bearn had been your own. 'Tis an untoward thing this AEmulation to command. The same day that I made the Remonstrance to the Nobless, they dispatcht away Captain Montaut to the King,The Sieur de Montluc layes down his Go∣vernment. whom I entreated to present my most humble service to his Majesty, and in my behalf to beseech him, that he would please to provide for my Goverment, whether I should live or die, for that he was to expect no more service from me: that I had al∣ready done enough, and must now make room for others, and that I would now for the time to come seek what I had ever avoided before, which was the privacy and re∣pose of my own House. He found at his arrival at Court, that the King had already dispos'd of my Government above a month before, which till this time never any King of France before had ever done: but I ought not to lay the blame upon him. When I heard the news I did not much concern my self at it, though it did a little trouble me I confess, to have such a trick put upon me; for though I had not been shot, I should never more have exercised that Command;The Marquis de Villars the Kings Lieute∣nant in Gui∣enne. and I think he that now has it, which is the Marquis de Villars, would as little care to be dismist from it as I; for it is not a Benefice without a Cure, to have to do with the Queen of Navarre, and the Prince her Son, who is already grown up to a man, the principal Governor, and an Enemy to our Religion; who being what he is cannot want courage, credit, or means, not onely in Guienne, but even in the King's Cabinet. Out of which consideration I had before quitted the Govern∣ment, had it not been that I would not the King should reproach me, that I had abandon'd his service in a time of War, and the greatest necessity of his affairs. That I may return to speak of my wound, which I do but too well remember, you that are Generals of Armies, and Lieutenants of Provinces, may here observe how much it imports you to preserve your own persons, and not to expose them to hazard, as I did mine in playing the Common Soldier, and the Pioneer. For this unlucky shot of mine was the cause that the Army under my Command moulder'd away to nothing. I do not however intend to say, that you ought to be Cowards, and to hide your selves behind the Gabions, whilst others lie open to the Harquebuze shot, but only that you may learn to be wise by my exemple, and go discreetly into danger: for upon your loss all the rest de∣pends; as you know it befell that brave Gaston de Foix at the Battel of Ravenna. I know very well that a good heart, seeing his men misdemean themselves, cannot forbear leading them the way, and exposing himself to danger, as I did, seeing my Foot go so untoward∣ly to work. Which made me call to the Gentlemen, for I ever found by experience, that fifty Gentlemen will do more than two hundred Common Soldiers. We retein some∣thing of honor, which our Fathers have acquired for us, and which gives us a Title to that fair Epithet of Noble. By the whole account of my life hitherto you have been able to judg whether or no the King had any reason to use me ill, considering that I never spar'd my life (which certainly is the thing most dear to us in this world next to our honors) for his service; and not only my own, but the lives of my Sons also: for of four that I had I have been three fall in Battel
in his Majesties service the fourth only remains, which is the Chevalier, whom though I had design'd for the Church, and the Bishoprick of Condom, yet did I alwaies command him to shew himself a Montluc; and he had the honour to be entitled Chevalier by the late King Henry my good Master, who sent him to Malta where he serv'd his Apprentice∣age in arms under the Chevalier de Romegas; and from whence the Grand Master writ me word, that immediately upon his arrival he had put him to the test, to try if he was of my race or no, and had found him right. He was afterward in the Siege the Grand Signi∣or laid before Malta, whch was the bravst that ever was since Artillerie was first founded. But do not you who serve the King dspair of honor and reward by my exemple, and be∣cause I was not so well us'd, as perhap I deserv'd to have been; for this does not pro∣ceed from the Kings own nature. You may perhaps be more fortunate, and may not have so many Enemies as I, who for disdaining to be any ones creature, had no Patron to de∣fend me; and on the other side have been perhaps too liberal of my tongue, in speaking freely what I thought. 'Tis dangerous sometimes to speak truth, and I could never lie nor dissemble. Yet shall I not be so ingrate as not to acknowledg my self highly oblig'd to the Kings my Masters for the benefits and honours they have conferr'd upon me, who from the condition of a private Gentleman, have rais'd me to the greatest Employments in the Kingdom: but I can also say that I purchased those honours at the price of my blood. Now you must know that having recover'd a little, and finding my self some∣thing better of my wound, I writ a Letter to the King, which I have thought fit to insert in this place, of which these were the Contents. SIR, I Have thus long deer'd to prefer my Complaints,The Sieur de Montluc's Let∣ter to the King, which contains an abstract of his whole life. both by reason of the great indispo∣sition upon me, and also because my friends were long before they would let me know of your Majesties unkindness in taking from me the Government of Guienne. Had your Majesty pleased to have had but two months patience only, you would have found that so soon as I had settled the Country in peace, I was resolv'd most humbly to beseech your Majesty to provide for the Government, by reason of my age, and the great woud I have receiv'd, and then without disgracing me, your Majesty had had sufficient argument to have deputed another in my place. But by the manner of doing it, your Majesty has evidently manifested to all the world, that you have stript me of it for some forfeiture of mine, either as to matter of arms, or for some foul play I have practised upon your Majesties Treasure, by which means my honour is like to be brought into dispute through∣out the whole Kingdom, which I cannot think I have deserv'd, and therefore am very much at a stand, as many others will be, to guess from whence the great distaste your Majestie declares to have taken against me should proceed; unless (out of the little hopes I had to be for the future serviceable to you) for having often importun'd your Majestie to make choice of some other in my stead; and as to that, your Majestie has since com∣manded me to reassume my former Authority, and to continue my administration. Nei∣ther can it be upon any jealousie your Majestie can have entertein'd, that I have embezell'd your Majesties Treasure; for you would never have punisht me for a crime whereof you could not as yet be assur'd that I was guilty; and I have that confidence in your Majestie's bounty and wisdom, that you would not easily have given credit to reports so remote from all probability; for in the time that I have been your Majesties Lieutenant in these parts, several Commissiners in Extraordinary, and several of your Receivers General, with other Officers of your Majesties Exchequer, have made their Accounts, and had I been found in any of their Papers, I have friends at Court that would not have fail'd to have set a mark upon such places, where my name was any way concern'd. But hitherto I have not been put to any distress in proving their accounts, forasmuch as it cannot be found, that I have ever taken upon me to touch one penny of your Majesties money, not only in this your own Province, but also at Sienna, and in Tuscany, where I had much greater conveniency of doing it than I could have here. And your Majestie may parti∣cularly please to remember, that having done me the honor for three years last past, to order the pension of six thousand Livers a year I pay to the Cardinal of Guise, should be discharg'd out of the Exchequer, I was so far from meddling with your Majesties mo∣ney without your leave, that I would never make use of that assignment. And of all this your Majesty may be fully satisfied at the  of the Commissioners you have sent into these parts, who I am very certain will not bring back my name in any of their ac∣counts, or if they should, there would yet be nothing prov'd against me, and therefore it cannot be imagin'd that your Majestie should be dissatisfied with me upon that ac∣count.
If peradventure your Majesties displeasure should proceed from a belief that I have committed some fault in point of arms, this opinion would also be very contrary to that your Majesty had of me, at the time when you were pleased three or four times to write me word,The King stiles the Scur de Monluc the Conservator of Guie. that I was the Restorer of Guienne; and I assure my self your Majesty has not forgot the reasons why you were pleased to grace me with that honorable Title; but will, I hope please to remember, that it was because in the first Commotions at Tholouze, the City having been disputed for three dayes together, and in that dispute two Thirds of the City wn by the Rebels was at my coming deliver'd, the Assailants at the sight of me only put to rout, and many of them taken and punisht according to their desert, insomuch that to this day, the Inhabitants of the said City look upon me as the Conservator of their lives and estates, and the honor of their Wives. With like diligence and good fortune the City of Brd aux, to which I went in two dayes and two nights from Tholouze, and where by the way I fought with, and routed the Forces that were gather'd together to hin∣der my passage, was by me immediately reliev'd. Having rescued Bordeaux from the same danger that I had before Tholouze, without staying longer than two dayes there, I crost the River with sixscore Horse, believing that Monsieur de Burie would come up to me, as indeed he did, but it was four hours after the fight, where he found that I had defeated six Ensigns of Foot, and seven Cornes of Horse, commanded by Monsieur de Duras. And after this victory the said Sieur de Burie and I went to besiege Mont-segur, which was bat∣ter'd, and taken by assault, as was also Penne of Agenois. I after this in two daies took Lecture, by reason that the late Captain Montluc had surpriz'd four hundred men of the Garrison of the said City, whom he had put all of them to the sword; and immediately without resting day or night I pursued Monsieur de Duras so close,The Battel of Vr. that I compell'd him to sight, before our Foot could come up to us; nay, I scarcely gave leisure to Monsieur de Burie to come time enough to be present at the Engagement, where we succeeded so well, that a handful of men defeated three and twenty Ensigns of Foot, and thirteen Corners of Horse. After which I sent your Majesty ten Companies of Spanish Foot, of which we had made very little use; but that did good service at the Battel of Dreux, as also did en Companies of Gascons, which I sent your Majesty by Captain Charry, and your Pro∣vince of Guienne remain'd quiet, and clear from all troubles, not a man daring to lift up his head but for your Majesties service; so that with good and just cause your Majestie conferr'd upon me the Title of Conservator of Guienne. As to the second Troubles, I had long before sufficiently advertiz'd your Majesty, and the Queen your Royal Mother, of what you afterwards saw come to pass, and though by your command I had twice or thrice letters sent me, that I was very ill enform'd: I did not for all that slack my vigilancie, nor neglect to stand upon my Guard, that I might not be surpriz'd; but the same day that the Insurrection hapned at Paris, without other intelligence than my own, and upon Michaelmas Eve, I put my self into Lectoure, the most important City of all Gascony, in so opportune a season, that I frustrated the design of six hundred men, which were to have been let in at the Postern, and after having pre∣serv'd the Town in your Majesties obedience, knowing you stood in need of relief, as your Majesty afterwards sent me word, I made so good haste in raising of men, that in 29 dayes after the said Michaelmas day I sent your Majesty twelve hundred Horse,Relief sent to the King. and thirty Ensigns of Foot, which were conducted by me as far as Limoges, and from thence by the Sieurs de Terride, de Gondrin, and de Monsales; when though it seem'd to many, that Guienne would be left a prey to the Vicompts, who had very great Forces; neverthe∣less at my return I found them so much work to do, that they gain'd nothing either upon me, or upon the Province: and with the few Forces I was able to gather together, I went afterwards into Xaintonge, where at my arrival those who had taken arms at Marennes were defeated by Madaillan, and the Seneschal of Bazadois, who after meeting with Mon∣sieur de Pons, took Marennes, with the Isles of Oleron and Alvert. With the like dili∣gence was the Isle of Rhé recover'd by my Nephew de Leberon,Taking of the Isles. whom I sent thither, and had your Majesty been pleased to have furnisht me with what you promised of money, Artillery, and other Ammunitions of War, I had put fair to have reduced Rochelle it self to your Majesties obedience, before the Peace that was at that time concluded. As to what concerns the last Troubles, it is true, that they broke out at a time when I was sick, and scarce recovering from the danger of death, yet I did not nevertheless for∣bear to put my self into the field, and to get together all the Horse and Foot I possibly could, and hearing that the Forces of Languedoc, Provence, and Dauphené were coming to fall into our Country, I went out accompanied with Monsieur de la Valette and d' Escarts, and some other Officers, to meet and fight them, and in so doing approacht them so near, that had not their Camp-master Captain Moreau been fortunately taken by us, we had
all been cut off,  defeaed; for besides that the Encounter had been in a place where the Horse could not possibly have come to ight, they had moreover fought us at the ad∣vantage of six to one, we being no more than five and twenty hundred, and they above twenty thousand men; all which will be made good by the testimony of the said Sieurs de la Valette, d' Esart, and other Captains, who were all of opinion, that the best we could do was to retire; and when we were all resolv'd to coast the Enemy, to keep them a little in, and to try to ge some advantage over them, the younger Monsales brought letters from your Majestie to all the Captains to march towards Monsieur de Montpensier, and to me that I must return, which I accordingly did, both out of regard to my own sick∣ness, and also to preserve the Country, as I have done so long as the Forces were in my hands. Being afterwards at Cahors, to which place I went with an intent to fight the Vicounts, I was advertiz'd that Pilles was about Agenois with a great number of Horse, whom thinking to surprize, I marched day and night to ight him, which had also so faln out, had it not been that Monsieur de Fontenilles, and Captain Montluc with some Light-horse met with five or six Cornets of the said Pilles his Cavalry, whom they charg'd with so great fry that they put them to rout, which made the said Pilles the same night pass the River Dordogne, and retreat towards the Body of their Army. As to the coming of the Count de Montgommery, 'is very well known, that at my de∣parture from Mont de Marsan, which in two hours time I had besieg'd, assaulted, and taken, Monsieur d' Anville carried away all the Forces in order to some designs he had in Languedoc, leaving me no more but my own Company, with those of Messieurs de Fon∣tenilles and de Gondrin, and five Ensigns of Foot, with which I was fain to make shift for the defence of Lectoure, Florence, Ville-neufue, and Agen; and although the said Ma∣reschal afterwards call'd from me the forenam'd two Companies, and that I was left alone with my own, yet did I not for all that forbear to put my self into Agen, when the Army of the Princes drew near, without being reliev'd by any but the Sieur de Fontenilles onely, who indeed came and brought his Company to my assistance. From which Town of Agen the Princes Army were very much incommodated; and whereas they had thrown a Bridg of Boats over the Garonne, with a design to pass into the Country, and of Condommois and Age∣nois, to make as it were a City; I broke their Bridg, and so shatter'd it to pieces, that they could never recover any more than two of the Boats, with which they repassed the River, but so leisurely withal, that had your Majesty been pleased to have sent me never so few Forces, I could have kept them well enough from ever uniting again. And whereas during the time of the said Princes being in these parts, they had possessed themselves of certain Castles in the Country of Agenois, I retook them, and reduced them all to your Majesties obedience. You Majestie has since commanded me to go make War in the Country of Bearn; wherein I so promptly obeyed your Command, that though it was very hard to raise men, by reason that every one took the Peace for concluded, notwithstanding in less then fifteen dayes I set on foot five and fourty Ensigns of Infantry, and six hundred Light∣horse, with which I resolv'd to invade the Country, either to force Montamat to a Battel, or to suffer his Towns and Castles to be taken one after another before his face, as any one may judg it must of necessity have fall'n out. For having begun with Rabasteins, as it was necessary I should, for the reasons I have before laid down, though it was one of the strongest places of all Guienne, I carried it in eight dayes time, playing at once in my own person the parts of Pioneer, Canoneer, Soldier, and Captain. Where in making my approaches I was like to have lost my youngest Son, who was shot close by my side, as also was Captain Paullac; and when it came to an Assault, seeing the two first Compa∣nies did not go on as I desir'd they should have done, I went my self to the Breach, ac∣companied with the Signieurs de Gas, and the Vicount d'Vza, and followed by about a hundred or sixscore Gentlemen, of which two and fourty were hurt, I my self being one of the number of those that were wounded, and in such a part that I shall carry the marks of it to my Grave. And although this action joyn'd to others of the like nature, that I have perform'd during the Reigns of the Kings your Father and Grandfather, make me hope for no other advantages than what was before in the prospect of my ambition, name∣ly a gracious acceptation, and an honourable acknowledgment of my service from the said Kings my Masters; I had reason however to believe that your Majestie would have my performances in some little esteem. Moreover I represented in my person before your eyes an old Soldier of threescore and ten years of age, your Majesties Lieutenant General in these parts, and one who onely in giving the word of Command to others, without en∣gaging in his own person, might have sufficiently perform'd the duty of his charge; but who nevertheless out of the zeal he had to render your Majestie Victorious in all your Enterprizes, put himself into the rank of the meanest Foot-Soldiers, and in the greatest
danger of death, where several Gentlemen also ran the same fortune, esteeming it a great honor and happiness to follow one of the oldest Soldiers, not to say Captains of France. I also thought your majesty might have consider'd, that as in the first Tumults, the first Victories your Majestie obtein'd were by my hand, I had likewise in these last Commo∣tns rendrd you victorious in the last Enterprize of War that was perform'd in the King∣dom: But when I expected a Letter at least, such as your Majesty is accustomed to write to the meanst Captain in your Kingdom, all the fruits of my great labour, and long ex∣pectation, was only to hear that you had depriv'd me of my Government, and (which was worse) without sending me so much as one syllable to signifie your Royal intention, insomuch that I saw the man already come who was to succeed me, before I had any inti∣mation of my being cashier'd from my Command. Nay, at the very same time, that by an universal Law throughout the whole Kingdom your Majesty has restr'd to their E∣states and Employments all such as have been depriv'd of them, I may say that by a par∣ticular Law made for me alone, I am degraded from an Employment wherein I have so long maintain'd my self with my sword in my hand. But though I had been stript to my Doublet, I should yet remain clthed with a Robe of Honor, to wit, the Reputation of having born arms from my Childhood for the service of your Crown, with all the si∣dty that the Kings my Masters could themselves desire. I am sure every one will frankly coness that I have been in as many Combats, Battels, Rencounters, Enterprizes both by day and night, Assaults, Takings, and Defences of Towns, as any man this day alive in Europe; and for such am known in Forreign Nations as well as at home, and yet I can say with truth (for which the Glory be attributed to God, and the honor to the Kings my Masters, who were pleased to employ me) that whether it were through my good for∣tune the influence of their Majesties arms, or any other accidents conducing to it, I was never defeated in any place, where I had the honor to command in Chief, nor never at∣taqu'd my Enemy but I beat him. Several persons of honor yet living will also bear wit∣ness of my behaviour at the Battels of Pavie, the Bicoque, and Serizolles, where I had the Command of all the Harquebuzeers, and also in what esteem the late Sieur de Lautrec had me, for having seen me in his own presence sight betwixt Bayonne and Fontarabie; as also for having serv'd under him in a Command of Foot in his Expedition into Lombardy, and the Kingdom of Naples, in which services I received no less than four Harquebuze shots. There are also several men of honor yet alive, who very well remember how I carried my self at the taking of the County of Oye, in the quality of Camp-Master to all the French Foot; and others are able to testifie in what esteem I was with the Prince of Malphe, and the late Maeschal de Brissac, for having seen me in Piedmont, at all hours, and upon all occasions both night and day venture my life for the service of this Crown, as others can wtness, that at the time when the disgrace besel our people in the Lower Bullen, I alone with a very small number of men maintain'd the fight, and at the time when your Majsties Royal Father, my good Master of blessed memory, gave me for lost, I came out in depite of the English, and brought off with me two and twenty Colours of ours, that had been taken, insomuch that one only remain'd in the hands of the Enemy. If Mon∣sieur de Guise were now alive, he would not conceal what he saw me do at the taking of Thionville, no more than will Monsieur le Mareschal de Villeneufue, who can witness if it was not I who took the Tower, from whence ensued the loss of the Town. All the Cap∣tains of Italy, Spain, and Germany will for ever honor me for what I did at the Siege of Sienna, where I was the late King your Father's Lieutenant, as I was afterwards in Tus∣cany, where I lost nothing, but remain'd victorious over the Enemy, and had my servi∣ces so highly accepted by your Royal Father, that besides that at my return from Sienna, he conferr'd upon me the Order, which in those dayes was a mark of great and extraordinary service, he moreover gave me the County of Gaure for term of life, which since, and after the death of my said Royal Master, at the calling in of your Majesties Demeasns was taken from me, without the least murmur or shew of discontent on my part at my being so depriv'd. All these things, Sir, I have thought fit to represent unto you, forasmuch as your Ma∣jesty may peradventure not have heard of them, and that in speaking of me in your Ma∣jesties presence I may by some have been otherwise represented, and have had other Cha∣racters given of me than I deserve. I know that sometimes they have made as if I were a Thief, and that otherwhiles, and for the most part have talkt as if for three years last past I had done nothing of any moment. Wherein, Sir, they have abused your Majesty more than they did me; for all the ill tongues in the world cannot deprive me of the honor I have acquir'd, whereas by their importunity they may have induced you to do a thing that I fear may be of ill exemple to men of my Trade; forasmuch as those who have of late been
call'd to Offices and Commands, and who desire to advance themselves by the exercise of arms, will be apt by my exemple to apprehend, that long services, and the glory by those services acquir'd throughout the world will not stand them in so much stead as the evil tongues of their Maligners, and such as would put a bar to their preferment, may do them harm. It remains, Sr, that for the conclusion of my long and tedious Letter I must humbly beseech your Majesty to excuse me, if after such a blow of fortune I have been constrain'd to address my Complaint, and to sigh out my grievance to you, and you alone; and have been oblig'd to do it, as well to make my self better known to your Majesty, than I have been in times past, as also most humbly to beseech you, that for the time to come, when your Majesty shall be importun'd to use either me, or any other of your good and faithful servants so unkindly, you will please to reserve evermore one ear for the accused, before you resolve upon doing any thing that may wound or dishonor them. As for what concerns my self, out of the desire I have ever had to see your Majesty prosper, I am very glad if in these last troubles you have been so well, and so successfully serv'd in all parts of your Kingdom by all those your Majestie has employed as by me, who on this side have preserv'd your Cities, and the Country committed to my charge, have beat∣en your Enemies as oft as I could get opportunity to fight them, and taken Towns by assault, with the extreamest peril of my life. And though it has been said, that I have done nothing considerable, yet I beseech your Majestie to believe that no man has surpass'd me in good intention, and a hearty desire to serve you. After which (since such is your royal pleasure) I am willing to retire without other mark of all my labours, and the ser∣vices of so many years, but the sorrow for the loss of my Children sacrific'd to your Crown, and seven Harquebuze shots, which will serve continually to put me in mind of the hum∣ble and affectionate devotion I have ever had to perform the best and most obedient ser∣vice to your glorious Predecessors; which also I shall ever retein for your Sacred Majestie, to whom I pray Almighty God to give all prosperity, health, and happiness, &c. This was my Letter, which more perplexed the Monsieurs, who at that time govern'd the Court, to comment upon, than it did me to write it. And that unknown to me was afterwards printed and publisht; for my friends, and such as best knew what I had done for the conservation of Guienne, were as much, or more offended, than I. And I would have it known, that both then and since, had I as disloyal a heart as they have, who after the first Commotions represented me to the Queen for a Spaniard, I had yet means, and interest enough to have done a great deal of mischief: But I neither am, nor ever will be other than a good Frenchman, and a true Servant to the Crown. I also know very well that none of these doings proceeded from the King, who never withdrew his favour from me. But a young Prince involv'd in so many affairs has much ado to please all the world; to which may be added, that several who could hurt me no way but with their tongues, had a very great influence, not over his Majestie (who never lov'd the Hu∣gonots, what ever he might pretend for his own repose) but with the Council. O that Kings and Princes ought to be very tender of disgracing a man, who has ever been loyal and faithful to them, and who is a man of spirit: for it might light upon such an one, as may put their affairs into a very ill posture, of which within these fifty years we have seen too many exemples, to the great loss and detriment of the King of France, as I have said before, when speaking of the traverses and ill offices that several great Captains have receiv'd at Court. How many are there, that had they been used after this manner, would not only have quitted all, but perhaps have done a great deal worse: for a man that does his duty, and finds himself ill rewarded, it goes to his heart. I have heard that either King Francis,A Gascon Gentleman's answer to the King. or Lewis (I know not which of them it was) one day asking a Gentleman, a Gascon, as I am, What would debauch him from his service? Nothing Sir, reply'd the other, unless it be a despite. And it is also an old saying, that Out of spite a man would turn Turk. Notwithstanding, all this unkindness could never make me either Spa∣niard or Hugonot. I have ever lov'd my honor too well for that, and will go down to my Grave with that fair white Robe, without suffering the least ugly spot upon the name of Montuc; and every one that has any regard to his honor ought to do the same. If his King and Master will not make use of his service he may sit at home, and look on to see how others behave themselves. If he be a man of valour, fortune that cast him down, will raise him up again; she is not alwayes angry. How many great Lords and valiant Cap∣tains have we seen cultivating their Gardens at home in a time of action, whom the King has been constrain'd to recall into his service, and could have wished he had never re∣mov'd them from him?
I have seen a great many in my time,The miserable condition of such as revolt from their Princes. both on the King's side, and also on the Emperor's, who have turn'd their Cassocks, and some very lightly, and upon very slender occasion: but they obtein'd no great advancement by it, and being amongst us, were lookt upon for such as they were. I believe our Enemies did the same. Every one loves the Treason wll enough, but they hate the Traitor. When that brave Prince Charles de Bourbon was constrain'd to side with the Emperor, and to give himself to the Devil, because God would have nothing to do with him (for doubtless he was compell'd and necessitated to it) we were told that even the Spaniard themselves lookt askew upon him; and the poor Prince after he had done a great deal of mischief lt his life. When after he was slain at Rome, it was a common dispute, whether the Pope, the King of France, or the Emperor was most glad of his death; the first, because he held him besieg'd; the King, in that he was deliver'd from a capital Enemy; or the Emperor, for being rid of a banisht and ne∣cessous Prince, that lay upon his hands, and was a burthen to him; though he had only nourisht him with promises, and nothing else. These scurvie despites proceed too far; am sure mine never did, nor ever shall make me do any thing contrary to my duty, or to the prjudice of my honor. If I was young, and that the King would not make use of my service, the world is wide enough, I would seek my fortune elsewhere; but never at the expence of my Prince, nor at the price of my own honor. The King having receiv'd my Letter, sent me in answer a great many good words, for they cost them nothing; the end will shew whether the Province will be better govern'd, and his Majestie better serv'd, and whether they who have succeeded me (though they are great persons, and great Cap∣tains) have done, or shall do hereafter better than I. But to return to the place where I left off; my Wife came to fetch me from Marsac, from whence she carried me in her Litter to Cassaigne near unto Condom, where to refresh me I was for three weeks together so crucified with the Cholick, that it had like to have cu'd me of all other discases. In this condition I had the comfort of Monsieur de Valence my Brother, who never left me till he saw me out of danger of death; and several Lords also both Catholick and Hugonot came to see me. Before Captain Montaut arriv'd at Court the Queen dispatcht away Monsieur de Beaumont, Steward of the Prince of Na∣varre's Houshold, by whm she sent me word, that in case I was in the Territories of the Queen of Navarre, I should forthwith retire, and put my men into Garrison. See what a sudden change was here! I askt him if there was a Peace concluded, to which he made answer, no; but that it was hoped there suddenly would. Why then should the King, said I, put his Army into Garrison? Is not the Country already sufficiently ruin'd and destroy'd? If I do this when the Peace shall come, and that we are to disband our Horse and Foot, not one of them but will plunder his Host for a farewel, seeing themselves dismissed without money. Seeing then it is so,The Army dis∣banded. that they are order'd to be put into Garrisons, I will even disband them for all together, and send them every man to his own house. To this end then I desir'd Mon∣sieur de Valence to write, and sign a Letter (I being in no condition to do it) to Monsieur de Gondrin forthwith to dismiss the Army, both Horse and Foot, and that every one in four dayes should be retir'd to his own home; which was accordingly perform'd. Mon∣sieur de Beaumont himself carried the Letter to Monsieur de Gondrin, and five weeks after the Queen sent to me to disband the Army, which I had done before, and by so doing had sav'd the people above 500000 Livers, as the Country it self will witness. I had sav'd the pitiful 4000 Francks that I had from the King untoucht, saving a hundred Crowns, that I took out to give Captain Montaut to defray his Journey to Court. And thus it was that I robb'd the Exchequer, and poll'd the People. Such about his Majestie as favour the Hugonots, do not care how deeply they charge me with Calumnies; but I would have the world to know, and do here declare, that in so many years that I have commanded, and in all the great Employments wherein I have been I could never enrich my self 20000 Francks, and yet they stick not to affirm, that I have pill'd and poll'd 300000 Crowns. I could wish it was true, provided it had been from the Hugonots our Enemies. God be praised for all. These slanderers shall never have that advantage over me as to make me hang down my head, but I will walk with my face erect, like a man of honor. The Treasures and Receivers are yet living: let his Majesty enform himself of them: let him examine their accounts, where if he find any one single Lyard converted to my profit, his Majesty does not do well if he do not bring me to my Trial. It is no wonder his Majesty is so ill serv'd, as 'tis reported he is, considering he makes no exemple; he is then to blame himself, and not those that do it. And as to Impositions and Taxes upon the People to enrich my self, and to fill my own Coffers, his Majesty in this case ought yet to be more severe against me than in the other, by how much the people are more to be pittied than the King; who if he want money knows how to make his people find it. 'Tis a priviledge
our Kings have so soon as they come out of their Page-ship, as one said of Lewis the Ele∣venth; which makes me conclude, that the King ought to inflict a more severe punish∣ment upon those who lea his people, than if they purloin'd from his own Exchequer. The Commissioners have given an account of all sorts of men who have rais'd money, let them look if they can find me in their Papers, and if any be come into my purse. I con∣fess I have dispos'd of some Hugonots Estates, who pretended to sit still at home, but were worse than the others wh were in arms: neither was it reasonable, that they should be better used than the poor Catholicks, who were gnawn to the very bones; and had I not done it, the Gentry would have taken it ill, and the common Soldier would have revolt∣ed: for where there is nothing to be got but blows men will hardly go volunteer to the Wars. Moreover they would have said I had held intelligence with the Enemy, by which means I should not have had a man to follow me; and I had rather have died than to have had such a repute. Had the King's Officers seized of these mens Estates, they would have extracted no less than a million of Francks: but there was juggling amongst them, and they held intelligence with one another. I have had my share; but it has ever been fair prize, and onely taken from such as carried Provisions and Merchandize to the Enemy; and yet I do believe all I made bold with being put all together, would not amount to above 3000 Crowns. Would to God that all the Chiefs of France had gone as roundly to work for the service of the King and Kingdom as I, and that by war they had desir'd to esta∣blish peace; which if they had, not a man in the Kingdom would have dar'd to have pro∣fessed himself a Hugonot. But I shall leave this unpleasing discourse. A little while after the Peace was published, the articles of which were very much to the Enemies advantage.The Peace published. We had beaten, and beaten them over, and over again; but not∣withstanding they had evermore such an interest in the King's Council, that all the Edicts continually ran very high in their favour. We got the better by arms, but they alwayes over-reached us in those confounded writings. Ah, poor Prince, how wofully are you serv'd, how ruinously are you adviz'd! If your majesty take not heed, your Kingdom from the most flourishing, will be made the most miserable that ever was; which though it was in the Reigns of your Grandfather and Royal Father, assaulted with many and po∣tent Enemies, and continually engag'd in war, wherein I have ever faithfully serv'd, yet matters still went on in excellent good order, and Commands were not prophan'd, as in these dayes. I pass by the injury your Majesty does your self, in giving your Enemies so great advantages by these fine Edicts. I shall not meddle with the corruption of your Courts of Judicature, nor the abuses in your Treasure, I only beg leave to say something concerning the ordering of your Militia; for should I plunge my self further into what has caused the ruine of your Kingdom, I should be forced to speak too loud, and that of no little ones. I know, Sir, very well, that your Majesty will not do me the honor to read my Book; you have other employment, and your time is too precious to be lavisht in reading the life of a Soldier, but perhaps some one who shall have read it, in discourse may give your Ma∣jesty some account of what it contains. For which reason I have assum'd the boldness to direct this short discourse I am about to make to your Majesties observation, and I beseech you take a little notice of it, forasmuch as therein are laid open the causes of those disasters I have seen happen in our Kingdom within these fifty years; in the beginning of which I first took up arms in the Reign of your Grandfather, King Francis of blessed me∣mory, during whose Reign a Custom was introduced, which I conceive to be very preju∣dicial to your State. Your Majesty may alter it, and in so doing do a great right to your self and your Kingdom, as to the concern of arms. A young Prince, as you are, for birth the greatest and the first of Christendom ought evermore to learn of old Captains. Your Majesty is naturally martial, and have a generos heart, and therefore will not, I hope dis∣dain the advice of an old Soldier, your Subject, and Servant. I remember the time when your Majesty took a delight to talk with me in private, then when you went your Ex∣pedition to Bayonne, and then very well perceiv'd that your discourse exceeded the capacity of your age, and o such a degree, that I dare be bold to say, might your Majesty have had your own way, all things had succeeded a great deal better: for though you had done nothing but only shewed your self, and have let your people see, that you was in person in your Army, you had at least gain'd the hearts of many, and astonisht the rest, and consequently had, without dispute been much better serv'd in this your Majesties ma∣turer Age. I do believe it was one of the greatest errors they made you commit (for it was not your Majesties fault that you was shut up when your Amies marcht.) The peo∣ple of your Kingdom are a good and an affectionate people, and rejoyce to see their King, so that your presence would have inspir'd a great many, and particularly of our Country of
Guienne with wiser and more loyal Councils than some of them have since embrac't. But I proceed to my discourse. Sir, when your Majestie conferres the place of a President, a Chancellor, a Lieutenant Criminal, or any other Office of Judicature upon any one, it is evermore with this re∣servation, that they shall not execute any of these Charges till first they shall be examin'd by your Parliaments, which are full of wie and learned men: and oftentimes your Ma∣jstie gives order, that they shall first be examin'd by your Chancellor, before they pre∣sent themselves before the Parliaments, which are to determine of their Capacities, and whe∣ther or no they be sufficiently read in the Law, not to be in danger of erring in the Arrests and Judgments they are to make in their Administrations, that so right may be done to those of your Subjects to whom it sall duly appertein. This, Sir, is a good and an equi∣table way of proceeding, for you owe us Justice impartial, and according to the weight of the Ballance. 'Tis a right to which we are born, and the chief thing you owe indif∣ferently to all; and therefore it is admirably well done, to make them pass those strict and severe Inquisitions that are requir'd in the Chambers of your Parliaments assembled. Yet can it not be ordered so, that Justice in all things is alwaies duly executed. You ought, Sir, to do the same in all other Offices and Commands you confer in your Kingdom;Disorders in the Kingdom of France through the defect of inex∣perienced Offi∣cers. and yet I see that the first that makes suit to your Majestie for the Govern∣ment of a place, a Company of Gens-d'arms, or of Foot, or the Office of a Camp-master, without considering what loss or detriment may thereby ensue, either to your own per∣son, or your Kingdom, you easily grant it, perhaps at the recommendation of the first Lady that speaks for it, and that perhaps your Majesty has danced with over night at a Ball; for whatsoever affairs are on foot, the Ball must trot. Sir, these Ladies have too much credit in your Court. O how many mischiefs have, and do daily arise, from having so lightly conferr'd these Commands! And although your Majesties proceeding be pru∣dent, and just in exposing your Officers of the long Robe to the utmost test, it is not how∣ever of so great importance to your State. For what loss can you sustain if they be igno∣rant? it falls not upon you; for he that gains the Tryal though contrary to Law and right, pays you the same duties that he did who is nonsuited in his cause; by which means you lose nothing of your Revenue, it is still in the Kingdom; and what imports it to you whether Iohn or Peter be Lord of such, or such a Mannor so long as you have your Fee∣farm rents still duly paid you? We are all your Subject: But the error and ignorance of Governors and Captains who obtein Places and Commands with great case, at the first word of the first that asks, is infinitely prejudicial to your Kingdom, and herein I am very confident all the great Captains and men of honor that are zealous for your service will be of my opinion. If your Majesty give the Government of a Place to a man of no experience, and who has never been in such a Command before, see what will follow. First it is an old saying, that When the eye sees what before it never saw, the heart thinks that which before it never thought. If therefore a Siege be clapt down before him, how is it to be expected that he should disengage himself? how is it possible he should understand and discover the de∣signs of the Enemy, on what part they can or will assault him? which there is a way to do without a Spy, as I have made it to appear by what I did at Sienna. How should he know how to fortifie and secure himself, and in short do a thousand, and a thousand things that will be necessary to be done, if he have never before been engag'd in such af∣fairs? Such as have been ten times besieg'd are apt enough to be startled at it, and often∣times so astonisht that they know not where they are. Now when your Majesty hears that your place is going to be beleaguer'd, you will presently fall to raising an Armie, as you have good reason to do, not daring to rely upon the small experience of this young Governor, and perhaps shall be constrain'd to go in haste in your own person, or at least to send one of my Lords your Brothers; where either the Town must be lost, or you must hazard a Battel, where your self, or one of your Brothers who shall command your Armie may be slain, together with several Princes of you blood, and a great number of your best Captains. Consider then, I beseech you Sir, the mighty loss and misadventure that de∣pends upon your easie conferring such a Command upon a man, without first know∣ing what he is able to do. For if he is a man of experience, and that he has manifested himself in all places where he has been under good Leaders, to be a man of courage and understanding; so soon as he shall enter into the place, he will presently fall to consider∣ing of the strength, and weakness of it, recollecting what he has seen done elsewhere, where he has been engag'd under another,The diligence requir'd in a Chief and what he has seen such and such a Captain do upon the like occasion; and thereupon will suddenly take order for the defects of the place, and begin to fortifie. He will also demand of you an Engineer, will enform you
of the Ammunition both of Victual, Arms, and Artillerie that he has found there, and will never cease solliciting till you have supplied him with all things necessarie, knowing very well what an inconvenience the loss of the place would bring upon you. When so soon as your Majestie shall have furnisht him with all he desires, and that by his fore∣sight he shall have provided against all the defects of the place, he may then know what he has to trust to, and shall have leisure to consider what he has to do, without precipi∣tation, which I have ever observ'd to be very dangerous in war, unless it be in an affair that requires extreme hast and diligence. And herein two things present themselves to your Majesties consideration; the first, that when your Enemy shall have heard of the valour of your Governor, and his great experience, together with the great foresight and diligence wherewith he has been careful to remedie the defects of his place, and the good discipline he there maintains; is it to be supposed, that he will venture to attacque a man qualified with the forenamed virtues? I do believe there is no Aailant in the world but would think of it twice before he would once resolve to do it,That the va∣lour of a Go∣vernor with∣holds an Ene∣my from com∣ing to attacque him, and if he call a Council about it, he will find that hardly one old Captain will advise him to go on to his own ruine; and if the Chief be a circumspect and experienced man, the counsel of the young hot-headed fellows must not be preferr'd to that of the old Soldiers, for they better understand the business of the world than the o∣thers do: and are unwilling to hazard the honor they have got; forasmuch as men look on∣ly upon the last of our actions, without much regarding what they have perform'd be∣fore. So much concerning the first. Now the second thing that presents it self to your Majesties consideration, is, that your Majestie reflecting upon the valour of the person you have entrusted with defence of your place, his diligence, and experience, will be at quiet within your self, knowing very well that such a man will do no unhandsome things, but will be tender of his own honor, as well as careful of his trust: by which means you shall have time to raise your Armie at leisure, and shall come to encamp your self in an advantagious place, where if your Enemie come to assault you, he shall be defeated; and on the other side, if he offer to assault the Town, you lye so close in his Rear, that let the Breach be never so wide, he dares not go to the assault, forasmuch as whether he enter or no he is certain to be defeated, for you surprize him in disorder; which will make him very warie of attempting any thing, where his ruine is so manifest before him; and ei∣ther force him to raise his Siege, and betake himself to some other Enterprize, or else come to assault you in your Fort; which also he will have a care of doing, as was the Emperor Charles at the Camp in Provence, at the time when your Majesties Grandfather was for∣tified in the plain field, and that the Enemie made a shew of attacquing Marseilles. You are evermore to take heed of committing errors in the beginning of a War; for if your affairs have once a disrepute upon them in the beginning, your Majestie may be assured, that your Soldiers will lose courage, and every one will seek an opportunity to run away, insomuch that you are never to hope your Army shall do any thing to purpose after. Of which I shall give your Majestie some Exemples, that you may see of how great impor∣tance it is to have a good Governor in a Town of War. Of these Exemples, the first shall be Charles Duke of Burgundy,The Duke of Burgundy de∣feated before Nancy. who after having lost two Battels against the Swiss at Mo∣rat, came with his baled Army to sit down before Nancy, which he thought to surprize, René King of Sicily, and Duke of Lorrain never dreaming that he would come to besiege that place; by which means it was totally unprovided, both of Victuals, Ammunition, and Men. King René had with him five or six Gascon Gentlemen (for these Princes of Lorrain have ever had a great kindness for our Nation) namely Captain Gratian Da∣guerre, a poor Gentleman of this Country call'd Pons, another call'd Gaian, and another whose name was Roquepines; the others were slain during the Siege, where these brave Gascons did so valiantly behave themselves, that with some of the Country people that put themselves into the Town, and some Gentlemen of the said Country, they defended the Town, and endur'd the last extremity of famine, by that means giving King René leisure to go himself into Switzerland to fetch his relief. King Lewis the Eleventh of France would not openly assist him, by reason of the League he had contracted with the Duke; but (as you Princes ordinarily do) he favour'd him understand, and disbanded four hundred men at arms, that were advanc'd as far as Pont St. Vincent, within two leagues of Nancy; so that when the Duke saw the Swiss coming upon him, he raised the Siege, and there lost both the Battel and his life. Had Iohn d' Albert King of Na∣varre, The loss of Pampelona. when he saw the Forces of Ferdinand coming to fall upon him, put one or two good Captains into Pampelona, he had not so poorly lost his Kingdom, as he did; for there wanted only a good man to have stopt the Career of the Spaniard, the place was good e∣nough. But he lost the Kingdom both for himself and his Posterity; for it is in too good
a hand ver to  it. These are two Examples of Antiquity that I have receiv'd from the old Captains of that Age; and I have heard others related, which I could here set down; but I leave those to the Historians, who are able to give a better account of them than I, and will now present your Majesty with some of my own. Kng Francis your Grandfather laid Siege to Pavie, where I was; he found within it Atonio de Lev a Spaniard, Le∣va a gea Ctan. and a man that by a long practice in arms had gain'd as great exprience as any other Captain that has been these hundred years. He had within but three Ensigns of Italians, and three thousand German Foot. His Majesty hld him a∣bove seven months beieg'd, in which time he had given several assauls, though the place was not very strong; but this Captain by his industrie and valour supply'd all other de∣s, and defended it so long, that he gave Monsieur de Bourbon time to go fetch relief of Germny, and come and sight a Battel with the King, which he won, and took the King prisoner; and had the said Sieur de Bourbon in the heat of this victory turn'd his Forces towards France, I know not how matters would have gone; and all these suc∣cesses beel the Emperor for havng made choice of this old Warriour, who put a stop to our Kings fortune.The Dke of  Of recent memory the valiant Duke of Guise put a shameful baffle upon the Emperor Charles at Metz, whom he constrain'd ignominiously to raise his Siege, whereupn his grat Army vansht into nothing, through the sole virtue of the Chief that oppos'd him.His Sn at Pctirs. And again in these late Commotions his Son, the Duke of Guise that nw is, has preserv'd Poictieres, a great City without a Fortress, which had it been taken by the Admiral, he had commanded all Poictau and Xaintonge to the very Gates of Bordea, wherein the virtue of this young Prince very much reliev'd your Ma∣jesties affairs, and was signally serviceable to the whole Kingdom. In like manner your Majestis Victory at Moncontor was demurr'd by the choice your Enemies made of Cap∣tain Pilles left in St. Iean,Captain Pilles at St. In. where the valour of this Chief, who very well understood how to defend his Post, set the Plugonot affairs again on foot, who by that means had leisure to steal away, and to come to fall upon us in Guienne. I have been told, that he was well assisted by a Captain, a very brave Soldier, call'd la Mote Puiols; but had they let me alone at the Battel of Vr, I had taken order with him for ever making war against you more; for I had my sword at his throat, when some body, I know not who, pull'd him away from me, and sav'd him. If the Admiral was upon his confession, he would not dny but that my sole person hindred him from attacquing Agen, which is no tena∣ble place; doubt not then Sir, but that the valour of one single man is able to give a stop to a torrent of success. Your Kingdom is the best peopled of any Kingdom in the world, and you are rich in great and faithful Captains, if you please to employ them, and not take in such as are in∣capable of command. Charles the Emperor, as I have oft been told, made his boasts that he had better Commanders than the late King Francis; and in truth he had very good ones, but ours were nothing inferior to them. You have choice enough, Sir, to put into your Frontier places.Frangt at Fontarabi. Do but consider of how great moment was the loss of Fontarabie, through the little experience of Captain Franget, and how dear the loss of Bullen cost your Father through the little experience of the Siur de Vervins,The Sieur de Vervi at Bul∣len. who was Governor there. And on the contrary, you may, Sir, please to remember (for I am certain you have heard it) what honour and advantage acr'd from the election your Royal Father,Sansac at Mi∣ra d, and Montc at Sinna. my good Master, made of that old Cavalier Monsieur de Sansac, who so long sustein'd the Siege at Mi∣randa; and the choice he was pleased to make of my poor person for the defence of Sienna, which was honourable to the French name. The security of a place, Sir, depends upon the Chief, who may make every one to fight, so much as the very Children, which will make an Enemy very unwilling to attacque him. Behold then, Sir, how much it imports your State, your People, and your own Honour; for it will evermore be said, and re∣corded to posterity, that it was Charles the Ninth who lost such and such a place; from which Fame God defend you. It shall live in history for ever, and all the good and evil that befals you in your Reign shall be recorded, and the evil rather than the good. Be then, Sir, circumspect, and consider of it thrice before you deliver to any one the defence of a place, and do not think it sufficient that the man is valiant, he must also be a man of experience. As to what concerns a Captain of Gens-d'arms,Of Captains of Gens d'arms. you make no more of creating him at the request of the first that recommends him to you, than you would do of a Searje∣ant of the Chasteler of Paris, who afterwards coming to be present at a Battel, you shall give him such a Post to make good, where the poor man not knowing how to take his ad∣vantage, either through want of courage or conduct, shall make you lose this Post, and by that means not only encourage the Enemy to save the day, but shall moreover discourage your own people; for four running Cowards are sufficient to draw all the rest after them,
even the Leaders themselves. And although they be bave enough in their own persons, and would mae head▪ yet, if they know not how to command, nor understand which way to play the st of their Game, all will run into confusion; for that it at that mo∣ment depends whlly upon him, and not upon the General, who cannot have his eye in all places at once; and in the noise and confusion of a Battel, it is impossible he should provide for all things. e then who has the Charge of a Post, or the Command of a Wing, if he want experience, and have never before been engag'd in such affairs, how is it pos∣sible to be expected that he should either command, or execute? And here's a Battel lost, and your own prsn, if you are there, either kill'd or taken; for I have never heard of any King of France that ever ran away. Neither is any better to be expected in any other Enterprize that shall be committed to the execution of such a man. Take heed then, Sir, to whom you give your Companies of Gens-d'arms; 'tis it that the young ones should be Apprentis, and larn of the old. I know very well that Princes are to be excepted from this Rule, who have ordinarily brave Lieutenants, who in effect are the Chiefs, for the said young Princes in their own persons are not usually there. Your Majestie has also Mareschaux de Camp,Of Marescha and Camp-Masters. and Camp-Masters both of Horse and Foot, both of them employments of great importance, for they are to discover all things, and in case the Armes lye near they are to make their discovery together, for the one can do nothing without the other, and together must bring you back an account of what is to be done for the ordering of the Battel, both Horse and Foot, after having viewed the situation of the place, and the Grownd where the Horse is to be drawn up, and the Foot also; and being agreed together, are to bring you back a report of all; whereupon you shall in your Council conclude what you have to do: but you are of necessity to ground your resolution upon their intelligence, which if they be not men of experience, O Sir, how many Errors will they cause you to commit! It is therefore very necessary that the men who discharge these Offices should have three qualities; of which the first is a long experience; for if they be men long beaten to the practice of Arms, and that they have been eye-witnesses of some miscarriages in the Armies wherein they have serv'd, provided they retein it; that very observation will make them circumspect and careful of falling into the like error. The second quality requir'd in men that are entrusted with these Offices, is, that they be bold and adventurous (for your Mareschaux and Mai∣sters de Camp, of all others must not be Cowards) or at least if they are not more vali∣ant than ordinary, (for I do not desire they should be Rowlands) they must not be afraid of blows; for if these men be timerous, you are not to expect that your Army should do any thing to purpose; by reason that they will evermore quarter your Army in fear and ap∣prehension, and consequently alwaies encamp at a disadvantage; by which means if your Adversary General be a man of Judgment, and practis'd in such affairs, he will easily discern your Armie to be in fear, as I my self have often judg'd in exercising this Com∣mand, by the meer observation of the Enemies manner of encamping, and have seldom been dceiv'd. Which is a thing of all others of the greatest danger, forasmuch as nothing so much encourages both the Officers and the Soldiers of an Armie, as to know that their Enemi marches and encamps in fear. The last qualitie requir'd in this sort of Officers, is, that they be circumspect and diligent; which three qualities will render them perfect and comple. They must not be men that love to sleep a la Francoise, nor slow dream∣ing people, that are long and tedious in resolving, they must have their feet, hands, and understandings prompt and quick, and their eye evermore at watch; for upon their vi∣gilancie and providence depends the safety of the whole Armie. It is morever necessary, that in the Election your Majesty or your Lieutenant shall make of such persons, you narrowly pry and examine that there be no unkindness, or dis∣simulation betwixt them; for whee there is Enmity, there is evermore envy, and that being betwixt them, tho one will never approve what the other shall do, and they will be eternally in dispute, from whence nothing but mischief can ensue. There is no Trade so full of jealousie and jggling as this of ours, and betwixt men that do not love one another there is nothing but contradiction; whereas on the contrary, if they be good friends, the one will evermore supply the defects of the other, and they will argue what is fittest to be done, amicably, and without doing one another the least ll Office: for they are by the Rule of , whether in quartering the Army, or in discovering the Enemy, to be alwaies together. They are also before the Kings Lieutenant to dispute a∣bout the Quarters, and to hew their reasons why they take them up in that place, and are likewise to appoint to what Post the Cavalrie is to retire in case of a Charge, whether to the Avant-Guard, or o the Battel, though it ought more properly to be to the Avant-Guard, by reason that the Cavalrie is a member belonging to it. It is also necessary that
they judg well of the Enemies Avenues, and accordingly where to plant the Artillery, where to encamp the Battel, and where the General shall take his place; and in case of an Alarm, where to plant the Guard, and where to place the Centinels; in short, all things pass through their care and conduct. When these, together with him that commands the Army shall be perfect in all this, and shall have order'd all things as they ought to be, they can never be surpriz'd: foras∣much as they shall so well have provided for all things necessary, that not a man in the whole Army but will know what he has to do; which being granted, every one will confess that Army cannot possibly fall into any disorder: for all the losses that such bodies usually sustein proceed only from negligence and supineness. This good order in quartering ought evermore to be observ'd, whether far off, or near to the Enemy, and also upon a March, which being done, the Army can never encounter any accident or novelty that can discom∣pose it, when the Enemy shall be near at hand: but if they shall deferre to do it till ne∣cessity requires, they will not find the Soldiers either so ready, or so well dispos'd; and besides it sometimes falls out, that they think the Enemy at a great distance, when he shall rise earlier than they, and come to beat up their Quarters. Moreover they ought in such a case to maintain a better intelligence betwixt themselves than upon a march, and then the Master of the Ordnance is to be joyn'd with them, and indeed upon these three persons next to the General the loss or gain of a Battel depends. Judg you then, Sir, whether these Employments are to be dispos'd of with so great facility, since the loss and overthrow of your Armies proceed from their insufficiency or negligence. When ever your Majesty or your Lieutenants shall make Election of such persons, your hearts ought to tremble with fear at so unadvised a choice.Captains of Foot. And you ought to consider of it more than once. You have, Sir, next your Captains of Foot, to whom you give Commissions at the fancie of a Monsieur or a Madam, who recommend them out of a desire they have to preferre their own Relations and Creatures, and to oblige others. From these Commands ill be∣stow'd, almost as many mischiefs may proceed as from the former; whether it be at the defence of a Breach, or in leading a Foot Company in a day of Battel, or in any other Enterprize of importance to your affairs: for if he who takes upon him such a Command, is not such as he ought to be, he will be defeated through his own fault, and all the men lost that are under his Command, where the damage and dishonor will be yours, and the foldness and courage of your Enemie will every day encrease. Of which your Majestie both has seen, and do now see the Experience. At the time when I first entred into arms, the Title of a Captain was a Title of honor, and Gentlemen of good Families were proud of it: But now-a-daies every Plow-boy and Carter that has commanded but in the qua∣litie of a Corporal takes upon him that Title. You will say, Sir, perhaps, that we who are your Majesties Lieutenants are in fault for this, but you must pardon us if you please: for it proceeds principally from you, who have begun to conferre these Commands upon little people, so that now the Gentlemen disdain them. In your Grandfathers time the Foot Companies consisted of a thousand men, which was a noble Command, and that was no small ease to your Treasure, there being not near so many foot Officers requir'd as I have said elsewhere: but now it is a very great disorder, and for which your Maje∣stie would do well to find out some remedy, that so many Captainets may return to be common Soldiers. And the same medly is at this day observ'd amongst your Knights of the Order, which is a very great confusion. Now, Sir, what does all this mean? but that to determine of differences and Suits in Law your Majesty makes all your Judges to pass a strict Examination, though you your self can lose nothing by the sentence, let it go which way it will; whereas where it imme∣diately concerns your own life, and the lives of my Lords your Brothers, and of all the Princes and great Captains of your Armie, and consequently the ruine of your Kingdom, your Majestie without any manner of difficulty, or consideration, conferres Commands and Governments upon the first that make suit for them. Sir, there is an old saying Si le Fol un conseil te donne, N'en fay refus pour la personne▪ If the Fool good advice deliver, Slight not the counsel for the Giver. Which I bring in here to excuse the advice I intend humbly to offer to your Majestie, and which you ought to take in good part from me, who am at this day the oldest Captain in your Kingdom; and who from the passages I have seen in my time, ought in reason to have gain'd some experience for the time to come. The Counsel that I will presume to
give you, is, that your Majestie would take exemple by the Examination whereby the bo∣dies of your Parliaments are compos'd, where the several members are first to present themselves before your Chancellor, your President and Counsellors, to be examin'd of their sufficiencie, who if they thereupon be found incapable, they are sent back to studie till they be wiser, and have rendred themselves worthy of the Employments to which they pretend. Before then, Sir, you dispose of any Command, upon which so many inconveniencies visibly depend, never conferre it at the importunity of any man alive, till first you have put the person upon his Examination, remanding him before your Doctors, which are the old Captains who have gain'd experience by a long practice in Arms. You may have some old ones, who have not much stirr'd from their own Houses, I do not take such for old Captains, but worse than those the Chancellor sends back to studie: for it is a saying. Too old to mend: but I mean that you should call to be assisting at your inquisition such as have ever follow'd the wars, and that are markt for such with a great many Para∣graphs, that is to say, with Harquebuze shots, or cuts, and slashes with the sword upon his face and bodie; which are signs that he has not alwaies sate idle by the fire side. To this end, Sir, 'tis it you should have a Chancelor; and Sir, it is most reasonable that that Chancellor be the Monsieur your Brother, although he be yet very young; for in three or four years that he has born Arms he has won two memorable Battels, so that with the good understanding and judgment he is Master of, and being descended of so good a Race, it is impossible but he must have retein'd a great deal: for he has heard great Doctors in our Faculty dispute before him. Your Majestie must therefore have no other Chancellor of Arms but him; you shall still, Sir, be superior, for no one can take that from you, and 'tis you onely that can confer honor upon others. As God has made you to be born a Prince to command so many millions of people, he has also distinguisht you by some particular Endowments from the rest of men. When then any one shall make suit to you for any of the foremention'd Commands, your Majestie would do well to assemble your Chancellor and your Doctors; and if you be there present in person, it would be better if your Majestie would take the pains your self to interrogate them if they know the per∣son in question, where he has serv'd his Apprentiship, and under whom, (for oftentimes Like Master, like Man) and what act of honor he has perform'd? I doubt not but these old Cavaliers will frankly tell your Majestie the truth, as knowing very well of what importance it is to have a Captain a Fool, a Coward, or a Novice; and according to their characters and opinion you may conferre upon him the Command he pretends to; for he has then passed the inquisition.A pleasant sto∣ry of the Siu de Montuc. And that your Majestie may be deliver'd from importu∣nities, do, Sir, as I did once at Alba in Piedmont. Every day my horses were borrowed of me (for we had a little kind of a Truce) This vext me, and I knew not how to a∣void it: but at last I commanded my Trumpet to go and make proclamation throughout the Town from the Governor, (which was my self) that I had made an Oath never any more to lend my horses, and that therefore I had caused it to be thus proclaimed, that no one might be ignorant of my vow. After which I was no more importun'd. Do you, Sir, the same; some day in a great Company declare openly before all the Lords and La∣dies of your Court, that you have taken an Oath never to dispose of any Command or Government, but by the advice of your old Cavaliers and Captains. This will presently be spread abroad; for what you Kings and Princes say and do disperses it self with mar∣velous swiftness; and this will also produce another great effect, which is, that such as are freshmen in Arms, knowing they cannot get in at the Window, will endeavour to signalize and make themselves known to such as are to open them the door, and every one will contend who shall do best. O if your Majestie will but please to do this, how many brave Captains will you have in a little space! you will have more valiant Leaders then are again to be found in all the Kingdoms of Europe. And this also will produce two things, which of all others you ought most to desire in your Militia; of which the first is, that when this Governor or Captain shall have been preferr'd by the testimony of your old Cavaliers, given either to your Majestie, or to the Monsieur your Brother, he will look upon it for so great an ho∣nor, that he will determine within himself, if he have never so little courage, rather to lose a thousand lives, than be guilty of the least cowardize, or commit the least offence: for he will evermore think, that should he misbehave himself, he should do an injury to those who nam'd him for the Employment he has obtein'd, and that your Majeste might justly reproach them with their oversight in that nomination: by which means they will endeavour to do the best they can that they may obtein honor, and that your Majestie may preferre them to a better Command; knowing that they must again pass the inqui∣sition
to arrive at it, and the examination of your old Captains, where if they shall have behav'd themselves amiss, they will evermore make a true report, and will be asham'd to advise your Majestie to create such a one Maistre, or Mareschal de Camp, whom they have seen misdemean himself in the quality of a simple Captain. The second advantage that will derive it self from this strict way of examination, is, that you will hereby stop the mouths of those importunate Lords and Ladies, who upon so light foundations make suit to you for Commands, upon which so many mischiefs de∣pend, being assur'd before hand, that your Majestie will not grant them without the parties being well examin'd before your Chancellor and Doctors, but will refuse them, as you would do him that should ask of you the Office of a Councellor of the Parliament of Paris before he has passed the Test; for the Court would not admit him. I have head that formerly your Father hearing that they had refus'd to admit one, who by some Lady was recommended to them, should say, that one Ass might very well pass amongst so many Spanish horses: but they would not believe him. Sir, put those by whom you desire to be serv'd to the Test. I once saw a Gentleman (as I remember he was a Pro∣venl) whose custom it was when any servant came to make him a tender of his service, he would presenly put him to trial, and putting a sword into his hand, would com∣mand him to defend himself, without permitting him nevertheless to thrust at him, where if he found him a man firm, and resolute, he would presently entertein him; if otherwise, he would tell him he was not for his turn. By which means he had evermore brave and resolute men about him, for every one knew his custom, and no one would offer himself but he was stout and hardy; for he was a rude Gamester. This was an Examination practis'd by a Subject of yours, and a Law he establisht within himself, for every man is a King in his own House; as your Grandfather was answer'd by the Collier. Establishing this severe Inquisition of the merits of men, all Europe would presently know it, and so many importunate Suitors will be astonisht at such a Law, and will think of nothing but how to learn, instead of courting Monsieur or Madam, and you will be rid of these impertinents whom you send about their business, and the other may go render themselves worthy before they offer to pretend to Employments too big for them, and that till they have given a better account of themselves, they cannot honestly pretend to, because they do not deserve them. There will also another conveniency arise from this way of proceeding, which is, that those you choose and honor with these Charges and Commands will hold them immedi∣ately from your self,The Character of a little Monsieur of the Court. or your Doctors, and not from the Ladies and the little Monsieurs of your Court, who better understand how to set the inger of their Watches to the hour of the day, than to level a piece of Canon against a Tower, or so much as to discharge a Musket, and yet by their haughty carriage, and stately motion, a man would think that all should tremble before them. I once heard one of these pretty fellows talk at such a rate, as if he had almost himself alone carried away the honor of the Battel of Monsieur de iron, and that Monsieur de Tavannes, nor even the Monsieur your Brother had done no∣thing comparable to him. Now, as I was saying, these Gentlemen who shall have the honor to hold their Commands immediately from your self after this manner, will think themselves much more highly honour'd; wherefore, Sir, in truth these are things you ought more to desire to see regulated, and to have a more especial regard unto, than all the rest that concerns military discipline, by how much all the Events of War, whether good or evil, under God, depends upon the choice you shall make of men of Com∣mand. I shall not here speak of Generals of Horse, nor Colonels of Foot, by reason those are two Employments that are only to be conferr'd upon Princes, or men of very extraordi∣nary quality, who though they be young and of little experience, it imports not much, provided the Camp-Master be an experimented man. And pursuing this method, your Majesty will soon see the confusion that is crept into your Armies vanisht and gone; and the ancient splendor and beauty of your Companies of Gens-d'arms restor'd. One thing I perceive, that we very much lose the use of our Launces, either for want of good horses, of which methinks the Race visibly decayes, or because we are not so dextrous in that kind of fight as our Predecessors were; for I see we quit them for the German pi∣stols, and indeed fighting in gross Battalions, these are much more ready than Launces are; for if they be not fought in file the Launceers are apt to encumber one another; and also that open kind of fight is not so safe and certain as in close Bodies. To return to my discourse; you may please to take notice, Sir, that all such as desire to advance themselves by Arms, will covet to be brought upon the Chequer of Examination. And in my opinion it would be well and prudently done of your Majestie to keep a List
of all the brave and qualified men you have in your several Provinces, to the end, that a vacancy of any Command falling, you may think of those persons, and worthily supply it: by which means such as know themselves to be in your List will be highly en∣couraged, and endeavour with all the power they have to do you some notable piece of service: and such as are not in, will expose themselves to a thousand dangers to be put in∣to it. This Book you should call the Book of Honor, and when you hear any one highly applauded, after having examin'd the particularities of his Exploits, your Majestie would do well to give publick Order to have his name entred into your List. I remember I have heard when I was very young, that Lewis the Twelfth did after this manner, especially by those of the long Robe, and that the Office of Chief Justice of Agenois (a place of great profit and honor) being vacant, he remembred himself of a good Lawyer, who had made him a very eloquent Oration at Orleans, whose name he had set down in his List, and in pure Gift gave him the place. He likewise did the same in all Employments; and I have seen the same way practised by that great Odet de Foix, under whom I serv'd in the beginning of my Arms: he knew the names of all the Captains and remarkable persons; and when any one had perform'd any signal Exploit, he presently bookt him down. But, Sir, withal you must oft turn over this Book, and not content your self with taking the names of such persons only, but employ and advance them according to their quality and desert, and encourage them by some gracious expressions in their favour; or if he be a poor Gentleman give him money, which if you please to do with your own hand, five hundred Crowns will be better taken than two thousand from the hands of a Treasurer; for something will evermore stick to their fingers. One time King Henry your Royal Father, and my good Master (whom God absolve) had order'd me two thousand Crowns, and he that was to pay it, was not asham'd to detein five hundred: but he met with a Gascon that was not wont to be so serv'd, nor to pay such large Fees. He knew I would complain of him to the King, and was more overjoyed that he could perswade me to receive it, than I was of the receipt. If your Majestie would give with your own hand, these tricks would not be put upon men of desert. It was said in your Grandfathers time, that his Predecessor alwaies did so, and had a Chest full of Baggs stuft with Crowns, in some more, in some less, which he himself distributed according to the quality of the person, or of the service he had perform'd. I know some will tell you that this is too much below a King; but Sir, do not believe them, for these are the people that would have the moulding of all the Paste, and would that your liberality should pass thorough their hands, to the end that they might nim from your bounty. Only one thing give me leave to tell your Majestie you should not give all to one, nor to a few persons; I beseech you, Sir, pardon my plainness, you have given one Gentleman of Gui∣enne enough to have satisfied fifty pretenders. I will not say but that the man was brave and valiant, but there were who deserv'd it as well, or better than he; and who notwithstanding had nothing at all. Your Majestie may please to take what I say in good part: I have one foot in the Grave, and 'tis the affection I bear to your Crown, that prompts me to say what I do. I am Neighbour to the Spaniard, but he never had other than Flours-de-Lis from me. I could say a great deal more, if I durst, for in truth there is but too much to say, and but too many things to be reform'd. I must now speak a little with your Majesties permission to the Monsieur your Brother, your new Chancel∣lor in arms. 'Tis to you then (my Lord) that I address my self, and I should be sorry this Book should go out of my hands without some honorable testimonie of your Grandeur. You are descended from the greatest Family in the world; there is no Record, but that these ten last descents have ever been hardie and warlike; and but very few from the first Christian King have been otherwise, although Races have gone out, and that others have seiz'd upon the Crown, which is exceedingly admirable; for of four Generations of Gentlemen you shall hardly find two Descents together valant: Which ought to make us believe, that God has a particular providence over this Kingdom, seeing he has given so great Gifts and Graces to those who are his Vicegerents, as to the Kings your Grand∣father and Father. And although you are no King, you nevertheless share in the blessing that God has so liberally conferred upon your Royal Family. O (my Lord) you have great reason to think, and to assure your self, that Almighty God has design'd you for great ends, as is already discern'd by the victories he has given you in your younger years, which are such as therein his Almighty arm has been manifestly seen, and that you have obtein'd them more thorough his Divine Will, than any power of man. Every one must therefore of necessitie confess that this Kingdom is the Care of Heaven, that the
King your Brother is God's Lieutenant, and that You are his. Behold what fair and honouable Titles! I must now take the boldness to talk a little to you. You are (my Lord) the prop upon whom he reposes and relies; you are he who are to command the Arms which are o carry him into all hazards, perils, and fortunes. You are the Trumpet which is to give us the signal what we are to do. You are our refuge and our hope, by whose testi∣monie we are to expect from the King the recompence of all our services. 'Tis you who are to recommend us to his Majesties knowledg, and who as a true Chancellor of the Sword are to make him a true Report of what we have done for his service; and who when we are dead and gone ought to present our Children to him, if we have behav'd our selves as men of honor ought to do. Finally you have all the eyes of France upon you, upon you (my Lord) who command Armies, and who have so often bang'd and bang'd again the Rebellious Hugonots. All Christendom knows that it is you, for the King is constrain'd, since his Council will have it so, to make war in his Cabine. Since then you hold so high a place, upon which all other Offies and Commands that concern Arms depend, and that we are all to stand or fall by you for the Kings service, and your own, your Highness ought to repose your entire confidence, and to lay out your whole care upon us who follow Arms: for all other conditions of men participate nothing with yours, for∣asmuch as all the rest depend upon men of the long Robe. Of such there are a great many in the Kings Council: you have nothing to do with these people, neither indeed is it proper you should; for too many irons in the fire never do well, and it is an old saying, All covet, all lose. If your Highness will please a little to reflect upon what I take the boldness to repre∣sent before you, you will find that it will be necessary, seeing you are in so high a Station, to weigh and consider what it is that may help to maintain and support you in so great and so honorable a Command, than which nothing can be greater. Shall it be from these young Captains that you are to expect it? no certainly; for in these kind of people thee is no manner of experience, but rather levity and folly. Shall it be from men of the long Robe? You are yet less to expect it from them than from the other. They will talk like fresh-water Soldiers; they meddle but too much that way, and upon the Green-Cloth will be prating of Arms, that they no more understand than the Carpet they prate upon. From whom then? It is from the old Captains who have been exer∣cised in Arms, and have passed the rude trial of Battels, Combats, Skirmishes, Sieges, and Aslaults. They will have cause to remember what they have seen, and will no doubt be mindful enough of the losses they have sustein'd, as also by what error and default the misfortune befell them. If they have been well beaten they will have cause to remember, and if they have been victorious they will hardly forget it. If you take advice of such men you cannot fail of keeping up your greatness, and of encreasing your reputation and renown: for of such you will learn to know how rightly to command, and shall retein from them what they shall represent before you, when giving an account of what they have seen. You cannot employ your time better than to learn prudence to such a degree, that Posteritie may triumph in your Name; and I know you are of too good a Race, not to covet that your renown should flourish after you are dead. There may peradventure be some old Captains about you, who have neither done nor seen any great matters; for having lov'd their Houses and their Riches better than the exercise of Arms. Truly (my Lord) there are two many Gentlemen of this humour, and the King would do well to degrade such dunghil-bred Gentlemen from all Nobilitie, who can command nothing but their Hounds and Greyhounds, whilst others are seeking dan∣ger in the field, and think it sufficient that they can wind a Horn. There is also another sort of men, who for want of understanding cannot retein what they have seen. They can perhaps say I was at the Battels of Cerizolles and Dreux, Iarnac and Moncontour, but they are not able to give any account how Monsieur d' Anguien won the first, and how Monsieur de Guise sav'd the second; the Errors the Admiral committed in the two others, your Highness noble resolution, and finally all that passed, with the reasons both of the one and the other, nor any thing of all this; so that you would say they had never heard talk of it, no more than the most stupid loggerheaded Lancequenet that was there. These are not the men you are to rely upon. You are not nevertheless to reject these people, for you are to make use of all sorts of men, especially in matters of war. The men you ought to have about your person, and of your Cabinet Council, should be such old Captains as have reputation to be men without fear, vigilant, and prompt of execution. Such a Captain there may be, as may have done one brace thing in his life; but who by his slowness may have lost a hundred fair opportunities, where honor and ad∣vantage
might have been obtein'd. Yet will I not say that you ought absolutely to de∣spise these people: I am not so imprudent as to intend any such thing; for so peradven∣ture I may singe my own wings, though what I am you will see in my Book. I dare presume to say, that at this time good and valiant Leaders do not grow by clusters, nor are to be sold by the dozen. You should, Sir, do something for every one of what degree soever; not for all alike, but according to every man's merit and renown. I know some will tell you, that if you draw so many about you, they will put you upon making great demands of the King; (for Soldiers are bold beggars) and that peradventure his Majestie may take offence at it; but for this there is a remedy good enough in the old Rule. Qui n'a de l'argent en bourse, Qu'il ait du Miel en Bouche. Who in his Pocket has no Money, In his mouth must carry Honey. By speaking them fair, and vouchsafing obliging language, you will entertein them in hopes that you do not forget them, but that when an opportunitie presents it self, you will be ready to do them the best Offices in your power. A kind reception, a gra∣cious smile, a friendly embrace, will keep them in breath. But if there be such a trouble∣some importunate fellow, that will not be satisfied with your gracious answers, you may conclude, that that man neither serves the King nor you heartily, or out of any great good will or affection to your person. Such people will never do you any good; and if the chance of war do not of it self free you from them, there are waies enough to shake them off; and whosoever he is that serves his Prince more out of avarice than affection, is unsound at the heart: For an avaritious servant when he sees he cannot satisfie his appetite of get∣ting will desire to change his Master, thinking to get more by another, and to that end will corrupt others by the complaints that he will daily make to the rest, of the ill usage they receive. Avoid then (my Lord) having to do with such kind of people, and be∣times before their venom have poison'd the rest: for such men do all they possibly can to make their Prince hated, to the end that they may cover their own private malice under the colour of a publick Odium, and such are easie to be known. Such I have known, and such you daily see, who although they bow under the burthen of the Kings bounty never cease asking, nor ever will. Moreover (my Lord) to nourish the good will, and cherish the affection of Gentlemen and Captains, you may do well sometimes to write to them, that they may be certain they are in your favour and remembrance; for this will make them believe that you have a desire to perform something more and greater than before, and that you intend to pur∣sue your fortune. And from this I will tell you what will follow, they will shew your Letters to their Relations and Friends, who so soon as they shall see them, and that you have such a one in so great esteem as to honor him with your Letters, they will lay out all they can wrap and wring to put themselves into equipage to follow him, by which means one servant will bring you twenty or thirty more, out of the hopes they shall con∣ceive, that in doing you service, you will be as gracious to them. And this will cost you no great trouble, your Secretaries will ease you of that, and but waving one hours recreation, you will sign more Dispatches than would serve the whole Kingdom. If it be to a man of very great qualitie, a word or two under your own hand in a Postscript will be no great trouble: but then it must not be too common, at the same time, nor in the same terms; a fault that I have evermore observ'd in the Secretaries of Princes, and particularly those of our own Nation: for they communicate their Letters to one another, and finding them all run in the same stile, make afterwards no great account of the favour. If (my Lords) you shall not please to do as I advise you,That a Gne∣ral ought to write fre∣quently to his Captains. see what will follow. When the Captain sees that you make no account of him, nor have him not in your remembrance, he will think you are satisfied with the fortune God has already bestowed upon you, and that therefore he is no more to hope that you shall have any ambition to be greater than you are; but that every man must think of retiring to his own house, without caring any more for Arms. And after a Soldier, let him have never so little a Competencie to live upon, has once begun to rellish the pleasure of his own House, his Wife, his Hawks, or his Hounds, and that he is once suffer'd to take that bent, it is a very hard matter to draw him out of the Chimney-corner to go again to the Wars, and to perswade him to forsake his soft and warm feathers, to lye abroad upon the hard and cold Turf; and if you get him out with much ado, it will be with a very ill will, and he will be alwaies
hankering homewards to see his Wife and Children. He shall never hear the report of a Musket, but, like aA Frank Archer is one of the Traind-Band o a P∣rish, that sel∣dom ees ser∣vice but upon extraordinary occasion; and by bing upon the List is ex∣empted from all Taxes, Frank-Archer, he will think himself slain. In all these things cu∣stome is all; Canon and Harquebuze-shot astonish such as are not used to them, but after a man has once or twice heard them rattle about his ears, he cares not so much. There is nothing so prejudicial to War, as to let Soldiers and Officers lye idle and rust. Hang up your Headpiece, or your Cuirasse against a wall, and in a little space i will be all rust and cobwebs: it is the same with men of war, if they be suffer'd to lye still and do nothing. Wherefore your Highness ought to have a special care of this; for keeping your Captains waking with your Letters, and some little benefits from the King, you will hold every one in expectation, and ready to march so soon as his Majesties Summons, or your Com∣mand shall be brought to them. To this end give your Secretaries order to put you in mind, for otherwise the Ladies, or the delights of the Court, will put it out of your head. You are young, and 'tis sit you should taste the pleasures of the world; it is but reasonable you should know what they are; we have done it before you, and those who are to fol∣low after will do the same. But go soberly to work. By this Alarm you shall give your Soldiers with your Letters, you will discover to all the world that you will not forget the facultie that God has given you, nor suffer your Talent to lye idle; and every one who has an inclination to arms will resolve to attend you to the utmost stretch of your fortune. You will make it appear, that since God has alreay laid his hand upon your shoulder, you will trie if he will not lay it upon your head also: you ought to have an opinion that he will be pleased to do it, and to take the verse in the Psalm for your Motto. Coelum Coeli Domino: Terram autem dedit filis hominum: which is to say, that God has reserv'd the Heavens for himself, and has left the Earth for us to conquer. This Verse was not made for such little Companions as I am, but for Kings and such Princes as you are: and yet give me leave to tell you, that although I am a poor Gentleman, and have not the spirit of a King, yet had God pleased to preserve my Sons, and have granted me a little better health, I should have thought, with the help of my friends, provided we had been at peace at home, to have got some corner of the world or another to my own share, and if I could not have got a great , I should at least have had a Gobbet; or at the worst I should only have lost my labour and my life, both which I should have thought well laid out for the purchase of honor. Had my Son liv'd I do verily believe he would have brought about the design, that the Admiral knows he had in his head, and that he may acquaint your Highness withal. You are young, your Brother has the great piece, you are to go seek your fortune elsewhere, and instead of being a Subject, make others Subjects to you. Since then such a poor fellow as I am have the courage to foar so high, and that the Sons of Labourers and Forge-men (as I have heard) have by their virtue arriv'd at Empire, what are you to hope for who are the Son and Brother to the greatest King in Europe? you ought to look for no less when occasion shall present it self, and that you shall see your time. A magnanimous Prince is never to rest contented, but still to push on his fortune; the world is so wide there is enough to conquer; and the King your Brother has power enough to assist you. You are in your age of underta∣king, and you are fortunate. I am sorry that you have laid aside the great and brave name ofFor he was Christned Ed∣ouard Alex¦ander, which he afterwards chang'd for Henry, and was Henry the third of France. Alexander, who, if I mistake not, was the most valiant Warriour that ever bore arms. His Majestie will help to set some foreign Crown upon your head. If then God shall do you the grace to put an end to these miserable domestick Broils, set your designs on foot, and trie to immortalize your Name. Employ those many Servants you have in conquering something; and seeing my age, and the wounds I have receiv'd will not per∣mit me to serve you in so brave an Enterprize, I shall at least humbly advise you never to stop the Career of your Arms, but still to attempt greater and more difficult under∣takings, taking the device of the Emperor Charles, who cut out so much work for your famous Ancestors. In case you cannot arrive at the utmost aim of your Ambition, you shall at least advance the better half way to your desires. I have no hopes, being a maim'd Valetudinary as I am, my self to serve you in these honorable designs; but I leave you three little Montlucs, which I hope will not degenerate from their Grandfather and their Fathers. More I have not to trouble your Highness withal; and also it is time to put an end to my Book. Behold here (fellows in Arms) you who shall read my life, the end of the Wars in which I have serv'd five and fifty years together that I had the honor to be in Command for the Kings my Masters. From which services, that I might not forget them, I brought away seven Harquebuze-shots for a Memorandum,The Sieur de Montluc's wounds. and several other wounds besides, there being not a limb in all my body that has escaped, my right arm only excepted. But I have by those wounds purchased a renown throughout Europe, and my name is known in the re∣motest
Kingdoms, which I esteem more than all the riches in the world; and by the Grace of God, who has ever been assisting to me, I will carry this reputation along with me to my Grave.Miserable con∣dition of a Sol∣dier. This is a marvelous contentment to me when I think upon it, and call to mind how I am step by step arriv'd to this degree of honor, and thorough so many dangers am come to enjoy the short repose that remains to me in this world, in the calm and priva∣cie of my own house, that I may have leisure to ask God forgiveness for the sins I have com∣mitted. Oh if his mercie was not infinitely great, in how dangerous a condition were all those that bear arms, especially that are in command; for the necessity of war forces us in despite of our own inclinations to commit a thousand mischiefs, and to make no more ac∣count of the lives of men than of a Chicken: to which the complaints and outcries of the people, whom we are constrain'd in despite of us every day to swallow up and devoure, and the Widows and the Fatherless that we every day do make load us with all the curses and execrations, misery and affliction can help them to invent, which by importuning the Al∣mighty, and daily imploring the assistance of the Saints, 'tis to be fear'd lye some of them heavie upon our heads. But doubtless Kings shall yet have a sadder account to make than we; for they make us commit those evils (as I told the King in discourse at Tholoze) and there is no mischief whereof they are not the cause: for seeing they will make warres, they should at least pay those who venture their lives to execute their passions, that they may not commit so many mischiefs as they do. I think my self then exceedingly happy, in that God has given me leisure to think of the sins I have committed, or rather that the necessity of war has enforc'd me to commit.The Sieur de Montluc's n∣ture. For I am not naturally addicted to mischief; above all I have ever been an enemie to the vice of impurity, and a sworn adversary to all disloyalty and treason. I know very well and confess, that my passion has made me say, and do things for which I now cry Meaculpa; but 'tis now too late to redress them, and I have one that lies heavier upon my heart, than all the rest. But had I proceeded other∣wise every one would have sirted me on the nose, and the least Consul of a Village would have clapt too his Gates against me, had I not alwaies had the Canon at my heels; for every one had a mind to Lord it. God knows how fit I was to endure such affronts; but all's done and past; my hand was ever as prompt as my tongue, and it was but a word and a blow. I could have wisht, could I have perswaded my self to it, never to have worn a sword by my side, but my nature was quite otherwse, which made me carry for my device, Deo Duce, Ferro Comite. One thing I can truly say of my self, that never any Kings Lieutenant had more commiseration of the ruine of the people than I, in all places where ever I came. But it is impossible to discharge those Commands without doing mis∣chief, unless the King had his Coffers cramm'd with Gold to pay his Armies; and yet it would be much to do. I know not if those that succeed me will do better; but I do not believe it. All the Catholicks of Guienne can witness, if I did not alwaies spare the people: for I appeal from the Hugonots, I have done them too much mischief to give me any good testimonie; and yet I have not done them enough, nor so much as I would; my good will was not wanting. Neither do I care for their speaking ill of me, for they will say as much or more of their Kings. But before I put an end to this Book of mine, which my name will cause to be read by many,The Sieur de Montluc's ac∣knowledgment. I shall desire all such as shall take the pains to read these Commentaries, not to think me so ingrate that I do not acknowledg, after God, to hold all I have of Estate and Preferment of the Kings my Masters, especially of my good Master King Henry, whom God absolve. And if I have in some places of my Book said, that wounds were the re∣compence of my service, it is not at all intended to reproach them with the blood I have lost in their quarrels. On the contrary I think the blood of my Sons who died in their ser∣vice very well employed.The death of the Sieur de Montluc's Son. God gave them to me, and he took them from me. I have lost three in their service; Marc Anthony my eldest, Bertrand (to whom I gave the name of Peyrot (which is one of our Gascon names) by reason that Bertrand did not please me) and Fabian Seigneur de Montesquieu. God gave me also three ohers. For of my second Son I had Blaize, and of my youngest Adrian and Blaize, whom God preserve, that they may be serviceable to their Kings and Country, without dishonouring their Race; that they may well study my Book, and so imitate my life, that, if possible, they may surpass their Grandsire; and I beseech your Majestic be mindful of them. I have left them, a∣mongst my Papers, the Letter your Majestic was pleased to write to me from Villiers dated the 3. of December 1570,The King's  Letter to the Sieur de Mont∣luc. which conteins these words. Assure your self, that I shall ever be mindful of your many and great services, for which if you shal in your own person fall short of a worthy recompence, your posterity shall reap the fruits of your merit; as also they are such, and have so well behav'd themselves in my service, that they have of themselves very well deserv'd my acknowledgment, and that I should do for them what I shall be very ready
to do whenever an opportunity shall present it self. Sir, this is your Majesties promise, and a King should never say or promise any thing but he will perform. I do not then by any means reproach my Misters; and I ought also to be satisfied, though I am not rich, that a poor Cadet of Gascony is arriv'd at the highest Dignities of the Kingdom. I see several at this day who murmur and repine at their Majesties; and for the most part those who have done little or nothing make the greatest complaints. In others who have really deserv'd something it is a little more pardonable: all that we have, of what degree soever we are, we hold it of the Kings our Masters. So many great Prin∣ces, Lords, Captains, and Soldiers, both living and dead, owe to the King the honors they have receiv'd; and their Names shall live by the Employments they have receiv'd from the Kings they serv'd, and were not only enterr'd with those honorable Titles, but have moreover honour'd those who are descended of them, and mention will be made of their virtue whilst any Records of honor remain in the world. I have listed a good number in my Book, and have my self had Soldiers under my Command, who have been no better in their Extraction, than the Sons of poor labouring men, who have liv'd and died in a reputation as great and high as they had been the Sons of Lords, through their own virtue, and the esteem the Kings and their Lieutenants had of them. When my Son Marc Anthony was carried dead to Rome, the Pope and all the Cardinals, the Se∣nate and all the People of Rome,Honor done to Marc Anthony de Montluc. payd as much honor to his Hearse as if he had been a Prince of the blood. And what was the cause of all this, but only his own Valour, my Reputation, and my King, who had made me what I was? So that the name of Marc Anthony is again to be found in the Roman Annals. When I first entred into Arms out of my Page-ship in the House of Lorrain, there was no other discourse but of the great Gonsalvo, call'd the great Captain. How great an honor was it to him (which also will last for ever) to be crown'd with so many Victories? I have heard it told, that King Lewis and King Ferdinand being together, I know not at what place, but it was some∣where where they had appointed an Interview, these two great Princes being sat at Table together,Honor done to the great Cap∣tain Gonsalvo. our King entreated the King of Spain to give leave that Gonsalvo might dine with them; which he accordingly did, whilst men of far greater quality than he stood waiting by. So considerable had the King his Masters favour, and his own valour made him. This was the honor he receiv'd from the King of France, who in recompence for his having depriv'd him of the Kingdom of Naples put a weighty Chain of Gold about his neck. I have heard Monsieur de Lautrec say, that he never took so much delight in looking upon any man, as upon that same. O how fair an Exemple is this for those who intend to advance themselves by Arms! When I went the second time into Italy as I passed through the Streets of Rome, every one ran to the windows to see him that had de∣fended Sienna, which was a greater satisfaction to me than all the Riches of the Earth. I could produce several Exemples of French men, of very mean Extraction, who have by Arms arriv'd at very great Preferments: but out of respect to their Posteritie I shall for∣bear; but it was the bounty of their Kings that so advanc'd them for the recompence of their brave services. It is then just that we confess, we could be nothing without their bountie and favour; if we serve them, 'tis out of obedience to the Commandment of God, and we ought not to try to obtein rewards by importunities and reproaches; and if any one be ill rewarded, the fault is not in our Kings, but in them who are about them, that do not acquaint them who have serv'd well, or ill; (for there are many of both sorts) to the end that his Ma∣jesties largess should be rightly placed. And there is nothing that goes so much to the heart of a brave and loyal Subject, as to see the King heap honors and rewards upon such as▪ have serv'd him ill. I am sure it is that that has vext me more than any disappoint∣ment of my own. I have often heard some men say, the King or the Queen have done this, and that for such a one, why should they not do as much for me? The King has pardoned such a one such an offence, why does he not also pardon me? I know also that their Majesties have said, They will no more commit such over-sights, we must wink at this one fault: but it was the next day to begin the same again. However a man ought never to stomack any thing from his Prince. The honor of such men lies in a very contemptible place, since they more value a reward or a benefit than their own reputation or renown, and are so ready to take snuff if they fail of their expectation. And moreover (as I have already said) they are commonly men that have never strook three strokes with sword, and yet will vapour what dangers they have passed, and what hardships they have endur'd. If a man should strip them naked, one might see many a proper fellow that has not so much as one fear in all his body. Such men, if they have born arms any while, are very fortunate, and at the day of Judgment if they go into Paradise, will carry all their blood
along with them, without having lost one dram of their own, or having shed one drop of any others here upon earth. Others I have heard, and of all sorts of men, even to the meanest, complain that they have serv'd the King four, five, or six years, and notwithstanding have not been able to get above three or four thousand Livers yearly Rent: poor men they are sore hurt. I speak not of the Soldiers only, but of all other conditions of men his Majestie makes use of. I have heard my Father, who was an old man, and others older than he, report that it was a common saying at Court, and throughout the whole Kingdom in the Reign of Lewis the Twelfth. Chastillon, Bourdillon, Galliot, & Bonneval, Governent le sang Royal. and yet I dare be bold to say, that all these four Lords who govern'd two Kings, put them all together never got ten thousand Livers yearly Revenue. I have formerly said as much to the Mareschal de Bourdillon, who thereupon return'd me answer, that his Predecessor was so far from getting 3000 Livers a year, that he sold 1500, and left his Family very ne∣cessitous. Should any one ask the Admiral to shew what his Predecessor, who govern'd all, got by his favour, I durst lay a good wager he could not produce 2000 Livers yearly Revenue. As for Galliot he liv'd a great while after the others, and he peradventure might in that long time take together three or four thousand Livers a year. For what concerns Bonneval; Monsieur de Bonneval that now is, and Monsieur de Biron are his Heirs, and I believe they can boast of no great Estates. O happy Kings that had such Servants. 'Tis easie to discern that these men serv'd their Masters out of the love and affection they bore to their persons and the Crown, and not upon the account of reward; and I have heard that they evermore rather begg'd for the King's own Domestick Servants, than for themselves. They are gone down to their Graves with honor, and their Successors are not nevertheless in want. Since I have spoken of others, I will now say something of my felf. Some perhaps after I am dead will talk of me, as I talk of others. I confess that I am very much oblig'd to the Kings I have serv'd, especially to Henry my good Master, as I have often said before, and I had now been no more than a private Gentleman, had it not been for their bounty, and the opportunities they gave me to acquire that reputation I have in the world; which I value above all the treasure the Earth contains, having immortaliz'd the name of Mont∣luc. And although during the long time that I have born arms, I have acquir'd but very little wealth, yet has no one ever heard me complain of the Kings my Masters: marry I have spoke at mouth of those about them, when in these late Troubles I was calumniated by them, as if I could have done all things with nothing. Believe me the wounds I have receiv'd have administred more comfort than affliction to me; and one thing I am sure of, that when I am dead they can hardly say, that at the Resurrection I shall carry all the blood, bones and veins I brought with me into the world from my Mothers womb, along with me into Paradise. As for Riches I have enough. It is true, that had I been bred up in the School of the Baylif of Esperon, I should have had more; the story is not amiss, and therefore I shall insert it here. Lewis the Twelfth going to Bayonne lay in a Village call'd Esperon,A pleasant sto∣ry of the Bay∣liff of Espron. which is nearer to Bayonne than two Bourdeaux. Now upon the great Road betwixt these two places, the Baylif had built a very noble House. The King thought it very strange, that in a Coun∣try so bare and barren as that was, and amongst Downs and Sands that would bear no∣thing, this Baylif should build so fine a House, and at supper was speaking of it to the Chamberlain of his Household; who made answer, that the Baylif was a rich man: which the King not knowing how to believe, considering the wretched Country his house was seated in, he immediately sent for him, and said to him these words. Come on Baylif, and tell me why you did not build your fine House in some place where the Country was good and fertile? Sir, answer'd the Baylif, I was born in this Country, and find it very good for me. Are you so rich, said the King, as they tell me you are? I am not poor, replied the other, I have (blessed be God) wherewithal to live. The King then askt him, how it was pos∣sible he should grow so rich in so pitiful a barren Country. Why, very easily Sir, answer'd the other, because I have ever had more care to do my own business, than that of my Master, or my Neighbours. The Devil refuse me, said the King (for that was alwaies his Oath) thy reason is very good; for doing so, and rising betimes, thou couldst not choose but thrive. O how many Sons has this Baylif left behind him to inherit this virtuous humour! I was never any of those.
I do really believe, that there is never a little Pedlar in the world, who, having trotted, run and moyl'd as I have done, but would have enricht himself to a Merchant. And there is never a Treasurer nor a Receiver (let him be as honest as he would) in the King∣dom, that had had so much money pass through his hands, as has done through mine, but more would have stuck to his fingers. I have been seven or eight times Captain of Foot, which is none of the worst Commands for getting of money; and I have known several Captains in my time, who have enricht themselves meerly out of their Soldiers pay. I was not so ignorant, nor so raw a Soldier, neither did I want dexterity, but that I could have done the feat as well as they; neither was it any such hard matter to learn, for with a good Quarter-master, and some few other little helps the business had been done. I have since been three times Camp-master, in which Employment God knows I might have had Skip-jacks enow to have made Muster, and intelligence enough with the Com∣missaries. I could have discover'd when any thing was to be got, as soon or sooner than any man in the Army, I had nose good enough. I was after Governor of a place, where I could have had fourscore or a hundred men at my devotion to have passed Muster, as Messieurs les Governurs know well how to do: by which means, having been so long in these Commands as I have been, and made so many Musters as I have done in my life, with a little good husbandry, Good God! what a Mountain of Gold might I have had! I never think of it but it makes me wonder at my own honesty, that could resist so many temptations. I was moreover the King's Lieutenant in Sienna, and another time at Mon∣talsin; where I had wayes enow to have lin'd my pockets, as others in the like Com∣mands have done: for it had been no more but to have had intelligence with three or four Merchants, who should have affirm'd that the Corn of the Garrison had been bought by them, and taken up upon their Credit, and it had been done. God knows what profits are made of these Magazines. I could then have made demands upon the account of bor∣rowing, and have deputed some who would have been ready to have taken the Employ∣ment upon them, to have brought in a hundred or two hundred thousand Francks in Debentures. But instead of this his Majesty owed us five payes when we came out of Sienna, whereof I found means to acquit him of three so soon as we came to Montalsin. Afterwards the second time that I was sent thither, in the place of Monsieur de Soubize, I stay'd six weeks by the Kings Command at Rome with the Pope, and his Majesties Am∣bassadors and Agents. It was at the time when the Duke of Alva made war with his Holiness, and all the Sea-coast was ready to be abandon'd, and Grossette was not able any longer to subsist, having not a grain of Corn, no more than the other Garrisons. I found at Rome some Siennois Gentlemen, that marcht out of Sienna with me, who brought me acquainted with a Banquer call'd Iulio d' Albia, a Siennois also, who upon my own bare word lent me 600A Moge is a Measure con∣taining about six Bushels. Moges of Corn, which are 300 Tuns or Barrels, at twelveMid de bled, (mesure de Paris) con∣tains twelve Septiers, the Septier two Mines, the Mine 6 Bisse∣aux, the Bisse∣au 4 Quarts, which amount to about five Quarters, a Coomb, and a Bushel of Lon∣don measure. Mids the Barrel, conditionally that I should monthly pay him 600 Crowns at every Muster. This money I could no way raise but out of the deductions I reserv'd from the Musters, and instead of putting it into my own pocket, I accordingly paid him all, the last pay∣ment only excepted; for there was no more money, nor means to have any; so that we made no Muster. I might have made my advantage of this, for I furnisht several pla∣ces that stood in need, according to the authority I was invested withal; and I sav'd half the Corn, which I lent to the Country people, who were more distrest for bread than the Soldiers. There it was that I began to play the Usurer; but it was at the expence of the King's Conscience; for, for every Muid that I lent them then, I receiv'd two at the Har∣vest; and indeed it was double worth at the time when I lent it, and yet a penny of this profit never came into my purse, for I left it all to the King. I stay'd yet seven months longer in these parts, without receiving so much as one Pay; during four months of which I made my men live of twenty ounces of bread a day out of the profits I made of the Corn, saving as much as in me lay my Masters money. The other three Months I paid the Soldiers with good words, and the liberality of my Bonnet, as I had done at Sienna. Some time after Don Francisco arriv'd, who found Corn yet in the Magazine. I moreover dealt with the Dutchess de Castro, Wife to the Duke who was slain at Pia∣cenza, who knew Monsieur de Valence my Brother, at the time when he was in the ser∣vice of Pope Paul Farnese. Pope Paul Caraffa had made a Prohibition, that no manner of Grain should be carried out of Romania; but this Dutchess under hand permitted cer∣tain Merchants to bring it by night into our Territories, where our merchants met, and bought it of them. I carried this practice very close, of which I could have made a very great advantage to my own private profit; but never so much as one Liard came into my purse.
I could have brought the King  Bill of two or three hundred thousand Francs debt, as did Signior Iourdano Corso, and others whom I shall forbear to name, who were well paid. I was neither so simple, nor my opportunities were not so few, but that I could have done it as well as any of them. I have been his Majesties Lieutenant in this Pro∣vince of Guienne, and have been much up and down abroad in the world, but never saw any Country equal to it,The fertility of Guienne. either in Riches or Conveniencie of Living. And having such an Employment, I could have had intelligence with the Receiver of the Province, (those kind of men desire no better) and have stuff my own Coffers; for what upon Musters, Garrisons, and Equipages of the Artillerie, I could have made infinite advantages. How many Impositions might I have laid upon the Country? for the King had given me power to do it, which would have turn'd to my particular benefit: for although his Majesty in that Commission doubtless intended those Levies for his own service; I could, if I would have put the charge upon him, and have converted a great part of them to my own proper use. I could if I would have fir'd Towns, and have sent a Will with the wisp up and down to the Towns and Villages to whisper the principal Inhabitants in the ear, that they must either give me money to free them, or that otherwise I would cause them to be undone, and come quarter Soldiers upon them, who should eat them to the very bones: for they know men of our Trade are seldom weary of ill doing. I could also have sent to tell the Hugonots, who liv'd at home under the protection of the Edict, that unless they greased me in the first, I would cause them all to be ruin'd and pull'd in pieces; and what would they not have given me to have secur'd their Lives and Estates? for they did not greatly confide in me, hearing how I had handled them before. But instead of making use of such Artifices of these to enrich my self, I let the Captains and Gens-d'arms, and others who serv'd the King, and askt it of me, take all; reserving very little or no∣thing to my own benefit. And even that which I had at Clairac I took by the King's permission. Let others therefore rest content. If God would please to let me be once cu∣red of this great Harquebuze-shot in my Face, I think yet, that should the War break out again, I should be one to mount to horse; and I think it is not far off; for so long as there are two Religions, France will evermore be in division and trouble. It cannot o∣therwise be, and the worst on't is, 'tis a War that will not be ended of a long time. Other quarrels are easily compos'd, but that for Religion has no end. And although the Martial sort of men are not very devout, they however side, and being once engag'd stick to their Party. In the posture that affairs now stand, I do not think we are at an end. However I have this satisfaction in my self, that I have to my utmost opposed it, and done my best endeavour to settle the peace of the Kingdom. Would to God that all those who have been in Command had conniv'd no more than I. But we must let God work his own will. After he has sufficiently scourg'd us for our sins he will burn the Rod. And now, you Lords and Captains, who shall do me the honor to read my Book, let me beseech you not to read it with prejudice, but believe that I have deliver'd the truth, without depriving any one of his due and merited honor. I make no question but that some will bring some things that I have here related into dispute, to see if they can catch me tripping in point of truth; forasmuch as they will find that God has ne∣ver more accompanied the fortune of any man, for the Employments I have gone tho∣rough, than he did mine. But let me assure such, that I have omitted an infinite num∣ber of passages and particularities, by reason that I never committed any thing to writing, nor ever kept any memorial, as never suspecting my self to become a Writer of Books. I ever thought my self unfit for that Employment, but in the time of my last hurt, and du∣ring my sicknesses I have dictated this that I leave you, to the end that my name may not be buried in oblivion; nor so many other gallant men, whom I have seen perform so many and so brave exploits:Negligence of Historians. for the Historians write only of Kings and Princes. How many brave Gentlemen have I here set down, of whom these people make no mention, no more than if they had never been? He who has writ the Battel of Crisolles, though he does name me, yet it is but slightly, and in transitu only; and yet I can honestly boast, that I had a good hand in that Victory; as also at Bullen and Thionville. Which they take no notice of at all, no more than of the valour and gallant behaviour of a great number of your Fathers and Kindred, whose names you will find here. Do not then think it strange if I have been so fortunate as I have written, for I never minded any thing but my Com∣mand, and have ever acknowledg'd that all my successes came from God, into whose hands I ever resign'd my self and all my affairs; although the Hugonots were pleased to report me for an Atheist. They are my profest enemies, and you ought not to believe them. And although I have had my imperfections and my , and am no more a Saint
than other men, (they had their share too though they pretended holiness and mortifica∣tion) yet I have ever placed my hope in God, evermore acknowledging, that from him a∣lone I was to expect my good or evil fortune, attributing to his bounty and assistance all the successes of my lif. Neither was I ever in any action whatever wherein I have not im∣plor'd his Divine assistance, and never passed over day of my life, since I arriv'd at the age of man, without calling upon his Name, and asking pardon for my sins. And many times I can say with truth, that upon sight of the Enemy I have found my self so possest with fear, that I have felt my heart beat, and my limbs tremble (let us not make our selves braver than we are; for every man upon earth apprehends death when he sees it before his eyes) but so soon as I had made my prayer to God, I felt my spirits and my strength return. The prayer which I continually used, from my fist entring into Arms, was in these very words.The Sieur de Montlus Pray∣er when he went to ight. My God, who hast created me, I most humbly beseech thee to preserve my Iudgment entire, that this day I may not lose it; for it is thou that gavest it me, and I hold it from no other but thee alone. If thou hast this day appointed me to die, grant that I may fall with the resolution of a man of honor, which I have sought for through so many dangers. I ask thee not my life, for I desire nothing but what pleases thee. Thy will be done, I resigne all things to thy divine wisdom and bounty. After which having said my little Latin prayers, I declare and protest in the presence of God and men, that I suddenly felt a heat creep o∣ver my heart and members, so that I had no sooner made an end, but that I found my self quite another man than when I began. I was no more afraid, and my understand∣ing again return'd to perform its Office, so that with promptitude and judgment I dis∣cern'd what I had to do, without ever losing it after in any Engagement wherein I have ever been. How many are departed this life, who were they now living could witness, if ever they saw me astonisht, or lose my judgment in any action of war, whether at an Assault, or in any other Rencounter or Battel. Messieurs de Lautrec, de l' Escut, de Barbezieux, de Monpezat, de Termes, du Bié, de Strozzy, de Bourdillon, de Brissac, d' Anguen, de Boitieres, and de Guise could have given testimony of me; for they had all had me un∣der their Command, and have all seen me in a thousand and a thousand dangers, with∣out the least sign of fear or amazement. Who, could they again return to life, would be good witness of the truth of what I have deliver'd; and yet they are not all dead, under whom, and by whom I had the honor to serve, and to be commanded, who al∣though they were much younger Captains than I, it was nevertheless fit I should obey them. Monsieur le Duc d' Aumale, and the Mareschaux de Cossé, and de Vielle Ville are of this number; and I beseech you (my noble Lords if my Book peradventure fall into your hands) to do me right, and declare whether what I have here deliver'd be true, or false; for you have been eye-witnesses of part of it; and I fancie that after my death you will be curious to see what I have writ. There are others also who are able to give me the lye, if I have said ought but true; namely Signior Ludovico de Biraga, and Monsieur le Pre∣sident de Birague, who never abandoned that brave Mareschal de Brissac. Several others are yet living who have been my Companions in Arms, and many others who have serv'd under my Command; all which are able to affirm the truth of what I have said, and whether whenever there was a debate about any Execution, I did not alwayes think no∣thing impossible; but on the contrary concluded things feasible, which others conclu∣ded impossible to be effected. I undertook it, and brought it about, having evermore that stedfast assurance in God, that he would not forsake me, but open the eyes of my understanding to see what was to be done to make my Enterprize succeed. I never thought any thing impossible but the taking of Thionville, of which the honor is to be attributed to Monsieur de Guise alone, and in truth there was more of fortune than reason in that success, though the said Sieur de Guise was ever confident he should carry it, and so he did. Fellows in arms, how many and how great things shall you perform if you put your whole trust in God, and set honor continually before your eyes? discoursing with your selves, that if it be determin'd you shall end your dayes in a Breach' tis to much pur∣pose to stay behind in the Graffe.A brave death illu∣strates a man's whole life. Vn bel morir, (sayes the Italian) tuta la vita honora. 'Tis to die like a beast for a man to leave no memory behind him. Never go about to deprive another man of his honor, nor ever set avarice and ambition in your prospect: for you will find that it will all come to nought, and end in misery and disgrace. I do not say this that I have any mind to play the Preacher, but meerly out of respect to truth. How many are there in the world, who are yet living, and whom I shall forbear to name, that have had the reputation of valiant men, and yet have been very unfortunate in their undertaking? Believe me the hand of God was in this, and though they might implore his divine ayd, their devotion was not right, which made the Almighty adverse to them.
If therefore you would have God to be assisting to you, you must strip your selves of am∣bition, avarice, and rancour, and be full of the love and loyaltie we all owe to our Prince. And in so doing although his quarrel should not be just, God will not for all that with∣draw his assistance from you: for it is not for us to ask our King if his cause be good or evil, but only to obey him. And if you are not rewarded for the services you have per∣formed, you will not stomack your being neglected, by reason it was not your intention nor design to fight upon the score of ambition and greatness, nor out of a thirst of riches; but upon the account of fidelity, and duty that God has commanded you to bear to your Prince and Sovereign. You will rejoyce to find your selves esteem'd and belov'd by all the world, which is the greatest Treasure a man of honor ought to cove. For great E∣states and high Titles perish with the body, but a good Reputation and Renown are im∣mortal as the Soul. I now see my self drawing towards my end, and languishing in my bed towards my dissolution, and 'tis a great consolation to me, that in spite of Death my name shall live and flourish, not only in Gascony, but moreover in foreign Nations. This then is the end of my Book, and of thus far of my life, which if God shall please longer to continue to me, some other may write the rest, if ever I shall again be in place, where I shall perform any thing worthy of my self; which nevertheless I do not hope for, finding my self so infinitely decayed, that I never again expect to be able to bear arms. I have however this obligation to the Harquebuze shot, which has pierced through and shatter'd my face, that it has been the occasion of writing these Commentaries, which I have an opinion will continue when I am dead and gone. I entreat all those who shall read them, not to look upon them as proceeding from the Pen of an Historian, but of an old Soldier, and a Gascon, who has writ his own life truly, and in the rough stile of a Soldier. All such as bear arms may take exemple by it, and acknowledge that from God alone proceed the successes or the misfortunes of men. And seeing we ought to have re∣course to him alone, let us beseech him to assist and advise us in all our afflictions, for in this world there is nothing else, of which the great ones have their share as well as the meanest of us all. Wherein he manifsteth his own greatness, in that neither King nor Prince are exemped from his correcting hand, and who stand not continually in need of him and his divine assistance. Do not disdain, you who desire to follow arms, instead of reading Amadis de Gaule, and Launcelot du Lake, to spend sometimes an hour in reading what I have done, and in taking notice of what I have been, in this Treatise that I leave behind me. By which means you shall learn to know your selves, and betimes to form your selves to be Soldiers and Captains; for you must first learn to obey, that you may afterwards know how to command. This is not for silk-worms, and spruce Courtiers to do; nor for those that are in love with their ease, but for such as by the ways of virtue, and at the price of their lives will endeavour to immortalize their names, as I hope, in despite of envy I have done that of Montluc. Here the Signieur de Montluc had put an end to his Boook; but since, the short Supplement following was found amongst his Papers. I Here thought I had at once put an end both to my Writing, and my Life; never imagining that God would ever again have enabled me to get on horse-back to bear arms; but he was pleased to order it otherwise. For some time all France was happy in the enjoyment of Peace and repose, whilst I alone was afflicted with sickness, and tor∣mented with my great wound, which together confin'd me for the most part to my bed: notwithstanding by little and little I recover'd my health, being more glad to be discharg'd of my Government, than if that heavy burthen had still layn upon my shoulders. The Marquis de Villars, who has now the charge upon him, will no doubt acquit himself of his trust, as an old Cavalier, and a great Captain ought to do. Now I ever said with my self, hearing news from Court (for I had yet some corre∣spondence there) that the Hugonots were too much caressed, for any good to come of it, and saw very well that there was some mischief a brewing. The King by his Letters, which I have yet by me, and also in discourse to several of my friends, was pleased to declare, that he was no way dissatisfied with me, that he desir'd to manifest how much I was in his favour and esteem, and that my own indisposition had been the only reason of his putting the Marquis de Villars into my place. I was content to believe it to be so; for we must believe as our Kings will have us, or otherwise we offend them. Now al∣though I was no more the Kings Lieutenant, notwithstanding all the Nobless, and all the
of Guienne ever paid me a very great respect, and very often came to visit me; at which times we never parted without some discourse of what the times would come to: for we thought the Hugonots were grown very insolent, and spoke almost as high as in the first Troubles. Had I been as young and lusty now, as I was then, I should have made some of them have held their prating, at least in Gascony, where I was. A year or thereabout being passed over in this manner,Th Execution upon St.  Eve at . news was brought of what had hapned upon St. Bartholomew's day at Paris; where the Admiral was so unadvised as to en∣gage his person, out of vanity to shew that he govern'd all. I wonder that so circumspect and so wise a man, and a man so well beaten to the affairs of the world should commit so gross an error. He paid dear for it, for it cost him his life, and many others. And indeed, to speak the truth, he had brought great troubles upon the Kingdom; for I know that all, nr the one half of the mischief was never contriv'd by the Prince of Condé. The said Prince; communicated but too much of his designs to me at Poissy, and I do believe, that would I have given ear to him, he would have told me all. I acquainted the Queen with every syllable of it; but she enjoyn'd me silence. She did not then think that things would have come to that pass, that they afterwards did. I know very well, and it is very well known to all the world, that she was accused for the cause of the Commotions, that hapned in the fist Troubles; and the Prince did her the wrong to send her Letters into Germany, to shew them, and cause them to be printed and published in all places: which nevertheless did not much advance his affairs. The said Lady the Queen being at Tholouze, did me the honor to talk with me above three hours upon that subject, and said a great many things to me, that I shall be so wise as to keep to my self. So it is, that it is a very easie matter to reprehend, and find fault with those who have the manage∣ment of the affairs of the world, especially affairs of so great importance as she had, ha∣ving the King and his Brothers so young upon her hands, and all the Princes being ban∣died against one another; and afterwards this specious Cloak of Religion, which has e∣qually serv'd both Parties to shadow and palliate their Revenge, and to make us devour one another. I pray what apparence could there be, that she should have any intelligence with the said Pince? what she has since done has sufficiently manifested the contrary. But I shall wave this discourse (for perhaps I say too much) and return to my former subject. Every one was astonisht to hear what had hapned at Paris,The Naval Army bfore Rochelle. especially the Hugonots, who could not find ground enough to ly over, the most of them escaping into Bearn. The rest turn'd Catholicks, or at least seem'd to do so. For my part I did them no harm on my side; but they were every where used exceedingly ill. I then thought that our Na∣val Army, which at that time lay before Rochelle, was design'd for something else than to go into Portugal, and then sounded the bottom of the Design: but I could not imagine why they had only wounded the Admiral at first, having the design that I afterwards saw they had. For had all the Hugonots the next day resolv'd with the great ones of their Faction, it had been easie for them to have retir'd from Paris, and to have put themselves into some place of safety: But they were blinded, and God depriv'd them of their under∣standings. I shall not here take upon me to determine whether this proceeding was good or evil; for there is a great deal to be said on both sides, and besides it were now to no purpose, for it would do no good. Those that follow after us may speak to better effect, and without fear. For the Writers of this Age dare not speak out, but mince the matter; for my part I had rather hold my peace, and say nothing. Though I had at this time no other Command than that of my own House and Fa∣mily, yet was the Queen pleased to do me the honor to write to me, and to send me word, that there was a dangerous Conspiracy discover'd against the King and his Crown, which had been the occasion of that which had hapned. I know very well what I thought: 'tis a dangerous thing to offend ones Master.Charles the IX. at Meaux. The King never forgot the time when the Ad∣miral made him go faster than an amble betwixt Meaux and Paris. We lose our un∣derstanding when we come to the pinch of affairs, and never consider that Kings have greaer stomacks than we to resent an injury, and that they are apter to forget services than offences. But let us talk of something else, this will be sufficiently canvased by others, who will be better able to undertake it than I. All the King and Queens care was how to take Rochelle,Rochelle the Refuge of the Hugonots. the only refuge of the Hugonots. God knows whether I did not send the Queen my advice touching this affair. At the Voyage of Bayonne, and afterwards at her coming into Xaintonge, I had proposed it to her, to make her self Mistress of it, without noise, or breeding the least disturbance; and by what I gather'd from Monsieur de Iarnac (to whom I discover'd my self a little, and not too much) I think there would have been very little difficulty in the business. She
was evermore afraid of renewing the War; but for so delicate a morsel one would not have been nice of breaking the ast. It might have been done, and afterwards it had been to much purpose for them to have complain'd. There would have been wayes enow found out to have appeas'd the people; for what could any one have said, if the King would have built a Ciadel in his own City? But it is now too late to repent that over∣sight. This City has furnisht the Hugonots with means to renew the Wars, and will still do it, if the King does not take it from them, to which end nothing should be omitted. For thorough the conveniencie of this City they manage the intelligences they have in England and Germany,The impor∣tance of Ro∣chelle. and take great prizes upon the Sea, with which they maintain the War. They moreover keep the Isles, from whence they extract a Mass of money, by reason of the Salt. The Queen shall pardon me if she please, she then committed a very great error, and moreover another since, not to supply us with means to execute her Com∣mand then when she sent us to besiege it: For Rochelle at that time was not the same that it is now, and I think I should have frighted them. And now behold all the world before Rochelle, and I also was invited to the Feast a∣mongst the rest: So God help me, when I took the resolution to go thither, I made full account there to end my dayes,The Siur de Montluc goes to the Siege of Rochelle. and to lay my bones before the Town. Being come thi∣ther I was astonisht to see so many men, so many minds; for they were strangely divided in their inclinations, and a great many there were who would have been sorry the Town should have been taken. The Siege was great and long, and many handsome actions were there perform'd, but well assaulted, better defended. I shall not take upon me to give the Narrative of the particularities of this Siege, for I was no more than a private person, and I will speak ill of no one. The Monsieur that commanded in chief at this Siege, and has since been King, knows very well, that having done me the honor to talk with me, and to ask my advice, I told him frankly what I thought. By this Leaguer all men who were present at it, and those who come after us, may judg, that places of such importance are either to be taken by famine, blocking them up, or foot by foot with time and patience. There was here a great fault committed, in hazarding so many men in Assaults, and another greater in keeping so ill watch, that supplies of powder came in by Sea, as they continually did: but to tell you my opinion, (which was also that of a great many others) they had been our own in spite of the best they could have done for their defence, and must have come out to us with Ropes about their necks; for the Succours the Count de Montgommery brought them were retir'd, and we were upon the point to grapple with them, for they were reduced to the last necessity of all things. But at the same time Monsieur de Valence my Brother was in Poland, to labour the Monsieurs election to that Kingdom,The Monsieur elected King of Poland. as he did. And I think the glory of that business is due to him: but it was also the cause that every one thought of entring into Capitulation with the Rochellors, as at last they did. The Deputies of Poland there came to salute the Monsieur for their King, and every one retir'd to prepare himself to see the Solemnity of this new Crown; so that after having lost a vast number of men at this Siege, we left the Rochellors still in posses∣sion of their City. It seem'd by some words the Monsieur cast out at his departure, that he was not very well satisfied with this new Kingdom: for my part I think it was a great honor both to him, and to us all, that so remote a Kingdom should come to seek a King in ours. Monsieur de Valence my Brother got a great deal of honor in this Negotiation, and his Orations are very fine, I make no doubt but he will insert them in his History. During these unhappy Wars, and this Siege, where I lost several of my Kindred and Friends, the Admiral de Villars, who was the Kings Lieutenant in Guienne, did in my opinion the best he could; and in truth there was not much to do, for the Hugonots were squandred here and there like a Covey of flown Partridges. But having taken a little heart by the length of this Siege, they made some attempts, which made me for my last misfortune, to lose my Son Fabian Signieur de Montesquien,Fabian de Montluc lain. who in forcing a Barricado at Noguarol, receiv'd a Harquebuze shot whereof he died. Although he was my Son, I must needs give him this testimony, that he was loyal and brave; and I verily believ'd that the sor∣row for his death would have ended my dayes, but God gave me courage to bear my loss; not with that patience I should have done, but as well as I could. In the mean time all France was full of Triumphs to honor the departure of the new King of Poland, whilst I remain'd at my own house, without other company than my own sorrows, saving that sometimes I was visited by my friends, and the Gentlemen of the Country. The King about this time made a new removal, which was very prejudicial to the Province of Guienne. Those who follow after us will learn to be wise by the oversights of others; and the error that his Majesty here committed, was, that he divided the Go∣vernment of Gvienne into two parts, wherein he gave all on this side the Garonne towards
Gascony to Monsieur de la Valette, and that on the other side to Monsieur de Losse. This was a very great mistake in the Kings Council; and more especially in the Queen, who would again divide it into three parts, to give one to Monsieur de Gramont. 'Twas pitty that so many wise head-pieces had not taken notice what inconveniences had already accru'd by giving so much power to Monsieur d' Anville before, by reason of the little in∣telligence there had been betwixt him and me, of which I have elsewhere given an account; and seeing all the forces of the whole Province, under one head, had enough to do to cause the King to be obey'd, what was to be expected from them, when separated, and under several mens Commands? This sows jealousie and dissention amongst them, which in the end grows to absolute breach; and all at the expence of the King and his people. The effects soon discover'd themselves; for Monsieur de Losse undertook the Siege of Cle∣rac, a palry Town, that had never dar'd to shut her Gates against me; where Monsieur de la Valette was also present, but it was only in the quality of a looker on: where in the end he did nothing worth speaking of; neither indeed am I at all concern'd in that af∣fair; so that what I say is only to enform the King, that to be well serv'd he ought never to divide a Government, but commit it entire to one Lieutenant only. His Kingdom is wide enough to satisfie the ambition of those who are greedy of Employments; and, with his Majesties pardon, they ought to stay their time, there will be enough for all. Some time after we heard so many strange things, that me-thought I saw the Enterpri∣zes of Amboise again on foot; for they talkt of prodigious things, and such as I should never have believ'd, if all was true that was said; which whether it was or no, I leave to others to examine. A little while after, news came of the Kings being sick, and of several great persons at Court being committed to prison, which made me think my self happy that I was so far off; for a man is often trapt when he least expects it, and when he knows no reason why.The death of Charles the 9th of Frane. In the end of all, news came of the death of the King, which was in truth a very great blow to the Kingdom: for I dare be bold to say, that had he liv'd he would have done great things, and to his Neighbour's cost would have remov'd the Scene of War out of his own Kingdom. Wherein if the King of Poland would have joyn'd with him, and have set on foot the great Forces he had been able to have rais'd in his Kingdom, all would have bowed before them, and the Empire would again have been restor'd to the House of France. His death did very much astonish us, by reason of the great designs he had, as it was said, in the Kingdom, and I do believe the Queen never found her self in so great a perplexity since the death of the King her Husband my good Master. Her Majesty did me the honor to write to me, and to entreat me to assist her in her great affliction, and to preserve the State till the coming of the King her Son. Wherefore to gratifie her Majesties desire, though I was overburdn'd with years and infirmity, as also to divert my own grief for the death of my Son,The Sieur de Montluc at∣tends the Queen to Lyons. and especially to manifest to her the desire I had to keep the promise I had made to her at Orleans; I went to Paris to receive her Majesties Commands, and from thence attended her to Lyons, where I had the oppor∣tunity of discoursing with her at large concerning several things which I have since seen discover themselves nearer at hand, and which it will be a great work in her to redress. The King being return'd,Henry the 3d. of France, and King of Po∣lnd returns into France. they made him commit a very great error, at his first footing in the Kingdom; for instead of composing all differences and disorders in the State, and establishing peace and tranquility amongst us, which at that time had been a very easie matter to do; they perswaded him to resolve upon a War. And they yet perswaded him to a greater inconvenience, for they made him believe, that entring into Dauphiné all places would immediately surrender to him, whereas notwithstanding he found, that every paltry Garrison made head against him: but I have nothing to do to give an account of those transactions. At his coming he was pleased to be exceedingly gracious and kind to me; and yet he was not so to all; and indeed I observ'd him to be much alter'd in his humor, from what he was wont to be. There were there some publick Councils held, but there were also others that were private, and very closely carried. Now his Majesty calling to mind the services I had done for the Kings his Grandfather, Father, and Brother; some of which he had heard of, and others had himself also seen, he was resolv'd to honor me with the Estate of Mareschal of France,The Sieu de Montluc crea∣ted Mareschal of France. and to make me rich in honor, since he could not do it in matter of wealth and estate. Having therefore caus'd me to be call'd for, and being come, to kneel down before him, after I had taken the Oath, he put the Mareschal's Staffe into my hand: Which having done, in returning my most humble thanks, I told him, That I had no other grief in this world, but that I had not ten good years in my belly, wherein to manifest how much I desir'd to be serviceable to his Majesty and Crown in that honorable Command. Having receiv'd his Commands, and those of the Queen, I return'd into Gascony to make preparation for war, for all things tended that
way: but I very well perceiv'd by the tediousness of my Journey, that I was rather to think of dying my self, than of killing others: for I was no more able to endure long Journies, nor to undergo any great labour. And moreover I very well foresaw, that the same would happen betwixt the Kings Lieutenants and me, that had hapned before betwixt me and the Mareschal d' Anville. Sometime after the Parliament of Bourdeaux writ me a Letter, that the Hugonots were playing prancks upon the River Dordogne, that some course must be taken with them, and that therefore they entreated me to draw a little nearer to them, that some order might be taken to prevent them from proceeding to greater mischief. I hereupon accordingly cae to la Reolle, where President Nesmond, to whom I was totally a stranger, Messieurs de Merville, de Monferran, and de Gourgues came to meet me, and there propos'd to me a great many things. I was not to seek in my answer, neither did I want sufficient excuses, particularly that some promises that had been made me had not been made good; to which I also remonstrated to them my Age and indisposition; and moreover the said Sieurs de Merville and de Monerran coming to my bed-side, I shew'd them my wounds, acquaint∣ing them withal with the Oath I had made never more to bear arms; but in the end I could not deny them, and they made me break my Oath. They being then return'd to make preparation for the attacquing of Gensac, I went thither. Presently after Monsieur de Monferran brought a brave Troop of Gentlemen out of his Government, (as also seve∣ral others ame in from other parts) together with a considerable number of foot, so that we carrd the Suburbs and the Barricado's at the very first assault. Messieurs de Duras, de la Marque, and de la Devese, there went on in their Doublets only, with their Swords in their hands up to the very Gates of the City, which was very madly done of them, for the Harquebuze shot flew very thick; but they did it in emulation of one another, and to shew that they were men without fear:Monsieur de Monferran sain. but (as ill fortune would have it) Monsieur de Monferran receiv'd a Harquebuze shot quite through the body, of which he died; which was great pity, for he was a Gentleman of extraordinary valour, and mightily belov'd of the Country, which will find a great miss of him. The Enemy seeing themselves coopt in after this manner, and the Canon ready to play, sent out a great Rogue, whom they call'd CaptainOr Cooper. Tonnellier, but a very good Soldier, as it was said, who capitulated and surrendred the place; in which Monsieur de Rausan, Brother to Monsieur de Duras, was placed Governor. I must now give an account of an accident that befel me at this Siege, which had never hapned to me before. After the death of Monsieur de Monferran I thought fit to dispose of the Command he had in the Army to Monsieur de Duras, conceiving that he being a Gentleman of so good a Family, as he was, he would be very well accepted by all: but every one was not well pleased with my choice.The Gentle∣men discon∣tented. From which another mischief also arose, which was, I was told, that the Gentlemen who were come along with these Messieurs, to serve me upon this occasion, high∣ly complained of some words which I had spoken of them, as false as the Devil himself. The words were unhandsome and dirty, for which reason I will not blot my paper with them; but they were all in so high a mutiny upon it, that they were ready to mount to horse, and leave me engag'd with the Canon. I therefore sent to entreat them to do me the favour as to take the field bettimes in the morning, where I had something to say to them; which accordingly they did. I was so early that I went by Torch-light, so impa∣tient I was to ease my heart; where the Gentlemen being all drawn round about me, with my hat in my hand, I spake to them to this effect. Gentlemen, IT is now many years that many of you have known me,The Sieur de Montluc's Ha∣rangue to the Gentlemen in mutiny. having born arms under my Command, both in our own domestick troubles of Guienne, as also abroad in for∣reign Countries: others also that are here present, I make no question, have heard talk of me, of my chollerick disposition and hasty humour; but I assure my self not one of you, as many as you are, ever knew, or ever heard, that I was of a detractive or an in∣jurious nature; and although I am not without my faults, yet have I never been guilty of that. How comes it then to pass, that you have done me the wrong to believe that I should be so indiscreet as to speak of you with such contempt, as I am told has been reported to you? Believe me I am so far from being guilty of such an injury to you who are Gentlemen, that I would not have spoken such a word of the meanest Soldier in the Army. I have ever lov'd and honour'd the Gentry, for under God it is they who have help't me to that honor and reputation I have acquir'd amongst men. You know very well, Gentlemen, that in the quality I now stand I am out of Combat, and therefore shall not give the lye to any; but I do assure you it is nothing so, and that I never ut∣ter'd
such a syllable; neither would I have done it for the world. Methinks at this age, and after having seen so much as I have done, I should know what it is to live in the world, and be careful of offending so many persons of honor, and Gentlemen of good and noble Families. Now (Gentlemen) I have understood the resolution you have ta∣ken to retire to your own houses, for which I am very sorry; as also that you dislike the nomination I have made of Monsieur de Duras. Wherein I shall so far comply with your satisfaction, as not to impose him upon you contrary to your liking, and seeing you are dissatisfied with my choice shall no more name him to you. His Majesty shall appoint some other in the place of the late Monsieur de Monferran, whom I lament from my soul. In the mean time, Gentlemen, do not deny me this one favour at least, to convoy the Canon to some place of safety; which if you shall not think fit to do for my sake, who have so many years been your Leader and Captain, yet do it for the affection and service you owe to the King your Lord and Soveraign. As for my own part, I will also go retire to my own house; for my age, my wounds, and other in∣firmities will no longer permit me to bear arms, nor to undergo the labours requir'd in war. Love me alwayes I beseech you, and remember your old Captain and fellow-Souldier. This Remonstrance of mine gave satisfaction to all, insomuch that they all told me with one voice, that in truth this story had given them very great offence, it being reported to them by one that carried the name of a Gentleman: but they now believ'd nothing of it, that they were my servants, and ready not only to convoy the Canon, but also to follow me wherever I would please in command them. I thought fit to commit this passage to wri∣ting, to the end that those who follow after may learn how to behave themselves upon the like occasion. Had I upon the instant known the man that had raised this fine report of me, I doubt I should have shew'd him a scurvy trick: but the Canon was car∣ried back, which they attended till they saw it lodg'd in safety, and so we took leave of one another, and departed every man to his own home. I had not been long at my own house before I had every day very strange news brought me from Court, and of great designs that were laid by the greatest men of the Kingdom: but when I heard that the King of Navarre made one amongst them, and was stoln a∣way from Court without taking his leave, I from that time forward concluded that Gui∣enne was again to suffer many miseries; for that he being a great Prince, young, and who gave visible hopes of being one day a great Captain, would easily gain the hearts of the Nobless and the People, and would keep the rest in awe. So God help me a thousand mischiefs were eternally before my eyes, so that I was often in mind to withdraw my self to avoid the affliction of hearing so continual ill news, and of seeing the ruine of my na∣tive Country. To which end a certain Priory was evermore running in my head, that I had formerly seen situated in the mountains, part in France, and part in Spain, call'd Srracoli; to which place I had some thoughts of retiring my self out of the Tumult of the world. I might there at once have seen both France and Spain; and if God lend me life, I know not yet what I may do. The End of the Seventh and last Book of the Commentaries of Messire Blaize de Montluc Mareschal of France.
BLASII MONLUCI FRANCIAE MARESCHALLI TUMULUS. Iliadis rursum nascatur conditor altae. Hoc tumulo rursum conditur Aeacides. FLOR. RAEMONDVS Senat. Burdigal. Quaeris qui siem? MONLUCIUS Nomini meo satis est nomen. Conjugi conjux. P. C. MONLVCIVM haec urna tegit. Cujus varios casus, terra marique exhantlatos labores Gallia testabitur, hostes praedicabunt, posteri mirabuntur. Vrbium propugnator, oppugna∣tor, Hostes saepius fudi, vici, subegi. Patriam in sua viscera versam quoties restitui? Imis functus, maxima consecutus. Terrarum orbem fama complexus. Fatis urgentibus lubens & integerrima mente cessi. Avo, Patri Filius, Nepos Blasius Monlucius P. RErum humanarum vices quis non miretur? festinantibus Pater fatis, tardantibus Avus in coelum receptus. Ille ferro, hic morbo. Ille in insulis Oceani Atlantici; hic in Gallia, hominibus exemptus. Ille me unicum, vix primos edentem vagitus superstitem reliquit. Hic tres liberos Gallicae florem nobilitatis, tria Martis pignora, vivens amisit & eluxit. Vtérque bellum & lituos spirans. At juventus patris seda∣tior, senectus avi praefervidior. Ex aeqüo tamen eadem utrique gloria. Ore facundus, corde catus, manu promptus, militibus pariter utérque gratus, militarem veterum ducum adoream triumphalibus laureis utérque supergressus. Avus nunquam victus, pater etiam moriens hostium victor extitit. Adlucete filio & nepoti vestro virtutis egregiam facem sanctissimae & fortissimae animae, invicta avita pietatis columina: & me vestigia per vestra euntem ad aeternum stirpis nominisque nostri decus tot inter rerum caligines, & errorum flexus, iti∣nere inoffenso perducite. ΕΙΣ ΓΑΜΠΡΟΤΑΤΟΝ ΚΑΙ ΤΟΝ ΑΝΔΡΕΙΟΤΑΤΟΝ ΤΩΝ Κελων Βλασιον ✚ Μονλυκον. Επιταφιον. . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . , . , . , . , .
Tombeau de Messire Blaise de Montluc. CE Marbre icy (passant) le grand Montluc enserre, Vn tel homme que luy, dedans si peu de terre Ne peut estre compris: ce tombeau labouré Clost seulement son corps, dont il est honoré. Mais juge par sa mort, le dommage & la perte, Que la Gascongne a fait depuis vensue & deserte. Et franc de passion, voy comme le laurier Ceignant so front recut honneur de ce guerrier. Ce grand guerrier qui fut la garde de son Prince, Le soustien & l'appuy de toute la province. O lieutenant de Roy & en guerre & en paix Tesmoins de sa vertu, il fit tant de boaus faits, Qu'il a laisse mourant ce beau doute à tout aage Quel des deux il estoit plus vaillant ou plus sage. En bataille rangée, il deffit par trois fois L'ennemy de son Roy, il remit sous ses loix La Guyenne revoltée aux factions civiles. Par force il emporta, & print cinquante villes, Le primier à Passaut en témoignant la foy Qu'l avoit à son Dieu, qu'il avoit à son Roy. Par degrez il acquist d'une honorable peine Tous les tiltres d'honneur, de soldt, capitaine, Colonel, Lieutenant, Vice-Roy, Mareschal. Et tousiours commandant, à soy tousiours esgal, Dedans soy retenant sous égale balance. La vaillance d' Ajax, de Nestor l'eloquence, De l'homme plus couard il animoit le coeur: Et au plus courageux faisoit venir la peur A sa seule parole, à sa seule presence. Il fut chaud & actif, remply de vigilance En tout il se monstra, & par tout invaincu, Et ne secut onc vainqueur que c'est d'estre vaincu, Où fut-ce par la force, ou par la courtoisie, Tant il avoit d'honneur sa belle ame saisie. L'Italie le sçait, où de son brave coeur. Mainte marque il laissa, & courtois & vainqueur. Et le sçait, l'Anglterre, & la France & l'Espagne, Et cette nation, que l' onde du Rhin baigne. Brave s'il eust voulu de l'invincible mort I leust encore peu faire languir l'effort. Mais voyam la vertu faire place a l'envie: L'honneur à la faveur, il desdaigna la vie Et desira mourir au monde vitieux, Pour aller immortel vivre dedans les cieux. O vous, de qui iamais l'amitié ne varie Pleurez-le ses amis, vous mirant en sa vie. Vous lasches envieux guidez d'un autre sort, Pleurez ensnblement, & sa vie & sa mort. Sa vie vous osta tout l'honneur & la gloire, Et sa mort vous ravit l'spoir de la victoire, Ayant si bien sceu vivre, & encore mieux mourir. C'est à luy desormais à qui faut recourir Pour le patron des deux, afin qu'on y contemple De bellevie & mort un admirable exemple. Heureux trois fois Montlve, qui vivant si longs jours, As eu pour compagnons, avecque toy tousiours Et l'heur & la vertu: & qui maugré l'envie, Vois d'un los immortel ta memoire suivie. Sur le Tombeau de son coeur. Icy de Montluc vainqueur Est enclos le brave coeur. Ou plustost affermer i'ose Qu'il est icy tout entier, Car tout ce coeur grand guerrier Estoit, & non autre chose, Siste Hospes, & perlege. Magnus ille Monlucius hic jacet & quiescit mortuus, qui vivens nus∣quam quiescere poterat. Haec te scire volebam, quandoquidem illud postremum per me ut sci∣res ipsemet voluit, moriensque commendavit. Abi, & bene precare. I, du Che Evesque de Condom Epitaphe de Blaise de Montluc Ma∣reschal de France, & de M. An∣toine, Pierre, & Fabien ses enfans. CEluy se plaint en vain qui dit que nostre vie, (Theatre infortuné de mainte Tragedie) Est serve du destin: que le lasche & le fort Pesle-mesle sans chois sont ravis de la mort. Ainçois que de Pluton la chartre tenebreuse Va plustost devorant une ame genereuse Que celle qui moisit d'un languissant seiour Dans son corps inutile, & mange en vain le jour. Vn jour du vertueux vaine une longue vie De celuy qui la passe aux vices asservie. Vn acte valeureux est l'embellissement Du tableau de la vie, & luy sert d'ornement, Ores qu'il fait tout seul, & ne pert point sa grace Lors que la mort le vif de nos couleurs efface. I'honnore plus d'Appelle une ligne, un seul trait. Que le labeur entier d'un vulgaire pourtrait. C'est le fait d'un grand maistre à bien tirer sa vie Et la rendre d'houneur de tout poinct accomplie. L'oeuvre artistement fait garde ses liaisons. Sa grace, sa beauté, & ses proportions: Le temps ne destaint point son raieunissant lustre, Ains contre ses efforts il se rend plus illustre: De l'indocte tableau la honte & le mépris, Et une obscure mort en est seule le pris. C'est un fait Atlantée, estre endosse d'années, Qui ne les fait marcher d'honneur accopagnées. L'honneur de la vieillesse est l'estançonnement, C'est son fonds, c'est son champ, c'est son propre element: Cet aage est un tomeau sans la belle lumiere De la vertu, qui doit luy estre familiere. Celuy qui maistrisé d'appetits éhontez Se precipite au sein des fausses voluptez Est sous l'escorce humaine une idolle mouvante. Non hommme, ains seulement sa peinture vivante. Nostre vie est un songe, une ombre decevant; C'est un nuage vain poussé au gré du vent,
Vne fueille d'Autone à la premiere haleine Des Aquilons que doit s'abbattre sur la plaine. Que l'on soit done d'honneur, non des ans envieux: Que s'ils nous sont donnés de la faveur des cieux, Il les faut soulever d'une vivante gloire, Dont la Parque ne puisse arracher la memoire: Comme a fait ce Montluc, Montluc ce grand guerrier, Qui honore son front d'un belliqueux Laurier, Et de Palmes sa main, palmes victoricuses Le signal verdoyant des armes glorieuses. C'est ce Montluc, qui fut aux combats nompareil, Le plus prompt à l'espée, le plus sage ou conseil, Capitaine invincible, ayant sous ses bannicres Rompu cent & cent fois mille bandes guerrieres. Son berceau fut Gascongne, où les peuples ardans Naissent, meurent soldats, & dápendent leurs ans: Indomptables, hautains à secourir leurs Princes, Et replanter les bords de leurs belles Provinces. Il estoit descendu d'ayculs braves & forts, Praticqs en toute guerre, entreprenants, accorts, Eschaussez d'un beau sang & d'une noble envie Ou de vaincre aux combats, ou d'y verser la vie. Le los de nos ayeuls va nostre coeur haussant, Ainsi de la vertu de son pere se sent Le ieune Lyonneau, qui jà desia menace De ses ongles tranchans des fiers taureaux l'audace. L'aiglc à grand peine esclos de son lict maternel Oze attaquer des cerfs le peuple au pied isnel: Il assaut des dragons l'engeance venimeuse Ee eschange sa vie en mort victorieuse, Ainsi ce chevalier avant que la saison Luy frisast sur la ioue une crespe toison Espoinçonné honneur, il voulut chaud aprendre Fier de coeur & de mains en sa ieunesse tendre Le mestier de Bellone, ayant devant ses yeux De ses preus devanciers les gestes glorieux, Bien tost on s'apperceut que sa vertu cogneiie, Sa vaillance aux dangers, sa prudence chesnüe Aux affaires doubteux voloit devant ses ans Iune soldat ja vieux de gestes triomphans. Comme l'on void la nuict à la robe estoillée Qui n'a point sa clarté de nuage voilée Des chetifs journaliers affublant les travaux Et d'un profond repos adoucissant leurs maux Ardente estinceler de mille flammes vives, Que Thetys a levé dans le frais de ses rives, Entre toutes bluete un feu plus radieux, Horrible, perruqué qui menasse les cieux, Qui menasse la mer & la terre d'orage: Ainsi du grand Montluc le Martial courage Terriblé flamboyoit entre tous les soldats Actif, laborieux, vray champion de Mars. La Toscane en trembloit, la superbe Italie, Angleterre, Piedmont, Flandres, la Germanie, Sa grand' picque en sa main guide des battaillons Estoit l'horreur, frayeur des peuples Bourguignons, Sons les feus ondoyans de l'acier de sa targe Le Fran ois gros de coeur ne craignoit point la charge De l'arrogante Espagne, ayant plus cher mourir Et vair son estomac d'un coup mortel ouvrir Que recevoir le froid d'une peur pallisante, Coulpable des honneur d'une ame peu vaillante. Son seul regard rendoit le soldat si hautain Qu'il sembloit ja tenir la victoire en la main. Il n y a point d honneur ny tiltre militaire, Dont ne l'ait ennobly, non la faveur prospere De fortune, mais bien sa fameuse valeur, Qui a tousiours vaincu des armes le mal-heur: Ayant e coeur plus grand non que Mareschaussees, Gouvernemens, grandeurs à la foule entassees, Ains plus grand qu'un Empire, & né pour commander Depuis le stot Indois jusq'à l' Angloise mer, Posez moy un Colosse au bas de la compagne Il est toutes fois grand: un Nain sur la montagne Est toutes fois petit: ainsi l'indignité D'un homme bas & vil monstre sa lascheté Quoy que hausse d'honneurs, & que la main royale De biens & de grandeurs luy soit trop liberale. Depuis quand le Françoise divisé en deux parts Fit floter contre soy ses propres estendars, Et que Mars tout sanglant, & la discorde irée Trainoit ceste couronne en pieces deschirée, Grand Alcide Gaulois il ramassa le bris: Mille fois la campagne il ioncha d'ennemis, Et vainqueur abbatit sous le fer de sa lance De l'heretique erreur l'outrageuse licence, Hardy, determiné, indomté, valcureux, Et l'exemple immortel des faicts chevaleureux. Mais qui pourroit conter ses guerres terminées, Escarmouches, assauts, & battailles données, Murs prins & defendus, celuy pourra nombrer Les estoiles des cieux, & les flots de la mer Luy seul eserire a peu digne de ceste gloire De ses divers travaux une immortelle histoire, Luy un second Cesar, le sçavant escrivain Des exploits achevez par sa vaillante main. Non autrement qu'un chesne orgueilleux de trophées Ses armes reluisoient de lauriers éstoffées, Ayant tousiours fait voir par le glaive pointu Qu'il estoit impossible d'abattre sa vertu Si bien que le Dieu Mars or qu'il portast envie Gros de rage & despit auxgestes de sa vie, N' a iamais entrepris dedans lest our sanglant Sur la poudre adenter ce Tydide vaillant. Dont époinct de fureur & boüillant de colere, A meurtry coup sur coup en leur fleur printaniere Trois freres, ses trois fils, trois Achilles François, Trois Scipions nouveaux flambans sous les harnois, Comme l'astre iumeau qui sauve de tempeste Du matelot ja prest à naufrager la teste. Ces vieux Heros de Gréce, & ses foundres Romains N' eussent passé l'honneur des trois freres germains, Si leur forte vigueur aux armes si bien née En leur tendre bourgeon n'eust esté moissonnée. Comme on void trois beaux lis qui d'un lustre pareil Des boutonnent leur robe aux royons du soleil. Ou trois beaux Hyacints à la face vermeille, Epanir les thresors de leur vifue merveille, Le ciel s'en resiouit, & verse sur ses fleurs Les larmes dont l'aurore argente leurs couleurs: Mais le coutre trenchant où le grsleux orage Les celestes honneurs de leurs beautez saccage. Le destin nous monstra puis à saudain repris Ces trois freres à soy du terrestre pourpris.
Craigniez vous que sous eux la Françoise vaillance Fit ployer (ô bons Dieux) du monde la puissance? Celuy qui fit broncher le Macedonien, Qui fit pomper son char du sang Emathien, Vid d'un oeil asseuré, haut revestu de gloire, La mort de ses deux fils assieger sa victoire, De mesme (o grand Montluc heurtè d'un tel malheur On ne te vid iamais foible sous la douleur: Ferme comme un rocher dedans la mer profonde, Lequel plus est batu plus se mocque de l'onde. Tu desseignois encor les combats retenter Quand la fieureuse mort vint au lict te donter. Tel est le fier torrent des affaires humanes Qui faict & puis deffaict toutes choses mondaines: Nous mourons en naissant, & mainte-fois au bord De ceste fresle vie on est pris de la mort: Mais heureux qui a peu plein d honneurs & d'années Attendre de pied oy les fieres destinées, Qui a veu pres de soy sans iamais s'esbranler Puissances, Royautez, Empires chanceler: Qui a peu sans frayeur voir fondre sur sa teste Des grands esclats du ciel la bruante tempeste. Tel fut ce Chevalier, auquel oncques la peur Par aucun accident ne fit tomber le coeur, Ayant heureusement vaincu Mars & l'envie Qui voyoit de travers la splendeur de sa vie: Ayant veu retourner deux fois quarante Estez. Assailly, combattu de mille adversitez: Mais compris en soy-mesme, il espointoit la flesche Dont le malheur pouvoit à son los faire bresche. Vous son fils, honorez du pere & des enfans Le Tombeau non de pleurs, mais de chars triomphans Gemissans sous le fais des despouilles vaincuës, Pistolets, coutelats, picques, lances, massuës, Morions, gantelets, brassars, cuissots percez, Panaches tous sanglans, corcelets enfoneez, Phifres, tambours, guidons fanfares de trompertes. Enseignes, estandars, & lancieres cornettes, Marques de leur proüesse, & dignes monumens De ces quatre guerriers, les premiers de leurs temps, Lesquels ores la haut de la voute dorèe Feront trembler d esclairs leur salade timbrée Foudroyans Encelade, & l'orgueil furieux Des Geans qui encor s'arment contre les Cieux. ALIUD. Ignavi Pario quaerant in marmore vitam, Quis vitae tantum spes jacet in tumulo: Haec gessi ut mutos liceat contemnere testes, Praxitelisve manus, seu Polyclete tuas. Nee vatum scriptis mea busta incisa legantur, Funditus extinctos hic tueatur honos. Sic scripsi, ut possint vates nil addere, nobis Aeternum ingenio suppeditante decus. Sed ne forte meum longinquo ex orbe profectus Ut redeat viso praetereat tumulum Extremi nomen sculpatur margine saxi Hoc satis est: populis caetera fama canet. Sic olim qui Alpes, Italas qui fregerat arces, Scribi unum hoc jussit, Annibal hic itus est. Faciebat Godofridus Malvinus Regius, Burdigalae Senator, anno 1577. Epitaphe de Messire Blaise de Mont∣luc, Mareschal de France. CI gist le grand Montluc, duquel la renommée Par mille cors divers, Embouchez hautement, a la gloire semée Au champ de l'univers. Montluc, qui de son nom comme vn foudre de guerre Estonna mille fois L'Italie, Le Piedmont, l'Espagne, & l'Angleterre Et le mutin François. De ces peuples domptez ayant l'ame eschauffée D'un desir glorieux, Despoü ille sur des poüille, il dressa maint trophée Tousiours victorieux. Mais la mort, qui demain doit trancher nostre vie Ou peut estre aujourd'huy, Le triomphe enviant de son heureuse vie Triomphe ores de luy. He que c'est peu de cas que des choses mondaines: C'en est rien que du vent. Car tout ainsi qu'on void qu'elles naissent soudaines: S'en vont soudainement. N'agueres ce Montluc fut l'honneur de son aage Vn Alcide nouueau. Apres tant de travaux pour son dernier partage Il n'a que ce tombeau. Lieutenances, estats, ordres, mareschaussés, Ny lots, ny dignitez, Ny honneurs, ny grandeurs, l'une à l'autre entassees, Ny lauriers meritez N'avoient rendu content sonesprit plein d'envie De plus outre tanter. (Iamais un brave coeur cependant qu'il a vie Ne se peut contenter) Ores il est contant avec six pieds de terre Partage égal à tous: Car autant en emporte un chetif beche-terre Que le plus grand de nous. Sa gloire seulement apres luy nons demeure Gloire qui ne meurt pas. Car la vertu iamais encor que le corps meure N'est subjette au trépas. Encor est fraische en nous d'Annibal la memoire, Encor vivent les faits Des Scipions, Catons & Cesars, dont la gloire Ne perira iamais. Ainsi apres cent ans de vie il ne nous reste Rien exempt du destin Que le seule vertu: car tost ou tard le reste Est conduit à sa fin. Repose donc en paix ô ame genereuse, Honneur de l'Vnivers Cependant que pleureus sur ta tombe podreuse Ie graveray ces vers. Montluc comblé d'honneurs de grandeurs & d'an∣nées Et de gloire chargé; Aiant servi cinq Rois fut par les destinées. Sous ce tombeau logé.
ALIUD. Ne mihi pro tumulo saxorum attollite molem, Grandia nec titulis saxa notate meis. Versae bello acies, quassataeque moenia, gentes Edomitae, nobis sint tumuli, & tituli. Flor. Remondus Senat. Burdig. ALIVD. ISta Monlucius jacet sub urna Franciorum equitum unus ex magistris, Quo nemo meliùs ferire punctim, Quo nemo meliùs ferire caesim Vel pedes, vel eques valebit unquam. Pellaeum hic juvenem, senem Camillum, Claros Scipiadas, ducemque luscum. Et duces veteres fuere quotquot Bellandi docuisset unus artem, Vincendi docuisset unus artem. Mavors scilicet, & soror flagello Clara sanguineo, Minerva, Apollo, Omnes denique dii, deaeque, quos nos Bellis imperitare suspicamur, Maximo studio, improbo labore, Scire illi dederant locare castra, Observare diem, locuinque pugnae, Armatorum aciem ordinare, firmis Ipsam subsidiis fovere, semper Hostium insidias cavere, saepe Hostes insidiis necare, nulla Non cibaria militi expedire, Torpescentia corda militantum, Forti & compta animare concione, Aestuantia, dulcibus, severis, Permulcere, vel increpare verbis Munia omnia militis, ducisque Exequi intrepide, ut frequens pudorem Tantis incuteret suis Magistris. Noster Monlucius deorum alumnus. Princeps militiae, decusque nostrae, Illis artibus, hic graves Latinos, Fortes Allobroges, feros Iberos, Gentes Caesareas, truces Britannos, Plebem Tectosagum impiam, rebelles Vibiscos tremefecit; imò saepe Caecidit, domuit: stupes viator? Non noras hominem: volens profecto Longé maxima praestitisset horum. P. de Termes Senat. Burd. Lucinae Vaticinium de fortuna Mon∣luci. VIx bene Monlucum dias in luminis oras Lucina extulerat, pueri cum pandere fata Incipit, ac tanto matrem solatur alumno. En, ait, en genetrix coelo hic gratissimus Heros, Italiam sternet juvenis Ticinumque, Padumque, Subjiciet Franco. Nec desaevisse juvabit, Germanas acies, & magni Caesaris arma, Allobroges quin ipse feros, Alpesque superbas Obterat, atque fugam castris immittat Iberis. Aspera Monlucum Cyrnus tremet: addita signis Lilia, victricesque rates mirabitur Aetna, De super, atque solo, atque salo congesta trophaea. Hinc ubi jam matura viri processerit aetas, Eruet hic arces, & propugnacula Martis Belgica, tum Sequanae coget parere Moscllam. Cumque resurgentes sistet Titanas Enyo, Quos non ille manu, quas non disjecerit urbes? At tu flos aevi, Divumque, Henrice, propago, Ne propera, & sceptri curam dimitte Poloni, Hic hostes premet excidio, flammasque Rupellae, Inferet, hic Francis avertet finibus Anglum, Heu quibus in pugnas animis ruet! Ecce Triumphi Exuviaeque micant: stridentque hinnitibus aures, Arva rubent, cerno strages, tonitruque furenti Oppida quassa, tubis reboat clangentibus aether Concussus vallesque, & vastae ripa Garumnae. Hic vir hic est fato Gallis datus. Ast ubi tandem Monlucum vincet mors effera, tum quoque Mavors Victus erit, nodoque manus Pax junget aheno. Ne me quaesieris extra. E. du Mirail Senat. Burdig. Tumulo Blasii Monlucii. Vnicus Alcides Manes prope & Infera rupit: Quid modo quadruplici facient Alcide miselli? Ecce tribus natis obsesso Blasius Orco Contulit arma parens: Iam scilicet Orce peristi. ALIUD. Geryonem triplicem seipso Monlucius auxit. Iam quadruplex, nati at{que} pater, stupor orbis & horror. Marc Monerius. Les Manes de Messire Blaise de Mont∣luc, Mareschal de France. Par. P. de Brach. QVand Cloton file-vie, à qui les destinées Font tourner le fuzeau de nos courtes années, Vovlut du grand Montluc tramer les heureux jours, Pour ne les tramer pas, comme elle fait tousiours, D'un fil simple commun, à l'ouvrage attentive Sa quenouîlle chargea d'une filace vive: En arma son costé, & avec une main Tira brin dessus brin le bout d'un fil humain, Faisant de l'autre main avec le fil baissée En l'air piroüetur la vitale fuzée. Le fil par le pezon jusqu'en terre alongé Fortement s'arrondit bien retors, bien dougé. Et la Parque achevant de tirer la filace Par trois fois ces deux vers chanta d'une voix basse,
I'attache ceste vie avec vn fi si fort, Qu'à peine sera-il desnoué par la mort. Puis le fuzeau grossi d'un grand nombre d' années Au poids elle donna és mains des Destinées. Et Iuppin retassant la paste entre ses mains, Dequoy pere commun il moule les humains, L'ayant fort repaistrie n fit une grand masse: Vn beau chef en forma imprimé d'une face. Quis' estevoit hautaine, & l' enta sur un corps Dont les membres estoient muscleus, nerveus, & forts, Auquel en l' avivant Mars vint à bouche pleine Neuf fois soufflr dessus le vent de son haleine, Vent bruyant, sous lequel avee mille dangers Le grand no de Mntluc fist voile aux estrangers, Vent, qui venant de Mars souflerr sur ceste image, Luy soufla dans le coeur l'ardeur de son courage: Alluma dans son ame un feu de guerroyer, Qui l'a fait entre nous tempester, foudroyer, Battre, bouleverser mille fortes murailles, Tenter & retenter le hazard des batailles Apprendre comme il faut une ville aborder, Comme il faut l'assaillir, comme il la faut garder, Ce qui fist qu'un laurier marquant mainte deffaite Espais fueille par fueille environna sa teste Mais las! comme il n'est rien, qui si tost qu'il est né, Ne soit d'un sort commun à la mort destiné, Ce Moutluc plein d'honneurs, de biens, & de vieillesse, Sentist le trait mortel▪ duquel la mort nous blesse. Or comme son esprit dessogeoit de son corps Mercure il rencontra, Mercure, qui des morts Tous les esprits attend, afin d'estre leur guide Au chemin tenebreux de l'onde Acherontide. Ce Dieu le conduissant de son double esleron Hachoit l'air qui siflant bruyot à l'environ; Et l'esprit le suivant parmy l'obscure voye De l'enfer plein d'effroy sans frayeur le costoye: Auquel comme de loin il cust monstré le lieu Du Passage infernal, Mercure dit adieu. L'esprit demeure seul, poursuivant son voyage Se rendit à la fin sur le bord du rivage, Où plantant fermement ses pieds sur le gravois Appella le Nocher à haute & rude voix: Mais sa nacelle armée & de voille & de rames Passoit à l'autre bord un nombre infini d'ames. Il passe par deux fois & au mesme batteau Pour la tourner passer, tourna repasser l'eau. L'esprit qui cependant attendant sur l'arene, Contemploit ce Nocher qui ramoit avec peine, Au poil blanc, au teint noir, au regard esgaré, Convert d'un vieil habit à lambeaux deschiré, Plein de poix, qui meslée au tortis des filaces Avoit de son vaisseau calfeutré les crevasses, Ses bras tiroient la rame avec un tel effort, Qu'en trois coups son batteau revint baiser le port. De mille endroits divers suivant les advenues, Afin de s'embarquer mille ames sont venues, Qui deça, qui delà sautant du bord de l'eau L'une sur l'autre entroient foule à foule au batteau, Qui n'a deux doigts de franc, affesse de sa charge, Qui ià le vieux Nocher vouloit pousser au large, Quand l'esprit à Montluc, à qui chasse du bord Le Nocher commandoit d'attendre un second port, S'estança dans l'esquif, qui ne vouloit le prendre: Et dit, ie passeray, c'est trop me faire attendre. Si tost qu'il eust gaigné le bord de ce vaisseau, Et charge & Nautonnier se renverse à vaut l'eau Et le premier mestier qu'apprit cette belle ame Dans ce Royaume noir, ce fut tirer la rame. Et comme en son vivant iamais necessité, N'avoit reduit Montluc en telle extremité, Qu'il n'y trouvast remede; ainsi dans l'enfer mesme Il trouva le remede à se passer soy-mesme, Charon qui cependant dedans l'eau grenoü illoit, Pluton & ses esprits à son aide appelloit. Et tout soudain qu'il eust d'ongles croches pris terre, Commençe de crier, nous sommes à la guerre. Alarme, alarme, alarme; & redoublant ces cris Espouvanta l'enfer, effraya les esprits. Pluton craint que quelqu'un par secrette rapine Vienne encor de nouveau ravir sa Proserpine. Il ne sçait, qu'il doit faire, il va de tous costez Rechercher dans l'enfer les soldats indomptez Qui ont durant leur vie avecques quelque gloire Acheté par leur sang l'honneur d'une victoire, Hardis, aspres, vaillans, ardans de sang humain, Et qui out furieux porté la guerre en main. Dix mille tels esprits sont sortis des lieux sombres, Où logent dans l'enfer plus plaisibles les ombres. L'un d'un grand coup d'espée a le chef avalé, L'autre de bras de iambe estoit escartelé, L'un porté dans le seing une bale cachée: L'autre a d'un coup d'espée une oreille tranchée. Mais comme la pluspart de ces braves soldats Ont veu l'ame à Montluc qui marchoit à grand pas En l'air branlant sa main d'une horrible menace Suivans à vanderoutte ils ont quitté la place, Presque tous les esprits à al' arme ventus En voyant l'autre esprit, se sont ressouvenus, Que cestoit ce Montluc, qui vivant sur la terre Estoit un second Mars, un foudre de la guerre, Et tous ceux qui vivans luy furent ennemis, Comme s'il les cherchoit, en fuitte se sont mis. A chasque ame il sembloit pensant estre attrappée Sentir encor le fil de sa sanglante espée. La Toscans, la Lombars, Napolitans, Anglois, Allemans, Espagnols & rebelles François Pesle-mesle fuyans d'une fuitte pressée Cul sur teste tombant à jambe renversee. Tout l'enfer retentist, & les esprits peureux Cerchent pour se cacher leurs sepulchres ombreus, Ils veulent tous crier; mais une crainte mole Dans leur bouche beante amortist la parole. Pluton qui cependant cherchoit par tous moyens De rasseurer le coeur de ses noirs citoyens, Et connoistre l'autheur de l'esmute avenüe, Ne les voyans suivis fors que d'une ame nue Se bouffit de colere: il enrage de voir Qu une ame ait peu l'enfer de frayeur émouvoir. Et rougissant de honte à grand pas il s'avance Vers l'esprit à Montluc qui ferme en countenance Sans s'effrayer de luy devers luy s'avançoit. Comme assez prés de luy l'esprit il apperçoit, Vomissant son couroux il commence luy dire, Viens tu superbe esprit pour troubler mon empire?
Arreste, arreste toy: sinon malgré le sort Ie te feray senir une seconde mort: Ou ie feray souffrir à ton ombre coupable L'impitoyable arrest du juge inexorable. Plus rigoreux vers toy sera son jugement, Que du fer, que du feu, que du geyneux tourment Qui es tu? d'ou viens-tu? de quelle and ace folle Ozes tu sans Caron passer dans sa gondolle. L'esprit ayant esté l'hoste d'un corps vainqueur, Duquel iamais la peur n'avoit glacé le coeur. Ne s'estonna craintif au bruit de sa menace: Ains luy contre-respond avec une humble audace: Icy ie ne viens pas, comme out faict autresfois Hercule tugeant, Thesée, ou Piritois, Pour troubler ton enfer: car cette ame eschauffée De gloire n'a iamais desiré ce trophée, Sans peur donques demeure en ces ombreux enfers, D'enfer le chien portier aux trois gosiers ouverts Et toy sans peur de moy, pluton, garde ta fame. Là haut une plus belle encor garde la flame De son amour vers moy: mais si tu es le Roy De ce Royaume noir plein d'horreur & d'effoy, Pour quoy n'establis-tu avec quelque justice, Les favourables loix d une douce police? Et quoy? luy dit Pluton, qu'as-tu ça bas trouvé, Qui par nouvelle loy doive estre reprouvé? Apres qu'on eust, dit-il, mis mon corps sous la lame Voulant passer ton flenve, ainsi que fait toute ame D'une rame Caron me chassa rudement, Bien que i'eusse attendu sur le port longuement, Et qu'il eust ia passe mainte ame en sa barque, Qui avoient eu congé depuis moy par la parque, Moy qui ay le coeur gros & pense meriter Pour le corps, d'oú ie sors, de me voir mieux traitter, Tout flambant de courroux i'entray dedans la nasse En renversant sa charge: & tout seul ie me passe. Or Pluton si tu veux avec un long discours Entendre qui ie suis, & quels furent mes jours, Ie n'aurois iamais fait contant ma vie entire. Le parler me faudroit plustost que ta matiere, Pluton, dont le courroux estoit desia flatté Par ses propos diserts plein d humble gravité, Luy dit, approche toy, ame genereuse Viens ç bas pour parer ma grand chambre fumeuse, D'oú es-tu qui tu es, & tes faicts conte moy. L'ame sans sonner mot longuement se tint coy: Puis dit en s'élevant comme un, qui se réveille, Si le nom de Montluc a frappé ton oreille, Nom que la renommée embouche en mille corps, Ie fus quand il vivoit, l'hostesse de son corps. La France est mon pays, Gascongne est ma nourrisse, Qui blandist ses enfans d un guerrier exercice, Qui arme leurs berceaux de petits estandars, Et leurs mains de tambours, les voüans au Dieu Mars. La lignée de ceux, desquels ie pris naissance, Est assez par mon nom conneue par la France, Comme un Lyon iamais n'engendre un cerf poureux. Succedant aux Montlucs en leur coeur genereux De guerre desireux ie n'eus loisir d'attendre Qu'un poil vint mollement sur ma ioue s'épandre, Poil la fleur du printemps, qui poinct sur nostre teint Car encor ie n'avois trois fois six ans atteint, Que sortant hors de page au Duc de Lorraines schappe, N emportant comme on dit que l'espée & la cape, Comme un jeune poulain qui branlant teste & col A force a destaché la boucle à son licol, Lors que libre il sent en fuyant l escurie Dispost court par les champs, & cherche un prairie▪ Où la terre grattant d'un jarret souple & prompt Il galoppe, il gambade, il fait en l'air le bond, Dessous ses pieds veneus le long de sa carriere. L'air demeure épaissi d'une obscure poussiere Son crain flotant espars se meut au gré du vent, Sous son viste galop par accord se mouvant La terre retentit: mais quand sur un rivage Il oit hanir la poutre, ou le poulin sauvage. Vne oreille dressant s'estant court arresté Escoute en quel endroit, puis court de ce costé. Ainsi du tabourin, qui le soldat rèveille, I'ecoutois quand le son viendroit à mon oreille: Pour courir celle part. Alors cet Empereur, Ce grand Charles, qui fut du monde la terreur Desseignoit de la France eriger un trophée. La guerre estoit par tout vivement échauffée. Là donques l'accourus; & sous Odet de Foix I'appris jeune soldat à porter le harnois. Et ores en Espagne & ores en Angleterre Ieune ie m'adextray au mestier de la guerre. Ie traversay les monts suivant l'espoir de tous, Qui pensoient que Milan seroit garde par nous. Mais comme bien souvant la fortune se mocque, Nous fusmes d'un malheur suivis à la Biquoque: Là où comme pieton, tout de poudre noircy Ie vis combattre à pied le grand Mommorancy, Que i'allay coudoyant au miljeu du carnage, Faisant sentir l'effort de mon jeune courage. Apres que nostre camp desespera de voir Par sa force Milan remis sous son pouvoir, Revenu, sans long temps m'arrester en Gascongne. La Navarre ie vis, Picardie & Bourgongne. Et bien que i'eusse veu ia maint & maint combat, Mon vol n'estoit plus haul, que le vol du soldat. Mais lors un point d'honneur salariant ma peine De soldat ie receus tiltre de capitaine. Bien tost ie me trouvay plus chaud en guerre épris, Lors que Fonterabie aux Espagnoles fut pris. Invincible au travail, apres Fonterabie Ie vis ô grand malheur, la route de Pavie, Iournée oû nostre Roy demeure prisonnier, Où presque te restay commbattant le dernier: Mais playé dans le corps, à la teste, au visage, Avec peine à la fin i'eschappe ce carnage. Puis avec ce Lautrec sous qui ie m'avancé Encor en Italie hardy ie repasse: Et suivant la Romaigne & la Brusse & l'Apouille Melphe nous demeura pour gueeriere despoüille: Où mes soldats Gascons mi suivant d'un prin-saut Furent veus les premiers sur la bresche à l'assaut. Naples sçait quels assauts en assiegeant ie baille: Et quantefois du pied i'ay marqué sa muraille. De ce voyage long d'un malheureux bonheur Ie revins tout chargé de loüange & d'honneur, Aux charges, aux assauts, rencontres, camisades, Ayant scellé mon los de quatre arquebusades.
Me trouvant à Marseille on vid là de quel soing Ie sçay la peur d'un siege asseurer au besoin. D où l Empereur qui peut t en faire encore le conte Partist sans l'assieger avec sa courte honte. Au siege contre luy ie fus à Perpignan. Le Piedmont s'es mouvant Cassal & Carignan Et Carmagnole & Quiers virent en cette guerre, Combien de chevaliers ie renversay par terre. Encor que de l honneur sans l'avoir dsiré De grand Maistre de Camp le Roy m'eust honoré Alors que l'aigle joint aux armes Espagnolles Entreprit d assailir nos gens à Cerisoles, Ie voulu bien qu' aux chefs ces traits soyent deffendus, Guider les pas douteux de nos enfans perdus. Ce fut lors qu'en vainquant, le François magnanime, T'offrit maint ennemy pour sanglante victime. Ce fut lors qu'acharné s empourpray mes deux mains Au sang des Espagnols, des Lombards, des Germains. Or l Anglois cependant; qui dautre part guerroye Pour la guerre s'armoit dans la terre d'Oye Pour ne voir guerre aucune où ie n'eusse ma part De gloire dsireux ie courus celle part. Là ie fis voir le coeur d'un guerrier de Gascongne. Alors mou Roy me vid en la basse boulogne (Et cet acte ie mets pour mes gestes plus beaus) Sauver l'honneur perdu de ving-deux drappeaux: Et malgré l'ennemy qui tiroit la deffaite. Faire couvrir de sang une brave retraite. En Piedmont appellé pour quelque remuëment D'Albe & de Moncallier i'eus le gouvernement. Sienne pour ne r'entrer dessous la tyrannie Des voisins Florentins, dont elle est ennemie, D'entre les mains desquels nos Roys avoient osté Le joug qui captivoit sa doucé liberté, Craignant & l'Empereur & le Duc de Florence, En ce temps mandia le secours de la France. Le Roy prestant l'oreille au prier des Siennois M'envoya pour leur aide ayant de moy fait chois. Là où representant sa Majesté Royalle I eus de son lieutenant la charge generalle. Et gardant aux Siennois leur chere liberté Là i'avois les fleurons du lis si bien planté Qu'encores aujourd'huy les bannieres Françoises Dans les vents boufferoient dessus les tours Siennoises, Si de Strossy le camp, en pieces estant mis N'eust donné l'advantage aux vainqueurs ennemis. Henry lors nostre Roy, Henry mon second maistre. Auquel ià ma vertu s'estoit faite connoistre Dans Sienne me sçachant sans secours assiegé, Bien tost pour ne me perdre envoya mon congé. Mais moy brave & vaillant, à qui iamais la crainte N'avoit dedans le coeur donné la moindre attainte. Voulant voir les assaults des campez ennemis, D'attandre son secours deux mois ie luy promis. Et comme le Nocher, qui au fort d'un orage Est des flots & des vents menasse de naufrage, Provident or deça, or de là, suit par tout, Dep uis un bous de nef, jusques à l'autre bout, Pour voir si sa navire au ventre creus & large, Cale trop dessous l'eau, sous le poids de sa charge: Si les fiers Aquilons le cordage ont lasché, Si la hune est entiere, ou le mast arraché: Si les bancs, si les rocs, ou les ondes bossues, Ont enfoncé les plis de ses costez pensues, Dans Sienna aussi i'alloy, visitant les rampars, I'avoisoy si du sein quelqu'un de mes soudarts Laissoit tamber le coeur: à ceux-là par menasse Coüards les hontoyant, ie remettois l'audace. Vivement assailly ie garday les Siennois, Comme i avois promis non seulement deux mois, Ains encor cy apres, de la ville assaillie Faisant coup dessus coup mainte brave saillie Et là ie fusse mort combattant, si la faim N eust vaincu mes soldats abayant dans leur sein, Ausquels pour destourner la honte de se rendre A tout accustomez sous moy ie fis apprendre Pour ne mourir de faim, à se paistre de chats, De chevaux, & de chiens, & d'asnes & de rats. Mais enfin entre nous manquant ce vivre mesme Nous sortismes vaincus d une famine extreme, Tous mes soldats & moy avant que dèloger Ayant trois jours entiers demeuré sans manger. Apres ce siege long, ie m'en revins en France, Où ie vis haut-loüant applaudir ma vaillance, Et mon corps entorner d'un belliqueux collier, De l'ordre de mon Roy, estant fait Chevalier, Ordre, qui lors pendoit pour enseigne honorable A signaler en nous un service notable. Au grand camp d'Amiens, ie fus fait Colonel: Que ce Prince Lorrain, dont le nom eternel Suivant de pere en fils commande à nos battailles, Te conte de quel heur i'assaili les murailles De ce fort Thionville, ou de proüesse armé, D'un tel coeur mes soldats à l'assaut i' animé Qui i'emporté par force une tour haute & forte, Qui pour entrée apres nous servit d'une porte. Puis d'honneur sur honneur estant du Roy payé En Toscane ie fus lieutenant renvoyé. Mais apres que la paix eust par ferme alliance Ioint le sang de Savoye, & d'Espagne à la France: Que l'Anglois fut boucle plus estroit dans sa mer: Que par la paix l'Itale on eust fait desarmer, En France ie revins avec mes capitaines, Qui par leurs faits vaillans emportoient leurs mains pleines De palmiers triomphans, & de vainqueurs lauriers, Que la paix marioit aux pasles oliviers: Mais comme apres la guerre, un vieil soldat l'on paye Du service passe, l'enroollant morte paye De quelque vieux chasteau ainsi de mes estats Que la paix ravissoit au gain de mes combats, Charles me surpaya, & d'une charge hautaine, Me fit son Lieutenant sur toute l'Aquitaine, Son Lieutenant en chef honneur estroitement Gardé jusques alors aux Princes seulement, En ce temps les François qui trop chauds à la guerre Ne peurent cn la paix vivre en paix en leur terre, Firent comme iadis les trop vaillans Romains Contre leur propre sang armans leurs propres mains. Baignant leur fer sanglant au sang de leurs entrailles, Demolissans leurs forts, se donnans des battailles, S'estans, pour donner voile à leur sedition, Couverts du faux mainteau d'une religion. La France pitoyable, erroit toute troublée: De nostre ieunée Roy la couronne ébranlée
Panchant dessus son chef sa cheute menassoit, De ses armes le lis paslement flétrissoit, Au Sceptre que tenoit en main ce jeune Prince Desia n'obeissit ma rebelle province, Quand contre ces mutins aux armes ie courus: Bourdeaux, Thoulouse prise à temps ie secourus. Lectoure ie gaignay: & le fort du fort Pene, Là où fut le tombeau de maint grand capitaine. Apres (bien que suivy de peu de cavalliers Desquels i avois fait chois, pour belliqueux guerriers) En suivant ma fortune éguillonné de gloire Ie combati Duras, & gaignay la victoire: Sous mes coups ou de bale ou de glaives trenchans, Ie fis long temps la mort errer parmy les champs, Des champs fatals de Ver, d'où sept mille ombres palles Vindrent ça bas hurter tes portes infernales. Depuis, bien que l'byver de ma vieille saison Eust negé sur mon chef, tout vicil & tout grison, Desirant de garder mou pays par ma perte, I'assiegeay Rabastens, la guerre estaut r'ouverte, Là pour marquer mon los par un exploit dernier, Ie redevins soldat, ie devins pionnier, Et plein de desespoir, de despit & de rage Voyant qu'en un assaut, mes gens perdoient courage, Qu'ils bransloient au retour, à la breche hazardeus Ie marchay le premier, guidant leurs pas douteus. La honte de me voir marcher de telle audace, (Encor qu'un coup de bale à jour perçat ma face) Combattre opiniastre avec un tel effort, Cela leur donnant coeur nous sit maistre du fort. Au bout de quelques ans, quand la mort qui assomme Les Princes & les Roys, aussi tost qu'un pauvre homme, Eust Charles nostre Roy mis dessous le cercucil, Laissant la France en proye, & le François en dueil, Et que Henry pour France eust Poulogne laissee, Ie me vis honnoré de la Mareschaussee, Se souvenant mon Prince autrefois de m'avoir, A la guerre sous luy veu faire mon devoir, Voulant par cét honneur, liberal reconnoistre. Mon service employé pour son frere mon maistre. Ainsi aux grands estats, dont ie fus honnoré Ie ne vins tout à coup, ains degré par degré, Comme l'astre éclattant, qui dans le ciel flamboye, Qui pour suivant le cours de son oblique voye Marche à pas mesurez, & selon les saisons De degrez en degrez, void ses douze maisons. Bien que ie fusse sec, & casse d'un long âge, Ie me sentois encor assez verd de courage, Pour suivre des desseins que i'avois pourpensez, Qui eussent couronné tous mes gestes passez, Mais m'estant retiré, pour ne voir tant de brigues, Pour ne voir les plus grands conniver sous leurs ligues, Vieil ie pris le chemin, qu à tous prendre il nous faut, Mourant comme une lampe, à qui l'buile deffaut. Voylà doncques Pluton, le discours de ma vie, Qui fust & de grandeur, & de bon-heur suivie, Bon-heur que i'ay cherché, en guerroyant tousiours N ayant iamais oyseux en vain mangé le jour. Mais le coiiard mal heur, qui ne m'ozoit attendre Pour s'attaquer à moy, sur les miens s'alla prendre: Car ayant eu cest heur, d'engendrer quatre enfans Tous quatre enfans de Mars, tous guerriers triomphans, Le malbeur contre moy bourrellé d'une envie Aux trois trancha le fil de leur trop courte vic. Mon brave Marc Antoine hayssant le repos Mourut en Italie, où reposent ses os Sur les rempars d'Hostie, où sa main redoutable La memoire laissa de maint acte notable, Peirot dont le coeur baut & plein d ambition, Estoit pour commander à quelque nation, Faisant voille au conquest d'un Royaume d'Affrique Fust tué dans une Isle en la mer Atlantique, Fabien, le François, comme ie t'ay conté, Estant contre soy-mesme en armes revolté, Ayant d'un fort tenu, forcé la barricade, Sentist un coup mortel, par une arquebusade. Ainsi veuf de ces trois que ie plaindray tousiours, Vn seul ioüit là haut de la clarté du jour, Qui a dans la cité de chevaliers armée Par maint exploit vaillant planté sa renommée, Qui les armes portant pour deffendre sa loy, Dans l'armée croisee a fait parler de soy Aux despens des vaincus: & qui brave n'agueres, Commandoit sur la mer aux Royales galeres Les sceut pour le combat si bieu faire ramer, Qu'il demeura vainqueur, le maistre de la mer: Vainqueur en terre, en mer, deux fois heureux en terre, Me vainquant, qui n'appris qu'à vaincre sur la terre, Lors qu'il executoit cest acte Martial Ie tirois à la mort, aggravé de mon mal: Mais m'estant de ce faict la nouvelle annoncée, Tout ravy ie sentis ma force renforcée, Par cet aise dernier flatté si doucement, Que ie mourois apres, plein de contentement, En voyant apres moy rester encor au monde Pour me faire revivre, un fils qui me seconde▪ Or donc Pluton, content dequoy plus ie ne vy, Et d'avoir mes trois fils avant ma mort ravy, Garde au moins celuy-là, & que la mort funeste, N'emporte des Montlucs le peu de grand qui reste. Garde mon frere encor, lequel ambassadeur Nos Roys ont douze fois chargé de leur grandeur: Ont fait voir les Romains, ont fait voir l'Allemagne, Ont fait voir la Hongrie, & la ville que baigne La mer de tous costez, l'Anglois, & l'Escossois, Deux fois voir le levant, deux fois le Poulognois, Voyage par lequel ceste gloire luy donne Qu'au chef de nostre Roy il a mis leur couronne: Renversant les complots de mainte nation, Qui briguoit la faveur de ceste eslection, C'est ce docte Prelat, qui pere d'éloquence Est baptisé du nom d'Ambassadeur de France: Qui par le miel coulant de sa diserte vois A fait autant d'exploits, que moy par le harnois. Or attendant qu'icy son ombre ie revoye, Dont le terme soit long, say moy monstrer la voye, Par où ie sois conduit au sejour bien-heureux Où logent les esprits des hommes genereux. L'ombre à peine avoit dit, que le Roy qui s'abaisse Pour honorer les grands, l'embrasse, la caresse, Luy-mesme la guidant aux champs Elisiens, Au quartier Martial des guerriers anciens, D'Alexandre, Hannibal, de Cesar, de Pompée, Des Catons, Scipions, vrays enfans de l'espée:
La Charles, là François, Henry, Monmorancy, Bourbon, Lautrec, Bayard, la Timoüille, Strossi, Leve, Termes, Brissac, & ce grand Duc de Guyse, Le bouclier des François, le pilier de I'Eglise, louyssent des rayons d un autre plus beau jour Où cette ame avec eux, fait son heureux sejour: Et la trompant le temps, d'un guerrier exercice, L'un deces obevaliers elle appelle à la lice, Elle court une bague, & cherche les esbats, Desquels le ieu figure un'ombre des combats. Car mesme quand le corps est sous la sepulture. L'ame imbuë retient l'instinct de sa nature. Les ames de ceux-là, qu'amour a tourmentez: Souspirent, lamentant dessous les bois mirtez, Des peuibles nochers les ames marinieres, Là bas dans un esquif frequentent les rivieres. Et quand le corps est mort les ames des guerriers Combattent se jouans sour l'ombre des lauriers. Ainsi va s'exerçant cette ame bein heureuse Veusue du corps enclous sous la tombe poudreuse, Ame qui pleine d'heur ne doir point desirer, Qu'honorant sa memoire on aille labourer Ny un marbre imagé des figures antiques, Ny de I or rebruny sur des pilliers Doriques, Ny qu'une Pyramide esleuée hautement Presse en terre ses os servant de monument: Car jamais par leur mort, jamais ceux-là ne meuront, De qui les braves faits pour monumens demeurent: Ce sont les vrays tombeaus: & le temps ronge tout De sa rongearde dent n'en peut venir à bout. Montluc donc ne mourra, & sa gloire immortelle Ne verra que le temps aye peuvoir sur elle. Montluc qui a laisse cette marque de soy, D'avoir six fois dix ans fait service à son Roy, Et cinquante & buict ans commande par son Prince Soit en la France, ou soit en estrange province. De n'avoir, quand luy seul a eu commandement, Attaqué l'ennemy, qu'il n'ait heureusement, Soit qu'il fust foible ou fort, emporté l'advantage, De n'avoir combattant jamais tourné visage. D'avoir eu cette gloire, avant voir son tripas, Qu'autre homme plus que luy n'avoit veu de combats, De battailles, assauts, rencontres, entreprises, Plus de murs deffendus, ny de plus belles prises, De n'avoir veu ses fils de luy degenerer, O heureux qui se peut, comme luy bien-heurer Par une heureuse mort, par unc heureuse vie, D'une telle memoire apres la mort suivie. In Tumulum illustrissimi viri D. Mont lucii, &c. Steph. Manialdus. MAgnanimi herois non pulchrum cerne sepul∣chrum, Et vitae & mortis nobile disce genus. Gentis Aquitanae splendor Montlucius armis Ingens, fortuna clarus, honore gravis, Militiam intrepidus primis scctatur ab annis, Atque ex militia praemia opima refert. Nam celer eximios explevit cursus honores, Fit torquatus eques, qui modo miles erat, Hinc belli auspiciis melioribus usus honorum Scandit ad excelsos, Marte juvante gradus. Discordes Gallos dum tristis turbat Erinnys, Civili & rabie Gallia tota ruit, Unus Aquitanae praefectus regius orae Debellat populos, magne Gerumna tuos. Horrendum quoties hostis, sensitque tremendum Terrisicum belli tempore fulmen erat. Scilicet ut fuerant primis veneranda sub annis Canicies animi, consiliumque sagax: Sic suit extremo sub tempore vivida bello Virtus & corpus dexteritate vigens. Caetera quid memorem nostrae non indiga laudis, Quae foret immensus dinumerare labor? Progeniem bello egregiam, vel Martia fratrum Pectora, quid titulis inseruisse juvat? Vivit adhuc frater nulli pietate secundus, Eloquio insignis, consilioque potens. Filius unus adhuc numerosa è prole superstes Patris ad exemplum non nisi magna sapit. In caeptis numquam sic deerit honoribus haeres. Clarescetque novis fascibus ista domus. Fortunata domus non quae divisa beatos Efficiunt homines, omnia mixta tenet: Ergo senex inter tot tantaque commoda vivens, Emeritae recolit tempora militiae. Infestis tandem cum nil rationis in armis Cerneret & toties foedera rupta dolis, Annorum plenus magnorum plenus honorum Expirat, placido & funere laetus obit. ALIUD EX GRAECO. Hoc jacet in parvo tumulo Montlucius ingens, Defuncti cineres & brevis urna tegit. Virtutes laudesque viri, praeclaraque facta Nec rapit interitus, nec recipit tumulus: Morte rapit celeri celebres Mars improbus, ast hic Aevo maturus, laude decorus obit. Steph. Manialdus. Montlucii Tribuni Militum Epicedium. ITe triumphales Montluci ad funera turmae Ite sub illius signis victricia semper Agmina, vosque adeò promptissima pectora bello Vascones exequiis longas indicite pompas. Et fortes si facta viros fortissima tangunt, Si stimulat virtus tanto subiisse feretro, Ne pigeat, non aequè animis armisque potenti Supremos unquam tumuli reddetis honores. Splendida porticibus sacris aulaea premantur, Templaque pullato obtentu color ater inumbret, Perque vias passim tristi pro munere crines Spargantur Cyparisse tui, quos delphica laurus Moestior, atque Apium foliis intexat amaris. Funereas exosa faces lux aemula noctis Marcescat, piceamque vomant funalia nubem. Atra procul lugubre sonent, & Lyda gementem Flebilibus numeris aspiret tibia cantum: Surda per armigeras acies sint tympana, nec se Indiciis manifesta suis humentia tangat Lumina, pars imis animi penetralibus erret.
Haec tu Montluci, tu belli fulmen habeto, Qualia persolvi manes sibi debita poscunt Emeriti & multa praecincti tempora lauro. Jam tibi delectae procedunt ordine turbae Signorum comites, & Martia castra sequentum: Figentur terrae vultus, longisque trahentur Arma notis, & humum vexilla sequentia vertent. Tum bellator equus nigro feralis amictu, Officium ad moestum lentis ducetur habenis; Quin ad certa tuum celebrabunt numina funus, Multaque visentur feralis fercula pomp, Partim hominum, partim manibus gestata deorum. Mars frameam, Bellona decus thoracis aheni, Et galeam Pallas, manicas furialis Enyo, Denique & aligero praepes victoria curru, Nunc stupe sacta, gravisque & saevo tarde dolore Bellorum feret exuvias, monumentaque laudis Plurima, Romanis etiam spectanda triumphis. Nec vero indecores illis ad grande feretrum Gentis Aquitanae primi, quorum inclita virtus Militiae claret studiis; moerentia jungent Agmina, quos oculis aliquis tùm forte pererrans, Miratusque viros, spirantiaque ora furorem Indomitum, tacito suspirans corde loquetur. Heu quantum imperium, si belligerantibus istis, Ductor in externos isset Montlucius hostes? Quale decus potuit tibi Gallica terra parare, Sive tuos longo protendere limite fines, Sive aliis velles populis tua dicere jura? Sed durae impediunt leges, civica fatis, Bella furunt, laevoque agitantur Vejove Galli. Eximium si quicquam habuit vis impia Martis, En etiam ut morbi populantur & aegra senectus. Marmoreum tandem ad tumulum sistetur, & alto Compositum corpus lecto fragrantis amomi, Et pinguis casiae & nardi lentore madebit, Parva quidem fuerint magnis haec praemia factis, Quae ritu concessa pio suprema dabuntur, Cum tibi perpetuos Montluci instaurat honores Fama peregrinis longè tua nomina terris Extento missura aevo: namque unde tepentem Producens rubicunda diem Pollentias exit, Et qua deciduo merguntur sole quadrigae Praecipites, tua facta canet, tibi mille parabit Linguas, mille annos & mille in carmina voces Extremasque tuba gentes ad splendida rerum Argumenta ciens, calidis memorabit ut annis Nobilitas generosa tuo sub pectore primum Extuderit vivas nativo fomite flammas: Utque animosa ruens horrendus miles in arma, Non satis ampla tibi pomaria laudis avitae Protuleris, seu magnanimo satus Aesone quandam, Thessalicae quem non capiens angustia terrae Compulit ad Scyticas ignoti Phasidis oras. Hic superatae Alpes, & vis inimica feretur Eridani ingentesque Itala tellure labores. Sed neque Senatum dira obsidionis egestas, Et plusquam Perusina fames, aut quam addita Poe∣nis Consilio immani placavit Ibera Saguntus, Defuerit titulis: nec desperata salutis Spes producta diu lethaeas senserit undas. Scilicet acclivi vectatur gloria curru, Semper & è duris molles sibi captat honores. Prospera quis nescit bellorum praelia quotquot Addita sunt fastis Francisci à tempore primi? Insubres domiti Allobroges, pulsique Britanni, Belgarum truces animi: damnum utraque sensit Helperia & tumidi compressa ferocia Rheni. At quis in his etiam Montluci nomina nescit? Undenis ductor lustris ille inclitus heros, Et patriae murus, regumque fidele suorum Praesidium, quantos bellorum pertulit aestus? Quas rexit fuditque acies foelicibus usus Fortiter auspiciis? quem nunquam impune moratus Hostis, & aversum nunquam in certamine vidit: Idque adeo validis docuit non una cicatrix Artubus, & pulchro violatae vulnere nares. Nec tamen interea reliqua ornamenta latebunt Virtutum, nec in hac sistet tua gloria parte, Montluci dicetur honos Ithacensis Ulixei Consiliis cecisse tuis, & Nestoris illa Mellea vox linguae patrio sermone disertae: Et memoranda fides etiam sanctissima tetris Hostibus, & concors animis clementia magnis, Ingeniumque memor, vigilesque in pectore curae, Et faciles aditus, & blandae questibus aures, Mens quo{que} non avidis unquam temerata rapinis, Insontesque manus, nec iniqua caede madentes. Talibus exurget titulis Montlucius, utque Septenis errans fidibus moduletio quondam Threiciae visa est citharae compescere tygres, Et quercus agitate vagas, & grandia summis Saxa movere jugis, sic vivida fama merenti Nectareum è tantis concentum laudibus edet, Manuricam huic rabiem mulcens, huic cruda Geloni Corda vel Armenium quae gens usurpat Araxem. Clara repercussae magnum aethera vocis imago Pulsabit, plaudet Tanais, Ponti utraque plaudent Littora: percipient extremae nomina terrae, Attonitaeque bibent oves, & laeta beatis Umbra locis, manesque inter veneranda quietos Elisias capiet sedes, ubi plurima laurus Miscet odoratis frondosa cacumina lucis. Io. Cuionius. Georgii Buchanani Scoti, in obitum Marci Antonii Montluci, qui Hostia pro defensione Ecclesia obiit, Carmen. MOntluci armatae regeres ut frena cohortis Supra annos virtus consiliumque dedit. Supra annos animi vis Martia perdidit ausum Obvia fulmineo pectore ferre globo. Quam super adstantem muris prius horruit hostem Hostia, defuncti vindicis ossa colit. Icta licet tanto genetrix sit Gallia casu Plus genuisse refert, quam periisse dolet. In eundem Ioachimi Bellai Andegavi. Littora Dardaniae quondam ut contingere primus Dum cupis, & primus, Protesilae, cadis: Sic cupidus pugnae fossa Montlucius hostem Dum prohibet primus, primus ab hoste cadit.
Hostia prima fuit Montlucius, Hostia nempe Haud alia poterat conditione capi. At vos ne haec decimum, Galli, vos ducat in annum Hostia, Montluci pectora quisque gerat. Ejusdem in eundem. Hospes siste gradum, rogo, hîc parumper▪ Quemque praetereas locum videto, Hoc, hoc sub tumulo jacet sepultus: Monluci illius (hoc sat est viator) Natus optimus, optimi parentis, Qui dum sorte datum locum tuetur, Pro fossa vigil excubatque primus, Caeco vulnere primus est peremptus. Illum mosta cohors prius Tribunum Mox caesum ingemuere tota castra. Pour Jean de Montluc Evesque de Valence. CY repose l'honneur de France Montluc Evesque de Valence. st assez, passe viateur, sn seul nom tu sçais sa gloire sert de trompette & d'histoire Dec & delà l'Equateur. Pour le Capitain Montluc Sieur de Caupene qui mourut à Madere. LE Ciel qui seul te sembloit grand, Montluc, en jeune âge te prend Voyant que peu sert plus attendre, Car le monde à ton appetit, Eust esté tousiours si petit Qu'il ne t'eust jamais peu comprendre. Pour Fabien de Montluc Sieur de Montes∣quieu. SONNET. L'Amour de son pays le brave Peleide Conduisoit à la mort, alors que pour venger Le Gregeois Menelas du Troyen estranger, Sa vie s'acheva par un trait homicide. L'amour de Dieu du Roy, & du pays te guide Montluc, à mesme pas misprisant ton danger, Quand chaussant le Biernois ardent de saccager Vn plomb donna dedans ta cuisse d'arnois vuide. Magnanime guerrier tu meurs avant ton temps, Si celuy peut mourir qui encor jeune d'ans Par une brave mort vient double vie acquerre. Et ore que tu es fait habitant des cieux, Peut-estre as tu pitié de nos jours soucieux, Où tu ris des desseins des autheurs de la guerre. SONNET. Sur le tombeau de Monsieur le Commandeur de Montluc. AVant leur temps, la mort tes deux aisnez atterre, Montluc, & ton puisné de mesme elle prend, En Italie, Afrique, en la France elle estend Morts de trois plombs fatals ces trois foudres de guerre. Ton pere qui son chef de mille lauriers serre Chargé d'ans & d'honneur les suit, apres luy grand Marche ton oncle grand, de qui le nom s'espand Par tous les lieux cogneus de l'habitable terre. Mais toy les survivant, morts ils ne sembloient pas, Voyant en tes discours, entreprises, combats, De tous revivre en toy le coeur & l'eloquence. Nous les voyons en toy & combattre & parler: Mais ores toy mourant, ils remeurent, & l'air Emporte nos regrets, le Ciel nostre esperance. I. du C. E. de C. Tumulo Blasii Montluci, DEsine mirari sata gens é stirpe virorum, Omnia si morsu laceret mors digna maligno. Heroum divina cohors huic subdita legi est Tantalus est testis, Sarpedon, quique parente Avo progeniti magnus domitorque ferarum. Nunc quoque Montlucius divis praeslantior illis, Haud virtute sua valuit depellere lethum Quin mors exultat tanto ductore pe empto. Interea super astra volat, coelumque capescit: Et tot gesta viri stupet omnis turba deorum. ALIUD. Bellipotens varios terrae pelagique labores Qui domuit, tegitur mortuus hoc tumulo Nempe suis iterum diffidens Jupiter armis Montluci Stygiis lumina mersit aquis. SONNET. Sur la deuise de Blaise de Montluc Mareschal de France. DEO DUCE, FERRO COMITE. CReature de Dieu, i'eus Dieu tousiours pour guide Enfant de Mars ie fus de fer accompagné En cet aage de fer où je fus desseigné Pour manier un fer iustement homicide Guerroyer justement, c'est alors que Dieu guide Et le coeur & la main, i'ay cela tesmoigné, Pour defendre nos Roys ne m'estant espargné. Ny pour sauver la France au François parricide. En cette mer Dieu fust mon estoile du Nort, Le fer mon instrument, pour maint guerrier effort, Aux uns, pour leurs tombeaux on bastit leur memoire. L'edifice élevant du fer de maint marteau, Et moy pour m'arracher des mains de la mort noire, Avec le fer au poing i'ay brise mon tombeau. P. DE-BRACH.
FIN.
