M474 12988750 96290
THE MANNER Of the IMPEACHMENT Of the XII. BISHOPS Accused of High Treason, for prefer∣ring a Petition, and making a Protestation, to the subverting the fundamentall Laws and Being of PARLIAMENTS. Whereunto is added the said Petition and Remonstrance of the said Bishops. London, Printed for Joseph Hunscott. 1642.
THe House of Lords was pleased, on the 30 of December, to send a Message to the House of Com∣mons, by Sir John Banks, and Judge Reeves, to desire a present Conference, by a Committee of both Houses, touching matters of dangerous and high con∣sequence. And at the Conference, the Lord Keeper, in the name of the house of Peers, delivered as followeth: That this Petition and Protestation of the 12 Bishops, contayning matters of high and dangerous Consequence, and such as my Lords are very sensible of, and such as require a speedy and sudden Resolution; it extending to the deep entrenching upon the Fundamen∣tall Priviledges and Being of Parliament. Therefore the Lords have thought fit, that this matter, concerning the whole Parlia∣ment, may be communicated to the house of Commons; It being a thing of so great and so generall Concernment. This being thus communicated to the
house of Commons, they came to this Reso∣lution, To accuse these 12 Bishops of high Treason, for endeavouring to subvert the Fun∣damentall Laws and Being of Parliaments. And Master Glynne was ordered to go to the Lords, and at their Bar, in the name of the house of Commons, and all the Com∣mons of England, To accuse these 12 Prelates of high Treason, for endeavouring to subvert the Fundamentall Laws of the Realm, and the very Being of Parliaments, manifested by preferring that Petition and Protestation; And to desire the Lords that they may be forth∣with sequestred from Parliament, and put in∣to safe Custody; and that their Lordships would appoint a speedy day for the Com∣mons to charge them, and they to answer, for that the Commons were ready to make good their Charge. He was further ordered to give the Lords thanks for communicating this Petition, with so much affection and speed, and for ex∣pressing their sense thereof. After Master Glyn had delivered this at the Barre, the Lords sent the Black Rod instant∣ly, to finde out these Bishops, and apprehend them; and by 8 of the Clock at night, they
were all taken and brought upon their knees to the Barre, and 10 of them committed to the Tower; and two (in regard of their Age, and indeed of the worthy parts of one of them, the learned Bishop of Durham) were committed to the Black Rod. To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the Lords and Peeres now assembled in Parliament. The humble Petition and Prote∣station of all the Bishops and Pre∣lates now called by his Majesties Writts to attend the Parliament, and present about London and Westminster, for that Service. THat whereas the Petitioners are called up by severall and respe∣ctive Writs, and under great pe∣nalties, to attend in Parliament, and have a cleer and undubitate Right to Vote in Bills, and other matters whatsoever, debateable in Parliament, by the ancient Customes, Laws, and Statutes of this Realm, and ought to be protected by your
Majesty, quietly to attend and prosecute that great Service. They humbly remonstrate and protest be∣fore God, your Majesty, and the Noble Lords and Peers now assembled in Parlament, That as they have an indubitate Right to sit and Vote in the House of the Lords, so are they (if they may be protected from force and vio∣lence) most ready and willing to performe their Duties accordingly. And that they do abhominate all Actions or Opinions, tending to Popery, and the maintenance thereof; as also, all propension and inclination to any malignant party, or any other side or party whatsoever, to the which their own Reasons and Consciences shall not move them to ad∣here. But wheras they have been at severall times violently Menaced, Affronted, and Assaulted, by multitudes of people, in their coming to perform their Services in that Honourable House; and lately chased away, and put in danger of their lives, and can finde no redresse or protection, upon sundry complaints made to both Houses in these particulars. They likewise humbly protest before your Majesty, and the Noble House of Peers, That
saving unto themselves all their Rights and Interests of Sitting and Voting in that House at other times, they dare not Sit or Vote in the House of Peers, untill your Majsty shall fur∣ther secure them from all Affronts, Indignities and dangers in the premisses. Lastly, Whereas their fears are not built up∣on Phantasies and Conceipts, but upon such Grounds and Objects, as may well terrifie men of good Resolutions, and much Con∣stancy. They doe in all duty and humility, protest before your Majesty, and the Peers of that most Honorable House of Parliament, against all Laws, Orders, Votes, Resolutions, and determinations, as in themslves Null, and of none effect; which in their absence, since the 27 of this instant Moneth of December, 1641. have already passed; as likewise against all such as shall hereafter passe in that most Honourable House, during the time of this their forced and violent absence from the said most Honorable House; not denying, but if their absenting of themselves were wilfull and voluntary, that most Honorable House might proceed in all these premisses, their ab∣sence, or this their Protestation notwithstan∣ding.
And humbly beseeching your most Excel∣lent Majesty to command the Clerk of that house of Peers, to enter this their Petition and Protestation amongst his Records. They will ever pray to God to blesse and preserve, &c. Jo. Eborac. Thomas, Duresme. Robt. Co. Lich. Jos. Norwich. Jo. Asaphen. Guil. Ba. & Wells. Geo. Hereford. Rob. Oxon. Ma. Ely. Godfr. Glouc. Jo. Peterburg. Mor. Llandaff. Vera Copia. Jo. BrowneCleric.Parliament.
