N1236 12863337 94710
THE TRVE COPPY OF A LETTER SENT FROM THOMAS Earle of Arundell, Lord Marshall, from Mid∣dleborough in Zealand, to Mr. Pym. And read before the Committee the 18. of Sep∣tember, 1641. Whereunto is added the Coppy of another Letter sent to Mr. Pym also from the Committee in SCOTLAND, Sep. 13. 1641. With the names of the Committees that sat there for that day. LONDON, Printed for Iohn Thomas, 1641.
The true Coppie of a Letter sent from the Lord Marshall from Middlebo∣rough in Zealand to Mr. Pym, which was read before the Committee on the 18. of September, 1641. Good Mr. Pym, I Thought it fit and agreeing with the trust put into my Hands by the House of Commons, and according to the order which you left with mee to give this accompt. That upon her Majesties Arrivall at Flushing, and a Receipt under her hand and Seale, J delivered unto her the foure Bills of Exchange for seven thousand pounds, as I was directed by the House. That after her Majesty had made a long stay at Dover, and resolved to passe by Dunkirke; On Fri∣day morning last, Sir Iohn Pennington comming a shoare and bringing with him Captaine Vernon, which was sent on purpose from Flushing, and but then arrived, bringing with him a Letter from the Brothoroad, who attended her Majesties comming to Flushing by command of the Prince of Orange, and the States, with great devotion, her Majestie changed her resolution from Dunkirke to Flushing, and instantly rose tooke boate and imbarqued her
selfe in the ship; The winde held faire and wee hoyst up Sayle, and with a prosperous and happy successe, next day at 10. of the clocke in the mor∣ning, wee landed at Flushing, being arrived, the Count Brotheroad attended her Majestie and will doe to the Confines of the States Provinces; her charges, and the charges of all her reteinues are wholy defrayed by him, and great acknowledgement made to her both of old and new obligations, her Majestie acknowledging this way, farre to exceed that of Brabant and Flanders, both in safety and speed, wherein I proved a true Prophet unto her Ma∣jestie. The Prince of Orange past the day before with his Army of 20000 men, from Ramkyns to Philip∣pin Sconce, in a thousand Shallops and Barques, where he will fall, is yet very uncertaine, but this is certaine, that Flanders at this time must needs be in many great and hard straights, it having in it three Armies on foot, and the Cardinall being sicke. Middleborough Sept. 11. 1641. Sir, I am your affectionate friend, Arundell and Surrey; Marshall.
This day also Mr. Pym read a Let∣ter from the Committee in Scotland, dated the 13. of September, 1641. directed to himselfe, because the House was adjourned. SIR, COnceiving it likely that the House would be adjourned before this can come to your hands, wee make our Addresses to you, desiring you to publish it to the House if it be fit∣ting, that wee doubt not but since our dispatches from Yorke, the House hath considered of providing money, to pay of the rest of the Army, Garrisons, and Artillery, for we find the effect thereof in part here, by the in∣telligence that commeth from Yorke hither, but have no enformation of our selves, whether there bee money enough provided, to effect the whole worke, that wee  not able to give the Scots any satisfaction, who desire to know the truth and cer∣tainty the  crtaine day, for the  Army within this  is no day prefixt,
wherein our Garrisons, Army, and Artillery, shall be disbanded, they are forced to be at an extraordinary charge, in the keeping up that part of theirs, which is still on foote, wee therefore propound, as in our former Letters, to the Wisdome of this House, that some speedy order bee taken, for the discharging of all, both of the Army, Garrisons, and Artille∣ry, and that some course be provided, for the Re∣moveall of the Ammunition, which shall be left un∣spent, whereof wee desire likewise, if it may stand with the full pleasure of the House, that wee may have a full and particular advertisement of the Pe∣remptory day which the House shall set for the dis∣banding of the Army, Garrisons, and Artillery, as also for the Removeall of the ammunition, that wee may be enabled to give the Scots satisfaction there∣in, and that we may have ground to presse the Scots likewise for the disbanding of theirs, upon the same day, which wee doubt not, will be performed accor∣dingly, Edenborough Sept. 13. 1641. Sir, we are your affectionate friends and servants. PHILLIP STAPLETON. JOHN HAMBDEN.
At the Committee appointed during this Recesse holden in the Exchequer Chamber September 18. Mr. Pym chosen for the Chaire, with the names of the Committees there appearing for that day. Sir Robert Pye. Mr. Wheeler. Mr. Spurslow. Alderman Soames. Mr. Bence. Lord Faulkeland. Sir Richard Cave. Sir William Drake. Sir Samuell Luke. Sir Peter Wroth. Sir Iohn Culpepper. Serjeant Wyld. Sir Iohn Francklyn. Mr. Stowen. Sir Gilbert Gerrard. Mr. White. Mr. Pym. Mr. Sollicitor. FINIS.
