N1453 11240460 47054
A TREATISE OF THE PRINCIPAL GROUNDS AND MAXIMES OF THE LAWES Of this Nation. Very usefull and commodious for all Students, and such others as desire the knowledg and understanding of the Laws. Lex plus laudatur, quando Ratione probatur. Written by that most Excellent and Learned Expositor of the Law, W. N. of Lincolns-Inn, Esquire. The second Edition, with Additions. LONDON, Printed by T. N. for W. Lee, D. Pakeman, R. Best, and G. Bedell, and are to be sold at their shops in Fleetstreet, and Grays-Inn gate, 1651.
An Analysis of the Laws of England, by the honorable and most learned William Noy Esq Atturney Gen: and of the Privy Councel to the late King. Justice is a constant & perpetuall will to ren∣der every man his own right: It is Naturall Accord∣ing to law whereare conside∣red Law Di∣vine Law of Reason Law Hu∣mane Forreign English Common, where is treated I. Of law where is consi∣dered The law it self, which is By Tra∣dition, which is General, and be∣longs to * Written Statute Injuries forbiden by that Law Private, against The per∣son and goods Publique against the King & Com∣mon∣wealth 2. Of the manner of deli∣vering that Law Civill Ecclesiastical Temporal In peace the Admiral In warr the Marshal
* The Person, where is conside∣red the Qua∣lity; as Name the King the subject who is of Baptism Creation Natural who is Politick Free, who is Villain In his own Power, where is considered Not in his own Power Intention Action there Cause Time Place Efficient Material Formal Final. by Nature Action of the person by common law, or the Kings Charter The Thing, which is universal which is Of natural Right Out of di∣vers causes Particular, in which do∣minion may be gained Where are considered Peculiar, which belongs to the King to the Subject according to his pre∣rogative Legal & ordinary Regal & absolute According to peculiar Custom of place prescription of persons 1. Things or goods them∣selves; which are Real Personal Primary Secondary Simple Compound Of the land Upon it Corporate Incorporate
2. To have owner∣ship, which is by Estate and Propriety by Right By his own Right Right of ano∣ther Single Joint by Possession Possibility Of frank∣tenement Chattels Hereditary Frank-te∣nement alone in Fee in Tail absolute conditional qualified general special by Law by Gift as Dower curtesy of Engl. for Life, or Life of another Real Personal Term of years at Will Animate Inanimate Remote Near reversion remain∣der Parceners joint tenants Tenants in common Interest and Propriety Use Authority of Action of Entry
3. The manner of acqui∣ring ow∣nership by Law by Pur∣chase Discent, or Forfeiture absolute With conside∣ration by Wri∣ting by Word by De∣vise by Re∣cord by Deed Fine Reco∣very Executed Executory with Vou∣cher without Single Double Feoffment Grant with atturny Barg. & sale inrol'd by Grant Ratifica∣tion Release Confirmation Render Election Concord Assignment by Common-law by Statute 4. The manner of admit∣ting ow∣nership by operation of Law by act of the party Extinguishment Suspension Discent, which takes away Entry Commission Omission Discontinuance Warranty Estoppell Forfeiture
II. The manner of deli∣vering the law is By Law By act of the party Imme∣diate Mediate, by acti∣ons in Courts where are considered Claim Entry 1. The diverse Actions in which Right is given Writs Plaints Origi∣nal Judi∣cial Real Perso∣nal Mixt For the Right The possession For the Person The Goods Of Right of law Of the Kings grace Of Course Magistral Pleas of the Crown Common Pleas 2. The divers Courts where re∣medy is had; here are con∣sidered The Courts themselvs Their jurisdi∣ctions; & there Tem∣poral Of the King The subject Superior Inferior Of Record Of Barony The per∣sons Pleas Of the Courts In them Judges Ministers Demand' Tenant Real Per∣sonal Plaintiff Defend' Of the Crown Common 3. The manner of prosecution in Courts Direct Collaterall By Processe By Pleading with that Pleas Tryall Judgment Execution by the Court-Adjornment by persons in the Court, as-Essoin 4. The manner of defeating the Process by Prohibition assignation of Errors 5. The manner of taking away the punishment Flight Pardon.
CHAP. I. The Laws of England are threefold; Common Laws, Customes, and Statutes. THE COMMON LAW. THE Common Law is grounded on the Rules of reason, and there∣fore we use to say in Argument, That reason will that such a thing be done, or that reason will not that such a thing be done; The rules of reason are of two sorts, some taken from Learning▪ as well Divine as Humane, and some proper to itself onely. OF THEOLOGIE. 1. Summa ratio est, quae pro Religione facit. ATenure to finde a Preacher, if the Lord purchase parcell of the Land▪ yet the whole service remaineth, because it is for the advancement of RELIGION. 2. Dies Dominicus non est Juridicus. Sale on a Sunday shall not be said Sale in a Market, to alter the property of the Goods.
OF GRAMMBR. OF Grammer, the rules are infinite in the Etymologie of a Word, and in the construction thereof; what is nature, is single. 3. Ad proxium antecedens fiat relatio, nisi impediatur Sententia. As an inditement against I. S. servant to I. D. in the County of Middlesex▪ Butcher, &c. is not good; for servant is no Addition, and Butcher shall be referred to I. D. which is the next Antecedent. OF LOGICK. 4. Cessante causa, cessat effectus. THe Executor, nor the husband, after the death of a woman Guardian in soccage, shall not have the Wardship, because (viz.) the natural affection is removed which was the cause thereof. Some things shall be construed according to the original cause thereof. 5. The Executor may release before the pro∣bate of the Will, because his title and interest is by the Will, and not by the probate.
To make a man swear to bring me money upon pain of killing, and he bringeth it ac∣cordingly, it is felony. Outlawry in Trespass, is no forfeiture of Land, as outlawry in felony is; for although the non-appearance is the cause of the Out∣lawry in both, yet the force of the Outlawry shall be esteemed according to the heynous∣ness of the offence, which is the principal cause of the Process. 6. According to the beginning thereof: As if a Servant, which is out of his Masters service, kill his Master, through the malice which he bare him when he was his servant, this is petty Treason. 7. According to the end thereof; As if a man warned to answer a matter in a Writ, there he shall not answer to any other matter then is contained in the Writ; for that as the end of his coming. 8. Derivativa potestas non potest esse majus primitiva. A Servant shall be stopped to say the
Frank-Tenement is belonging to his Ma∣ster, by a recovery against his Master, al∣though the servant be a stranger to the Re∣covery; for he shall not be in better case then he is in, whose Right he claimeth, or ju∣stifieth. 9. Quod ab initio non valet, in tractu tempo∣ris non convalescit. If an Infant, or a married woman, do make a Will, and publish the same, and af∣terwards dyeth, being of full age, or sole, notwithstanding this Will is void. 10. Vnumquodque dissolvitur eo modo quo colli∣gatur. An Obligation or other matter in writing, may not be discharged by an agreement by word, but by writing. 11. He that claimeth a thing on high, shal neither have gain, nor loss thereby. As if one Joynt-Tenant make a Lease o his Joyntee, reserving rent, and die; the heire which surviveth shall have the reversi∣on of his Joyntee, but not the Rent, because he cometh in by the first Feoffer, and not un∣der his companion.
Also where the husband being leased for yeers in right, reserving a Rent, the woman shall have the residue of the terme, but not the rent. 12. Debile fundamentum, fallit opus. When the estate whereunto the Warran∣tie is annexed is defeated, the Warrantie is also defeated. 13. Incidents may not be severed. As if a man grant Wood to be burnt in such a house, wood may not be granted a∣way, but he which hath the house, shall have the wood also. 14. Actio personalis moritur cum persona. As if battery be done to a man, if he that did the battery, or the other die, the Action is gone. If the Leasor covenant to pay quit-rents, during the terme, his Executor shall not pay it, for it is a personal covenant. 15. Things of higher nature, do determine things of lower nature. As matters of writing do determine an agreement by words.
If an offence which is murder at the Com∣mon law, be made high Treason, no appeal lieth for it, for that the Murder is drowned, and punishable as Treason, whereof no ap∣peal lieth. 16. Majus continet minus. Whereby the Custom of a Manor, a man may demise for life, he may demise to his Wife, durante viduitate. 17. Majus dignum trahit ad se minus dignum. As the Writings, the Chest or Box they are in. OF PHILOSOPHY. 18. Naturae vis maxima. NAtural affection or brotherly love, are good causes or considerations to raise an use. And one brother may maintain a suit for another. 19. The law favoureth some persons. Viz. Men out of the Realm, -or in Pison, Wo∣men
married, Infants, Ideots, Mad-men, Men without intelligence, Strangers, that are neither parties, nor privie, and things done in anothers right. A descent shall not take away the entry of a man out of the Realm, or in prison, or of a married woman, or of an infant. And a lease made to the husband and wife, after the death of the husband, the wife shall not be charged for waste, during the mariage. An Ideot shall not be compelled to plead by his Guardian or next friend, but shall be in the Court; and he that pleadeth the best plea for himself, shall be admitted: If a dumb man bring an action, he shall plead by his next friend: If a Lessee for years grant a Rent-charge, and surrendereth, the rent shall be paid, du∣ring the terme, to the Stranger: A man Out-lawed or Excommunicated▪ may bring an Action as an Executor: 20. And a mans person before his possessions, Mentioned of corporal pain, shall avoid a Deed, but not his Goods.
21. And matter of possession more then matter of right, when the right is equall. As if a man purchase several lands at one time, held of several Lords by Knights ser∣vice, and dieth, the Lord which first seizeth the Ward, shall have it, otherwise his elder Lord. 22. Matter of profit or interest shall be taken largely: and it may be assigned, and it may not be countermanded; but matter of plea∣sure, trust or authority, shall be taken strictly, and may be countermanded. As licence to him in my Park, or in my Garden to walk, extendeth onely to him∣self, and not to his servant, nor any other in his companie; for it is matter of pleasure on∣ly; otherwise it is of a Licence to hunt, kill, and carry away the Deer, which is matter of profit. A Church-way is matter of ease. OF POLITICAL. 23. NOthing shall be void, which by possibi∣lity may be good; If Land be given to a man, and to a woman married to another
man, and the heires of their two bodies, this is a present estate Tayle, because of the pos∣sibilitie. 24. Ex nudo pacto non oritur actio. No man is bound to his promise, nor any use can be raised without good consideration. A consideration must be some cause or oc∣casion which must amount to a recompence in Deed, or in Law, as money, or natural af∣fection, not long acquaintance, nor great fa∣miliarity. 25. The Law favoureth a thing that is of necessity. As to pay several expences, shall not be said to Administer; to distrain in the night, dammage feasant, to kill another to save his own life. A servant to beat another to save his Ma∣ster, if he cannot otherwise choose. To drive another mans cattel amongst mine own, untill I come to a place to shift them, is no Trespass. 26. And for the good of the Common-wealth. As killing of Foxes, and the pulling down of an house of necessity to stay a fire.
27. Communis error facit jus. As an Acquittance made by a Major alone, where there be a hundred presidents, is good. 28. And things that are in the Custody of the law. Goods taken by Distress, shall not be taken in Execution for the debt of the ow∣ner thereof. 29. The husband and the wife are one person. They cannot sue one another, nor make any Grant one to another: And if a woman marry with her Obligor, the debt is extinct; and she shall never have any action, if ano∣ther were bound with him; for by the mariage the Action is suspended; and an action perso∣nal suspended against one, is a discharge to all. 30. An Obligation with a condition to enfeoff a woman before such a day, and before the day the Obligor taketh her to wife, the ob∣ligation is forfeited, because he cannot in∣feoff her, but he may make a lease for years with a remainder to his wife. When a joynt Purchase is, during the mar∣riage, every one shall have the whole.
When a joynt purchase, during the mari∣age, is made, and the husband sell; the wife shall have a Cui in vitâ for the whole against both, and on a feoffment made to one man and his wife, and to a third person, the third person shall have one moity. 31. All that a Woman hath, appertaineth to her Husband. Personal things, and things absolutely re∣all, as Lands, rents, and so forth, or Chattels reall, and things in Action, are onely in her right; notwithstanding real things, and things in Action, he may dispose at his pleasure, but not Will or charge them; and he shall have her real Chattels, if he survive. Of things in Action, the woman may dispose by her last Will, and she may make her husband her Executor, and he shall recover them to the use of the last will of his wife. If a Leassee for years grant his terme to a man, or woman, and to another, they are joynt-Tenants; But if goods be given to her and to another, her husband and the other are Tenants in common. The Husband may release an Obligation, or trespass for goods taken when his wife was sole, and it shall be good against the wo∣man
if he die; but if he die without making any such Release, the woman shall have the Action, & not the Executor of her husband. The woman surviving, shall have all things in Action; or her Executors, if she die. The Husband shall be charged with the debts of his wife but during her life. 32, The will of the Wife, is subject to the will of her husband. Note, a Feoffment made to the wife, she shall have nothing, if her husband do not thereunto agree. MORALL RULES. 33. THe Law favoureth works of Charitie, right, and truth, and abhorreth fraud, coven and incertainties, which obscure the truth; contrarieties, delayes, unnecessary cir∣cumstances, and such like. 34. Dolus & fraus una in parte sanari debet. No man shall take benefit of his own wrong; if a man be bound to appear at a day, and before the day the Obligee casts him in prison, the bond is void.
A Grant of all his woods in B. Acre, which may be reasonably spared, is a void Grant, if it be not reserved to a third person, to appoint what may be spared. A Feoffment made in Fee of two Acres to two men, Habend one acre to one, and the o∣ther acre to the other; this Habend▪ is void. 35. Lex neminem cogit ad impossibilia, &c. The Law compelleth no man to shew that which by intendment he doth not know; as if a servant be bound to serve his Master in all his commandements lawfull, it is a good Plea, to say, he served him lawfully. A Covenant to make a new Lease upon the Surrender of the old Lease, and after the Covenanter doth make a Lease by Fine, for more years to estrange, the Covenant is broken, although the Lessee did not surren∣der, the which by the words ought to be the first Act, for that the other had disabled to take, or to make. LAW CONSTRUCTIONS. THe Law expoundeth things with equity and moderation, to moderate the strict∣ness; it is no Trespass to beat his Apprentice
with a reasonable correction, or to go with a woman to a Justice of Peace, to have the peace of her husband, against the will of her husband, which equity doth restrain the ge∣nerality, if there be any mischief or inconve∣nience in it; As if a man make a feoffment of his lands in, and with Common, in all his Lands in C. the Common shall be intended within his Lands in C. and not in his other Lands he shall have else-where. 36. Every Act shall be taken most strictly a∣gainst him that made it. As if two Tenats in Common, grant a Rent of 10. shillings, this is several, and the Grantees shall have 20. shillings: but if they make a Lease, and reserve 10. shillings, they shall have onely 10. shillings between them▪ So an obligation to pay 10. shillings at the feast of our Lord God; it is no Plea to say that he did pay it; but he must show at what time, or else it will be taken he paid it after the feast. 37. He that cannot have the effect of a thing, shall have the thing it self. Ʋtres magis valeat quam pereat. As if a Termor grant his Terme, Haben∣dum
immediat è post mortem suam; the Gran∣tee shall have it presently. 38. When many joyn in one Act, the Law saith it is the Act of him that could best do it, and that thing should be done by those of best skill. As the Disseizee, and the heir of the Dis∣seizor, who is in by discent, joyn in a Feoff∣ment; This shall be the Feoffment of the heire onely, and the confirmation of the Dis∣seizee. And the Merchant shall weigh the Wares, and not the Collectors▪ 39: When two titles concur, the elder shall be preferred. 40: By an acquittance for the last payment, all other Arrerages are discharged. 41: One thing shall enure for another: If the Leasor enfeoff the Lessee for life, it shall be taken for a confirmation▪
42. In one thing, all things following shall be con∣cluded, in granting, demanding, or prohibiting. If one except a Close, or a Wood, the Law will give him a way to it. 43. A man cannot qualifie his own Act. As to release an Obligation untill such a time. 44. The construction of the Law may be alter∣ed by the special agreement of the parties. If a house be blown down by the wind, the Lessee is excused in waste; but if he have covenanted to repair it, there an Action of Covenant doth lie by the agreement of the parties. 45. The Law regardeth the intent of the par∣ties, and will imply their words thereunto; and that which is taken by common intend∣ment, shall be taken to the intent of the par∣ties; and common intendment is not such an intendment as doth stand indifferent; but such an intent as hath the most vehement pre∣sumption. All incertaintie may be known
by circumstances, every deed being done to some purpose, reason would that it should be construed to some purpose, and variance shall be taken most beneficial for him to whom it is made, and at election. 46. An intendment of the parties shall be or∣dered according to the Law. If a man make a Lease to a man, and to his heires, for ten years, intending his heires shall have it, if he die, notwithstanding the intent, the Executors shall have it. 47. Qui per alium facit, per seipsum facere vi∣detur. A promise made to the Wife in considera∣tion of a thing to be performed by her Hus∣band, if he agree, and perform the Conside∣ration, in an Action of the case, he shall de∣clare the assumption was made to him. And if my servant sell my goods to ano∣ther in deqt I shall suppose, he bought them of me.
CUSTOMES. Consuetude est altera lex. CUstomes are of two sorts; General Cu∣stomes in use throughout the whole Realme, called Maximes; and particular Cu∣stomes used in some certain County, Citie, Towne, or Lordship, whereof some have been specified before, and some follow here, and where occasion is offered. GENERAL CUSTOMES. THe Kings Excellencie is so high in the Law, that no Freehold may be given to him, nor derived from him, but by matter of Record. Every Maxim is a sufficient authority to itself; and which is a Maxime, and which is not, shall alwayes be determined by the Judges, because they are known to none but to the learned. A Maxime shall be taken strict. A particular Custom, except the same be a Record in some Court, shall be pleaded, and tryed by 12. men.
CHAP. II. Statutes. THe last ground of the Laws of England standeth in divers Sta∣tutes made by our Soveraigne Lord the King, and his Progeni∣tors, and by the Lords Spiritual, and Tem∣poral, and the Commons in divers Parlia∣ments, in such cases where the former Laws seemed not sufficient to punish evill men, and to reward the good. Of general Statutes the Judges will take notice if they be not pleaded, but not of spe∣cial, or particular. All Acts of Parliaments, as well private as general, shall be taken by reasonable con∣struction, be collected out of the words of the Act only, according to the true intention and meaning of the maker. Foure lessons to be observed, where contrary Laws come in question. 1. The inferiour Law must give place to the superiour. 2. The law General must yeild to the Law special. 3. Mans laws to Gods Laws. 4. An old law to a new law.
And oftentimes all these laws must be joyned together to help a man to his right; as if a man disseized, and the disseizor made a Feoffment to defrand the plaintiff, in this case, it appears that the said unlawfull entrie is prohibited by the law of Reason. But the Plaintiff shall recover double dammage, and that is by the Statute of 8 Hen. 6. And that the dammage shall be sessed by 12. men, that is, by the custome of the Realm, and so in some case, these three laws do maintain the Plaintiff's right. And these laws concern either mens pos∣sessions, or the punishment of offences. And so much shall be sufficient to be said touching common Law, Customes, and Sta∣tutes. CONCERNING POSSESSIONS. The difference between Possession and Seizin, is, Lease for years is possessed, and yet the Lessor is still seized; and therefore the termes of the Law are, that of Chattels a man is pos∣sessed; whereas in Feoffments, gifts in tayle, and Leases for life, he is called seized.
CHAP. III. Of possession of Frank-Tenement. TEnant in Fee-simple, is he which hath Lands, or Tenements to hold to him and his heires for ever. It is the best Inheritance a man may have; He may sell, or grant, or make his Will of those Lands. And if a man die, they do discend to his heire of the whole blood. CHAP. IV. FEE-TAYLE. Fee-Tayle is, of what body he shall come that shall inherit. Tenant in Tayle, is said to be in two man∣ners. Tenant in Tayle General, and Tenant in Tayle Special. GEneral Tayle is, where Lands or Tene∣ments be given to a man, and his wife, and to the Heires of their two bodies, or to his heires males, or to his heires females.
Tenant in Tayle, is not punishable for waste. Tenant in Tayle cannot Will his Lands, nor bargain, sell or grant, but for terme of his life, without a Fine, or Recovery. If a man will purchase lands in Fee, it be∣hoveth him to have these words, Heires, in his purchase. If a man would grant Lands in Tayle, it behoveth him to appoint what body they shall come of. Yet a devise of lands to a man and his heires males, is a good Intayle; and of lands to a man for ever, a good Free-Simple. How Lands shall discend. Inheritance is an estate which doth di∣scend; it may not lineally ascend from the son which purchaseth in Fee, and dyeth, to his Father; but discendeth to his Uncle or Brother, and to his heires, which is the next of the whole blood, for the half blood shall not inherit: But the most worthy of Blood, as of the blood of the Father before the Mother; of the elder Brother before the other, and borne within espousall. A discent shall be intended to the heire of
him which was last actually seized; That the Sister of the whole blood, where the elder Brother did enter after the death of his Fa∣ther, and not his Brother of the halfe blood, nor any other collaterall Cosen shall inherit; yet notwithstanding such a one is heire to a common Ancester; in which Rule, every word is to be observed, and so in every Maxim, if the Land, Rent, Advowson, or such like do discend to the elder Son, and he die before any entry, or receit of the rent, or presentment to the Church, the youn∣ger son shall have and inherit; and the rea∣son is, because that in all inheritances in pos∣session, he which claimeth title there unto as heire, ought to make himself heire to him that was last actually seized. Here the possession of the Lessee for years, or of the Guardian, shall invest the actual pos∣session, and Frank-Tenement in the elder brother. But he dying seized of a Reversion, or a Remainder, or an estate for life, or in tayle; There he which claimeth the Reversion, or Remainder as heire, ought to make himself heire to him that had the Gift, or made the purchase. Feodo excludeth an estate tayle, where the second son shall inherit before the daughter.
And if the Lands be once settled in the blood of the father, the heire of the mother shall never have them, because they are not of the blood of him that was last seized. And to the heire of the blood of the first Purchaser; As if the Father purchase Lands, and it di∣scendeth to the son, who entreth, and di∣eth without heires of the Fathers part, then the Lands shall discend to the heires of the mother or father of the father, and not to the heires of the mother of the son; although they are more neer of blood to him that was last seized, yet they are not of the blood of the first Purchaser. If the heires be females in equal distance, as Daughters, Sisters, Aunts, and so forth, they shall inherit together, and are but one heire, and are called Parceners. Gavill-kinde. Doth discend to all the sons, and if no sons, to all the daughters: And may be given by Will by the Custome.
CHAP. V. PARCENERS. Parceners are of two sorts. Women and their heires by the Common law. Men by the Custom. THey may have a Writ of Partiti∣on, and the Sheriff may go to the Lands, and by the oath of 12: men, make Partition between them, and the eldest shall have the Capitall Messuage by the Common Law, and the youngest by the Custome; Where the par∣ties will not shew to the Jewry the certain∣tie, there they shall be discharged in consci∣ence, if they make Partition of so much as is presumed and known by presumptions and likelyhoods. Parceners may by agreement make parti∣tion by Deed, or by Word, and the eldest first choose, unless their agreement be to the contrary. Every part at the time of the partition must be of an even yearly value, without in∣cumbrance. Rent may be reserved for equality or Par∣tition (and may be distrained for) without a Deed.
Parceners by divers discents, before par∣tition, being disseized, shall have one assize. A Parcener before partition, may charge, or demised her part. The entrie or Act of one Copartner, or joynt-Tenant shall be the Act of both; when it is for their good. If a Parcener after Partition be entred, she may enter upon her Sisters part, and hold it with her in Parcenary, and have a new Par∣tition, if she hold none of her part before she was outed, viz. in exchange. CHAP. VI. JOYNT-TENANTS. IOynt-Tenants be such as have joynt estates in goods, or lands, where he that surviveth shal have all without incumbrance, if the Tenements abide in the same plight as they were granted. Joynt-Tenants may have several estates; A Joynt-Tenant cannot grant a Rent∣charge, but for terme of his own life. A Joynt-Tenant may make a Lease for life, or for years, of his part, or Release, and the Lessee for years may enter, although the Lessor die before the Lease begin, and his
heire shall have the Rent, but the Survivor the Reversion. A Joynt-Tenant may have a Writ of Parti∣tion by the Statute of the 31. of H. 8. cap. 32. A Partition made by Joynt-Tenants, or Te∣nants in Common of Estates of Inheritance, must be by Indenture; by Word 'tis void. CHAP. VII. TENANTS in COMMON. Tenants in Common, are those that hold Lands and Tenements by several titles. They may joyne in action personal, but they must have several actions Real. They may have a Writ of Partition by the Stat. of 31. H. 8. cap. 32. IF one Parcener, Joynt-Tenant, or Te∣nant in Common take, all the other have no Remedie, but by Ejectione firme, or such like, or Waste. Gavil-kinde-Lands. Tenant by the curtesie of Kent, whether he have Issue or no, untill he marry, and so forth, he may not commit Waste.
CHAP. VIII. TENANT in DOWER. A Woman shall be indowed of all sorts of inheritance of her husband, where the Issue that she had by him may inherit, as heire to his father, by meetes, and bounds of a third part, She shall have house-roome, and meat, and drink in common, for forty dayes; But she may not kill a Bullock within those 40. days after the death of her husband, in which time her Dower ought to be assigned her. The Assignement by him that had the Frank-Tenement is good, but by him that is Guardian in Soccage, or Tenant by Elegit, verte Elegit, or Statutes, or Lessee for years, is not. She is to demand her Dower on the Land. She shall recover dammages when her hus∣band dyed seized, from the death of her hus∣band; if the heire be not ready at the first day to assigne her Dower. She shall have all her Chattels real againe, execept her husband sell them; he may not charge them, or give them by his Will; and likewise her bonds, if the money were due in
the life of her husband, and all convenient apparel; but if she have more then is fit for her degree, it will be assets. A woman shall be barred of her Dower so long as she detaineth the bodie of the heire, being Ward, or the Writing of the sons Land. A woman shall not be endowed of any lands that her husband joyntly holdeth with another, at the time of his death. Dower of Gavil-kind Lands. If the woman shall be endowed of one half so long as she is unmarried, and chaste, and it may be held with the heire in Common. It is of Lands and Tenements, and not of a Faire or such like; where the Heire loseth not his inheritance, there she loseth not her Dower. Joynture. IF a woman have a Joynture be fore marri∣age, she may claim no Dower, 27. Hen. 8. If it be made during marriage, she may en∣ter into her Joynture presently. If she enter, or accept of it, she shall not be endowed. If she shall be expulsed of any part of her Joynture, she shall be endowed of the resi∣due of her husbands Lands.
CHAP IX. Tenant for terme of Life. TEnant for terme of life, is he that hath Lands or Tene∣ments for terme of his life, or another mans life, and none of lesser estate may have a Free-hold. If a Tenant for life sowe the Lands and die before the corn be reaped; his Executor shall have it, but not the Grasse, nor other fruit. If a Tenant for life be impannelled upon an Inquest, and forfeit Issues and die, they shall be levied upon him in the Reversion; and so likewise if the Husband, on the Lands of the Wife. CHAP. X. Tenant for Terme of yeares. Tenant for terme of years, is where a man letteth lands or tenements to another for certain yeares. HE may enter when he will, the death of the Lessor is no let, and may grant away his terme be∣fore it begin; but before he en∣ter, he cannot Surrender, nor have any action of trespasse, nor take a re∣lease.
He is bound to repaire the Tenements. The Lessor may enter to see what Repara∣tions or Waste there is, and he may distraine for his rent or have an action of debt. If Tenant for life or years granteth a grea∣ter estate then he hath himselfe, he doth for∣feit his terme. CHAP. XI Tenant at Will. Tenant at Will is hee that holdeth lands, or tenements at the Will of another. THe Lessor may reserve a yeare∣ly rent, and may distraine for it, or have an Action of debt; the Lessee is not bound to re∣paire the Tenements. The Will is determined by the death of the Lessor, or of a woman Lessee by her marriage, or when the Lessee will take upon him to doe that which none but the Lessor may doe lawfully, it determineth the Will and Possession, and the Lessor may have an action of Trespasse for it. The Lessee shall have reasonable time to have away his goods, and his corne; But he shall lose his Fallow, and his dung carried forth.
CHAP. XII. REMAINDER: A Remainder is the residue of an estate at the same time appoin∣ted over, and must be ground∣ed upon some particular estate given before▪ granted for years or for like, and so forth. And ought to begin in possession, when the particular estate endeth, there may bee no mean time between; either by Grant or Will. No remainder can be of a Chattel personal; a Remainder cannot depend on a matter ex post facto, as upon Estate tayle, upon condition That if the Tenant in Tayle sell, then the Land to remain to another, is a void Remainder. CHAP. XIII. REVERSION. A Reversion is the residue of an estate that is left after some particular estate, granted out in the Grantor; as if a man grant Lands for life, without further granting; the Reversion of the Fee-simple is in the Lessor.
CHAP. XIV. WASTE: WASTE lieth against a Tenant by the curtesie, for life, for years, or in Dower, and they shall lose the place wasted, and treble dammages. Waste lieth not against a Tenant by Elegit, Statute-Merchant, or Staple; but account af∣ter the debt or dammage levied. Waste, or account will lie against a Te∣nant in Mortgage, because he had Fee condi∣tionall. Waste is not given to the heire for Waste in the life of his Father. Waste is given against the Assigne of the Tenant for life, or of anothers life, but not against the Assignee of a Tenant in Dower, or of the curtesie, it is to be brought against themselves. It is Waste to pull up the formes, benches, doors, windowes, walls, Filbert-Trees, or Willows planted.
CHAP. XV. DISCONTINUANCE. DIscontinuance is where a man that hath the present possession, by make∣ing a larger estate then he may, di∣vesteth the inheritance of the Lands or Tene∣ments out of another, and dieth, and the o∣ther hath right to have them, but he may not enter, because of such alienation, but is put to his Writ. If a man seized in the right of his Wife, or if a Tenant in Tayle made a Feoffment, and died, the Wife might not enter, nor the Issue in Tayle, nor he in Reversion, but are put to the Waction. Now the wife may enter by the Statute, 3: 2. H. 8. and a recovery suffered by the Te∣nant by curtesie, or by the Tenant after possi∣bility of issue extinct, or for terme of life, is now made no discontinuance. Such things that pass by way of a grant by deed without livery, and seizin, cannot be discontinued as a reversion, or Rent-charge Common, &c. A Release or Confirmation without War∣ranty, maketh no discontinuance.
CHPP. XVI. DISCENTS. DIscents which take away entries, is where a man disseizeth another, and dieth, and his heire entreth, or ma∣keth a Feoffment to another in Fee, or in tayle, and he dieth, and his heire entreth; these discents put a man from his entrie. A discent, during minority, marriage, non sanae mentis, imprisonment, or being out of the Realm, do not take away an entry. Discents of Rents in gross, the Lord not∣withstanding may distrain. A dying seized of a terme for life, or of a Remainder, or Reversion, doth not take a∣way an Entrie, he must die seized in Fee▪ and Frank-Tenement. A diseizin cannot be to one joynt-Tenant or Parcener alone, if it be not to the other. If a condition be broken after a discent, the Donor, Feoffor, or his heires may enter. A wrongfull diseizin is no discent, unless the diseisor have quiet possession five years without entrie, or claime, 32. H. 8.
CHAP. XVII. CONTINUALL CLAIME: COntinual Claime is a demand made by another of the propertie or pos∣session of a thing which he hath not in possession, but is withholden from him wrongfully; defeateth a discent, hap∣ning within a year and a day after it is made, and now by the statute within five years. CHAP. XVIII REMITTER. REmitter is, when by a new title, the Frank-Tenement is cast upon a man, whose entrie was taken away by a discent, or discontinuance, he shall be in by the elder title; as if Tenant in tayle discontinue the tayle, and after diseizeth his continuance, and dieth thereof seized, and the land di∣scend to his Issue, in that case he is said to be in his Remitter, viz. seized his Ancient E∣state tayle. When the entrie of a man is lawful, and he taketh an estate to himself, when he is of full age, if it be not by Deed indented, or matter
of Record which shall estop him, it shall be to him a good Remitrer. A Remitter to the Tenant shall be a Re∣mitter to him in the remainder, and reversion CHAP. XIX. TENURES. ALL lands are holden of the King im∣mediately, or of some other person, and therefore when any that hath Fee, dyeth without heire, the lands shall escheate to the Lord. And they are holden for the most part ei∣ther by Knights service, or in Soccage. Knights Service draweth to it Ward, Mar∣riage, and Relief, viz. Of Ward, Marriage, and Relief. THe heire male unmarried, shall be in Ward untill 21 years of age. If he be married in the life of his Ance∣tors, yet the Lord shall have the profit of the nd till his full age. None shall be in Ward during the life of he Father.
If the heire refuse a convenient marriage, he shall pay to the Lord the value, when he cometh to full age. If the Ward marrie against the will of the Guardian, he shall pay him the double value of his Marriage; but if the heire be of the full age aforesaid, he shall pay a relief. A relief for a whole Knights Fee, is 5l for half a Knights Fee 50s. for a quarter 25, for more, more; for less, less, accordingly. A Relief is no service, but is incident to a Service, the Guardian must not commit Waste, viz. Chattels. Tenure in Soccage. TEnure in Soccage is, where the Tenant holdeth of his Lord by fealty, suit o Court, and certain Rent for all manner of Service. The Lord shall not have the Wardship but a relief presently after the death of his Te∣nant. A Relief for Soccoge land, is a years ren and is to be paid presently upon a discent o purchase. As if the Land were held by Fealty and 10s. Rent per annum, 0s. shall be pai for Relief. The next of the kin to whom the inheri∣tance
may not discend, shall have the Ward∣ship of the Land, and of the heire, untill his age of 14. years, to the use of the heire, at which age, the heire may call him to account. If the Guardian die, the heire cannot have an Action of account against the Executor of the Guardian. The Executor of the Guardian may not have the Wardship, but some other of the next of kin; the Husband may not alien the interest of the Wife, in the Guardianship, nor hold it; if she die, it may not be sold. If another man occupie the Lands of the heire, as warden in Soccage, the heire may call him to account, as Guardian. If the Guardian hold the Lands, after the heire is 14. the heire shall call him to account, as his Bailiff. Gavill-kinde. THe next of kin shall have the Guardian∣ship of the body, and lands untill the heire be 15. years of age. Diversities of ages. A man hath but two ages. The full age of Male and Female is one and twenty. A Woman hath six ages. THe Lord her father may distrain for ayd for her marriage, when she is seven. She is double at nine.
She is able to assent to Matrimony at twelve. She shal not be in Warde, if she be fourteen. She shall go out of Ward at sixteen. She may sell, or give her lands at 21. No man may be sworn in any Jury, before he be 21. before which age, all gifts, grants, or deeds as do not effect by delivery of his own hands, are void, and all others voidable, except for necessary meat, drink, and appar∣rel, &c. An infant may do any thing for his own advantage, as to be Executor, or such like; an Infant shall sue by his next friend, and an∣swer by his Guardian. Gavill-kind. The heire may give or sell at fifteen years of age. 1. The land must discend, not be given him by Will. 2. He must have full recompence. 3. It must be by Feoffment, and livery of seizin with his own hands, not by war∣rant of Attorney, nor any other con∣veyance. BY the Civil Law, an Infant may be Exe∣cutor at 17. years of age. An Infant may make a Will of his goods at 14. years of age, and a Maid at 12.
CHAP. XXI. RENTS. There are three manners of Rents. Rent-Service. Rent-Charge. Rent-Seck. REnt-Service is, where a man hold∣eth his lands of his Lord by cer∣tain Rent, and so forth. Rent-Charge is granted, or re∣served out of certain Lands by Deed, with a clause of distress. Rent-Seck, is a Rent granted without a distress; or Rent-service, severed from other service, becometh a Rent-seck. The Reversion of a Rent without a Deed, is void if the Reversion be not in the reser∣or; if a Rent be granted from the Reversion, it is a Rent-seck He which is not seized of a Rent-seck, is without remedie for the same. The gift of a peny by the Tenant, in name of seizin of a Rent-seck, is a good possession and seizin. No Rent may be reserved upon any Feoff∣ment, Gift, or Lease, but only to the Donor, and his heires, not to any stranger.
A Rent-charge is extinct by the Grantees purchase of parcell of the Land, but by the purchase of any of his Ancesters it shall not, it shall be apportioned like Rent-service, ac∣cording to the value of the land; but if the whole Land discend of the same inheritance, the rent is extinguished. By the grant of the Reversion, the rents and Services pass: If Rent be granted to a man without more; saying, he shall have it for terme of his life. If the Lord accept of Rent or service of the Feoffment, he excludeth himself of the Arrerages of the time of the Feoffment. For a Rent-charge behind, one may have an Action of annuity, or distrain. Distress. For what, when, and where a man may distrain. A man may distrain for a Rent-Charge, Rent-Service, Herriot▪service, and all manner of Service, as Homage. Escuage. Fealtie. Suite of Court. And Relief, &c. HErriot custome must be seized: and for Amerciaments, in a Leete, upon whose
ground soever it be in the liberty; a man may not distrain for rent, after the Lease is ended, nor have debt upon a Lease for life, before the estate of Frank-Tenement be deter∣mined. A man may not distrain in the night, but for dammage Feasant. A man may not distrain upon the possessi∣ons of the King, but the King may distrain of any Lands of his Grantee, or Patentee. A man may not distrain the beasts of a stranger that come by escape, untill they have been Levant, and Couchant on the ground, but for dammage Feasans. A man may not distrain the Oxen of the Plough, nor a Mil-stone, nor such like that is for the good of the Common-wealth, nor a Cloke in a Taylors shop, nor victuals, nor corne in sheafes, but if it be in a Cart, for dammage Feasans. A distress must be always of such things as the Sheriff may make a Replevin. A man may not sever horses joyned toge∣ther, or to a cart. If a man put cattell into a pasture for a week, and afterwards I. N. doth give him notice that he will keep them no longer, and the owner will not fetch them away; I. N. may distrain them dammage Feasans.
If a man take beasts dammage Feasans, and driving them by the high way to a pound, the beasts enter into the house of the owner, and the taker prayeth the delivery of them, and the owner will not deliver them: a Writ of Rescous lyeth. If a man distrain goods, he may put them where he will. But if they perish, he shall answer for them. If cattell, they ought to be put in a com∣mon pound, or else in an open place, where the owner may lawfully come and feed them, and notice given to him thereof, and then if they die, it is in default of the owner. Cattell taken dammage Fesans, may be im∣pounded in the same land; but goods or Cat∣tell taken for others things may not. Sheep may not be destreined, if there be a sufficient distress besides. No man shall drive a distress out of the County wherein it was taken. No distress shall be driven forth of the hundred, but to a pound Overt within three miles. A distress may not be impounded in se∣veral places, upon pain of five pounds, and treble dammage, Fees for impounding one whole Distress, Four pence.
The executor or administrator of him which had Rent or Fee-Farme in Fee, in Fee∣tayle, or for life, may have debt against the Tenant that should pay it, or distrain: and this is by the Statute 32: H. 8. So may the husband after the death of his Wife, his Executor, or Administrator. So may he which hath Rent for another mans life, distrain for the arrerages after his death, or have an action of Debt, 32. H. 8. But if the Landlord will distrain the goods, or cattell of his Tenant, and do sell them, or worke them, or convert them to his own use, he shall be executor of his own wrong. CHAP. XXIII. Diseizin of Rents▪ Three causes of Diseizin of Rents-Service. Rescous. Replevin. Inclosure. Foure of Rent-Charge, Denyer, & Inclosure. Forestalling is a Diseizin of all. FOrestalling is, when the Tenant doth with force, and armes, way∣lay, or threaten in such manner, that the Lord dareth nor distrain, or demand the Rent.
Denyall is, if there be no distress on the Land, or if there be none ready to pay the Rent, &c. And of such diseizins, a man may have an action of Novell diseizin against the Tenant, and recover his Rent, and arrerages, and his dammage and costs; and if the Rent be be∣hind another time, he shall have a Redissei∣zin, and recover double dammage. Rescous, and Pound-breach. IF the Lord distrain when there is no rent nor service behind, the Tenant may not rescue; otherwise if another distreine wrong∣fully; but no man may break the Pound, al∣though he did tender amends before the cat∣tell were impounded. If the Lord come to distrain, and see the beasts, and the servant drive them out of his fee, the Lord may not have Rescous, because he had not the Possession, but he may follow them, and distrain, but not dammage feasans.
CHAP. XXIV. COMMON. COMMON is the right that a man hath to put his beasts to pasture, or to use, and occupy ground that is ano∣ther mans. There be divers Commons, viz. Common in gross, Common appendant, Common ap∣pertinant, Common, because of neighbour∣hood, viz. the termes of Law. The Lords of Wastes, Woods and pasture, may approve against their Tenants and neigh∣bours with common appertenant, leaving them sufficient Common, and pasture to their Tenants. As if one Tenant, surcharge the Common; the other Tenants may have against him a Writ de admensuratione pasturae; But not a∣gainst him that hath Common for beasts without number, neither may the Lord en∣close from such Tenants: if he do, the Tenant may bring an assize against him, and recover Treble dammage, but the Lord may have a quo jure, and make the Tenant shew by what title he claimeth.
CHAP. XXV. WAYES. The Kings high-way is that which leadeth from village to village. A common high-way is that which leadeth from a village into the fields. A private way is that which leadeth from one certain place unto another, 3. Ed. 3. IN the Kings high-way, the King hath onely passage for himself and his people; and the Frank-Tenement, and all the profits are in the Lord of the soyle, as they be pre∣sented at the Leete. Of a Common high-way, the Frank-Te∣nement and profits are to him that hath the land next▪ thereto adjoyning, and if it be stopped, and I be damnified by it, I have no remedy, but by presentment in the Leete. If a private way be straitned, or if a bridge there, which another ought to repair, be de∣cayed, an action of the case lieth; But if the way be stopped, an Assize of Nusance lieth, and the Lessee may have it after the Lessors years begin, or the Lessee may have an acti∣on of the case: if the most part of a Water-Way, be stopped, an Assize will lie.
CHAP. XXVI. LIBERTIES. A Libertie is, a royall priviledge in the hands of a subject. ALL Liberties are derived from the Crown, and therefore are extin∣guished if they come to the Crown again by escheate, forfeiture, or such like, for the Greater doth drowne the lesser. One may have Park, a Leete Wayfe, stray, wreck of Sea, and enura placitorum, by pre∣scription, and without allowance in Eyre. But not Cognizance of plea, nor Cattalla fellonum, vel fugitinorum, aut ut ligatorum A libertie may be forfeited by misusing, as to keep a market otherwise then it is granted. A libertie may be forfeited for not using, when it is for the good of the Common∣wealth; as not to exercise the Office of the Clarke of the Market; but not to use a mar∣ket, is not. Whatsoever is in the King, by reason of his Prerogative, may not be granted, or pardoned by generall words, but by speciall.
CHAP. XXVII. Of Chattells Reall. Chattells Reall, are Guardianships, Leases for years, or at will, &c. GUardianship is a Commodity of ha∣ving the custodie of the body, or lands, or both, where the heire is within age; and the Lord of whom the Land is holden, by Knights service, shall have the same to his own use; for it is a Chattell Re∣all, and therefore his Executor shall have it. The Guardian must not do waste, nor in▪ feoff, upon pain of losing the Wardship. But he must maintain the buildings out of the Issues of the Lands, and so restore it to the heire. If the Committee of the King commit, the Wardship shall be committed to another; if the Grantee, he shall lose the Wardship. And one of the friends of the Ward, being his next friend that will, may sue for him. If a Lease be made to a man and his heires for 20. years, it is a Chattell, and his Execu∣tor shall have it; otherwise if a man Will a Lease to a man and his heires, here the word
Heires, are words of purchase, and his heires shall have it▪ If a man grant, Proximam advocationem to I. S. and his heires, it is but a Chattell, for it is but for unicâ vice. Writings pawned for money lent, are Chattells. If a woman have execution of Lands by Statute-Merchant, and taketh a husband, he may grant it, for it is a chattell. Of Chattells Personall. CHattells Personall, are Gold, Silver, Plate, Jewels, Utensils, Beasts, and other Chat∣tells, and moveable Goods whatsoever; Obli∣gations, and Corne upon the ground. All goods, as well moveable, as unmovea∣ble, Corne upon the ground, Obligations, right of Actions, money out of bags, and corn out of sacks, Sunt Cattalla. Money is not to be passed by the grant of all his goods, and Chattells; nor Hawkes, nor Hounds, nor other things; ferae naturae, for the propertie is not in any, not after they are made tame, longer then they are in his Pos∣session; as my Hounds following me, or my man, or my Hawke flying after a foule, or my Deer haunting out of my Park. But if
they stray of their own accord, it is lawfull for any man to take, and the heire shall have them. All Chattells shall go to the Executors; Fatts, and Furnaces, fixed in a Brew house, or Dy-house by the Lessee; if they be fixed by Tenant in Fee, the heire shall have them. Now something hath been said concerning Possessions, it followeth, that it be shewed, how they may be conveyed from one man to another. CHAP. XXVIII. OF CONVEYANCES. In every Conveyance, there must be a Gran∣tor, and a Grantee, and something granted. The Conveyance of some persons is void, of others voidable. CONVEYANCE of a Woman Covert is void, without the consent of her hus∣band, and it ought to be made in her and his name, except it be done as Executor to an∣other. Of an Infant, that which doth not take ef∣fect with the delivery of his own hands, is void, and an Action of Trespass will lie a∣gainst him, for taking the things given.
Otherwise it is but voidable, except it be as Executor, or for necessary meat, and drink, &c. for his advantage. Voidable Of non sane memorie, Royall. Voidable or made by duresse, Royall. VOydable by the parties themselves, and their heires, and by them that shall have their estates, except Non sane himself. Grants by Fine. VOydable by Writ of Error, by an Infant▪ during his nonage, and by the Husband for a Fine levied by his Wife alone, during their marriage. Conveyance of some persons cannot be good for ever, without the consent of others, as the Deane without the Chapter; the Ma∣jor without the Commonaltie, and of o∣ther bodies politick, that have a common Seale, or of a Parson without the Patron and Ordinary. If there be no condition in the Convey∣ance, it shall be intended the elder. A Conveyance made to a feme Covert, shall be good, and of effect, untill her husband do disagree. An Infant may be Grantee, so may a Wo∣man Outlawed, a Villaine, a Bastard, and a Fellon.
A Bastard can have no heire, but the Issue of his body lawfully begotten. An Infant at the age of discretion, by his actuall entry; and a woman against the will of her husband may be a disseisor, or a Trespassor. In all conveyances there must be one na∣med, which may take by force the grant, at the beginning of the grant. A grant made to the right heires of one that is dead, is good, or Custodibus Eccle. is good for goods. All Chattells, reall or personall, may be granted; or given without a Deed. Rent-service, Rent-seck, Rent-charge, Common of Pasture, or of Turbarie, Rever∣sion, Remainder, advowson, or other things which lieth not in manuall occupation, may not be conveyed for years, for life, in tayle, or in Fee, without writing. The Major, or Commonalty, or such like, cannot make a Lease for years, without a Deed.
CHAP. XXIX. OF DEEDS. Three things needfull, and pertaining to eve∣ry Deed; Writing, Sealing, and delivering. IN the Writing must be shewed the per∣sons names, their dwelling place, and de∣gree. The things granted, upon what consideration, the estate, whether absolute, or conditionall, with the other circumstances, and the time when it was done. No grant can be made, but to him that was partie to the Deed; except it be by way of Remainder. The words must be sufficient in Law to bind the parties; as if a man grant omnes terras certa sua, a Lease for years passeth not, but for Frank-Tenement, at least, nec per om∣nia bona sua. Exceptio semper ultimo ponenda est: THe Habendum must include the pre∣misses: A Condition cannot be reserved, but by the Grantor, and it is proper to follow the Habend. presently. The Habendum, or Condition must not be
Repugnant to the Premises, if it be, it is void, and the Deed will take effect by the Pre∣mises. A Warrant is good, although it extend not unto all the Lands, nor to all the Feoffees, or made by one of the Feoffors. If it be rased, or interlined in the Date, or in any materiall place, it is very suspitious. Of Sealing. A Writing cannot be said to be a Deed, if it be not sealed, although it be written, and delivered, it is but an Escrowe. And if it were sufficiently fealed, yet if the Print of the seale be utterly defaced the Deed is unsufficient; it is not my Deed. It may not be pleaded, but it may be given in Evidence. Of Delivery. A Deed taketh effect by the delivery, and if the first take any effect, the second is void. A Jurie shall be charged, to enquire of the delivery, but not of the date, yet every Deed shall be intended to be made, when it doth beare date.
Diversitie in delivering of a WRITING. As a Deed. As Escrow. THis Delivery ought to be done by the partie himself, or by his sufficient At∣tourney, and so it shall binde him, whosoever wrote, or sealed the same. If one be bound to make assurance, he need not to deliver it, unless there be one to read it to him before. And if any writing be read in any other forme to a man unlearned; It shall not be his Deed, although he Seale and deliver it. ▪There are two sorts of Deeds. A Deed Poll, which is the Deed of the Grantor, a Deed indented, which is the mutuall Deed of either parties; but in Law, one is the Deed of the Grantor, and the other the counter-partie, and if any variance be in them, it shall be taken as it is in the Deed of the Grantor; and if the Grantor Seale only, it is good.
CHPP. XXX. BARGAINS and SALES. NO Mannor-lands, Tenements, or o∣ther hereditaments can pass, alter, or change, from one man to ano∣ther, whereby an estate of Inhe∣ritance or Free-hold is made, or taketh ef∣fect in any person or persons, or any use thereof is made, by reason only of any Bar∣gain and Sale therefore, except the same be made by writing indented, sealed, and in∣rolled in one of the Courts of Record at Westminster, or within the same Court or Countie where the Tenements so bargain∣ed, do lie, before the Custos Rotulorum, and two Justices of Peace, and the Clerk of the Peace, or two of them, where of the Clerk of the Peace to be one, and that within six months after the date of such writing in∣dented, 27, H. 8. The inrollment shall be indented the first day of the Terme, and shall have relation to the delivery of the Deed, against all stran∣gers.
CHAP. XXXI. FEOFFMENTS. A Feoffment, is an estate made by delivery of Possession, and seizin by the party, or his sufficient Attorney. A man cannot make livery of seizin, before he have the Possession. A Joynt-Tenant cannot enfeoffe his Compani∣on. A Co-partner make a Feoffment of his part, or release. A man cannot enfeoffe his Wife. A Disseizor cannot enfeoffe the Dsseizee; for his entrie is lawfull upon the disseizor. Such persons as have possession in lands for yeers, or for life, &c. cannot take by livery and seizin of the same Lands. IF a Feoffment be made, and the Lessee for years give leave to the Lessor to make Livery and seizin of the Premisses, saving to himself his Lease, &c. and he doth, the terme is not surrendred; for the Lessee had an Interest which could not be surrendred without his consent to surrender, & here his intent to surrender doth not appear; where∣fore he may enter, & have his term & the rent is renewed,
but it is otherwise with a Lessee for life, and the rent is extinct. The Lessor cannot make Livery and seizin against the Will of the Lessee being on the Land; But he may grant the Reversion, and if the Lessee do Attorn, the Free-hold will pass without Livery of seizin. Livery of Seizin. LIvery of seizin, is a Ceremonie used in Conveyance of Lands, that the Common people might know of the passing, or alterati∣on of the estate: it is requisite in all Feoff∣ments, gifts in the tayle, and Leases for life, made by deed, or without deed. No Free-hold will pass without Liverie of seizin, except by way of surrender, Parti∣tion, or exchange, or by matter of Record, or by Testament. Livery of seizin must be made in the life∣time of him that made the estate. Dona clandestina sant semper suspitiosa. BY Livery of seizin in one County, the Lands in another County will not pass. Livery within view, is good, if the Feoffee
do enter in the life-time of the Feoffor. Livery may not be made of an estate to be∣gin in Future, for no estate in Frank-Tene∣ment may be given in Futuro, but shall take effect presently, by Livery and Seizin. Of Ʋses. THe Statute of 27. H. 8. hath advanced uses, and hath established suretie for him that hath the Use against his Feoffees; for before the Statute, the Feoffees were owners of the Land, but now it is destroyed, and the cestya{que} Use is owner of the same; before the possessi∣on ruled the Use, but since the Use governeth the possession, Indentures subsequent be suf∣ficient to direct the Uses of a Fine or Reco∣very precedent, when no other certain and full declaration was made before. Attorney. AN Attorney ought to do every thing in the name, and as the act of him which gave him the authority; as Leases in name of the Lessor, but he must say, by vertue of his Letter of Attorney, I do deliver you possessi∣on and seizin of, &c. for, &c. An Attorney must first take possession be∣fore he can make Livery of Seizin. If an Attorney do make Livery of Seizin;
otherwise then he hath warrant, then it is a diseizin to the Feoffor. An Attorney must be made by writing sea∣led, and not by word. CHAP. XXXII. EXCHANGE. In Exchange, both the estates must be equall, there must be two Grants; & in every grant, mention must be made of this word exchange. It may be done without Livery of Seizin, if it be in one Shire, or else it must be done by In∣denture, and by this word Exchange, or else nothing passeth without livery. EXCHANGE, importeth in the Law a Condition of Re-entry, and a Warranty voucher, and recompence of the other land that was given in Ex∣change; an Assignee cannot re-enter, nor vouch, but Rebate; Exchanger may re-enter upon an Assignee. And the same condition de∣feated in part, is defeated in the whole, and the same law is in partition. CHAP. XXXIII. GRANTS. GRants must be certain. A Grant to I. S. or I. N. is void for the incertaintie, al∣though it be delivered to I. S. The deli∣very
of the Deed will not make a void Grant good, or to take effect. The Lord cannot Grant the Wardship of his living Tenant; because of the uncertainty who shall be his heire, unless he name some person. When any thing is granted that is not cer∣tain, as one of my horses, then the choice is in the Grantee. When several things are granted, then it is in the choice of him that is to do the first Act. A man cannot grant, nor charge that which he never had. A man may charge a Reversion. A Parson may grant his tythes, or the Wool of his Sheep for years. A thing in action, a cause of a suite, right of entrie, or a Title for a condition broken, or such like, may not be given or granted to a Stranger; But only to the Tenant of the ground, or to him that hath the Reversion, or Remainder. A thing that cannot begin without a Deed, may not be granted without a Deed; as a Rent-Charge, Fayer, &c. Every thing that is not given by delivery of hands, must be pas∣sed by Deed, the right of a thing reall or per∣sonall,
may not be given in, not released by Word; a Rent of condition, or a re-entrie may not be reserved to one that is not partie to the Deed. All things that are incident to others, pass by the grant of them that they are incident unto. A man by his Grant, cannot prejudice him that hath an elder title. If no estate be expressed in the Grant, and Livery and seizin be made, then the Grantee hath but estate or life; But if there be such Words in the Grant, which will manifest the Will of the Granter, so his will be not against the law, the estate shall be taken according to his intent and will. All Grants shall have a reasonable constru∣ction, and all Grants are made to some pur∣pose, and therefore reason would they should be construed to some purpose. All Grants shall be taken most strong a∣gainst him that made it, and most beneficiall to him to whom it is made. To Grants of Reversion, or of Rents, &c. there must be Attornment, otherwise no∣thing passeth, if it be not by matter of Re∣cord.
ATtornment is the agreement of the Te∣nant to the Grant, by writing, or by Word; as to say, I do agree to the Grant made to you, or I am well contented with it, or I do Attorne unto you, or I do become your▪ Tenant, or I do deliver unto the Gran∣tee a peny, by way of seizin of a Rent, or pay, or do but one service onely in the name of the whole; it is good for all. It must be done in the life-time of the Grantor. Without Attornment, a Signiory, a Rent∣charge, a Remainder, or a Reversion, will not pass, but by matter of Record. Without Attornment, services pass not by the sale of the Manor, nor from the Ma∣nor, but by bargain and sale inrolled. Attornment must be made by the Tenant of the Free-hold, when a Rent-charge is granted. By the Attornment of the Termor to the Grantee of a Reversion, with Liverie, and the Rent also, though no mention be made thereof; before attornment a man may not distrain, nor have an action of waste. By fine, the Lord may have the Wardship of the body, and Lands before the attornment of his Tenant. The end of attornment, is to perfect
Grant, and therefore may not be made upon condition, or for a time. A Tenant that is to perfect a Grant by At∣tornment, cannot consent for a time, nor up∣on a Condition, nor for part of a thing gran∣ted: But it shall enure the whole absolutely. If the Tenant have true notice of all the Grant, then such Attornment is void. Attornment necessary upon a Devise. CHAP. XXXIV. LEASES. A Lease for years must be for a time cer∣taine, and ought to express the terme, and when it should begin, and when it should end certainly; And therefore a Lease for a year, and so from year to year; during the life of I. S. but for two years, it may be made by Word or Writing; If I Lease to I. N. to hold untill a hundred pounds be paid, and make no livery of seizin, he hath estate only at Will. A Lease from year to year, so long as both the parties please, after entrie in any year, it is a Lease for that year, &c. till warning be given to depart. 14. H. 8. 16. A Lease beginning from henceforth, shal be accounted from the day of the delivery▪
from the making▪ shall be taken inclusive from the day of the making, or of the date exclusive. If Lands discend to the heires before his entrie, he may make a Lease thereof. A man lets a house, cum pertinent▪ no lands pass; but if a man let a house, cum omnibus ter∣ris eidem pertinent, there the lands thereunto used pass. If a man lets Lands, wherein is Coale∣mines, quarries, and such like, if they have bin used, the Tenant may use them. if they be not open, if the Tenant for them, imploy them not on the Land, it is waste, likewise marle; the land is the place where the Rent is to be paid and demanded, if no other place be∣tween the parties be limited. Trespass is not given for paying of the Rent to the Lessor, howsoever it be payable there. And if a man let lands without impeach∣ment of Waste, and a Stranger cut down the trees, and the Lessee doth bring an action of Trespass, he shall not recover for the value of the Trees, but for the Crop, and bursting of his close, and the heire of the Lessor shal have such trees, and not the Executor of the Les∣see, unless they be cut by the Lessee, and en∣joyed by the Grantee, without Waste.
Lessee for years, or for life, Tenant in Dower, or by the curtesie, or Tenant in tayle after possibility, &c. have onely a special in∣terest or property in the trees, being upon the ground, growing as a thing annexed unto the Land, so long as they are annexed thereunto. But if the Lessee, or any other sever them from the Land, the property and interest of the Lessee in them, is determined; and the Lessor may take them▪ as things that are par∣cell of his Inheritance, the Interest of the Lessee being determined. To accept the rent of a void Lease, will not make the Lease good; But avoidable it will. If the Husband and Wife do purchase Lands to them and the heires of the Hus∣band, and he make a Lease, and die; his Wife may enter, and avoid the Lease for her life, but if she die, leaving the husband, who after∣ward dies, before the terme ends, the Lease is good to the Lessee, against the heire. Where it is Covenanted and granted to S. I. that he shall have five Acres of land in D. for years, this is a good Lease, for consessit is of such force as dimisit. If a man make a Lease for 10 years, and afterwards maketh another lease for 21 years▪ the latter shall be a good Lease for eleven years, when the first is expired.
If the Lessee at his cost, do put glass in the Windowes, he may not take the same away again, but he shall be punished for Waste; and so of Wainscot, and seeling, if it be not fixed with Screwes. Tenant in tayle may make a lease for such lands or inheritance, as have been commonly letten to farm▪ if the old lease be expired, sur∣rendered or ended, within one year after the making of the new; But not without impeach∣ment of Waste, nor above 21 years, or three lives, from the day of the making, reserving the old Rent, or more, 32. H. 8. By Indenture of Lease, by Tenant in tayle, for 21 years, made according to the forme of the Statute, rendring the ancient, or more Rent. If the Tenant in tayle die, it is a good lease against his Issue; But if a Tenant in tayle die without Issue; the Doner may avoid this Lease by entrie, 32. H. 8. 28. And if he in the Remain∣der, do accept the Rent, it shall not tie him, for that the Tayle is determined, the Lease is determined, and void. Ed. . 19. The Husband may make such a Lease of his wifes lands by Indenture, in the name of the husband and wife, and she to seale thereunto, and the rent must be reserved to the husband and his wife, and to the heires of the wife, according to her estate of Inheritance.
A Lease made by the husband alone, of the Lands of his wife, is void after his death; But the Lessee shall have his Corne. By the husband and wife, voidable, if it be not made as aforesaid. If a man do let Lands for years, or for life, reserving a Rent, and do enter into any part thereof, and take the profit thereof, the whole Rent is extinguished, and shall be su∣spended, during his holding thereof. The aceptation of a re-demise, to begin presently, is suspension of the Rent, before any entrie; otherwise of a re-demise to begin in suturo. Reservations and Exceptions. THere are divers words, by which a man may reserve a Rent, and such like, which he had not before▪ or to keep that which he had, as Tenendum, reservandum, solvendum, saciendum, it must be out of a Messuage▪ and where a distresse may be taken; and not out of a Rent: and it must be com∣prehended within the purport of the same Word. Exceptions of part ought always to be o such things which the Grantor had in posse∣sion at the time of the Grant. The heire shall not have that which is re∣served,
if it be not reserved to him by speci∣al words. If a man make a Feoffment of Lands, and reserve any part of the profits thereof, as the grass, or the Wood, that reservation is void, because it is repugnant to the feoff∣ment. A man by a Feoffment, Release, Confirma∣tion, or Fine, may grant all his right in the Land, saving unto him his Rent-charge, &c. Things that are given only by taking and use∣ing: As pasture for four Bullocks, or two loads of Wood, cannot be reserved but by way of Indenture, and then they shall take effect by way of Grant, of the Grantor, during his life and no longer, without speciall Words. Exceptions of things, as Wood, Myne, Quarrie, Marle, or such like, if they be used, it is implied by the Law that they shall be used; and the things without which they cannot be had, is implied to be excepted, al∣though no, &c. But otherwise, if they be not used, then the way and such like must be excepted. An Assignee may be made of Lands given in Fee, or for life, or for years, or of a Rent∣charge, although no mention be made of the Assignee in the Grant. But otherwise it is of a promise, Covenant, or Grant, or Warranty.
If a Lessee do assigne over his terme, the Lessor may charge the Lessee, or assigne at is pleasure. But if the Lessor accept of the Rent of the Assignee, knowing of the assignement, he hath determined his acception, and shall not have an action of debt against the Lessee, for Rent due after the assignement. If after the assignement of the Lessee, the Lessor do grant away his Reversion, the Grantee may not have an action of debt a∣gainst the Lessee. If a Lessee do assigne over his interest, and die, his Executor shall not be charged for rent due after his death. If the Executor of a Lessee do assigne over his interest, an action of debt doth not lie a∣gainst him for rent due after the assignement. If the Lessor enter for a condition broken, or the Lessee do surrender, or the terme end, the Lessor may have an action of debt for the arrearages. A Lease for years, vending rent, with a condition, that if the Lessee assigneth his terme, the Lessor may re-enter. The Lessee assigneth, the Lessor receiveth the Rent of the hands of the assignee, not knowing of the assignement, it shall not exclude the Lessor of his entrie.
A thing in a Condition may be assigned o∣ver for good cause, as just debt: as whereas a man is indebted unto me 20. pounds, and another do owe him 20. pounds, he may as∣signe over his Obligation unto me, in satisfa∣ction of my debt, and I may justifie the suing for the same, in the name of the other, at my own proper costs and charges. Also where one hath brought an action of debt against I. N. which promiseth me, that if I will aide him against I. N. I shal be paid out of the sum, in demand I may aid him. An assignee of Lands, if he be not named in the condition, yet he may pay the money to save his Land. But he shall receive none, if he be not na∣med; the tender shall be to the Executor of the Feoffees. Assignee shall alwayes be intended, he that hath the whole estate of the assignor, that is assignable; a Condition is not assignable, and not of an Executor, or Administrator: if there be such an assignee, the law will not allow an assignee in the law, if there be an assignee indeed; so long as any part of the estate re∣maineth to the assignor, the tender ought to be made to him or his heires, it serveth; yet a colourable payment to the heire, shall not veste the estate out of the assignee, as a true payment will, viz. Covenant.
CHAP. XXXVI: SURRENDERS. A Surrender is an Instrument testify∣ing with apt words, that the particu∣lar Tenant of Lands, or Tenements for life, or years, doth sufficiently consent, that he which hath the next imme∣diate Remainder, or Reversion thereof, shall also have the particular estate of the same in possession; and that he yeildeth, or giveth the same to him for ever; Surrender ought forthwith to give a present possession of the thing Surrendred unto him which hath such an estate, where it may be drowned. A Joynt-Tenant cannot surrender to his fellow. Estating of things that may not be grant∣ed without a Deed, may be determined by the Surrender of the Deed to the Tenant of the Land. Lease for years cannot surrender before his Term begin; he may grant, he cannot sur∣render part of his Lease.
Surrenders are in two manners; In Deed. In Law. A Surrender in Law, is when the Lessee for years, doth take a new Lease for more years. A Surrender in Deed, must have suffici∣ent words to prove the assent, and will of the Surrenderer to Surrender; and that the o∣ther do also thereunto agree. The husband may Surrender his Wifes Do∣wer for his life, and her Lease for ever. By Deed Indented, a man may Surrender upon condition. CHAP. XXXVII. RELEASES. A Release is the giving or discharging of a Right, or Action which a man hath or clai∣meth against another, or out of, or in his lands. A Release or Confirmation made by him that at the time of the making thereof had no right, is void; if a right come to him afterwards, unless it be with warranty, and then it shall barr him of all right that shall come to him after the warranty made.
Release, or confirmation made to him that at the time of the Release, or Confirmation made, had nothing in the Lands, is void, it behoveth him to have a Free-hold or a pos∣session and privitie. A Release made to a Lessee for years, be∣fore his entrie, is void. A man may not release upon a Condition, nor for a time, nor for part; But either the Condition is void, and the time is void, and the Release shall enure to the partie to whom it is made for ever, for the whole, by way of extinguishment: But a man may deliver a Re∣lease to another, as an Escrowe, to deliver to I. S. as his Act and Deed if I. S. do perform such a thing, or Release upon a condition by Deed indented, may be good. A Joynt-tenant or a Rent-charge, may re∣lease, yet all the Rent is not extinct, nor yet if he purchase the lands, his fellow shall have the Rent still. If the grantee release parcell of a Rent∣charge to the Grantor, yet all the Rent is not extinct. A Release to charge an estate, ought to have these words, Heires, or words to shew what estate he shall have. A release made to him that hath a Reversi∣on, or a remainder in Deed, shall serve and
help him that hath the Frank-tenement; So shall a Release made to a Tenane for life, or a Tenant in Tayle, inure to him in the Reversi∣on, or Remainder, if they may shew it, and so to Trespassors and Feoffees, but not to Dis∣seisors. A Release of all manner of Actions doth not take away an entrie, nor the taking of ones Goods againe, nor is any Plea against an Executor. A Release of all demands, extinguisheth all Actions Reall and Personall, appeales, Execu∣tions, Rent-charge, Common of Pasture, Rent-Service, and all right, and Seizure, and all right in Lands, and propertie in Chattels: But not a possibility, or future duty, as a Rent payable after my death, and such like. CHAP. XXXVIII. CONFIRMATION. Confirmation, is when one ratifieth the possessi∣on, as by Deed to make his passession perfect; or to discharge his estate, that may be defea∣ted by another entrie. AS if a Tenant for life, will grant a Rent-charge in Fee, then he in the Reversion may confirme the same Grant.
Whereas a man by his entrie, may defeat an estate; there by his Deed of Confirmati∣on, he may make the estate good. A Confirmation cannot charge an estate that is determined by express Condition, or limitation; To confirm an estate for an houre, if it be for Tenant for life, it is good for life; if to Tenant in Fee, for ever. A lease for years may be confirmed for a time, or upon condition, or for a piece of the Land; But if a Frank-tenement be, it shall enure to the whole absolutely. A Confirmation to charge an estate, must have words to shew what Estate he shall have. To confirm the Estate of Tenant for life, to his heires, cannot be but by Habendum, the Land to him and his heires: And there∣fore it is good to have such a Habendum in all confirmations. In a Confirmation, new service may not be reserved, old may be abridged. A Confirmation made to one Disseizor, shall be voidable to the other, so shal not a Release.
CHAP. XXXIX. CONDITION. There are two manner of Conditions, one ex∣pressed by Words, another implyed by the Law; the one called a Condition in deed, the other, a Condition in Law. ESTATE made, and the condition against the law, the Estate's good, the Condition's void. If the Estate beginneth by the Con∣dition, then both are void. Bonds with Conditions expresly against the Law, are void. Conditions repugnant, the estate good, the Condition void. Conditions impossible, are void, the E∣state good; it shall not enlarge any estate. By pleading, a man may not defeat an E∣state of Frank-Tenement, by force of a con∣dition in Deed; without he shew the Condi∣tion of Record, or in writing sealed; yet the Jurie may help a man, where the Judges will take their Verdict at large: of Chatttels he may. Promise doth make a Condition; but when it doth depend upon another sentence, or hath reference to another part of the deed, it maketh no condition, but a qualification,
or limitation of the sentence, or of that part of the Deed, as provided, that the person of the Grantee shall not be charged. He which hath interest in a Condition, may fulfill the same for safeguard of himself. Between the parties, it is not requisite the Condition be performed in every thing if the other do agree, but to a stranger it must. If the Obligee be partie to any Act. by which the Condition cannot be performed; then the Obligor shall be discharged; So he shall be by the Act of the Condition. Where the first Act in the Condition is to be performed by the Obligee, and he will not do it, there the Obligation is not forfeited. Where no time is set, if the Condition be for the good of a stranger, or of the Obligee, then it is to be performed within convenient time, if for the good of the Obligor at any time during their lives; Immediately, shall not have such a strict construction; but that it shall suffice, if it be done in convenient time. If a man be bound to pay money, or farm Rent, he must seek the parties. But if he be bound to perform all payments: if he render his farm on the land, it sufficeth. If the Feoffee, or Feoffor die before the day of payment, the tender shall be to the
Executor, although the heire of the Feoffee do enter, if the heire be not named, vide, Assignee in assignement. The money must be tendred so long before Sun-set, that the receiver may see to tell it. To pay part of a Sum at the day, cannot be satisfaction for the whole sum, as a horse or a robe is. But before the day, or at ano∣ther place, at the day of the request, and ac∣ceptance of the Obligee, is full satisfaction. An Acquittance is a good barr, if nothing be paid. In all cases of Conditions, a payment of a certain sum in gross, touching Lands, or Tenements, if lawfull tender be once refu∣sed, he which made the tender is discharg∣ed forever. And the manner of the tender, and pay∣ment shall be directed by him that made it, and not by him that did accept it, as that he paid the sum in full satisfaction, and that he accepted thereof in full satsfaction. An acquittance is a good bar, &c. Where a man is bound to pay money, to make a Feoffment, or renounce an Office, or the like, and no time is limited when the shall do it, then upon request, he is bound to per∣form it, in so short a time as he may. Bu where the time is limited, if he doe
refuse before the day it is no matter, if he be readie to perform it at the day. Where a Covenant or Condition is to mar∣ry or Enfeoff a stranger by such a day; the re∣fusall of the stranger is no Plea, as that of the Obligee is; The Obligee is to be ready on the Land, at his own perill; a Stranger must be requested: if he refuse, the Obligation is forfeited, wherefore it is good to have these words, if the Stranger do there unto assent. Entrie. THe determination of an estate is not effe∣cted before entrie. When any person will enter for a Condi∣tion broken, he must be seized on the same course and manner he was when he departed from his possession. It behoveth such persons as will re-enter upon their Tenants to make a demand of the rent. If the Lessor demand before he die, his heire may enter. If the Lessor distrain, he may not re-enter. The Lessor may accept of the Rent, and yet re-enter: but if he receive the next rent he may not, for that establisheth the Lease. Entry into one acre in the name of more, is good; it doth not extend into two Counties.
By the Entry of the Husband, the Franck∣tenement shall be in the wife, and so of such like. In Gavill-kind Land, the eldest son only shall enter for the breach of a Condition. Demand. THe Land is the place where the rent is to be paid and demanded, if there be no other place appointed. And there the Lessor himself, or his suffi∣cient Attorney, a little before Sun set, in the presence of two or three sufficient witnesses, shall say, here I demand of I. B. 10. l. due to me at the Feast of, &c. for a Messuage, &c. Which he holdeth of me in Lease by Inden∣ture, &c. and there remain; the last day the rent is due to be paid until it be dark, that he cannot see to tell the money. CHAP. XI. WARRANTIES. There are three manner of Warranties. Lineall. Collaterall. By Discent. VVArranty Lineall, is where a man by his Deed bindeth him and his heires to Warranty, and dieth, and the War∣ranty doth discend to his issue.
Warrantie Collaterall is in another line, so that he to whom it diseendeth, cannot convey the title that he hath in the Testa∣ments by him that made warranty. Warranty by Disseizin, is where he which hath no right to enter, entreth, and maketh a warranty: this is by Disseisin, and barreth not. Line all Warranty barreth him that clai∣meth Fee; and also Fee-taile with assets in Fee; if he sell, his son may have a Forme∣don. Collaterall Warranty is a barr to both, ex∣cept in some cases that be remedied by Sta∣tute, as Warranty by Tenement, by the curte∣sie, except he hath enough by discent, by the same Tenement. Tenant, In dower, for life, not remedied, but do barre the heire, and him in reversion. AWarranty diseendeth alwaies to the heir at the Common law, viz the eldest Son, and followeth the estate, and if the e∣state may be defeated, the Warranty may also. It barreth not the second Son in Gavill∣kind, although all the sons shall be vouched, and not the eldest alone. Yet he only shall be barred.
To plead a Warranty against him that made it, or his heires, is called a Rebutter. Where Fee, or Frank-tenement is War∣ranted, the party shall have no advantage, if he be not Tenant. Where a Lease for years is warranted, it shall be taken by way of Covenant, and good, if he be outed. The Feoffor by the words dedi & concessi, shall be bound to warranty, during his own life. CHAP. XLI. COVENANTS. COvenants are of two sorts; expres∣sed by words in the Deed, or im∣plyed by the Law. A covenant in Deed, is an agreement made by the Deed in writing, between two persons to performe some things, and sealed: for no writ of Covenant is maintainable without such a specialty, but in London, &c. When a Covenant doth extend to a thing in being parcell of the demise, or thing to be done by force of the Covenant is quodamodo, annexed, or appertaining to the thing demi∣sed, and goeth with the land, it shall bind the assignee, if he be not named: as to repair the
houses, it shall bind all that shall come to the same by the act of the law, or by the act of the party. But if the Covenant do concern the land, or thing demised in some sort, the Assignee shall not be charged, although he be named; as to make a Wall at anothers bodies house, or to pay a sum of money to the Lessor, or to a stranger, But the Lessee his executors and Administrators shall be charged. If the Covenant do extend to a thing that had no being, but to be made new upon the Land, it should binde the Assignee, if he be named, because he shall have the benefit of it. If a man make a Lease for years, and the Lessee covenanteth and granteth to pay, &c. to the Lessor his heirs and assignes, yearly during, &c. ten pound, his Executors shall have it. A Covenant in Law, upon a demise, or grant, the Assignee in Deed, or in law may have a Writ of Covenant. An Obligation to perform all Covenants and grants is forfeit on the breach of a Cove∣nant in law. A Covenant in Law is not broken but by an elder title. A Covenant in Law may be qualified by the mutual consent of the parties.
CHAP. XLII. How Chattels personal may be bargained, sold, exchanged, lent, and restored. AContract is properly where a man for his mony shall have by the assent of another, certain goods, or some other profit at the time of the con∣tract, or after. In all Bargaines, Sales, Contracts, Promi∣ses, and Agreements, there must be quid pro quo, presently, except day be given expresly for the payment, or else it is nothing but com∣munication. If a man do agree for a price of wares, he may not carry them away before he hath paid for them, if he have not day expresly given him to pay for them. But the Merchant shall retain the wares until he be paid for them, and if the other take them, the Merchant may have an action of trespass, or an action of debt for the mo∣ney at his choice. If the bargain be that you shall give me ten pound for my Horse, and you do give me a penny in earnest, which I do accept: This is a perfect bargain, you shall have the Horse by an action of the Case, and I shall have the money by an action of debt.
If I say the price of a Cow is four pounds, and you say you will give me four pounds, and doe not pay me presently, you may not have her afterwards, except I will; for it is no contract. But if you goe presently to telling of your money, if I sell her to another, you shal have your action of the Case against me. If I buy one hundred loads of Wood to be taken in such a Wood at the appointment of the vendor, if he upon request will not as∣signe them unto me. I may take them, or I may sell them: But if a stranger doe cut down any part of the trees, I may not take them; But I may supply my Grantee of the residue, or have my action of the Case. If the bargain be, that I shall give you ten pounds for such a Wood, if I like it upon the view thereof, this is a bargaine at my plea∣sure vpon my view; and if the day be agreed upon, if I disagree before the day, if I agree at the day the bargain is perfect, although afterwards I do disagree. But I may not cut the Wood before I have paid for it; if I do, an action of Trespasse will lie against me, and if you sell it to another, an action of Trespass on the Case will lie against you. If I sell my horse for money, I may keep him untill I am paid, but I cannot have an a∣ction of debt untill he be delivered, yet the
property of the horse is by the bargain in the bargainer, or buyer; but if he do pre∣sently tender me my money, and I do refuse it, he may take the horse, or have an action of detainment. And if the horse die in my stable between the bargain and the delivery, I may have an action of debt for my money, because by the bargain the property was in the buyer. If a Deed be made of Goods and chattels, and delivered to the use of the Donee, the property of the Goods and Chattels are in the Donee presently: before any entry, or a∣greement, the Donee may refuse them if he will. If I take a horse of another mans, and sell him; and the owner take him again: I may have an action of Debt for the money, for the bargain was perfect by the delivery of the horse, & caveat Emptor. Every Con∣tract importeth in it self an assumption: for when one doth agree to pay money, or deli∣ver a thing upon consideration, he doth as it were, assume and promise to pay and deliver the same, and therefore when one selleth any goods to another, and agreeth to deliver them at a day to come: and the other in considera∣tion thereof, agreeth to pay so much money on the delivery, or after, in this Case, he may
have an action of Debt, or an action on the Case upon the assumption. The duty to resign an Action personal, may not be apportioned; as if I sell my Horse, and another mans for ten pounds, who taketh his Horse againe, I shall have all the money. If a man retained a servant for 10.l. per an∣num, and he depart within the year, he can have no wages: if it were to be paid at two Feasts, and the man after the first Feast die, he shall have wages but for the first Feast; there∣fore men take order for it in their Wils. By a Contract made in a Faire or Market, the property is altered; Except it be to the King; so that the buyer know not of the for∣mer property, and doe pay tole, and enter it; and those things as thereupon ought to be done, it must be on the Market, and at the place where such things are usually sold, as Place at the Goldsmiths stall, and not in his Inner shop. In exchange of a Horse for a Horse, or such like, the bargaine is good without giving of day, or delivery. If a thing be promised by way of recom∣pence for a thing that is past; it is rather an ac∣cord than a contract; & upon an accord, there lieth no account, but he unto whom the pro∣mise is made, may have charge, by reason of
the promise, which he hath also performed; then he shall have an account for the thing promised, though he that made the promise have no profit thereby; as if a man say to ano∣ther man, heal such a poor man, or make such a high-way, &c. The intent of the party shall be taken ac∣cording to the Law, as if a man retain a ser∣vant, and do not say one year, or how long he shall serve him, it shall be taken for one a yeer, according to the Statute. In all contracts he that speaketh obscurely, or ambiguously is said to speak at his own pe∣ril, and such speeches are to be taken strong∣ly against himself. CHAP. XLIII. Of Lending and Restoring. IF Mony, Corn, Wine, or such other things, which cannot be redelivered, be occu∣pied or borrowed, if it perish, it is at the peril of the borrower. But if a Horse, or a Cart, or such other things, as may be used, and delivered again, be used in such manner as they were lent, if they perish, he that oweth them shall bear the loss, if they perish not through the de∣fault
of him that did borrow them, or that he did make a promise at the time of delivery, to redeliver them safe againe. If they be occu∣pied in any other wise then according to the lending, in what wise soever it perish; if it be not in default of the owner, he that did borrow them, shall be charged with them in Law and Conscience. If a man have goods to keep to a certain day, he shall be charged, or not charged af∣ter as default or defaults is in him. But if he have any thing for keeping them safe, or make promise to redeliver them, he shall be charged with all chances that may fall because of his promise. If a man finde goods of another mans, if they be hurt or lost by the negligence of him that found them he shall be charged to the owner. If a common carrier go by waies that be dangerous for robbing, and will drive by night, or other unfit times, and is robbed; or if he do overcharge his Horse, or driveth so that his stuff fall into the Water, or other∣wise be hurt by his default, he shall be char∣ged by his default. And if a Carrier would percase refuse to carry, unless a promise were to him, that he shall not be charged with any such misde∣meanour, that promise were void.
Every Inholder is bound by the Law, bona & Cattalla of his Guest to keep in safety, so long as it is within the Inn, if the Guest did not deliver them unto him, nor acquaint him with them. He shall not be charged if the Servant or Companion of the Guest do imbezel them; or if the Guest do leave them in the outward Court. The Offler shall not answer for the Horse that is put to pasture at the request of the Guest: but if he do it of his own head, he shal. If any man offer to take away my Goods, I may lay my hands upon them, and rather beat him, then suffer him to take or carry them away. CHAP. XLIV. How far other mens Contracts and misde∣meanours do binde us. A MAN shall be bound by many Trespasses of his wife, but not to sustain corporal punishment for it. For Murder, Fellony, Battery, Trespass, bor∣rowing or receiving of money in his Masters name, by a Servant, the Master shall not be charged unless it be done by his command, or came to his use by his assent.
If I command one to do a Trespass, I shall be a Trespassor, or otherwise if I do but con∣sent: There is no accessary in Trespass. We shall be charged if any of our family lay or cast any thing into the high way, to the noisance of his Majesties Liege People. Every man is bound to make recompence, for such hurt as his beasts shall doe in the corne or grass of his neighbour, though he knew not that they were there; and for his Dogs, Beares, &c. if they hurt the goods or Chattell of any other; for that he is to govern them. A man shall not be charged by the contract of his wife or his servant, if the thing come to his use, having no notice of it: But if he com∣mand them to buy, he shal be charged though they come not to his use; or had notice therof. If a Wife or Servant use to buy or sell, if he sell his Masters Horse, and exchange his Oxe for wheat that cometh to his Masters use, his Master may not have an action of Trespass for it, but he shall be charged for the corn, and the other need not to shew that he had warrant to buy for him. If a man-servant that keepeth his shop, or that useth to sell for him, shall give away his goods, he shall have Trespass against the Donee.
But if I deliver my Goods to another to keep to my use, and he do give them away, I shall not: for the Donee had notice whose goods they were, as in the case of the servant. If a man make another his general receiver, which receiveth money, and maketh an ac∣quittance, and payeth not his Master; yet that payment dischargeth the debtor. If a servant keep his Masters fire negligent∣ly, an action lieth against the Master: Other∣wise if he bear it negligently in the street. If I command my servant to distrain, and he doth ride on the distress; he shall be pu∣nished, not I. If a man command his servant to sell a thing that is defective, generally to whom he can sell it; deceit lieth not against him: O∣therwise if he bid him sell it to such a man, it doth. A Contract or a promise made to the wife is good, when the husband doth agree, so it is to a servant; and it shall be said to be made to the husband and Master himself. If a man taketh a wife that is in debt, he shall be charged with her debts, during her life; if she die, he shall be discharged.
CHAP. XLV. Wills and Testaments. Having hitherto treated of such contracts as de take effect in the life time of the parties, with their differences, it is now to deale with Instruments which take effect after their Deaths; that those things which they have preserved with care, and gotten with paines in their life, might be left to their posterity in peace and quietnesse after their Death: of which sort are last Wils and Testaments. There are two sorts of Wils; Written and Nuncupative. ANuncupative Testament is when the Testator doth by Word onely without writing declare his Will, before a sufficient number of Witnesses, of his Chattels onely: for Lands passe not but by writing; It may for the better continuance after the making, be put in writing, and proved: But it is still a Testament Nuncupative. A written Testament is that, which at the very time of the making thereof is put in wri∣ting; by which kind of Testament in writing, only Lands and Testaments pass, and not by word of mouth only.
Two things are required to the perfection of a Will, by which Lands pass, viz. First writing, which is the beginning. Secondly, the death of the Devisor, which is the finishing. In a Will of Goods, there must be an Exe∣cutor named; otherwise of Lands. A man may make one Executor or more simply, or conditionally for a time, or for parcel of his Chattels. If no Executor be named, then it still re∣taineth the name of last a Will, and shall be annexed to the Letters of Administration in regard of the Gift. Gavil kinde Lands may be devised by cu∣stome. Lands bolden In Socage tenure all is devisable Knights Service 2 parts 3 in writing. FEAR, fraud, and flattery, three unfit ac∣cidents to be at the making of a Will. A woman may make a Will of the goods of her husband, by his consent and license; by Word is sufficient, and of the goods she hath as Executor, without his consent; but she cannot give them unto him. A boy after his age of fourteen, and a Maid after her age of twelve may make a Will of their goods and Chattels by the Ci∣vil Law.
The will of the Donor shall be alwayes observed, if it be not impossible, or greatly contrary to the Law. A Devisor is intended Inops consilii, and the Law shall be his Counsell, and according to his intent appearing in his Will, shall supply the defect of his words. A Prerogative Will is five pound in ano∣ther Diocess. A man may not traverse the Probate of a Testament, or Letters of Administration di∣rectly, but he may say against the Testament that the Testator never made the party his Executor. CHAP. XLVI. DEVISES. A Devise ought to be good and effectu∣al at the time of the death of the Devisor. The Devisee may not enter into the terme, or take a Chattell, but by the deli∣very of the Executor. But he may sue for it in Court Christian. Into Frank-tenement, or inheritance he may enter. Devisees are Purchasees, as if a Lease for years be Willed to a man and his Heires, the Heire shall have it; for Heire is a name of purchase here.
A Reversion of Lands or Tenements will pass by the name of Lands and Tenements in a Devise. If a man devise all his Lands and Tene∣ments; a Lease for years doth not pass, where he hath Lands in Fee, and also a Lease there; otherwise it will. If a man devise all his goods, a Rent-charge which he had for years will pass, and all o∣ther his personall Chattells. And if a man give all his moveables to one, he shall have all his Horses, Cattell, pans, and personall chattells; and all his immoveables to another, he shall have all his Corn grow∣ing, and fruit on his Trees, and the chattells reall. A man may devise Lands or goods to an Infant in the mothers belly, or goods to the Church-wardens of D. There is great diversity where the property is devised, and when the occupation is devi∣sed: A man may devise that a man shall have the occupation of his Plate, or other chattells during his life, or for years, and if he die within the term, that it shall remain to M. A. and it is good, for the first hath but the oc∣cupation, and the other after him shall have the property. But if a chattell be given to one for life, the
remainder to another, the remainder is voyd. For a Grant or Devise of a Chattel for an houre, is good for ever; and the Devisee may dispose of it; but if he do not, the other shall have it. A man may Devise his Lands he holdeth in Lease, but not his Lease, under this condition; Provided, that if the Devisee die within the term then he shall have it. If a man Will his goods to his wife, and that after her decease, his Son and Heir shall have the House wherein they are; she shall have the house for term of her life, yet it is not devised unto her by express words. But it doth appear that his intent was so by the words. If a man willeth his Lands to his wife, til his Son commeth to the age of 21 yeers, and the woman taketh another husband, and dyeth, the husband shall have the Interest. By a Devise a man may have the Fee-simple without express words of Heirs, as if Lands be willed to a man for ever, or to have and to hold to him and to his assignes, &c. By Will, Lands may be intailed without the word, Body: as if Lands be given to a man, and to his heirs male, it doth make an estate tail. If a man Will that his Executors shall sell his Lands, the inheritance doth descend to
the Heir; yet the Executors may enter, and enfeoffe the Vendee. But if Lands be given to the Executor to sell, and they receive the profits thereof to their own use, and do not sell the same in reasonable time, the Heir may enter. An Executor may sell, if the other will not. If Lands be recover'd against Tenant for life or for years, by an action of Waste, or for∣mer title, he may not give his Corn. If the Cognizee have sown the Lands, and the Cognizor bring a scire: he may give the Corn sown. If a man Devise omnia bona & Cattalla, Hawks nor Hounds do not pass, nor the Deer in the Park, nor the Fish in the Ponds. CHAP. XLVII. EXECUTORS. AN Executor is he that is named and appointed by the Testator, to be his successor in his stead to enter, and to have his goods and chattels, to use Actions against his Debtors, and Legacies, so far as his goods and chattels will extend. Where two Executors are made, and one doth prove the Will, and the other doth re∣fuse,
notwithstanding he that refuseth may administer at his pleasure, and the other must name him in every action, for every duty due to the Testator, and his release shall be a good barr: If he do survive he may administer, and not the Executor of him that died; but otherwise if all had refused. If one prove the Will in the name of both, he that doth not administer shall not be charged. If the Executor do once any action that is proper to an Executor, as to receive the Testators debts, or to give acquittance for the same, &c. he may not refuse. But other acts of charity or humanity, he may do; as to dispose of the Testators goods about the Funerall, to feed his cattell least they perish, or to keep his goods least they be stoln, these things may every one do, without danger. When Executors do bring an action, it shal be in all their names, aswell of them that do refuse, as of other, But an action must be brought against him that doth administer only, and he which first cometh shall first answer. An Executor of an Executor, is Executor to the first Testator. And shall have an action of debt, accompt, &c. or trespass, as of the goods
of the first Testator carried away, and execu∣tion of Statutes and Recognizances, &c. St. 25. Ed. 5. The title and interest of an Executor, is by the Testament, and not by the Probate, but without shewing it, they may release the Probate. The Justices wil not allow them tosue actions. The Executor shall have the wardship of the Body and Lands of the Ward in Knights ser∣vice, but not in Soccage, and Leases for years, and rent charges for years, Statutes, Recog∣nizances, Bonds, Lands in Executions; Corn upon the ground, Gold, Silver, Plate, Jewels, Money, Debts, Cattell, and all other goods and Chattells of the Testator, if they be not devised, and may devise them; But if he do will omnia bona & Cattallasua, the goods of the Testator pass not, neither shall they be forfeited by the Executor. An Executor is chargeable for all duties of the Testator that are certain; but not for Trespass, nor for receipt of rents, nor for oc∣cupation of Lands, as Bailiffe or Guardian in Soccage, &c. For this is not any duty cer∣tain so farr as he shall have Assets; If the Executor do waste the goods of the Testator, he shall pay them of his own. An Executor shall not be charged, but
with such goods as come to his hands, but if a stranger take them out of his possession, they are assets in his hands. If an Executor take goods of another mans amongst the goods of the Testator, he shall be excused of the taking in Trespass. Duties by matter of record shal be satisfied before duties by specialty, and duties by specialty before charges, and Legacies before other duties. An Executor may pay a debt or credit of some kind, depending the writ, before notice of the action, but not after notice or issue joy∣ned. An Executor may pay debts with his own money, and retain so much of the Testators goods, but not Lands appointed to be sold. Any of these words, debere, solvere, recipere, borrowed, or any word that will prove a man a debtor or to have the money; If it be by Bill will charge the Executor, or Administra∣tor, but not the Heir, if he be not named. CHAP. XLVIII. ADNINISTRATORS. AN Administrator, is he to whom the Ordinary of the place where the in∣testate dwelt, committeth the Testa∣tors goods, Chattel, credits, and rights.
For wheresoever a man dieth intestate, ei∣ther for that he was so negligent he made no Testament, or made such an Executor as re∣fused to prove it, or otherwise is of no force; the Ordinary may commit the administrati∣on of his goods to the Widow, or next of kin, or to both, which he pleaseth, making request; and revoke it again at his pleasure. The Ordinary may assigne also a Tutor to the intestates children, to his sonnes untill twelve year. But so that it be not a prejudice to him that is the Guardian; and after those years, he or she may respectively choose their own Cu∣rators, and the Guardian may confirm them, if there be not good order taken by their fa∣thers Will. As if such a Tutor die, the Infant cannot have an Action of account against his Execu∣tor. The power and charge of an Administra∣tor is equall in every point to the power and charge of an Executor: a man may have an action of the case against the Executor or Administrator upon the assumption of the Testator, upon good consideration, or debt for Labourers wages, by the Statute. And if a man make an Infant his Executor, the Ordinary may commit the Execution of
the will to the Tutor of the Child, to the Childs behoof, until he be of the age of 17. years, and if he be granted for longer time, it is void. An Administrator dur ante minoritate, may do nothing to the prejudice of the Infant, he may not sell any of the goods of the deceased unless it be upon necessity, as for the pay∣ment of debts, or that they would perish; nor let a Lease for a longer time, then whilst he is Executor. An infant upon the true payment of a debt due to the Testator, may make an acquittance, and it shall be good. For a Child may better his estate but not make it worse. CHAP. XLIX. HEIR. IF a man die seised of any Lands, and do not dispose of them by his Will they do descend to his Heir, as aforesaid. And he shall have not onely the Glass, and Wainscot, but any other of such like things affixed to the Free-hold, or ground; as Tables, Dormant, Furnances, Fats in the Brew-house, or Dye-house; and the
Box or Chest wherein the Evidences are; the Hawks and the Hounds, the Doves in the Dove-house, the Fish in the Pond, and the Deer in the Parke, and such like. He shall be charged by specialty, for the debts of his Ancestour, so long as he hath as∣sets, if the Executor or Administrator have not sufficient. No Law nor Statute doth charge the Heir for the wrong, or trespass of his Father, but by express words. Widow. THe Widow shall have all her apparell, her bed, her copher, her chains, borders, and Jewels, by the honorable Custome of the Realm, except her Husband unkindly give a∣ny of them away; or be in debt, that it cannot be paid without her Bed, &c. yet she shal have her necessary apparell. What things are Arbitrable, and what not. THings, and Actions personall incertaine are Arbitrable, as Trespasse, taking away of a Ward, &c. But things certain are not arbitrable, but when the submission is by specialty, if they be not joyned with others incertain, as debt with trespass, &c.
Matters concerning the common-wealth; some are not arbitrable as criminall offences▪ felonies and such like, concerning the crime. In the submission, three things are to be regarded. First, that it be made in writing with the parties Covenants, or bonds subsequent and sufficient to binde them, their heires, Execu∣tors, and Assignes to performe the Award, which shal be thereupon made, that both the Arbitrators may know their power, and the parties revoke not their power. For all is void that is not contained in the Submission, or necessarily depending thereupon; And the Arbitrators labour lost, if they want means to compell the same to be executed. Secondly, that there be power given to them sufficient to do all things necessary for the ordering of the controversies, as to appoint times and places for their meetings, to exa∣mine and decide the matters committed, and to bring their parties with their proofs, evi∣dences, and witnesses thither together before them, and to punish the place defective, and to expound and correct such doubtfull sen∣tences, and questions, as may arise upon their Award, afterwards inconvenient to either parties, contrary to equity, and the Arbi∣trators good meaning; which inconveniencies
not before by them seene, at the making of the Award, Tempor is filia veritas. Thirdly, convenient time and place are to be limitted for the yeelding up their Award to the parties, or to their assignes. Six things to be regarded in an Arbitrement. 1. THat it be made according to the very submission, touching the things com∣mitted, and every other circumstance, 2 That it be a finall end of all controversies committed. 3 That it appoint either partie to give or doe unto the other something beneficiall in appearance at least. 4 That the performance be honest and possible. 5 That there be a mean how either part by the Law may attain unto that which is thereby awarded unto him. 6 That every partie have a part of the A∣ward delivered unto him. For if it faile in any of these points, then is the whole Arbitrament voyde, and of none effect: Examples there of. 1 AN Award that the parties shall obey the Arbitrament of A. M. is void, for power may not be assigned.
2 An Award that any of the parties shall be bound, or do any other Act by the advice of the Arbitrator, is not good except it be in the submission so, but that the parties shall be bound, or make assurance by the advise of Counsel, is good. 2 An Award, that the parties shall be non∣suited, is not good, because it is no final end, for the party may begin again: that the par∣ty do withdraw his sute, is good. If the submission be of divers things, and the Award onely of some of them, yet is the Award good for that part, as if the Submissi∣on be of all Actions real and personal onely, or if it be onely, de possessione. 3 If to submit themselves to the Arbitra∣ment of all trespasses, and it is awarded that the one shall make amends to the other, and nothing is awarded for the others benefit; this Award is void. So it were if one of them should go quite against the other, if the Submission were not by bond, for an Award must be final, obliga∣tory, and satisfactory to both parties. An Award, that either party shall release to the other all actions, and that because the one hath trespassed more then the other, he shall pay to the other first, is good. In debt or trespass of goods taken, that
the Defendant shall retain part, and the Plain∣tiffe to have the rest, is not good. 4 An Award, that one of the parties shall do an act to any Stranger, the act is void, if the parties be not bound. Or if it be that he shall cause a Stranger to enfeoffe, or be bound to the other partie, be∣cause he hath no means to compel the stran∣ger. 5 An Award is void, if it be neither exe∣cuted, nor any means by law for the executi∣on thereof, as if it should be awarded that one should pay the other 10 pounds, this is good, for he may recover the same by an action of debt. But if it were awarded, the one should deliver to the other an acre of Land, or do such like act Executory, it were void, if it be not delivered straight-way, or provision made by bond, or otherwise to compel the payment thereof, according to the Award, if the submission be not by specialty. 6 Indentures of Arbitrament must be made of so many parts, that every person may have a part. Arbitramentum aequum tribuit cuique suum. AN Award is commonly made by Lay∣men, and shall be taken according to their intent, and not in so precise a form as
Grants, or pleadings, but as verdicts, yet the substance of the matter ought to appear ei∣ther by express words, or by words equiva∣lent, or by those that do amount thereunto. But it were good that Awards were drawn up by some that is skilful, for the avoiding of Controversies, which otherwise may arise a∣bout the same. Agreement. AN agreement is made between the par∣ties themselvs; there must be a satisfacti∣on made to either party presently, or remedy for the recompence, or else it is but an indea∣vour to agree. Tender of money without payment, or a∣greement to pay money at a day to come, is not any satisfaction before the day be come, and the money be paid; it cannot be pleaded in Bar, in an action of Trespass. For that as the other partie hath no meanes to compell the other to pay the money: So he may refuse it at the day, if he will, otherwise in an Arbi∣trament; but money paid at a day, before the Action brought, is a good plea. FINIS.
A TREATISE OF PARTICULAR ESTATES. Written By Sir JOHN DODDRIDGE KNIGHT. LONDON, Printed, Anno. Dom. 1651.
A TREATISE OF PARTICULAR ESTATES. Particular ESTATES. A Particular Estate is such, as is derived from a general Estate, by separation of one from the other; As if a man seised in Fee simple of Lands, or Tene∣ments, doth thereof cheat by gift or grant an state Tayle, or by demise a Lease for life, or y estate for years, these are in the Donee, or easee. Particular Estates in possession derived nd separated from the Fee simple, in the De∣nor, or Leasor in Reversion.
Also if Lands be demised to A. for life, the remainder to B. and the Heires of his bo∣dy, the remainder to C. and his heires, the Estate for life limited to A. the Estate Tayle limited to B. are particular Estates derived ut supra, and separated in Interest from the Fee simple; the remainder given to C. albeit the same remainder doth depend upon those Particular Estates. And of Particular Estates, some are created by agreement between the Parties; and the particular Estates before specified: And some by act of Law; as the state in Tayle apres possibility de issue extinct, Estates by the courtesie of England, Dower and Wardship for albeit an estate in Dower, be not com∣pleat untill it be assigned, which oftentime is done by assent and agreement between parties; yet because the partie that so assign¦eth the same, is compellable so to do by cours of Law, that Estate is also said to be create by Law; also an Estate at will is a kinde of particular Estate, but yet not such as maket any Division of the Estate of the Lessor, is sei¦sed, for notwithstanding such an Estate, the Lessor is seized of the Land in this Deme¦sure as for Fee in possession, and not in Re¦version. Also an Estate at will is not such particular
Estate, whereupon a Remainder may de∣pend; But of all the Estates before mention∣ed, many fruitfull rules, and observations, are both generally, and particularly so lively set forth by the said Mr. Littleton in the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8. Chapters of his first Book, which is extant as wel in English as in French, whereunto I referr you. Possession. IT is further to be observed, that all Estates that have their being, are in Possession, Reversion, Re∣mainder, or in Right, but of all these, Possession is the Principall: there are two degrees of the first, and chiefest possession, in fait poss, in Law or Deed, is such as is before spoken of: And that is most proper to an Estate, which is present and immediate; but yet such possession of the im∣mediate Estate, if it be not greater then a tearm doth operate and enure to make the like possession of the Free-hold, or Reversion; when a man is said to have a Tearm, it is to be intended for years, when it is said, a man to have the Fee of Lands, it is also to be intended a Fee simple; Possession is that possession, which the Law it self casteth upon
a man before any Entry, or Pernancy of the profits: As if there be Father and Son, and the Father dieth seised of Lands in Fee, and the same do descend to the Sonne, as his next Heire in this case, before any entry, the same hath a possession in Law; so it is also of a Reversion exportant, or a Remainder dependant upon particular Estate, or life; in which case, if Tenant for life die, he in Reversion, or Remainder, before his Entry, hath only possession in Law. All manner of possessions that are not possessions in fait, are only possessions in Law; and it is to be ob∣served then, if a man have a greater Estate in Lands then for years, the proper phrase of speech is, that he is thereof seised; but if it be for years only, then he is thereof possessed: But yet nevertheless the Substantive (posses∣sion) is proper as well to the one as to the o∣ther. Reversion. A Reversion is properly an Estate which the Law reserveth to the Donor, Grantor, or Lessor, or such like, which he doth dispose par∣cel of his Estate, when he doth dispose less E∣state in Law then that whereof he was seised, at the time of such disposition: as if a man
seised of Lands in Fee, doth give the same to another; and the Heires of his body, or if he doth dismiss the same for life or years; in these cases the same reserveth the reversion thereof in Fee, to the Donor, or Lessor, and his Heires; because he departed not with his whole Estate, but onely with a particular E∣state, which is less then his Estate in Fee; and such Reversion is said to be expectance upon the particular Estate. Also if he that is but Tenant for life, for Land, and doth by Deed or paroll, give the same S. in Tayle, or for tearm of his life, which is a greater Estate then he may lawfully dispose; In this case the Law reserveth a Reversion in Fee, in such Donor, though he were formerly but Tenant for life: and the reason thereof is, for that by such unlawfull disposition, which by deed or word, cannot be without livery and seisin, he doth by wrong pluck out the right∣full state in Fee, from him that was thereof formerly seised in Reversion or Remainder, and thereof by a priority of time, gained in an instance, he was seised of a Fee simple, at the time of the executon thereof. But if a man seised of Lands in Fee simple, giveth the same to A. and his heirs, until B. do die with∣out heire of his body; in this case the Law reserveth no Reversion in the Donor, because
the state is disposed to A. is a Fee simple, deter∣minable, is in nature so great as the state, which the Donor had at the time of such gift, and consequently he departed thereby with al his state, and therby an apparent difference is be∣tween a gift made to A. and the heires of his own body, and a gift made to him and his heires, until B. die without heire of his body: for in the one case the Donor hath but an E∣state Tayle, and in the other a Fee simple de∣terminable, hath a possibility of Revertor: for if B. die without heire of his body, then whether A. be living or dead, shall revert to the Donor, but such possibility of Reversion, for he that hath but such a possibility, hath no Estate, nor hath he power to give his pos∣sibility; but in the other case, the Donor hath Estate in Fee; and therefore he hath power to dispose thereof at his pleasure. Remainder. A Remainder is a remnant of an estate disposed to another at the time of creation of such particular Estates, whereupon it doth depend, as if S. seised of lands in Fee, demiseth the same to B. for life, the remainder to C. and the heirs of his body, the remainder to D. and his heirs; In this
case I. S. hath a particular Estate of the Les∣sor, is then also disposed to C. and D. ut su∣pra, whereby B. hath an Estate for life, C. a Remainder in Tail, and D. a Remainder in Fee, depending in order upon the particular Estate in possession; and in every Remain∣der five things are requisite. First, That it depend upon some particular Estate. Secondly, That it pass out of the Grantor, Donor, or Lessor, at the time of the creation of the particular Estate, whereon it must de∣pend. Thirdly, That it veste during the particular Estate, or at the instant time of the determi∣nation thereof. Fourthly, That when the particular Estate is created, there be a Remnant of an Estate left to the Donor, to be given by way of Re∣mainder. Fifthly, That the person or body to whom the Remainder is limitted, be either capable at the time of limitation thereof, or else in potentia propinqua, to be thereof capable, during the particular Estate; If Lands be given to I. S. and his Heirs, the Remainder for default of such Heir to I. D. and his Heirs, that Remainder is void, because it doth not depend upon any particular Estate; But if
Lands be given to I. D. the life of I. D. the Remainder to I. B. his Remainder is good, for it is not limited to depend upon a Fee∣simple, but upon a particular Estate; which is onely called an Estate for life of I. B. descen∣dable: if Lands be given to B. for 11. years, if C. do so long live, the Remainder, after the death of C. to D. in Fee, this Remain∣der is void, for in this case it cannot pass out of the Lessor at the time of the creation of the particular Estate for years: but if a Lease be made to B. for life, the Remainder to the Heires of C. (who is then living) this Remainder is good, upon a contingency, that if C. dye in the life of B. for that Re∣mainder may well pass out of the Leassor presently without be yaunce, without any inconveniency, because onely the inheritance separated from the Free-hold, is in abeyance: if Lands be given for life, with a Remainder to the right Heirs of I. S. and the Tenant for life dyeth in the life of I. S. this Remainder is void, because it died not vest or settled, ei∣ther during the particular Estate, or at the time of the determination thereof, for un∣til, I. S. die, no person is thereof capable, by the name of the Heir. But if Lands be given to I. S. for terme of his life, the Remainder to his right Heir,
(in the singular number) and the Heirs of his body, and after I. S. hath issue a Son and dyeth, that is a good Remainder, and the Son hath thereby an Estate Tail, for although it were unpossible that such Re∣mainder should vest during the particular E∣state; because during his life, none could be his Heir; yet it might be and did vest at the instant of his death, which was at the time of his determination of the particular E∣state. Concerning the fourth thing, if a man sei∣sed of Lands in Fee, granteth out of the same a Rent, or Common to Pasture, or such like things, which before the grant had no being, to I. S. for terme of life, the Remainder to I. D., in Fee, this Remainder is void, because of this thing Granted, there was no Remnant in the grant to dispose. And because some heretofore have been of opinion, that albeit the same cannot take no effect, as another Grant of a new Rent or Common. Ʋtres magis valeat quam operat. This is a rule in Law, that a thing enjoyed in a superior degree, shall not pass under the name of a thing, in any inferior degree; and therefore if Lands be given unto two persons, and unto the Heirs of one of them, unto the Husband and Wife, and Heir of the Hus∣band;
and he that hath the Estate of Inheri∣tance, granteth the Version of the same Land to another in Fee, such Grant is void, be∣cause the Grantor was thereof seised in a su∣periour degree, viz. in Possession, and not in Reversion, as appeareth 22. Ed. 4. fol. 2 & 13. Ed. 3. Brook. title of Grants, 137. And concerning the first and last thing, if a Lease be made of Land, for term of life, the Remainder to the Major and Commonalty of D. whereas there is no such Corporation therein, being this Remainder is meerly void, albeit the Kings Majesty by his Letters Pattents, do create such Corporations, du∣ring the particular Estate; for at the time of such grant, the Remainder was void, be∣cause then there was no such body corporate thereof capable, or potentia propinqua to be created and made capable thereof, during the particular Estate, but the possibility thereof, was then forraign and probably intended. The like law is, if a remainder be limited to I. the Son of T. S. who had then no Son, and afterwards during the particular Estate, a Son is born who is named John, yet this Remainder is void; for at the time of such a Grant, as was not to be probably in tender, that T. S. should have any Son of that name.
Also before the dissolution of Abbies; if a Lease of Land were made to I. S. for life, the Remainder to one that then was a Monk, such Remainder was void, for the cause be∣fore alledged, albeit we were deraigned du∣ring the particular Estate. But if such Re∣mainder had been limited to the first begot∣ten Son of I. S. it had been good, and should accordingly have vested in such a Son afterwards born, during the particular E∣state. Rights. A Right in Land, is either cloa∣thed or naked; a Right cloa∣thed, is when it is wrapped in a possession, Reversion, or Remainder; a naked Right, which is also most commonly called a Right, is when the same is separated from the posses∣sion or Remainder, by dissessin, discontinu∣ance, or the devesting, and separating of the possession; as for example, if a Lease of Land be made for life to I. S. the Remainder to I. D. in Fee, in this case I. S. hath a Right cloathed with a Remainder. But if a Stranger that hath no Right or Title, doth in the same case enter into the Land by wrong, and put I. S. out of
possession, such entry by wrong is called a disseisin; and therefore the possession is moved from the Right by reason thereof, the Disseisor, is seised of the Land, and I. D. hath also the like naked cloathing to the Re∣mainder, by such dissessin, is likewise devested, and plucked out of him, cannot be revested in him, during the Right of such particular E∣state, unless the possession of the particular Tenement but therewith revested; which must be by this entry or recovery by action; and by such entry of the particular Tene∣ment, or by his Recovery, with execution, the Remainder shal be invested, as well as the particular Estate; and so there is a Right in goods and chattels, as well as Lands, Tene∣ments, and Hereditaments, which is also cloathed with a possession, so long as the Rightful proprietor hath the same, but if an∣other doth take them from him by wrong, he now hath onely a naked Right to the same, which cannot be by him granted, for the cause before alledged, but yet he may release his Right there unto him that is thereof pos∣sessed; for the same reason that is before al∣ledged, if a release of Right, happen to be forfeited to the King, his Highness may grant the same by his Prerogative. FINIS.
CERTAIN OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING A DEED OF FEOFFAMENT. By T. H. Gent. Cujus posse est velle. LONDON, Printed, Anno Dom. 1651.
CERTAIN OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING A DEED OF FEOFFAMENT. The Premisses. YOU may finde in the Premisses, First, The direct nomination, as well of the Feoffor, as of the Feoffee, together with their places of residence, habitation or dwelling, and their qualities, estates, addi∣tions, or conditions. Secondly, The certain
expressement and setting down of the Lands conveyed. In Com. Norff.) Comitatus dicitur a comitando, of accompanying together, for ge∣nerally at Assises and Sessions, those of that County where such Assises or Sessions are kept use to be impannelled upon Juries, &c. for trial of issue taken upon the fact be∣twixt party and party, and not those in ano∣ther County; and it is a common presumption, that al persons within their Counties take no∣tice of such things as are there publickly don, hereupon it hapneth, that where Lands, &c. lie in divers Counties, if they be conveyed by Feoffament, &c. livery of seisin, must be made in every County, where any parcel of the lands, &c. do lie. Otherwise it is of two par∣cels of land in one and the same County. The name County, is in understanding al one with Shire, which is so called from dividing, and either of them contain a certain portion of the Realme, which is parted into Counties, or Shires, for the better government thereof, and the more easie administration of Justice; hence it cometh to pass, that there is no parcel of this Kingdome, which lieth not within the circuit or precinct of some Coun∣ty or Shire. There are reckoned in England, 41, Counties or shires, and in Wales 12. The
County of Northfolke lying Northward, is so called, in opposition to Suffolke, which lyeth towards the South, each one in respect of o∣ther gaineth his name. The addition given to the Feoffor, you may perceive to be Yeoman, the Etymology wher∣of, Mr. Verstegan fetcheth from Gemen, a word anciently used amongst the Teutonicks, which as my Authour saith, signifyeth vulgar or common, and so the letter G. by corrup∣tion being turned into the letter Y. instead of Gemen, we say and read Yemen, or Yeomen. Others, (how probably I dare not affirm) de∣rive it by contraction from these two words, viz. Young Men. Famous Master Cambden, in his Britannia, after he hath reckoned up sundry degrees, both of Nobility, and Gen∣try, ranketh Yeomen in order next Gentle∣men, naming them Ingenuous, in which sence I apprehend Yeomen to be mentioned in a cer∣tain Statute made 16 R. 2. and in divers other Statutes. And although the derivations of words be conveniently required in the Law, & in every liberal Science, for ignoratis termi∣ignoratur & ars, yet to use the expressi∣on of a learned Divine, though spoken in another case Melius est dubitare de occultis quam litigare de incertis: So I must leave you to your own conceit, concerning the o∣rigi∣nall
of the word Yeoman, having onely set you down one or two opinions about it: however, I must not forget what Sir Thomas Smith saith in his Repub. Anglorum, who ve∣ry truely and properly calleth him a Yeoman whom the Laws of England call legalem ho∣minem, that is to say a free man born, and M. Lambert in his Eirenarcha, will excellently inform you who are, and who are not pro∣bi & legales homines. There is no speciall, but only a generall consideration expressed in the Feoffament, neither of which (as I conceive) is in such case absolutely materiall (though I may say formall) in regard of the notoriety of deeds of Feoffament, &c. for livery and seisin (as shall be said afterwards) is essentially requi∣red to make them perfect, which cannot be without the knowledge of others, besides the parties themselves, and a Feoffament doth thereby always import a free and willing consent, otherwise peradventure it might have happened in a Bargain and sale, before 27. H. 8. cap. 16. for the better illustration whereof, take this example: You and another man agree together, theat you shall give him a certaine summe of money, for a parcell of Land, and that he shall make you an assu∣rance of it, you pay him the money, but he
maketh you no assurance; in this case al∣though the state of the Land be still in him▪ nevertheless, the equity in conscientia boni viri, is with you, which equity is called the use, for which until the 27. H. 8. cap. 10. there was no remedy (as saith Sir Francis Bacon) and that very truly, except in the Court of Chancery, but the same Statute conjoyneth and annexeth the Land and the use together, so you by this means for the consideration have the Land it self, without any fur∣ther Conveyance, which is called a bar∣gain and sale. But those grave Senators, and worthy States men who made the said Act of the 2. H. 8. cap. 10. for the transferring of uses into possession, wisely fore-seeing that it would be very inconvenient and prejudicious, nay, mischevous, that mens possessions should upon such a sodain, by the payment of a lit∣tle money be transported from them, (and perhaps in a Tavern or Ale-house, and upon straynable advantages) did discreetly pro∣vide in the same Parliament, the said Act of 27. H. 8. cap. 16. that Lands, &c. upon the payment of money as aforesaid, should not pass without a Deed indented and inrolled, as by the purport of the same Act may ap∣pear. Now seeing that before the said Act of 27 H. 8. c. 16. Lands might pass by bargain
and sale upon consideration, without deed in∣dented and inrolled, and might not pass▪ without consideration in such manner, there∣fore I have heard Lawyers say that considera∣tion is still required in a bargain and sale, though it be by deed indented and inrolled, according to the same Statute. Sure I am that regularly in a deed of Feoffament, it is not so as formerly is declared, and for the reason before expressed. Dedisse. The word dedi (by force of an act of Par∣liament made 4. Ed. 1. c. 4. commonly called the Statute de Bigamis,) implyeth a warran∣ty to the Feoffee▪ and his Heires during the life of the Feoffor, whereupon Fitz Herbert in his Natura brevium. fo. 134. h. puts a case to this effect, viz. If a man give Lands to one in Fee, by Deed, by the words dedi▪ concessi, &c. hereby he shal be bound to warrant the Lands of the Feoffee, by vertue of those words, and if the Feoffee be impleaded he shall have his writ of Warrant' Chart. against the Feoffor, by reason of the words Dedi, con∣cessi, &c. but not against his Heire, for the Heire shal not be bound to Warranty, except the Father binde himself and his Heires to Warranty, &c. by express words in the deed, I know some alledg, that because as
well the Statute, as Fitzh. mention not one∣ly dedi. but concessi also, therefore the one without the other, implyeth no warranty▪ to whom it may be answered that the Statute it self doth plainly prove against them, for the conclusion thereof hath these words, ipse tamen feoffator invita sua ratione proprii do∣ni sui tenetur warrantizare; and also the Testimony of Sir Edward Coke, may be pro∣duced herein, who affirmeth that the Statute of Bigamis, anno. 14. Eliz. in the Court of Common Pleas was expounded, as above is mentioned, namely that dedi did imply the Warranty, and Mr. Perkins, cap. 2. saith that dedi in a deed of Feoffament, compre∣hendeth in it a Warranty, against the Feoffor, and so doth not the word Concessi. Concessisse. I conceive the word concessi in Feoffaments and Grants (the implyed warranty excepted which dedi creates) to be of the same effect with dedi; & also with confirmavi, especially in some cases: to which purpose hear what Lit∣tleton speaketh in his Chapter of Discontinu∣ance, Also (saith he) in some case this verbe dedi, or this verbe concessi, hath the same effect in substance, and shal enure to the same intent, as the verbe confirmavi; as if I be disseised of a carve of Land, and I make such
a deed Sciant presentes, &c. quod dedi to the disseisor, &c. or quod concessi, to the said dis∣seisor the said carve, &c. and I deliver onely the deed to him, without any livery of seisin of the Land, this is a good confirmation, and as strong in Law, as if there had been in the Deed this verb confirmavi, &c. Liberasse. The word Liberavi, I take to be of the same nature with Tradidi, which I have of∣ten seen in Feoffaments, whereof it is remar∣kable, that Hephron the Hittite, when he as∣sured the field of Machpelah to Abraham, Gen. 32. 11. used the word trado: agrum trado tibi, that is, to Abraham, as Hieromes Translation reads it. Feoffasse. This word cometh from feudum or feo∣dum, which signifieth Fee, and is alwayes, or for the most part used in Feoffaments, as participating of the same nature. Confirmasse. Concerning the word confirmo, somewhat may be gathered from what hath been spo∣ken about the Verb concessisse, yet I cannot forget how Hierome renders the expresment of the said assurance of the said field of Mach∣pelah to Abraham for a possession, in these words, co. firmatus est ager. &c. Gen. 23. 17.
And now I come to the second thing consi∣derable in the premisses, namely, the Feoffee whose addition is generoso. Generoso. Generosus, in English we read Gentleman, which some derive from the two French words, Gentil-houme, denoting such a one as is made known by his birth, stock, and race. Sir Tho. Smith calleth all those Gentlemen that are above the degree of Yeomen, whence it may be concluded, that every Noble-man may be rightly termed a Gentleman, sed non vid versd. Master Cowel conceiveth the rea∣son of the appellation to grow, because they observe Gentilitatem suam, the propagation of their blood, by giving or bearing of armes, wherby they are differenced from others, and shew from what Family they are descended. Haeredi & assignatis suis Some will have an Heir so called, quia haeret in haereditate, or quia haeret in se haereditas, but to let such conceits of witty invention pass, it is certain, that an Heir is so called from the Latin word Haeres. Littleton in his Chap. of Fee-simple saith, that these words (his Heirs) onely make the estate of inheritance in all Feoffaments,
and Grants, &c. Sure then it is necessary for him that purchaseth Lands, &c. in Fee sim∣ple, to have the Feoffament run to himself & haeredibus suis, for if it run onely to him∣self, & assignatis suis, although livery and seisin be made accordingly, and agreeable to the deed; yet thereby onely an estate for life shall pass, because there wanteth words of Inheritance: and without livery and seisin in the case aforesaid, onely an Estate at Will shall pass. And the reason why the Law is so strict in this thing (as in many others) for to prescribe and appoint such certain words to create and make an estate of inheritance, is, as Master Plowden saith in his Commentaries, for the eschewing and avoiding of incertain∣ty, the very Fountain and spring, from whence floweth all manner of confusion and disorder, which the Law utterly contemneth and abhorreth; what herein hath been said, is to be apprehended and understood of per∣sons in, and according to their natural capa∣cities. Yet perhaps an estate of inheritance may sometime pass in a Deed of Feoffament, by words, which may have reference, and will relate to a certainty, for Certum-est quod certum reddi potest: as for example, You En∣feoffe me and my Heirs of a certain piece of Land, to hold to me, & my Heirs, &c. and I re∣enfeoffe
you, in as large, ample, and benefici∣all manner, as you enfeoffed me: in this case (they say) you have a Fee simple for the rea∣son above expressed. So I come next to see what observations the Deed of Feoffament further affordeth. Totam ill. pec. tre cont. Very necessary and convenient it is in deeds of Feoffament, &c. to have the Lands, &c. thereby intended to be conveyed, certainely and expressely to be set downe, aswell how much by estimation in quantity, they doe containe, as the quality of the same whether Meadow, Pasture, &c. being the species of Land, which is the genus, and the place where, and manner how they exist and lye, the better to shunne and avoid doubt, and ambiguity, which oftentimes stirre up occasions of un∣kind suites and contentions betwixt party and party, I know that Grammarians rea∣ding the word peciam, will be ready to smile, and alledge, that it cannot defend it selfe in bello Grammaticali, which I easily confesse; but what then what can they inferre from hence? will they therefore utterly condemne the use thereof? me thinkes they should not, but might give Lawyers leave to speakin their owne Dialect. But what, if some take excepti∣ons at this word, having occasion to meete
with it here, what would they do, should they read the volums of the Law, where in∣stead of bellum, they shall find guerra, instead of Sylva they shall sind boscus, and subboscus, with a thousand the like? Surely (as saith Erasmus) they might commend or else con∣demn what they could not understand, or happily understanding, might admire from whence such uncouth words should proceed: for their better information (if I thought they would thank me for my labour) I could tell them that because the Saxons, Danes, and Normans, have all had some hand, or at least a finger in our lawes, therefore through the commixtion of their several Languages, it comes to pass that such difficult termes, and harsh Latin words (if I may so call them) are frequenly obvious in the books and wri∣tings of the Law. And indeed I see no reason why any man should object or cavil against the usage of such words, though they be not classical, seeing that aswel in the Art of Lo∣gick, as in Philosophy, there are found ma∣ny words, which they call Vocabulaartis, vo∣cables of Art, which can no better stand, ac∣cording to the strict rules of Grammar, then the ancient words of Law which cannot be changed without much inconvenience.
Acra. Acra, in English an Acre, seemeth to come from the Latin word ager; an acre is taken to be a quantity of Land containing 40 perches in length and 4 in breadth. Master Crompton in his Jurisdiction of Courts saith that a Perch is in some places more, and in some places less, according to the different usages in different Countries, and so then it must needs be of an Acre. But ordinarily, or for the most part, a Perch is accounted, and esteemed to contain 16 foot and an half in length. I take it to be the same with that measure which we call a Rodde or Pole. A Perch in Law-latin, is called pertica, or perti∣cata. See the Ordinance made for measuring of Land, anno 34. Ed. 3. in Pulton's abr. titl. Weights and Measures. Quaren. Quarentena, in English a Furlong, or Fur∣row long: Firlingus, or firlingum is the same, it hath been sometime accepted and taken for the eighth part of a mile, anno 35. El. c. 6. and I have read that Firlingus, or ferlingus ter∣rae continet 32. acras. The Latins call it Stadium.
Abbutt. Abbutto is a verbe used by Lawyers, to shew how the heads of Lands do lie, and upon what other Lands or places, denoting for the more certainty, what Lands, &c. are adjacent about the Lands, &c. abbuttelled. And now that I may speak once for all, in regard that Lawyers do use to abbreviate their words in writing, the reason is not as some ignorant∣ly have supposed, because they cannot ex∣press their terminations and endings, as they ought to be, but because of the multiplicity of business which they are to go through, oftentimes requiring very suddain dispatch. Yet I could wish that the custome of short writing alicui scriptori non esset dispendium, but I fear me too many hereby take occasion to be wilfully ignorant, which otherwise per∣adventure they would not do. Militis. Miles, amongst the Latins, signifieth a souldier, and in this place, and the like, Miles is to be Englished a Knight, which (as Master Cambden noteth) is derived from the Saxon Gnite, or Cnight. The Heraldes will enform you of divers and sundry orders of Knights, if you please to consult with them,
or their writings thereabouts. A Knight at this day is, and anciently hath been, repu∣ted and taken for one, who for his valour, and Prowess, or other service for the good of the Common-wealth performed, hath by the Kings Majesty, or his sufficient Deputy, on that behalf, been as it were lifted up on high, advanced above or separated from the common sort of Gentlemen: The Romans called Knights Celeres, and sometimes Equi∣tes from the performance of their service up∣on horse-back, and amongst them there was an order of Gentility, stiled Ordo Equestris, but distinguished from those they called Cele∣res, as several Roman Histories do plainly te∣stifie. The Spaniards call them Cavalleroes. The French men Chivaliers. And the Ger∣manes Rieters, all which appellations evident∣ly enough appear to proceed from the Horse, which may be some restimony of the manner of the execution of their warlike exercises. And surely it is a very commendable policy in States to dignifie well deserving persons with honorable Titles; that others may thereby be stirred up to enterprize, and undertake Hero∣ick Acts, and encouraged to the imitation of worthy and renowned vertues.
Armig. Armiger, in English signifieth Esquire, from the French Escuier, and perhaps an E∣squire may be called Armiger quasi arma ge∣rens, from his bearing of armes. Ancient Writers, and Chronologers, make mention of some who were called Armigeri, whose of∣fice was to carry the shield of some Noble∣man. Master Cambden cals them Scutiferi. which seems to import as much, and homi∣nes ad arma dicti: they are esteemed and ac∣counted of amongst us next in Order to Knights. Clerici. Clericus, in English we read Clerke. It hath with us two sundry kindes of acceptations. In the first sense it noteth such a one, who by his practise and course of life doth exercise his pen in any the Kings Majesties Courts, or elsewhere, making it his calling or profession: hereupon you shal find in the current of Law, mention made of divers Clerkes; as for ex∣ample, The Clerke of the Crown: The Clerke of Assise: The Clerke of the Warrrants: The Clerke of the Market: The Clerke of the Peace, with many others. In the second sense it denoteth such a one as belongeth to,
and is imployed about the Ministry of the Church, that being his function: in which signification it is to be taken in this place, and in the like; for I, for my part, did never find Clerk in the first sense appropriated to any, as an addition simply. We have the use of the word Clericus, from Clerus, or Clerecu∣tus, signifying the Clergy, that is to say, the whole number of those, which properly so called, or rather strictly, are de Clero domi∣ni, i. e. Hereditate sive sorte domini, for Cle∣rus cometh from , a Greekword, sig∣nifying the same with sors in Latine; name∣ly, a lot or portion. The Habendum. Habend'. THe Office of the Habendum, is to name again the Feoffee, and to limit the cer∣tainty of the estate, and it may and doth sometimes qualifie the generall implication of the estate, which by construction and in∣tendment of Law passeth in the premisses: for an example whereof see Bucklers case in the second Book of Sir Ed. Cokes Reports, and Throgmortons case, in Plowdens Commenta∣ries. It is to be noted, that the premisses may be inlarged by the Habendum, but not abridg∣ed,
as it plainly appeareth, aswell in the said case of Throgmorton, as in Worteslies case re∣ported also by Master Plowden, and I have read (as my collections tell me) that it is re∣quired of the habendum, to include the pre∣misses. Moreover, the habendum, (as W. N. Esquire, hath it in the treatise of the grounds and maximes of the Law) must not be repug∣nant to the premisses, for if it be, it is void, and the Deed will take effect by the Premis∣ses, which is very worthy of Observation. The Tenendum. Tenend'. THe Tenendum, before the Statute of Quia emptores terrarum, made 18. Ed. 1. was usually de Feoffatoribus & haeredi∣bus suis & non de capitalibus dominis feodo∣rum, &c. viz. of the Feoffors, and their Heires, and not of the chief Lords of the Fee, &c. whereby there hapned divers in∣conveniences unto Lords, as the losing of their Escheats, or forfeitures and other rights belonging to them by reason of their Seigni∣ories, which as the same Statute expresseth it, durum & difficile videbatur, &c. whereup∣on it was granted, provided and enacted quod de caetero liceat unicuique libero homini
terras sitas seu tenementa sua, seu partem in∣de ad voluntatem suam vendere, ita tamen quod feoffatus teneat terram illam seu tene∣mentum illud de capitali domino feodi illius per eadem servitia & consuetudines per quae feoffator suus illa prius de eo tenuit. Q' estat' fuit fait (as saith one) pur l'advantage de Senior', which statue was made for the ad∣vantage of Lords, and indeed I easily believe it. Now it is evident from that which hath been declared out of the said Statute, that at this day the tenendum, where the Fee sim∣ple passeth, must be of the chief Lords of the Fee, &c. for no man since the said Sta∣tute could convey Lands in Fee, to hold of himself, out of which rule the King only (I think) may be excepted, and 'tis not in si∣lence to be passed over, that where Lands, &c. are conveyed in Fee, though there be no tenendum at all mentioned, yet the Feoffee shall hold the same in such manner as the Feoffor held before, quia fortis est legis ope∣ratio: the Statute so determines. The clause of warranty. Et ego & haeredes mei, &c. warrantizabi∣mus, &c. defendemus, &c. WArrantizo, is a verb used in the Law, and onely appropriated to make a
Warranty. Littleton in his chapt. of Warranty saith, Que cest parol, &c. that this word War∣rantizo, maketh the Warranty, and is the cause of Warranty, and no other word in our law, and the argument to prove his asser∣tion, is produced from the form and words u∣sed in a fine, as if he should say, Because the word defendo, is not contained in fines to create a Warranty, but the word warrantizo onely, ergo, &c. which argument deduced and drawn à majori ad minus, is very forcible, for the greater being inabled, needs must the les∣ser be also inabled: Omne majus in se continet quod minus est, & quod in majori non valet, nec valet in minori. But certainly Littleton is to be understood only of an express warranty indeed, and of a warranty annexed to Lands, for there may be, and are other words, which will extend and inure sufficiently to warrant chattels, &c. and which will imply a warran∣ty in Law, as dedi, &c. and excambium (as I have heard say) implyeth a warranty in Law, which from Glanvil's vel in excambi∣um, or escambium datione lib. 3. cap. 1. may receive some confirmation: And Littleton in his Chapter of parceners, teacheth that partition implyeth a warranty in Law, &c. And lest some may here say, that defendemus stands for a cypher, I will tell them what
Bracton declareth of it, speaking about a war∣ranty in deed, from the Feoffor and his heirs, whose words are these: per hoc autem quod di∣cit (scilicet Feoffator) defendemus, obligatse & haeredes suos ad defendendum fi quis velit ser∣vitutem ponere rei datae contra formam dona∣tionis, &c. Lawyers in their Books make mention of three kindes of Warranties, viz. Warranty lineall, Warranty collaterall, and Warranty which commences by disseisin. The first is when one by Deed bindeth both him∣self and his heires to Warranty, and after death, this warranty discendeth to and upon his Heire. The second is in a transverse, or o∣verthwart line, so that the party upon whom the warranty descendeth, cannot convey the title which he hath in the Land, from him that was the maker of the Warranty. The third and last is, where a man unlawfully en∣treth upon the Freehold of another, thereof disseising him, and conveyeth it with a war∣ranty, but this last cannot barr at all. Of these, you may read plentifull and excellent matter and examples in Littletons Chapter of Warranty, and Sir Ed. Coke, learnedly com∣menting upon him, to whom for further il∣lustration hereof, I referr you, as also unto Master Cowels interpretation of words in the title Warranty, who there remembreth divers
things very worthy observation concerning it. Before I come to the fifth part of the Deed of Feoffament, give me leave to observe that a Warranty alwayes descendeth to the Heire at the Common Law, and followeth the E∣state (as the shadow the substance) and whensoever the Estate may, the Warranty may also be defeated, and every Warranty (as saith Sir Ed. Coke) which descends, doth descend to him that is Heire to him which made the Warranty, by the Common-Law. And moreover it is to be noted, as may be gathered from what hath been formerly said, that an Heire shal not be bound to an express Warranty, but when the Ancestor was bound by the same Warranty, for if the Ancestor were never bound, the Heire shall never be charged. And I remember I have read a case in Br. abr. 35. H. 8. pl. 266. to this purpose. Si home dit en son garrantie, Et ego tenementa praedicta cum pertinentiis praefato A. B. le donee warrantizabo, & ne dit, ego & haeredes mei, il mesme garrantera, mes son heire nest tenus de garranter, pur ceo que (Heires) ne sont expresse en le garran∣ty. B. garr. 50. So I will forbeare to speake any further herein, being a very intricate and abstruse kinde of learning, requiring the pen of a most cunning and experienced Law∣yer
and now I address my self to the fifth orderly, or formall part of the Deed of Fe∣offament The clause of in cujus, &c. In cujus rei testimonium. THis clause is added as a preparatory di∣rection to the sealing of the Deed, for sealing is essentially required to the perfection thereof, because it doth plainly shew the Fe∣offors consent to, and approbation of what therein is contained, hereupon it will not be much devious or out of the way, to make some mention of those fashions, which in the man∣ner of sealing, and subscribing of deeds, have been anciently used by our Ancestors: Some report that the Saxons in their time, before the Conquest, used to subscribe their names to their Deeds, adding the signe of the crosse, and setting down in the end, the names of cer∣tain witnesses, without any kinde of sealing at all. But when the Normans came in, as men loving their owne Country guises, they per petit & petit changed that custome (as also many others) which they found here, and In∣gulphus who was made Abbot of Croyland, in an. dom. 1075. seemeth to confirme this opi∣nion in these words: Normanni cheirographo∣rum confectionem cum crucibus aureis, &
aliis signaculis sacris in Anglia firmari soli∣tam, in cera impressa mutant. Yet I have read of a sealed Charter in England before the Conquest, namely that of St. Ed. made to the Abby of Westminster: yet surely this doth not altogether repugne that which hath been for∣merly said, for I have seen in Master Fabians Chronicle, and elsewhere that Saint Ed. was educated in Normandy, and tis not unlikely but he might in some things incline to their fashions. The French-men have a proverbe, Rome n'a este bastie tout en un jour; and we in England use the same, namely Rome was not built in one day: So it cannot be conceived that the Normans in an Instnat did alter the Saxon custome wholly in this particular, but that it did change by degrees, and perhaps at the first, the King and some nigh unto, and about him did use the impression of a Seale, which I am somewhat perswaded to beleeve, from a certain story which I have heard, con∣cerning Richard de Lucy, chief Justice of En∣gland, who in the time of H. 2. is said to have chidden an ordinary man, because he had sealed a Deed with a private Seal Quant ceo∣pertaine al Roy & Nobility solement. In the dayes of Edward the third, sealing and Seales were very usuall amongst all men, for proofe whereof I need not produce any other testi∣mony,
but the Deeds themselves, whereof al∣most every man hath some. But I must re∣member that Sir Ed. Coke, in the first part of his Institutes, fo. 7. a. seemeth to overthrow the former opinions about the first using of Seales in England, The sealing of Charters and Deeds, (saith he) is much more ancient then some have imagined, for the Charter of King Edwin brother of King Edgar, bearing date an. dom. 956. made of the Land called Jecklea, in the Isle of Ely, was not onely sea∣led with his owne seale (which appeareth by these words) Ego Edwinus gratia Dei totius Britannicae telluris Rex meum donum proprio figillo confirmavi, but also the Bishop of Win∣chester put to his seal, Ego Aelfwinus Winton' Ecclesiae divinus speculator proprium sigillum impressi. And the Charter of King Offa, where∣by he gave the Peter-pence, doth yet remain under Seal. The either of which two Char∣ters, are much more ancient then that of Saint Edw. before mentioned, yet happily there may be some reason probably affirmed why as well King Edwin and the Bishop of Winchester, as Offa, who was King of Mereia about the yeare 788. did annex their Seales to their Charters, which no King of England or Nobleman did before or after them, (ex∣cept Saint Ed.) untill the comming in of the
Conquerour, that ever I could learne, heare, or read of, in any Authour. Neverthelesse, I must of necessity leave the search of such reason to others better studyed in the Com∣mentations and alterations of persons, times, and customes then I my selfe, however I never heard any one deny, but that the frequent use of sealing Deeds did commence in the time of Ed. 3. and was not ordinarily used a∣mongst private men untill then, as hath been formerly touched. Of the Date. Dat'. IN this clause the Stile of the King at large, the yeare of his Reigne, and the yeare of our Lord God, according to the computati∣on and account of the Church of England, together with the day of the moneth are ex∣pressed. In former times Deeds were often made without date, and that of purpose, that they might be alledged within the time of prescription, as Sir Ed. Coke, in his said Booke of Institutes, fo. 6. very worthily observes, and moreover that the date of Deeds, was com∣monly added in the Reigne of Ed. 2 and Ed.
3. and so ever since, to whom I refer you, who in the place last quoted, hath very ex∣cellent matter and observations thereabouts. And thus to perform what I promised, I will speak a word or two concerning Livery of Seisin, and so conclude. Livery of Seisin. LIvery of Seisin is a ceremony in Law, used in the conveyance of an Estate of Free∣hold at the least in Lands and other things corporeal: but in a Lease for years, at Will, &c. Livery of Seisin is not required, it being onely a Chattel and no Free-hold. By Li∣very of Seisin, the Feoffor doth declare his willingness to part with that whereof he makes the Livery, and the Feoffees accep∣tance thereof is thereby made known and manifest. The Author of the new Termes of the Law, saith that it was invented as an open and notorious thing, by means where∣of the Common people might have know∣ledge of the passing or alteration of Estates from man to man, that thereby they might be the better able to try in whom the right and possession of Land's and Tenements were
if they should be impanelled on Juries, or o∣therwise have to do concerning the same. The usual and common manner in these daies of delivering of Seisin, I know to be so frequent, that of purpose I will omit it: But I pray you note with me before I make an end, that Livery of Sesin is of 2 sorts, viz. Livery of Seisin in Deed, and Livery of Seisin in Law, which is sometimes termed livery of Seisin within the veiw. Livery of Seisin with∣in the veiw cannot be good or effectual, ex∣cept the Feoffee doth enter into the Lands, &c. whereof the Livery of Seisin was made unto him in the life time of the Feoffor; & it is not to be passed over in silence, that a Livery in Law may sometimes be perfected by an en∣try in Law, as if a man maketh a deed of Fe∣offament, and delivers Seisin within the view, the Feoffee dares not enter for fear of death, but claimes the same, this shall vest the Free∣hold and inheritance in him, to which effect you may see the opinion of certain Justices, 38. Assis. Pl. 23. upon a verdict of Assise in the County of Dorc. And I conceive that this vesting of a new Estate, in the said case in the Feoffee, making his claim were he dares not enter, stands upon the same reason, for (con∣trariorum eadem est ratio) that the revest∣ing of an ancient Estate and Right in the dis∣seisee
doth by such claim, whereof you may read plentifully in Littleton his Chap∣ter of Continual Claim. It is worth the observation that no man can constitute a∣nother to receive Livery for him, within the view, nor yet to deliver (as I have heard my Master say) for none can take by force or vertue of a Livery in Law, but he that taketh the Free-hold himself, & è contra. Otherwise it is to take and give Li∣very of Seisin in Deed, for there aswel the Feoffee in the one case may ordain and make his Attorney, or Attorneys in his name and stead, to take Livery, as the Feoffor in the other case to give Livery, Concurren∣tibus iis quae in jure requiruntur. And now let Delivery of the Deed to be added to the sealing thereof, and the state executing of the Lands thereby conveyed, and then I presume none will refuse to allow that eve∣ry thing hath been named, which is essen∣tially required to the perfection of a bare Deed of Feoffament, and although I have mentioned the delivery of the Deed in the last place, yet it is not the least thing, or of the least consequence or moment, for after a Deed is sealed, if it be not delivered, est a¦nul purpose, it is to no purpose, and the de∣livery
must be by the party himself, or his sufficient warrant: So it may be gathered from what hath been said, that sealing of Deeds without Delivery is nothing, and that Delivery without Sealing will make no Deed, but that both Sealing and Delivery must concur and meet together, to make perfect Deeds. I hope such as are present at the Sealing and Delivering of Deeds of Feoffament, and the State executing thereupon, will not for∣get to subscribe their names, or markes, as witnesses thereof, whereby they may the better be inabled to remember what therein hath been done, if peradventure there shall be occasion to make use of them. And it is not amiss here before I end, to observe, that although upon Deeds of Feoffament, &c. it was not usual before the latter end of Hen. 8. or thereabouts to endorse or make mention upon such Deeds of the Sealing and Delive∣ring of the Deeds, or state executing of the Lands, &c. intended thereby to be convey∣ed, (for I my self have many Deeds of Feoffament which do testifie as much) yet it is to be credibly supposed, and not with∣out some manifest probability, that such persons whose names are inserted after a
certain clause in such Deeds, beginning with hiis testibus, were eye-witnesses of all. Thus desiring you to take notice that I have called the said six parts of the Feoffament formal, because they are not absolutely of the essence of Deeds, &c. manebo in hoc gyro. I will here conclude, requesting all those to whom any sight hereof shall, or may happen to come, friendly to admonish me of my failings here∣in: Whereby they shall ever engage me thankfully. FINIS.
