N1487 13640486 100884
A DECLARATION OF THE FAITH and ORDER Owned and practised in the Congregational Churches IN ENGLAND; Agreed upon and consented unto By their ELDERS and MESSENGERS IN Their Meeting at the SAVOY, October 12. 1658. LONDON: Printed by John Field, and are to be sold by John Allen at the Sun Rising in Pauls Church-yard, 1659.
A PREFACE. Confession of the Faith that is in us, when justly called for, is so indispensable a due all owe to the Glory of the Soveraign GOD, that it is rank∣ed among the Duties of the first Command∣ment, such as Prayer is; and therefore by Paul yoaked with Faith it self, as necessary to salvation: With the heart man believeth unto righteousness, and with the mouth confes∣sion is made unto salvation. Our Lord Christ himself, when he was accused of his Doctrine, considered simply as a mat∣ter of fact by preaching, refused to answer; because, as such, it lay upon evidence, and matter of testimony of others; unto whom therefore he refers himself: But when both the High Priest and Pilate expostulate his Faith, and what he held himself to be; he without any demur at all, cheerfully makes declaration, That he was the Son of GOD; so to the High Priest: And that he was a King, and born to be a King; thus to Pilate; though upon the uttering of it his life lay at the stake: Which holy profession of his is celebrated for our example, 1 Tim. 6.13. Confessions, when made by a company of professors of Chri∣stianity joyntly meeting to that end, the most genuine and natural use of such Confessions is, That under the same form of words, they express the substance of the same common salvation, or unity of their faith; whereby speak∣ing the same things, they shew themselves perfectly joyned in
the same minde,1 Cor. 1.10. and in the same judgement. And accordingly such a transaction is to be looked upon but as a meet or fit medium or means whereby to express that their common faith and salvation, and no way to be made use of as an imposition upon any▪ Whatever is of force or constraint in matters of this nature, causeth them to dege∣nerate from the name and nature of Confessions, and turns them from being Confessions of Faith, into exactions and impositions of Faith. And such common Confessions of the Orthodox Faith, made in simplicity of heart by any such Body of Christians, with concord among themselves, ought to be entertained by all others that love the truth as it is in Jesus, with an an∣swerable rejoycing: For if the unanimous opinions and as∣sertions but in some few points of Religion, and that when by two Churches,Acts 15. namely, that of Jerusalem, and the Messengers of Antioch met, assisted by some of the Apostles, were by the Believers of those times received with so much joy, (as it is said, They rejoyced for the consolation) much more this is to be done, when the whole substance of Faith, and form of wholsome words shall be declared by the Messengers of a multitude of Churches, though wanting those advan∣tages of counsel and authority of the Apostles, which that Assembly had. Which acceptation is then more specially due, when these shall (to choose) utter and declare their Faith, in the same substance for matter, yea, words, for the most part, that other Churches and Assemblies, reputed the most Or∣thodox, have done before them: For upon such a corre∣spondency, all may see that actually accomplished; which the Apostle did but exhort unto, and pray for, in those two more eminent Churches of the Corinthians and the Romans;
(and so in them for all the Christians of his time) that both Jew and Gentile, that is, men of different perswasions,Rom. 15.6, 8, 9. (as they were) might glorifie GOD with one minde and with one mouth. And truly, the very turning of the Gentiles to the owning of the same Faith, in the substance of it, with the Christian Jew (though differing in greater points then we do from our brethren) is presently after dignified by the Apostle with this stile, That it is the Confession of Jesus Christ himself; not as the Object onely, but as the Author and Maker thereof: I will confess to thee (saith Christ to God) among the Gentiles. So that in all such accords,v. 9. Christ is the great and first Confessor; and we, and all our Faith uttered by us, are but the Epistles, (as Paul) and Con∣fessions (as Isaiah there) of their Lord and ours; He, but expres∣sing what is written in his heart, through their hearts and mouthes, to the glory of God the Father: And shall not we all rejoyce herein, when as Christ himself is said to do it upon this occasion: as it there also follows, I will sing unto thy Name. Further, as the soundness and wholsomness of the matter gives the vigor and life to such Confessions, so the inward freeness, willingness and readiness of the spirits of the Confes∣sors do contribute the beauty and loveliness thereunto: as it is in Prayer to God, so in Confessions made to men. If two or three met, do agree, it renders both, to either the more accepta∣ble. The Spirit of Christ is in himself too free, great and ge∣nerous a Spirit, to suffer himself to be used by any humane arm, to whip men into belief; he drives not, but gently leads into all truth, and perswades men to dwell in the tents of like precious Faith; which would lose of its preciousness and value, if that sparkle of freeness shone not in it: The cha∣racter of his people, is to be a willing people in the day of his
power▪ (not Mans) in the beauties of holiness, which are the Assemblings of the Saints: one glory of which Assemblings in that first Church, is said to have been, They met with one accord, which is there in that Psalm prophesied of, in the instance of that first Church, for all other that should succeed. And as this great Spirit is in himself free, when, and how far, and in whom to work, so where and when he doth work▪ he carrieth it with the same freedom, and is said to be a free Spirit, as he both is, and works in us: And where this Spirit of the Lord is, there is Liberty. Now, as to this Confession of ours, besides, that a con∣spicuous conjunction of the particulars mentioned, hath ap∣peared therein: There are also four remarkable Attendants thereon, which added, might perhaps in the eyes of sober and indifferent spirits, give the whole of this Transaction a room and rank amongst other many good and memorable things of this age; at least all set together, do cast as clear a gleam and manifestation of Gods Power and Presence, as hath appeared in any such kinde of Confessions, made by so numerous a company these later years. The first, is the Temper, (or distemper rather) of the times, during which, these Churches have been gathering, and which they have run through. All do (out of a general sense) complain that the times have been perillous, or dif∣ficult times; (as the Apostle foretold) and that in respect to danger from seducing spirits, more perillous then the hot∣test seasons of Persecution. We have sailed through an Aestuation, Fluxes and Refluxes of great varieties of Spi∣rits, Doctrines, Opinions and Occurrences; and especially in the matter of Opinions, which have been accompanied
in their several seasons, with powerful perswasions and temptations, to seduce those of our way. It is known men have taken the freedom (notwithstanding what Au∣thority hath interposed to the contrary) to vent and vend their own vain and accursed imaginations, contrary to the great and fixed Truths of the Gospel, insomuch, as take the whole round and circle of delusions, the Devil hath in this small time, ran, it will be found, that every truth, of greater or lesser weight, hath by one or other hand, at one time or another, been questioned and called to the Bar amongst Us, yea, and impleaded, under the pretext (which hath some degree of Justice in it) that all should not be bound up to the Traditions of former times, nor take Reli∣gion upon trust. Whence it hath come to pass, that many of the sound∣est Professors were put upon a new search and disquisition of such truths, as they had taken for granted, and yet had lived upon the comfort of: to the end they might be able to convince others, and establish their own hearts against that darkness and unbelief, that is ready to close with error, or at least to doubt of the truth, when error is speciously presented. And hereupon we do professedly account it one of the greatest advantages gained out of the temptati∣ons of these times; yea the honor of the Saints and Mi∣nisters of these Nations, That after they had sweetly been exercised in, and had improved practical and experimental Truths, this should be their further lot, to examine and discuss, and indeed, anew to learn over every Doctrinal Truth, both out of the Scriptures, and also with a fresh taste thereof in their own hearts; which is no other then what the Apostle exhorts to, Try all things, hold fast that which is good. Conversion unto God at first, what is it else
then a savory and affectionate application, and the bringing home to the heart with spiritual light and life, all truths that are necessary to salvation, together with other lesser truths? all which we had afore conversion taken in but notionally from common education and tradition. Now that after this first gust those who have bin thus con∣verted should be put upon a new probation and search out of the Scriptures,This per∣swasion cometh not of him that calleth you. Gal. 5.8. not onely of all principles explicitely ingredi∣ents to Conversion; (unto which the Apostle referreth the Galatians when they had diverted from them) but of all other superstructures as well as fundamentals; and together therewith, anew to experiment the power and sweetness of all these in their own souls: What is this but tryed Faith in∣deed? and equivalent to a new conversion unto the truth? An Anchor that is proved to be sure and stedfast, that will certainly hold in all contrary storms: This was the eminent seal and commendation which those holy Apostles that li∣ved and wrote last; Peter, John and Jude; in their Epistles did set and give to the Christians of the latter part of those primitive times. And besides, it is clear and evident by all the other Epistles, from first to last, that it cost the Apo∣stles as much, and far more care and pains to preserve them they had converted, in the truth, then they had taken to turn them thereunto at first:1 Pet. 1.5. And it is in it self as great a work and instance of the power of God, that keeps, yea, guards us through faith unto salvation. Secondly, let this be added, (or superadded rather) to give full weight and measure, even to running over) that we have all along this season, held forth (though quarrel∣ed with for it by our brethren) this great principle of these times, That amongst all Christian States and Churches, there
ought to be vouchsafed a forbearance and mutual indulgence unto Saints of all perswasions, that keep unto, and hold fast the necessary foundations of faith and holiness, in all other matters extrafundamental, whether of Faith or Order. This to have been our constant principle, we are not ashamed to confess to the whole Christian world. Wherein yet we desire we may be understood, not as if in the abstract we stood indifferent to falshood or truth, or were careless whether faith or error, in any Truths but fundamental, did obtain or not, so we had our liberty in our petty and smaller differences: or as if to make sure of that, we had cut out this wide cloak for it: No, we profess that the whole, and every particle of that Faith delivered to the Saints, (the substance of which we have according to our light here professed) is, as to the propagation and furtherance of it by all Gospel-means, as precious to us as our lives; or what can be supposed dear to us; and in our sphere we have endea∣vored to promote them accordingly: But yet withall, we have and do contend, (and if we had all the power which any, or all of our brethren of differing opinions have desired to have over us, or others, we should freely grant it unto them all) we have and do contend for this, That in the con∣crete, the persons of all such gracious Saints, they and their errors, as they are in them, when they are but such errors as do and may stand with communion with Christ, though they should not repent of them, as not being convinced of them to the end of their days; that those, with their er∣rors (that are purely spiritual, and intrench and overthrow not civil societies,) as concrete with their persons, should for Christs sake be born withall by all Christians in the world; and they notwithstanding be permitted to enjoy all Ordi∣nances and spiritual Priviledges according to their light, as
freely as any other of their brethren that pretend to the greatest Orthodoxity; as having as equal, and as fair a right in and unto Christ, and all the holy things of Christ, that any other can challenge to themselves. And this doth afford a full and invincible testimony on our behalf, in that whiles we have so earnestly contended for this just liberty of Saints in all the Churches of Christ, we our selves have had no need of it: that is as to the matter of the profession of Faith which we have maintained together with others: and of this, this subsequent Confession of Faith gives sufficient evidence. So as we have the confidence in Christ, to utter in the words of those two great Apostles, That we have stood fast in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free (in the be∣half of others, rather then our selves) and having been free, have not made use of out liberty, for a cloak of error or malici∣ousness in our selves: And yet, loe, whereas from the beginning of the rearing of these Churches, that of the Apostle hath been (by some) prophecyed of us, and applyed to us, That whiles we promised (unto others) liberty, we our selves would become servants of corruption, and be brought in bondage to all sorts of fancies and imaginations; yet the whole world may now see after the experience of many years ran through (and it is manifest by this Confession) that the great and gracious God hath not onely kept us in that com∣mon unity of the Faith and Knowledge of the Son of God, which the whole Community of Saints have and shall in their generations come unto, but also in the same Truths, both small and great, that are built thereupon, that any other of the best and more pure Reformed Churches in their best times (which were their first times) have arrived unto: This Confession withall holding forth a professed op∣position unto the common errors and heresies of these times.
These two considerations have been taken from the sea∣sons we have gone through. Thirdly, let the space of time it self, or days, wherein from first to last the whole of this Confession was framed and consented to by the whole of us, be duly considered by sober and ingenuous spirits: the whole of days in which we had meetings about it, (set aside the two Lords days, and the first days meeting, in which we considered and debated what to pitch upon) were but eleven days, part of which also was spent by some of us in prayer, others in consult∣ing; and in the end all agreeing. We mention this small circumstance but to this end, (which still adds unto the for∣mer) That it gives demonstration, not of our freeness and willingness onely, but of our readiness and preparedness unto so great a work; which otherwise, and in other Assem∣blies, hath ordinarily taken up long and great debates, as in such a variety of matters of such concernment, may well be supposed to fall out. And this is no other then what the Apostle Peter exhorts unto, Be ready always to give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason or account of the hope that is in you.1 Pet. 3.15. The Apostle Paul saith of the spiritual Truths of the Gospel,8 Cor. 2. That God hath prepared them for those that love him. The inward and innate constitution of the new crea∣ture being in it self such as is suted to all those Truths, as congenial thereunto: But although there be this mutual adaptness between these two, yet such is the mixture of ig∣norance, darkness and unbelief, carnal reason, preoccupa∣tion of judgement, interest of parties, wantonness in opini∣on, proud adhering to our own perswasions, and perverse oppositions and aversness to agree with others, and a mul∣titude of such like distempers common to believing man: All which are not onely mixed with, but at times, (especially in
such times as have passed over our heads) are ready to over∣cloud our judgements, and do cause our eyes to be double, and sometimes prevail as well as lusts, and do byass our wills and affections: And such is their mixture, that although there may be existent an habitual preparedness in mens spi∣rits, yet not always a present readiness to be found, special∣ly not in such a various multitude of men, to make a solemn and deliberate profession of all truths, it being as great a work to finde the spirits of the just (perhaps the best) of Saints, ready for every truth, as to be prepared to every good work. It is therefore to be looked at as a great and special work of the holy Ghost, that so numerous a company of Mini∣sters, and other principal brethren, should so readily, speedi∣ly and joyntly give up themselves unto such a whole Body of Truths that are after godliness. This argues they had not their faith to seek; but, as is said of Ezra, that they were ready Scribes, and (as Christ) instructed unto the kingdom of heaven, being as the good housholders of so many families of Christ, bringing forth of their store and treasury New and Old. It shews these truths had been familiar to them, and they acquainted with them, as with their daily food and provision, (as Christs allusion there insinuates) in a word, that so they had preached, and that so their people had believed, as the Apostle speaks up∣on one like particular occasion. And the Apostle Paul con∣siders (in cases of this nature) the suddenness or length of the time, either one way or the other; whether it were in mens forsaking or learning of the truth. Thus the suddenness in the Galatians case in leaving the truth, he makes a wonder of it:Gal. 1.6. I marvel that you are SO SOON (that is, in so short a time) removed from the true Gospel unto another. Again on the contrary, in the Hebrews he aggravates their back∣wardness,
That when for the time you ought to be Teachers,Heb. 5.12. you had need that one teach you the very first principles of the Oracles of God. The Parable contrary to both these having fallen out in this transaction, may have some ingredient and weight with ingenuous spirits in its kinde, according to the proportion is put upon either of these foremention∣ed in their adverse kinde, and obtain the like special obser∣vation. This accord of ours hath fallen out without having held any correspondency together, or prepared consultation by which we might come to be advised of one anothers mindes. We alledge not this as a matter of commendation in us; no, we acknowledge it to have been a great neglect: And ac∣cordingly one of the first proposals for union amongst us was, That there might be a constant correspondence held among the Churches for counsel and mutual edification, so for time to come to prevent the like omission. We confess that from the first, every, or at least the ge∣nerality of our Churches, have been in a maner like so ma∣ny Ships (though holding forth the same general colours) lancht singly, and sailing apart and alone in the vast Ocean of these tumultuating times, and they exposed to every wind of Doctrine, under no other conduct then the Word and Spirit, and their particular Elders and principal Bre∣thren, without Associations among our selves, or so much as holding out common lights to others, whereby to know where we were. But yet whilest we thus confess to our own shame this neglect, let all acknowledge, that God hath ordered it for his high and greater glory, in that his singular care and power should have so watcht over each of these, as that all should be found to have steered their course by the same
Chart, and to have been bound for one and the same Port, and that upon this general search now made, that the same holy and blessed Truths of all sorts, which are currant and warrantable amongst all the other Churches of Christ in the world, should be found to be our Lading. The whole, and every of these things when put toge∣ther, do cause us (whatever men of prejudiced and oppo∣site spirits may finde out to slight them) with a holy ad∣miration, to say, That this is no other then the Lords doing; and which we with thanksgiving do take from his hand as a special token upon us for good, and doth show that God is faithful and upright towards those that are planted in his house: And that as the Faith was but once for all, and in∣tentionally first delivered unto the Saints; so the Saints, when not abiding scattered, but gathered under their respe∣ctive Pastors according to Gods heart into an house, and Churches unto the living God, such together are, as Paul forespake it, the most steady and firm pillar and seat of Truth that God hath anywhere appointed to himself on earth, where his truth is best conserved, and publiquely held forth; there being in such Assemblies weekly a rich dwelling of the Word amongst them, that is, a daily open house kept by the means of those good Housholders, their Teachers and other Instructers respectively appropriated to them, whom Christ in the vertue of his Ascension, conti∣nues to give as gifts to his people, himself dwelling amongst them; to the end that by this, as the most sure stand∣ing permanent means, the Saints might be perfected, till we all (even all the Saints in present and future ages) do come by this constant and daily Ordinance of his unto the unity of the Faith and Knowledge of the
Son of God unto a perfect man,Eph. 4.12. unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ (which though growing on by parts and piecemeal, will yet appear compleat, when that great and general Assembly shall be gathered, then when this world is ended, and these dispensations have had their fulness and period) and so that from henceforth (such a pro∣vision being made for us) we be no more children tossed 14. to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Do∣ctrine. And finally, this doth give a fresh and recent de∣monstration, that the great Apostle and High-priest of our profession is indeed ascended into heaven, and continues there with power and care,Heb. 3.6. faithful as a son over his own house, whose house are we, if we hold fast the confidence and the rejoycing of the hope firm unto the end: and shews that he will, as he hath promised, be with his own Institutions to the end of the world. It is true, that many sad miscarriages, divisions, breach∣es fallings off from holy Ordinances of God, have along this time of tentation, (especially in the beginning of it) been found in some of our Churches; and no wonder, if what hath been said be fully considered: Many reasons might further be given hereof, that would be a sufficient Apology, without the help of a retortion upon other Churches (that promised them∣selves peace) how that more destroying ruptures have befallen them, and that in a wider sphere and compass, which though it should not justifie us, yet may serve to stop others mouthes. Let Rome glory of the peace in, and obedience of her chil∣dren, against the Reformed Churches for their divisions that
occurred (especially in the first rearing of them) whilest we all know the causes of their dull and stupid peace to have been carnal interests, worldly correspondencies, and coalitions strengthened by gratifications of all sorts of men by that Religion, the principles of blinde Devotion, Traditional Faith, Ecclesiastical Tyranny, by which she keeps her children in bondage to this day. We are also certain, that the very same prejudice that from hence they would cast upon the Reformed (if they were just) do lye as fully against those pure Churches raised up by the Apo∣stles themselves in those first times: for as we have heard of their patience, sufferings, consolations, and the tran∣scending gifts poured out, and graces shining in them, so we have heard complaints of their divisions too, of the forsakings of their Assemblies,Heb. 10.22. as the custom or maner of SOME was (which later were in that respect felones de se, and needed no other delivering up to Satan as their punish∣ment, then what they executed upon themselves.) We read of the shipwrack also of Faith and a good Conscience, and overthrowings of the faith of SOME; and still but of some, not all, nor the most: which is one piece of an Apo∣logie the Apostle again and again inserts to future ages, and through mercy we have the same to make. And truly we take the confidence professedly to say, that these tentations common to the purest Churches of Saints separated from the mixture of the world, though they grieve us (for who is offended, and we burn not?) yet they do not at all stumble us, as to the truth of our way, had they been many more: We say it again, these stumble us no more (as to that point) then it doth offend us against the power of Religion it self, to have seen, and to see daily in particular persons called out and separated from the world
by an effectual work of conversion, that they for a while do suffer under disquietments, vexations, turmoils, unsettle∣ments of spirit, that they are tossed with tempests and hor∣rid tentations, such as they had not in their former estate, whilst they walked according to the course of this world: For Peter hath sufficiently instructed us whose business it is to raise such storms, even the Devil's; and also whose designe it is, that after they have suffered a while, thereby they shall be setled, perfected, stablished, that have so suffered, even the God of all Grace. And look what course of dispensation God holds to Saints personally, he doth the like to bodies of Saints in Churches, and the Devil the same for his part too: And that consolatory Maxim of the Apostle, God shall tread down Satan under your feet shortly, which Paul ut∣tereth concerning the Church of Rome, shews how both God and Satan have this very hand therein; for he speaks that very thing in reference unto their divisions, as the co∣herence clearly manifests; and so you have both designs exprest at once. Yea, we are not a little induced to think, that the divisions, breaches, &c. of those primitive Churches would not have been so frequent among the people themselves, and not the Elders onely, had not the freedom, liberties and rights of the Members (the Brethren, we mean) been stated and exercised in those Churches, the same which we maintain and contend for to be in ours. Yea (which perhaps may seem more strange to many) had not those Churches been constituted of Members in∣lightned further then with notional and traditional know∣ledge, by a new and more powerful light of the Holy Ghost, wherein they had been made partakers of the holy Ghost, and the heavenly gift, and their hearts had tasted the good Word of
God, and th Powers of the world to come, and of such Mem∣bers at lowest, there had not fallen out those kindes of di∣visions among them. For experience hath shewn, that the common sort of meer Doctrinal Professors (such as the most are now a days) whose highest elevation is but freedom from moral scandal joyned with devotion to Christ through meer education, such as in many Turks is found towards Mahomet, that these finding and feeling themselves not much concerned in the active part of Religion, so they may have the honor (especially upon a Reformation of a new Refine∣ment) that themselves are approved Members, admitted to the Lords Supper, and their children to the Ordinance of Baptism; they regard not other matters (as Gallio did not) but do easily and readily give up themselves unto their Guides, being like dead fishes carried with the common stream; whereas those that have a further renewed light by a work of the holy Ghost, whether saving or temporary, are upon the quite contrary grounds apt to be busie about, and inquisitive into, what they are to receive and practise, or wherein their consci∣ences are professedly concerned and involved: And thereupon they take the freedom to examine and try the spirits, whether of God or no: And from hence are more apt to dissatisfaction, and from thence to run into division, and many of such proving to be inlightned but with a temporary, not saving Faith (who have such a work of the Spirit upon them, and profession in them, as will and doth approve it self to the judgement of Saints, and ought to be so judged, until they be otherwise discovered) who at long run, prove hypocrites through indulgence unto lusts, and then out of their lusts persist
to hold up these divisions unto breach of, or departings▪ from Churches, and the Ordinances of God, and God is even with them for it, they waxing worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived; and even many of those that are sincere, through a mixture of darkness and er∣roneousness in their judgements, are for a season apt out of conscience to be led away with the error of others, which lie in wait to deceive. Insomuch as the Apostle upon the example of those first times, foreseeing also the like events in following generations upon the like causes, hath been bold to set this down as a ruled Case, that likewise in other Churches so constituted and de facto empriviledged as that of the Church of Corinth was (which single Church, in the sa∣cred Records about it, is the compleatest Mirror of Church-Constitution, Order and Government, and events thereupon ensuing, of any one Church whatever that we have story of) his Maxim is, There must be also divisions amongst you; he setly inserts an [ALSO] in the case, as that which had been in his own observation, and that which would be  the fate of other Churches like thereunto, so prophesieth he: And he speaks this as pe∣remptorily as he doth elsewhere in that other, We must through many tribulations enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: Yea, and that all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution: There is a [MUST] upon both alike, and we bless God, that we have run through both, and do say, and we say no more; That as it was then, so it is now, in both respects. However, such hath been the powerful hand of Gods Providence in these, which have been the worst of our Try∣als, That out of an approved experience and observation
of the issue, we are able to add that other part of the Apostles Prediction, That therefore such rents must be, that they which are approved may be made manifest among you; which holy issue God (as having aimed at it therein) doth frequently and certainly bring about in Churches, as he doth bring upon them that other fate of division. Let them there∣fore look unto it, that are the Authors of such disturbances, as the Apostle warneth, Gal. 5.10. The experiment is this, That we have seen, and do daily see, that multitudes of ho∣ly and precious souls, and (in the holy Ghosts word) approved Saints, have been, and are the more rooted and grounded by means of these shakings, and do continue to cleave the faster to Christ, and the purity of his Ordinances, and va∣lue them the more by this cost God hath put them to for the enjoying of them, who having been planted in the House of the Lord, have flourished in the Courts of our God, in these evil times, to shew that the Lord is upright. And this expe∣rimented event from out of such divisions, hath more con∣firmed us, and is a lowder Apologie for us, then all that our opposites are able from our breaches to alleadge to preju∣dice us. We will add a few words for conclusion, and give a more particular account of this our DECLARATION. In drawing up this Confession of Faith, we have had before us the Articles of Religion, approved and passed by both Houses of Parliament,June 20. 1648. after advice had with an Assembly of Di∣vines, called together by them for that purpose. To which Confession, for the substance of it, we fully assent, as do our Brethren of New-England, and the Churches also of Scotland, as each in their general Synods have testified.
A few things we have added for obviating some erro∣neous opinions, that have been more broadly and boldly here of late maintained by the Asserters, then in former times; and made other additions and alterations in method, here and there, and some clearer explanations, as we found occasion. We have endeavored throughout, to hold to such Truths in this our Confession, as are more properly term∣ed matters of Faith; and what is of Church-order, we dispose in certain Propositions by it self. To this course we are led by the Example of the Honorable Houses of Parliament, observing what was established, and what omitted by them in that Confession the Assembly pre∣sented to them. Who thought it not convenient to have matters of Discipline and Church-Government put into a Confession of Faith, especially such particulars thereof, as then were, and still are controverted and under dispute by men Orthodox and sound in Faith. The 30th cap. there∣fore of that Confession, as it was presented to them by the Assembly, which is of Church-Censures, their Use, Kindes, and in whom placed: As also cap. 31. of Synods and Councels, by whom to be called, of what force in their decrees and determinations. And the 4th paragr. of the 20th cap. which determines what opinions and practises disturb the peace of the Church, and how such disturbers ought to be proceeded against by the Censures of the Church, and punished by the Civil Magistrate. Also a great part of the 24th cap. of Marriage and Divorce. These were such doubtful assertions, and so unsutable to a Confession of Faith, as the Honorable Houses in their great Wis∣dom thought fit to lay them aside: There being nothing that tends more to heighten dissentings among Brethren,
then to determine and adopt the matter of their difference, under so high a title as to be an Article of our ith: So that there are two whole Chapters, and some Para∣graphs in other Chapters in their Confession, that we have upon this account omitted and the rather do we give this notice, because that Copy of the Parliaments, followed by us,Aug. 1647 is in few mens hands; the other as it came from the Assembly, being approved of in Scotland, was printed and hastened nto the world before the Par∣liament had declared their Resolutions about it; which was not till June 20. 1648. and yet hath been, and conti∣nueth to be the Copy (ordinarily) onely sold, printed and reprinted for these eleven years. After the 19th cap. of the Law, we have added a cap. of the Gospel, it being a Title that may not well be omitted in a Confession of Faith. In which Chapter, what is dispersed, and by intimation in the Assemblies Confession with some little addition, is here brought to∣gether, and more fully under one head. That there are not Scriptures annexed as in some Con∣fessions (though in divers others it's otherwise) we give the same account as did the Reverend Assembly in the same case:Session 86. which was this; The Confession being large, and so framed, as to meet with the common errors, if the Scri∣ptures should have been alleadged with any clearness, and by shewing where the strength of the proof lieth, it would have required a volume. We say further, it being our utmost end in this (as it is indeed of a Confession) humbly to give an account what we hold and assert in these matters; that others, especi∣ally the Churches of Christ may judge of us accordingly.
This we aimed at, and not so much to instruct others, or convince gainsayers. These are the proper works of other institutions of Christ, and are to be done in the strength of express Scripture. A Confession is an Ordi∣nance of another nature. What we have laid down and asserted about CHURCHES and their Government, we humbly conceive to be the Order which Christ himself hath appointed to be ob∣served, we have endeavored to follow Scripture-light; and those also that went before us according to that Rule, desirous of nearest uniformity with reforming Churches, as with our Brethren in New England, so with others, that differ from them and us. The Models and Platforms of this subject laid down by learned men, and practised by Churches, are various: We do not judge it brotherly, or grateful, to insist upon comparisons as some have done; but this experience teacheth, That the variety, and possibly the disputes and emulations arising thence, have much strengthened, if not fixed, this unhapy perswasion in the mindes of some learned and good men, namely, That there is no set∣tled Order laid down in Scripture; but it's left to the pru∣dence of the Christian Magistrate, to compose or make choice of such a Form as is most sutable and consistent with their Civil Government. Where this opinion is en∣tertained in the perswasion of Governors, there, Churches asserting their Power and Order to be jure di∣vino, and the appointment of Jesus Christ, can have no better nor more honorable entertainment, then a To∣leration or Permission. Yet herein there is this remarkable advantage to all
parties that differ, about what in Government is of Christs appointment; in that such Magistrates have a far greater tude in conscience, to tolerate and permit the several forms of each so bound up in their perswasion, then they have to submit unto what the Magistrate shall impose: And thereupon the Magistrate exercising an indulgency and forbearance, with protection and encouragement to the people of God, so differing from him, and amongst themselves: Doth therein discharge as great a faithfulness to Christ▪ and love to his people, as can any way be suppo∣sed and expected from any Christian Magistrate, of what perswasion soever he is. And where this clemency from Governors is shewed to any sort of persons or Churches of Christ upon such a principle, it will in equity produce this just effect, That all that so differ from him, and amongst themselves, standing in equal and alike difference from the principle of such a Magistrate, he is equally free to give a like liberty to them, one as well as the other. This faithfulness in our Governors we do with thank∣fulness to God acknowledge, and to their everlasting ho∣nor, which appeared much in the late Reformation. The Hicrarchie, Common-prayer-book, and all other things grie∣vous to Gods people, being removed, they made choice of an Assembly of learned men, to advise what Govern∣ment and Order is meet to be established in the room of these things; and because it was known there were diffe∣rent opinions (as always hath been among Godly men) a∣bout forms of Church-Government, there was by the Ordinance first sent forth to call an Assembly, not onely a choice made of persons of several perswasions to sit as Members there, but liberty given, to a lesser number, if
dissenting, to report their Judgements and Reasons,  well and as freely as the major part. Hereupon the Honorable House of Commons (an In∣dulgence we hope will never be forgotten) finding by pa∣pers received from them, that the Members of the Assembly were not like to compose differences a∣mongst themselves, so as to joyn in the same Rule for Church-Government, did Order further as followeth: That a Committee of Lords and Commons, &c. do take into consideration the differences of the Opinions in the Assembly of Divines in point of Church-Government, and to endeavor a union if it be possible; and in case that cannot be done, to endea∣vor the finding out some way, how far tender confer∣ences, who cannot in all things submit to the same Rule which shall be established, may be born with ac∣cording to the Word, and as may stand with the pub∣lique peace. By all which it is evident the Parliament purposed not to establish the Rule of Church-Government with such rigor, as might not permit and bear with a practise diffe∣rent from what they had established: In persons and Churches of different principles, if occasion were. And this Christian clemency and indulgence in our Governors, hath been the foundation of that Freedom and Liberty, in the managing of Church-affairs, which our Brethren, as well as WE, that differ from them, do now, and have many years enjoyed. The Honorable Houses by several Ordinances of Par∣liament after much consultation, having settled Rules
for Church-Government, and such an Ecclesiastical Order as they judged would best joynt with the Laws and Govern∣ment of the Kingdom,Ordi∣nance of March 14. 1645. did publish them, requiring the pra∣ctise hereof throughout the Nation; and in particular, by the Ministers of the Province of London. But (upon the former reason, or the like charitable consideration) these Rules were not imposed by them under any PENAL∣TY or rigorous inforcement, though frequently urged thereunto by some. Our reverend Brethren of the Province of London, ha∣ving considered of these Ordinances, and the Church-Go∣vernment laid down in them, declared their opinions to be, That there is not a compleat rule in those Ordinances; also,Conside∣rations and Cau∣tions from Si∣on Coll. June 19. 1646. that there are many necessary things not yet established, and some things wherein their consciences are not so fully sa∣tisfied. These Brethren in the same paper, have pub∣lished also their joynt Resolution to practise in all things ac∣cording to the rule of the Word, and according to these Or∣dinances, so far as they conceive them correspond to it, and in so doing they trust they shall not grieve the spirit of the truly godly, nor give any just occasion to them that are contrary minded, to blame their proceedings. We humbly conceive (that WE being dissatisfied in these things as our Brethren) the like liberty was intended by the honorable Houses, and may be taken by us of the Congregational way (without blame or grief to the spirits of those Brethren at least) to resolve, or rather to conti∣nue in the same resolution and practise in these matters, which indeed were our practises in times of greatest op∣position, and before this reformation was begun. And as our Brethren the Ministers of London, drew up and published their opinions and apprehensions about
Church-Government into an intire System; so we now give the like publique account of our consciences, and the rules by which we have constantly practised hitherto; which we have here drawn up, and do present. Where∣by it will appear how much, or how little we differ in these things from our Presbyterian Brethren. And we trust there is no just cause why any man, ei∣ther for our differing from the present settlement, it be∣ing out of conscience, and not out of contempt, or our differences one from another, being not wilful, should charge either of us with that odious reproach of Schism. And indeed, if not for our differing from the State-settle∣ment, much less because we differ from our Brethren, our differences being in some lesser things,Jus divinum Minist. pub. by the Pro∣vost of Lon∣don, in the Preface. and circumstances onely, as themselves acknowledge. And let it be further considered, that we have not broken from them or their Order by these differences (but rather they from us) and in that respect we less deserve their censure; our practise being no other then what it was in our breaking from Episcopacy, and long before Presbytery, or any such form as now they are in, was taken up by them; and we will not say how probable it is that the yoke of Episcopacy had been upon our neck to this day, if some such way (as for∣merly, and now is, and hath been termed Schism) had not with much suffering bin then practised & since continued in. For Novelty, wherewith we are likewise both charged by the enemies of both, it is true, in respect of the pub∣lique and open profession, either of Presbytery or Inde∣pendency, this Nation hath been a stranger to each way, it's possible ever since it hath been Christian; though for our-selves we are able to trace the footsteps of an Indepen∣dent Congregational way in the ancientest customs of
the Churches, as also in the writings of our soundest Pro∣testant Divines, and (that which we are much satisfied in) a full concurrence throughout in all the substantial parts of Church-Government, with our Reverend Brethren the old Puritan non-Conformists,Puritanis. Ang. by Dr. Aims near 50 years since, as the opinions of Whitehead, Gilbe, Fox, Dearing, Greenham, Cartwright, Venner, Fulk, Whitaker, Rainold, Perkins, &c. who being instant in prayer and much sufferings, prevailed with the Lord, and we reap with joy, what they sowed in tears. Our Brethren also that are for Presbyterial subordinations, profess what is of weight against Novelty for their way. And now therefore seeing the Lord, in whose hand is the heart of Princes, hath put into the hearts of our Go∣vernors to tolerate and permit (as they have done many years) persons of each perswasion, to enjoy their consci∣ences, though neither come up to the Rule established by Authority: And that which is more, to give us both pro∣tection, and the same encouragement that the most de∣voted Conformists in those former superstitious times en∣joyed, yea, and by a publique Law to establish this Liberty for time to come; and yet further, in the midst of our fears, to set over us a Prince that owns this Establishment, and cor∣dially resolves to secure our Churches in the enjoyment of these Liberties, if we abuse them not to the disturbance of the Civil Peace. This should be a very great engagement upon the hearts of all, though of different perswasions, to endea∣vor our utmost, joyntly to promove the honor and prospe∣rity of such a Government and Governors by whatsoever means, which in our Callings as Ministers of the Gospel, and as Churches of Jesus Christ the Prince of peace, we are any way able to; as also to be peaceably disposed one
towards another, and with mutual toleration to love as brethren, notwithstanding such differences, remembring, as it's very equal we should, the differences that are be∣tween Presbyterians and Independents, being differences between fellow-servants, and neither of them having au∣thority given from God or man, to impose their opinions, one more then the other. That our Governors after so solemn an establishment, should thus bear with us both, in our greater differences from their Rule, and after this, for any of us to take a fellow-servant by the throat, upon the ac∣count of a lesser reckoning, and nothing due to him upon it: is to forget, at least not to exercise, that compassion and tenderness we have found, where we had less ground to challenge or expect it. Our prayer unto God is, That whereto we have already attained, we all may walk by the same rule, and that wherein we are otherwise minded, God would reveal it to us in his due time.
Books sold by John Allen at the Sun Rising in Pauls Church-yard, viz. Mr. Caryls fifth Volume on the Book of Job, in quarto. Mr. Caryls seventh Volume on the Book of Job, in quarto. Bezae Novum Testamentum, in folio. Mr. Allens Scripture Chronology, in quarto. Mr. Baxters Call to the Unconverted. Mr. Cotton on the Covenant, intended suddenly for the Press. Mr. Lukins Practice of Godliness. Mr. Burgess of Original sin. Pareus on the Revelation, in folio. Mr. Gataker against Judicial Astrology, wherein he proves it to be the way and practice of Heathens, and ought not to be so much as named by them that profess the Name of Christ. Esay 47.12, 13. Jer. 10.2. The History of the Evangelical Churches of the Valleys of Piemont, containing a most exact Description of the Place, and a faithful Account of the Doctrine, Life and Persecutions of the ancient Inhabitants, together with a most naked and punctual Relation of the late Bloody Massacre 1655. and a Nar∣rative of all the following Transactions to 1658. justifid part∣ly by divers ancient Manuscripts, written many hundred years before Calvin or Luther. By Samuel Morlaend Esq in folio. The humbled sinner resolved what he should do to be saved: or Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, the onely way of Salvation, by Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick, in quarto. The Riches of Grace displayed in the offer and tender of Sal∣vation to poor sinners, by the same Author, in twelves. The Fountain opened, and the Water of Life flowing forth, for the refreshing of thirsty sinners, by the same Author, quarto. The Gospels Glory, without prejudice to the Law, shining forth in the Glory of God the Father, Son and holy Ghost, for the salvation of sinners, by Mr. Richard Byfield, in octavo.
A DECLARATION OF THE FAITH and ORDER Owned and practised in the CONGREGATIONAL CHURCHES IN ENGLAND. CHAP. I. Of the holy Scripture. ALthough the Light of Nature, and the Works of Creation and Providence, do so far manifest the Goodness, Wis∣dom and Power of God, as to leave men unexcusable; yet are they not suf∣ficient to give that knowledge of God and of his Will, which is neces∣sary unto salvation: Therefore it pleased the Lord at sun∣dry times, and in divers maners to reveal himself, and to declare that his Will unto his Church; and afterwards for the better preserving and propagating of the truth, and for the more sure establishment and comfort of the Church against the corruption of the flesh, and the malice of Satan
and of the world, to commit the same wholly unto writing: which maketh the holy Scripture to be most necessary; those former ways of Gods revealing his Will unto his peo∣ple, being now ceased. II. Under the name of the holy Scripture, or the Word of God written, are now contained all the Books of the Old and New Testament; which are these: Of the Old Testament. Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, Jo∣shua, Judges, Ruth, 1 Samuel, 2 Samuel, 1 Kings, 2 Kings, 1 Chronicles, 2 Chronicles, Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, The Song of Songs, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Lamentations, Ezekiel, Da∣niel, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi. Of the New Testament. Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, The Acts of the Apo∣stles, Pauls Epistle to the Romans, 1 Corinthians, 2 Corinthians, Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, Co∣lossians, 1 Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians, 1 to Timo∣thy, 2 to Timothy, To Titus, To Philemon, The Epi∣stle to the Hebrews, The Epistle of James, The first and second Epistles of Peter, The first, second and third Epistles of John, The Epistle of Jude, The Revelation.
All which are given by the inspiration of God to be the Rule of Faith and Life. III. The Books commonly called Apocrypha, not being of Divine inspiration, are no part of the Canon of the Scri∣pture; and therefore are of no authority in the Church of God, nor to be any otherwise approved or made use of, then other humane writings. IV. The Authority of the holy Scripture, for which it ought to be believed and obeyed, dependeth not upon the Te∣stimony of any man or Church; but wholly upon God (who is Truth it self) the Author thereof; and therefore it is to be received, because it is the Word of God. V. We may be moved and induced by the Testimony of the Church, to an high and reverent esteem of the holy Scripture. And the heavenliness of the Matter, the effica∣cy of the Doctrine, the majesty of the Style, the consent of all the parts, the scope of the whole, (which is, to give all glory to God) the full discovery it makes of the onely way of Mans Salvation, the many other incomparable ex∣cellencies, and the intire perfection thereof, are Arguments whereby it doth abundantly evidence it self to be the Word of God; Yet notwithstanding, our full perswasion and assurance of the infallible Truth and Divine Authority thereof, is from the inward work of the holy Spirit, bear∣ing witness by and with the Word in our hearts.
VI. The whole Counsel of God concerning all things neces∣sary for his own Glory, mans Salvation, Faith and Life, is either expresly set down in Scripture, or by good and ne∣cessary consequence may be deduced from Scripture; unto which nothing at any time is to be added, whether by new Revelations of the Spirit, or Traditions of men. Never∣theless we acknowledge the inward illumination of the Spi∣rit of God to be necessary for the saving understanding of such things as are revealed in the Word: And that there are some circumstances concerning the Worship of God and Government of the Church, common to humane acti∣ons and Societies, which are to be ordered by the Light of Nature and Christian prudence, according to the general Rules of the Word, which are always to be observed. VII. All things in Scripture are not alike plain in themselves, nor alike clear unto all: yet those things which are necessa∣ry to be known, believed and observed for salvation, are so clearly propounded and opened in some place of Scripture or other, that not onely the learned, but the unlearned, in a due use of the ordinary means, may attain unto a suffi∣cient understanding of them. VIII. The Old Testament in Hebrew (which was the Native Language of the People of God of old) and the New Te∣stament in Greek (which at the time of writing of it was most generally known to the Nations) being immediately inspired by God, and by his singular care and providence
kept pure in all Ages, are therefore Authentical; so as in all Controversies of Religion the Church is finally to ap∣peal unto them. But because these Original Tongues are not known to all the people of God, who have right unto and interest in the Scriptures, and are commanded in the fear of God to read and search them; therefore they are to be translated into the vulgar language of every Nation unto which they come, that the Word of God dwelling plentifully in all, they may worship him in an ac∣ceptable maner, and through patience and comfort of the Scriptures may have hope. IX. The infallible Rule of Interpretation of Scripture, is the Scripture it self; And therefore when there is a questi∣on about the true and full sense of any Scripture (which is not manifold, but one) it must be searched and known by other places, that speak more clearly. X. The Supreme Judge by which all controversies of Reli∣gion are to be determined, and all Decrees of Councels, Opinions of ancient Writers, Doctrines of men and private Spirits, are to be examined, and in whose Sentence we are to rest, can be no other, but the holy Scripture deli∣vered by the Spirit; into which Scripture so delivered, our Faith is finally resolved.
CHAP. II. Of God and of the holy Trinity. THere is but one onely living and true God; who is infinite in Being and Perfection, a most pure Spirit, invisible, without body, parts, or passions, immutable, immense, eternal, incomprehensible, almighty, most wise, most holy, most free, most absolute, working all things according to the Counsel of his own immutable and most righteous Will, for his own Glory, most loving, gracious, merciful, long-suffering, abundant in goodness and truth, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin, the rewarder of them that diligently seek him; and withal, most just and terrible in his Judgements, hating all sin, and who will by no means clear the guilty. II. God hath all Life, Glory, Goodness, Blessedness, in, and of himself; and is alone, in, and unto himself, All-suf∣ficient, not standing in need of any Creatures which he hath made, nor deriving any glory from them, but onely manifesting his own glory in, by, unto, and upon them: He is the alone Fountain of all Being, of whom, through whom, and to whom are all things; and hath most So∣veraign dominion over them, to do by them, for them, or upon them, whatsoever himself pleaseth: In his sight all things are open and manifest, his Knowledge is infinite, infallible, and independent upon the Creature, so as nothing is to him contingent or uncertain. He is most holy in all his Counsels, in all his Works, and in all his Commands.
To him is due from Angels and Men, and every other Creature, whatsoever Worship, Service or Obedience, as Creatures, they owe unto the Creator, and whatever he is further pleased to require of them. III. In the Unity of the God-head there be three Persons, of one Substance, Power, and Eternity, God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost: The Father is of none, neither begotten, nor proceeding; The Son is eternally begotten of the Father; The holy Ghost eter∣nally proceeding from the Father and the Son. Which Doctrine of the Trinity is the foundation of all our Com∣munion with God, and comfortable Dependence upon him. CHAP. III. Of Gods Eternal Decree. GOd from all eternity did by the most wise and ho∣ly Counsel of his own Will, freely and unchange∣ably ordain whatsoever comes to pass: Yet so, as thereby neither is God the Author of sin, nor is violence offered to the will of the Creatures, nor is the liberty or contin∣gency of second Causes taken away, but rather established. II. Although God knows whatsoever may or can come to pass upon all supposed Conditions, yet hath he not de∣creed any thing, because he foresaw it as future, or as that which would come to pass upon such Conditions.
III. By the Decree of God for the manifestation of his Glo∣ry, some Men and Angels are predestinated unto everlast∣ing Life, and others fore-ordained to everlasting Death. IV. These Angels and Men thus predestinated, and fore-ordained, are particularly and unchangeably designed, and their number is so certain and definite, that it cannot be either increased or diminished. V. Those of mankinde that are predestinated unto Life, God, before the foundation of the world was laid, accord∣ing to his eternal and immutable purpose, and the secret counsel and good pleasure of his Will, hath chosen in Christ unto everlasting Glory, out of his meer free Grace and Love, without any fore-sight of Faith or good Works, or perseverance in either of them, or any other thing in the Creature, as Conditions or Causes moving him thereunto, and all to the praise of his glorious Grace. VI. As God hath appointed the Elect unto Glory, so hath he by the eternal and most free purpose of his Will fore-ordained all the means thereunto: Wherefore they who are elected, being faln in Adam, are redeemed by Christ, are effectually called unto Faith in Christ by his Spirit working in due season, are justified, adopted, sanctified, and kept by his power, through Faith, unto salvation. Neither are any other redeemed by Christ, or effectually
called, justified, adopted, sanctified and saved, but the Elect onely. VII. The rest of mankinde God was pleased, according to the unsearchable Counsel of his own Will, whereby he ex∣tendeth or withholdeth mercy, as he pleaseth, for the glory of his soveraign power over his Creatures, to pass by, and to ordain them to dishonor and wrath for their sin to the praise of his glorious Justice. VIII. The Doctrine of this high mystery of Predestination is to be handled with special prudence and care, that men at∣tending the will of God revealed in his Word, and yield∣ing obedience thereunto, may from the certainty of their effectual Vocation, be assured of their eternal Election. So shall this Doctrine afford matter of praise, reverence and admiration of God, and of humility, diligence, and abun∣dant consolation to all that sincerely obey the Gospel. CHAP. IV. Of Creation. IT pleased God the Father, Son and holy Ghost, for the manifestation of the glory of his eternal Power, Wisdom and Goodness, in the beginning to create or make of nothing the world, and all things therein, whether visi∣ble or invisible, in the space of six days, and all very good.
II. After God had made all other creatures, he created Man, male and female, with reasonable and immortal Souls, endued with knowledge, righteousness and true ho∣liness, after his own Image, having the Law of God writ∣ten in their heart, and power to fulfil it; and yet under a possibility of transgressing, being left to the liberty of their own Will, which was subject unto change. Besides this Law written in their hearts, they received a command not to eat of the Tree of the Knowledge of good and evil; which whiles they kept, they were happy in their communion with God, and had dominion over the Creatures. CHAP. V. Of Providence. GOd the great Creator of all things, doth uphold, di∣rect, dispose and govern all creatures, actions, and things from the greatest even to the least by his most wise and holy Providence, according unto his infallible fore-knowledge, and the free and immutable counsel of his own Will, to the praise of the glory of his Wisdom, Power, Justice, Goodness and Mercy. II. Although in relation to the fore-knowledge and decree of God, the first Caufe, all things come to pass immutably, and infallibly; yet by the same Providence he ordereth
them to fall out, according to the nature of second Causes, either necessarily, freely, or contingently. III. God in his ordinary Providence maketh use of means, yet is free to work without, above, and against them at his pleasure. IV. The almighty Power, unsearchable Wisdom, and in∣finite Goodness of God, so far manifest themselves in his Providence, in that his determinate Counsel extendeth it self even to the first Fall, and all other sins of Angels and Men (and that not by a bare permission) which also he most wisely and powerfully boundeth, and otherwise order∣eth and governeth in a manifold Dispensation to his own most holy ends; yet so, as the sinfulness thereof proceed∣eth onely from the Creature, and not from God, who be∣ing most holy and righteous, neither is, nor can be the au∣thor or approver of sin. V. The most wise, righteous and gracious God doth often∣times leave for a season his own children to manifold tem∣ptations, and the corruption of their own hearts, to cha∣stise them for their former sins, or to discover unto them the hidden strength of corruption, and deceitfulness of their hearts, that they may be humbled; and to raise them to a more close and constant dependence for their support upon himself, and to make them more watchful against all future occasions of sin, and for sundry other just and holy ends.
VI. As for those wicked and ungodly men, whom God as a righteous Judge, for former sins, doth blinde and harden, from them he not onely withholdeth his grace, whereby they might have been inlightned in their understandings, and wrought upon in their hearts; but sometimes also withdraweth the gifts which they had, and exposeth them to such objects, as their corruption makes occasions of sin; and withal gives them over to their own lusts, the tempta∣tions of the world, and the power of Satan; whereby it comes to pass that they harden themselves, even under those means which God useth for the softning of others. VII. As the providence of God doth in general reach to all Creatures, so after a most special maner it taketh care of his Church, and disposeth all things to the good thereof. CHAP. VI. Of the fall of Man, of Sin, and of the Punishment thereof. GOd having made a Covenant of Works and Life, thereupon, with our first Parents and all their posterity in them, they being seduced by the subtilty and temptation of Satan, did wilfully transgress the Law of their Creation, and break the Covenant in eating the forbidden fruit.
II. By this sin they, and we in them, fell from original righ∣teousness and communion with God, and so became dead in sin, and wholly defiled in all the faculties and parts of soul and body. III. They being the Root, and by Gods appointment stand∣ing in the room and stead of all mankinde, the guilt of this sin was imputed, and corrupted nature conveyed to all their posterity descending from them by ordinary generation. IV. From this Original corruption, whereby we are utterly indisposed, disabled and made opposite to all good, and wholly inclined to all evil, do proceed all Actual trans∣gression. V. This Corruption of nature during this life, doth remain in those that are regenerated; and although it be through Christ pardoned and mortified, yet both it self and all the motions thereof are truely and properly sin. VI. Every sin, both original and actual, being a transgression of the righteous Law of God, and contrary thereunto, doth in its own nature bring guilt upon the sinner, whereby he is bound over to the wrath of God, and curse of the Law, and so made subject to death, with all miseries spiritual, temporal and eternal.
CHAP. VII. Of Gods Covenant with Man. THe distance between God and the Creature is so great, that although reasonable creatures do owe obedience unto him as their Creator, yet they could never have at∣tained the reward of life, but by some voluntary condescen∣sion on Gods part, which he hath been pleased to express by way of Covenant. II. The first Covenant made with man, was a Covenant of Works, wherein life was promised to Adam, and in him to his posterity, upon condition of perfect and personal obe∣dience. III. Man by his fall having made himself uncapable of life by that Covenant, the Lord was pleased to make a second, commonly called the Covenant of Grace; wherein he freely offereth unto sinners life and salvation by Jesus Christ, requiring of them faith in him that they may be saved, and promising to give unto all those that are ordained unto life, his holy Spirit, to make them willing and able to believe. IV. This Covenant of Grace is frequently set forth in the Scripture by the name of a Testament, in reference to the death of Jesus Christ the Testator, and to the everlasting Inheritance, with all things belonging to it, therein be∣queathed.
V. Although this Covenant hath been differently and vari∣ously administred in respect of Ordinances and Institutions in the time of the Law, and since the coming of Christ in the flesh; yet for the substance and efficacy of it, to all its spiritual and saving ends, it is one and the same; upon the account of which various dispensations, it is called the Old and New Testament. CHAP. VIII. Of Christ the Mediator. IT pleased God in his eternal purpose, to chuse and ordain the Lord Jesus his onely begotten Son, according to a Covenant made between them both, to be the Mediator between God and Man; the Prophet, Priest, and King, the Head and Savior of his Church, the Heir of all things, and Judge of the World; unto whom he did from all eter∣nity give a people to be his feed, and to be by him in time redeemed, called, justified, sanctified, and glorified. II. The Son of God, the second Person in the Trinity, be∣ing very and eternal God, of one substance, and equal with the Father, did, when the fulness of time was come, take upon him Mans nature, with all the essential properties and common infirmities thereof, yet without sin, being conceived by the power of the holy Ghost in the womb of the Virgin Mary of her substance: So that two whole per∣fect
and distinct natures, the Godhead and the Manhood, were inseparably joyned together in one Person, without conversion, composition, or confusion; which Person is very God and very Man, yet one Christ, the onely Medi∣ator between God and Man. III. The Lord Jesus in his Humane nature, thus united to the Divine in the Person of the Son, was sanctified and anointed with the holy Spirit above measure, having in him all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, in whom it pleased the Father that all fulness should dwell, to the end that being holy, harmless, undefiled, and full of grace and truth, he might be throughly furnished to ex∣ecute the Office of a Mediator and Surety; which Office he took not unto himself, but was thereunto called by his Father, who also put all Power and Judgement into his hand, and gave him Commandment to execute the same. IV. This Office the Lord Jesus did most willingly undertake; which that he might discharge, he was made under the Law, and did perfectly fulfil it, and underwent the punish∣ment due to us, which we should have born and suffered, be∣ing made sin and a curse for us, enduring most grievous tor∣ments immediately from God in his soul, and most painful sufferings in his body, was crucified, and died, was buried, and remained under the power of death, yet saw no corruption, on the third day he arose from the dead with the same Bo∣dy in which he suffered, with which also he ascended into Heaven, and there sitteth at the right hand of his Father, making intercession, and shall return to judge Men and An∣gels at the end of the world.
V. The Lord Jesus by his perfect obedience and sacrifice of himself, which he through the eternal Spirit once offered up unto God, hath fully satisfied the Justice of God, and purchased not onely reconciliation, but an everlasting inhe∣ritance in the Kingdom of heaven, for all those whom the Father hath given unto him. VI. Athough the work of Redemption was not actually wrought by Christ, till after his Incarnation; yet the vertue, efficacy and benefits thereof were communicated to the Elect in all ages successively from the beginning of the world, in and by those Promises, Types and Sacrifices, wherein he was revealed and signified to be the Seed of the Woman, which should bruise the Serpents head, and the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, being yester∣day and to day the same, and for ever. VII. Christ in the work of Mediation acteth according to both Natures, by each Nature doing that which is proper to it self; yet by reason of the unity of the Person, that which is proper to one Nature, is sometimes in Scripture attributed to the Person denominated by the other Nature, VIII. To all those for whom Christ hath purchased Redem∣ption, he doth certainly and effectually apply and commu∣nicate the same, making intercession for them, and reveal∣ing unto them in and by the Word, the mysteries of salva∣tion,
effectually perswading them by his Spirit to believe and obey, and governing their hearts by his Word and Spi∣rit, overcoming all their enemies by his almighty Power and Wisdom, in such maner and ways as are most conso∣nant to his wonderful and unsearchable dispensation. Chap. IX. Of Free-will. GOd hath endued the Will of man with that natural li∣berty and power of acting upon choice, that it is nei∣ther forced, nor by any absolute necessity of Nature de∣termined to do good or evil. II. Man in his state of Innocency had freedom and power to will and to do that which was good and well pleasing to God; but yet mutably, so that he might fall from it. III. Man by his fall into a state of sin, hath wholly lost all ability of will to any spiritual good accompanying salvati∣on; so as a natural man being altogether averse from that good, and dead in sin, is not able by his own strength to convert himself, or to prepare himself thereunto. IV. When God converts a sinner, and translates him into the state of grace, he freeth him from his natural bondage under sin, and by his grace alone inables him freely to will
and to do that which is spiritually good; yet so, as that by reason of his remaining corruption, he doth not per∣fectly nor onely will that which is good, but doth also will that which is evil. V. The will of Man is made perfectly and immutably free to good alone in the state of Glory onely. CHAP. X. Of Effectual Calling. ALl those whom God hath predestinated unto life, and those onely, he is pleased in his appointed and accepted time effectually to call by his Word and Spirit, out of that state of sin and death in which they are by nature, to grace and salvation by Jesus Christ, inlightning their mindes spiritually and savingly to understand the things of God, taking away their heart of stone, and giving unto them an heart of flesh, renewing their wills, and by his almighty power determining them to that which is good, and effectually drawing them to Jesus Christ; yet so, as they come most freely, being made willing by his grace. II. This effectual Call is of Gods free and special grace alone, not from any thing at all foreseen in man, who is altoge∣ther passive therein, until being quickned and renewed by the holy Spirit, he is thereby enabled to answer this Call, and to embrace the grace offered and conveyed in it.
III. Elect Infants dying in Infancy, are regenerated and saved by Christ, who worketh when, and where, and how he pleas∣eth: so also are all other elect persons who are uncapable of being outwardly called by the Ministery of the Word. IV. Others not elected, although they may be called by the Ministery of the Word, and may have some common ope∣rations of the Spirit, yet not being effectually drawn by the Father, they neither do nor can come unto Christ, and there∣fore cannot be saved; much less can men not professing the Christian Religion, be saved in any other way whatsoever, be they never so diligent to frame their lives according to the Light of Nature, and the Law of that Religion they do profess: And to assert and maintain that they may, is very pernicious, and to be detested. CHAP. XI. Of Justification. THose whom God effectually calleth, he also freely ju∣stifieth, not by infusing righteousness into them, but by pardoning their sins, and by accounting and accepting their persons as righteous, not for any thing wrought in them, or done by them, but for Christs sake alone; nor by impu∣ting Faith it self, the act of believing, or any other Evan∣gelical obedience to them, as their righteousness, but by im∣puting Christs active obedience unto the whole Law, and
passive obedience in his death, for their whole and sole righ∣teousness, they receiving and resting on him and his righ∣teousness by Faith, which Faith they have not of them∣selves, it is the gift of God. II. Faith thus receiving and resting on Christ, and his righ∣teousness, is the alone instrument of justification; yet it is not alone in the person justified, but is ever accompanied with all other saving graces, and is no dead Faith, but work∣eth by Love. III. Christ by his Obedience and Death did fully discharge the Debt of all those that are justified, and did by the sa∣crifice of himself, in the blood of his Cross, undergoing in their stead the penalty due unto them, make a proper, real, and full satisfaction to Gods Justice in their behalf: Yet in as much as he was given by the Father for them, and his Obedience and Satisfaction accepted in their stead, and both freely, not for any thing in them, their justification is onely of free grace, that both the exact justice and rich grace of God might be glorified in the justification of sinners. IV. God did from all eternity decree to justifie all the Elect, and Christ did in the fulness of time die for their sins, and rise again for their justification: Nevertheless, they are not justified personally, until the holy Spirit doth in due time actually apply Christ unto them.
V. God doth continue to forgive the sins of those that are justified; and although they can never fall from the state of justification, yet they may by their sins fall under Gods fatherly displeasure: and in that condition they have not usually the light of his Countenance restored unto them, until they humble themselves, confess their sins, beg par∣don, and renew their faith and repentance. VI. The justification of Believers under the old Testament, was in all these respects one and the same with the justifica∣tion of Believers under the new Testament. CHAP. XII. Of Adoption. ALl those that are justified, God vouchsafeth in and for his onely Son Jesus Christ to make partakers of the grace of Adoption, by which they are taken into the num∣ber, and enjoy the Liberties and priviledges of the Chil∣dren of God, have this Name put upon them, receive the Spirit of Adoption, have access to the Throne of Grace with boldness, are enabled to cry Abba Father, are pitied, protected, provided for, and chastened by him as by a fa∣ther, yet never cast off, but sealed to the day of Redem∣ption, and inherit the Promises as Heirs of everlasting Sal∣vation.
CHAP. XIII. Of Sanctification. THey that are united to Christ, effectually called and regenerated, having a new heart and a new spirit crea∣ted in them, through the vertue of Christs death and re∣surrection, are also further sanctified really and personally through the same vertue, by his Word and Spirit dwel∣ling in them; the dominion of the whole body of sin is destroyed, and the several lusts thereof are more and more weakned and mortified, and they more and more quick∣ned, and strengthned in all saving graces, to the practice of all true holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. II. This Sanctification is throughout in the whole man, yet imperfect in this life, there abideth still some remnants of corruption in every part, whence ariseth a continual and irre∣concileable war, the flesh lusting against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh. III. In which war, although the remaining corruption for a time may much prevail, yet through the continual supply of strength from the sanctifying Spirit of Christ, the rege∣nerate part doth overcome, and so the Saints grow in grace, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.
CHAP. XIV. Of saving Faith. THe grace of Faith, whereby the Elect are inabled to be∣lieve to the saving of their souls, is the work of the Spirit of Christ in their hearts, and is ordinarily wrought by the Ministery of the Word; by which also, and by the administration of the Seals, Prayer, and other means, it is increased and strengthened. II. By this Faith a Christian believeth to be true whatso∣ever is revealed in the Word, for the Authority of God himself speaking therein, and acteth differently upon that which each particular passage thereof containeth, yield∣ing obedience to the commands, trembling at the threat∣nings, and embracing the promises of God for this life, and that which is to come. But the principal acts of saving Faith are, accepting, receiving, and resting upon Christ alone, for justification, sanctification, and eternal life, by vertue of the covenant of Grace. III. This Faith, although it be different in degrees, and may be weak or strong, yet it is in the least degree of it differ∣ent in the kinde or nature of it (as is all other saving grace) from the faith and common grace of temporary believers; and therefore, though it may be many times assailed and weakned, yet it gets the victory, growing up in many to the attainment of a full assurance through Christ, who is both the author and finisher of our Faith.
CHAP. XV. Of Repentance unto life and salvation. SUch of the Elect as are converted at riper years, having sometime lived in the state of nature, and therein ser∣ved divers lusts and pleasures, God in their effectual calling giveth them Repentance unto life. II. Whereas there is none that doth good, and sinneth not, and the best of men may through the power and deceitful∣ness of their corruptions dwelling in them, with the preva∣lency of temptation, fall into great sins and provocations; God hath in the covenant of Grace mercifully provided, that Believers so sinning and falling, be renewed through re∣pentance unto Salvation. III. This saving Repentance is an Evangelical Grace, where∣by a person being by the holy Ghost made sensible of the manifold evils of his sin, doth by Faith in Christ humble himself for it with godly sorrow, detestation of it, and self-abhorrency, praying for pardon and strength of Grace, with a purpose, and endeavor by supplies of the Spirit, to walk before God unto all well-pleasing in all things. IV. As Repentance is to be continued through the whole course of our lives, upon the account of the body of death, and the motions thereof; so it is every mans duty to repent of his particular known sins particularly.
V. Such is the provision which God hath made through Christ in the Covenant of Grace, for the preservation of Believers unto salvation, that although there is no sin so small, but it deserves damnation; yet there is no sin so great, that it shall bring damnation on them who truly re∣pent; which makes the constant preaching of Repentance necessary. CHAP. XVI. Of good Works. GOOd works are onely such as God hath commanded in his holy Word, and not such as without the warrant thereof are devised by men out of blinde zeal, or upon any pretence of good intentions. II. These good Works done in obedience to Gods com∣mandments, are the fruits and evidences of a true and live∣ly Faith, and by them Believers manifest their thankful∣ness, strengthen their assurance, edifie their Brethren, adorn the profession of the Gospel, stop the mouthes of the adversaries, and glorifie God, whose workmanship they are, created in Christ Jesus thereunto, that having their fruit unto holiness, they may have the end eter∣nal life.
III. Their ability to do good works is not at all of them∣selves, but wholly from the Spirit of Christ: And that they may be enabled thereunto, besides the graces they have already received, there is required an actual influence of the same holy Spirit to work in them to will and to do, of his good pleasure; yet are they not hereupon to grow negligent, as if they were not bound to perform any duty, unless upon a special motion of the Spirit, but they ought to be diligent in stirring up the grace of God that is in them. IV. They who in their obedience attain to the greatest height which is possible in this life, are so far from being able to supererogate, and to do more then God requires, as that they fall short of much, which in duty they are bound to do. V. We cannnot by our best works merit pardon of sin, or eternal life at the hand of God, by reason of the great dis∣proportion that is between them, and the glory to come; and the infinite distance that is between us, and God, whom by them we can neither profit, nor tisfie for the debt of our former sins; but when we have done all we can, we have done but our duty, and are unprofitable servants: and be∣cause as they are good, they proceed from his Spirit, and as they are wrought by us, they are defiled and mixed with so much weakness and imperfection, that they cannot en∣dure the severity of Gods judgement.
VI. Yet notwithstanding, the persons of Believers being ac∣cepted through Christ, their good works also are accepted in Him, not as though they were in this life wholly un∣blameable and unreproveable in Gods sight, but that he looking upon them in his Son is pleased to accept and re∣ward that which is sincere, although accompanied with many weaknesses and imperfections. VII. Works done by unregenerate men, although for the matter of them they may be things which God commands, and of good use both to themselves and to others: yet be∣cause they proceed not from a heart purified by Faith, nor are done in a right maner, according to the Word; not to a right end, the glory of God; they are therefore sinful, and cannot please God, nor make a man meet to receive grace from God; and yet their neglect of them is more sin∣ful, and displeasing unto God. CHAP. XVII. Of the Perseverance of the Saints. THey whom God hath accepted in his beloved, ef∣fectually called and sanctified by his Spirit, can nei∣ther totally nor finally fall away from the state of grace, but shall certainly persevere therein to the end, and be eternally saved.
II. This Perseverance of the Saints depends not upon their own free-will, but upon the immutability of the Decree of Election, from the free and unchangeable love of God the Father, upon the efficacy of the merit and intercession of Jesus Christ, and union with him, the Oath of God, the abiding of his Spirit, and of the seed of God within them, and the nature of the Covenant of Grace, from all which ariseth also the certainty and infallibility thereof. III. And though they may through the temptation of Satan, and of the world, the prevalency of corruption remaining in them, and the neglect of the means of their preservation, fall into grievous sins, and for a time continue therein, where∣by they incur Gods displeasure, and grieve his holy Spirit, come to have their graces and comforts impaired, have their hearts hardned, and their consciences wounded, hurt and scandalize others, and bring temporal judgements upon them∣selves; yet they are and shall be kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation. CHAP. XVIII. Of the Assurance of Grace and Salvation. ALthough temporary believers, and other unregenerate men may vainly deceive themselves with false hopes, and carnal presumptions of being in the favor of God, and state of salvation, which hope of theirs shall perish; yet
such as truly believe in the Lord Jesus, and love him in sincerity, endeavoring to walk in all good conscience before him, may in this life be certainly assured that they are in the state of Grace, and may rejoyce in the hope of the glo∣ry of God, which hope shall never make them ashamed. II. This certainty is not a bare conjectural and probable per∣swasion, grounded upon a fallible hope, but and infallible as∣surance of faith, founded on the blood and righteousness of Christ, revealed in the Gospel, and also upon the in∣ward evidence of those graces unto which promises are made, and on the immediate witness of the Spirit, testify∣ing our Adoption, and as a fruit thereof, leaving the heart more humbl and holy. III. This infallible Assurance doth not so belong to the es∣sence of Faith, but that a true believer may wait long, and conflict with many difficulties before he be partaker of it; yet being inabled by the Spirit to know the things which are freely given him of God, he may without extraordina∣ry revelation in the right use of ordinary means attain there∣unto: And therefore it is the duty of every one to give all diligence to make his calling and election sure, that there∣by his heart may be inlarged in peace and joy in the holy Ghost, in love and thankfulness to God, and in strength and chearfulness in the duties of obedience, the proper fruits of this assurance; so far is it from inclining men to loosness.
IV. True believers may have the assurance of their salvation divers ways shaken, diminished and intermitted, as by neg∣ligence in preserving of it, by falling into some special sin, which woundeth the conscience, and grieveth the Spirit, by some sudden or vehement temptation, by Gods with∣drawing the light of his countenance, suffering even such as fear him to walk in darkness, and to have no light; yet are they neither utterly destitute of that seed of God, and life of Faith, that love of Christ and the Brethren, that sin∣cerity of heart and conscience of duty, out of which by the operation of the Spirit, this assurance may in due time be revived, and by the which in the mean time they are sup∣ported from utter despair. CHAP. XIX. Of the Law of God. GOd gave to Adam a Law of universal obedience written in his heart, and a particular precept of not eat∣ing the Fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, as a Covenant of Works, by which he bound him and all his posterity to personal, entire, exact and perpetual obedi∣ence, promised life upon the fulfilling, and threatned death upon the breach of it, and indued him with power and abi∣lity to keep it. II. This Law so written in the heart, continued to be a per∣fect
Rule of righteousness after the fall of man, and was de∣livered by God upon mount Sinai in ten Commandments, and written in two Tables, the four first Commandments containing our duty towards God, and the other six our du∣ty to man. III. Beside this Law commonly called Moral, God was pleased to give to the people of Israel Ceremonial Laws, containing several Typical Ordinances, partly of Worship, prefiguring Christ, his Graces, Actions, Sufferings and Be∣nefits, and partly holding forth divers Instructions of Moral Duties: All which Ceremonial Laws being appointed one∣ly to the time of Reformation, are by Jesus Christ the true Messiah and onely Law-giver, who was furnished with power from the Father for that end, abrogated and taken away. IV. To them also he gave sundry Judicial Laws, which ex∣pired together with the State of that people, not obliging any now by vertue of that Institution, their general equi∣ty onely being still of moral use. V. The Moral Law doth for ever binde all, as well justified persons as others, to the obedience thereof▪ and that not onely in regard of the matter contained in it, but also in re∣spect of the Authority of God the Creator, who gave it▪ neither doth Christ in the Gospel any way dissolve, but much strengthen this obligation.
VI. Although true believers be not under the Law, as a Co∣venant of Works, to be thereby justified or condemned; yet it is of great use to them as well as to others, in that, as a rule of life, informing them of the Will of God, and their duty, it directs and bindes them to walk accordingly, discovering also the sinful pollutions of their nature, hearts and lives, so as examining themselves thereby, they may come to further conviction of humiliation for, and hatred against sin, together with a clearer sight of the need they have of Christ, and the perfection of his obedience. It is likewise of use to the regenerate, to restrain their corrupti∣ons, in that it forbids sin, and the threatnings of it serve to shew what even their sins deserve, and what afflictions in this life they may expect for them, although freed from the curse thereof threatned in the Law. The promises of it in like maner shew them Gods approbation of obedi∣ence, and what blessings they may expect upon the perfor∣mance thereof, although not as due to them by the Law, as a Covenant of Works; so as a mans doing good, and re∣fraining from evil, because the Law incourageth to the one, and deterreth from the other, is no evidence of his being under the Law, and not under Grace. VII. Neither are the forementioned uses of the Law contrary to the grace of the Gospel, but do sweetly comply with it, the Spirit of Christ subduing and inabling the will of man to do that freely and chearfully, which the will of God re∣vealed in the Law required to be done.
CHAP. XX. Of the Gospel, and of the extent of the Grace thereof. THe Covenant of Works being broken by sin, and made unprofitable unto life, God was pleased to give unto the Elect the promise of Christ, the seed of the Wo∣man, as the means of calling them, and begetting in them Faith and Repentance: In this promise, the Gospel, as to the substance of it, was revealed, and was therein effectu∣al for the conversion and salvation of sinners. II. This promise of Christ, and salvation by him, is reveal∣ed onely in and by the Word of God, neither do the works of Creation or Providence, with the Light of Nature, make discovery of Christ, or of Grace by him, so much as in a general or obscure way; much less that men destitute of the revelation of him by the Promise or Gospel, should be inabled thereby to attain saving Faith or Repentance. III. The revelation of the Gospel unto sinners made in divers times, and by sundry parts, with the addition of Promises and Precepts for the obedience required there∣in, as to the Nations and persons to whom it is granted, is meerly of the Soveraign will and good pleasure of God, not being annexed by vertue of any promise to the due im∣provement
of mens natural abilities, by vertue of common light received without it, which none ever did make, or can so do: And therefore in all ages the Preaching of the Go∣spel hath been granted unto Persons and Nations, as to the extent or straitning of it, in great variety, according to the Counsel of the Will of God. IV. Although the Gospel be the onely outward means of revealing Christ and saving Grace, and is, as such, abundant∣ly sufficient thereunto; yet that men who are dead in tres∣passes, may be born again, quickned or regenerated, there is moreover necessary an effectual, irresistible work of the holy Ghost upon the whole soul, for the producing in them a new spiritual life, without which no other means are suf∣ficient for their conversion unto God. CHAP. XXI. Of Christian Liberty, and Liberty of Conscience. THe Liberty which Christ hath purchased for Believers under the Gospel, consists in their freedom from the guilt of sin, the condemning wrath of God, the rigor and curse of the Law, and in their being delivered from this present evil world, bondage to Satan, and dominion of sin, from the evil of afflictions, the fear and sting of death, the victory of the grave, and everlasting damnation; as also in their free access to God, and their yielding obedi∣ence unto him, not out of slavish fear, but a childe-like
love and willing minde: All which were common also to Believers under the Law, for the substance of them; but under the New Testament the liberty of Christians: is fur∣ther inlarged in their freedom from the yoak of the Cere∣monial Law, the whole Legal administration of the Cove∣nant of Grace, to which the Jewish Church was subjected, and in greater boldness of access to the throne of Grace, and in fuller communications of the free Spirit of God, then Believers under the Law did ordinarily partake of. II. God alone is Lord of the Conscience, and hath left it free from the Doctrines and Commandments of men, which are in any thing contrary to his Word, or not contained in it; so that to believe such Doctrines, or to obey such Commands out of conscience, is to betray true Liberty of Conscience; and the requiring of an implicit faith, and an absolute and blinde obedience, is to destroy Liberty of Conscience, and Reason also. III. They who upon pretence of Christian Liberty do pra∣ctice any sin, or cherish any lust, as they do thereby pervert the main designe of the Grace of the Gospel to their own destruction; so they wholly destroy the end of Christian Liberty, which is, that being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, we might serve the Lord without fear, in ho∣liness and righteousness before him all the days of our life.
CHAP. XXII. Of religious Worship, and the Sabbath-day. THe light of Nature sheweth that there is a God, who hath Lordship and Soveraignty over all, is just, good, and doth good unto all, and is therefore to be feared, lo∣ved, praised, called upon, trusted in, and served with all the heart, and all the soul, and with all the might: But the acceptable way of worshipping the true God is instituted by himself, and so limited by his own revealed will, that he may not be worshipped according to the imaginations and devices of men, or the suggestions of Satan, under any visi∣ble representations, or any other way not prescribed in the holy Scripture. II. Religious Worship is to be given to God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and to him alone; not to Angels, Saints, or any other Creatures, and since the Fall, not with∣out a Mediator, nor in the mediation of any other but of Christ alone. III. Prayer with thanksgiving, being one special part of na∣tural worship, is by God required of all men, but that it may be accepted, it is to be made in the name of the Son by the help of his Spirit, according to his will, with under∣standing, reverence, humility, fervency, faith, love, and perseverance, and when with others, in a known tongue.
IV. Prayer is to be made for things lawful, and for all sorts of men living, or that shall live hereafter, but not for the dead, nor for those of whom it may be known that they have sinned the sin unto death. V. The reading of the Scriptures, Preaching, and hearing the word of God, singing of Psalms, as also the admini∣stration of Baptism and the Lords Supper, are all parts of religious Worship of God, to be performed in obedience un∣to God with understanding, faith, reverence, and godly fear. Solemn Humiliations, with Fastings and Thanksgiving upon special occasions, are in their several times and seasons to be used in a holy and religious maner. VI. Neither Prayer, nor any other part of religious Worship, is now under the Gospel either tyed unto, or made more acceptable by any place, in which it is performed, or to∣wards which it is directed; but God is to be worshipped every where in spirit and in truth, as in private families day∣ly, and in secret each one by himself, so more solemnly in the publique assemblies, which are not carelesly nor wil∣fully to be neglected, or forsaken, when God by his Word of Providence calleth thereunto. VII. As it is of the law of Nature, that in general a propor∣tion of time by Gods appointment be set apart for the wor∣ship of God; so by his Word in a positive, moral, and per∣petual
commandment, binding all men in all ages, he hath particularly appointed one day in seven for a Sabbath to be kept holy unto him, which from the beginning of the world to the resurrection of Christ, was the last day of the week, and from the resurrection of Christ was changed into the first day of the week, which in Scripture is called the Lords day, and is to be continued to the end of the world as the Christian Sabbath, the observation of the last day of the week being abolished. VIII. This Sabbath is then kept holy unto the Lord, when men after a due preparing of their hearts, and ordering their common affairs beforehand, do not onely observe an holy rest all the day from their own works, words, and thoughts about their worldly imployments and recreations, but also are taken up the whole time in the publique and private exercises of his Worship, and in the duties of Neces∣sity and Mercy. CHAP. XXIII. Of lawful Oaths and Vows. A Lawful Oath is a part of religious Worship, wherein the person swearing in truth, righteousness and judge∣ment, solemnly calleth God to witness what he asserteth or promiseth, and to judge him according to the truth or fals∣hood of what he sweareth.
II. The name of God onely is that by which men ought to swear, and therein it is to be used with all holy fear and re∣verence: Therefore to swear vainly, or rashly, by that glo∣rious or dreadful name, or to swear at all by any other thing, is sinful, and to be abhorred; yet as in matters of weight and moment an Oath is warranted by the Word of God un∣der the New Testament, as well as under the Old; so a law∣ful Oath, being imposed by lawful authority in such mat∣ters, ought to be taken. III. Whosoever taketh an Oath warranted by the Word of God, ought duly to consider the weightiness of so solemn an act, and therein to avouch nothing but what he is fully perswaded is the truth: neither may any man binde himself by Oath to any thing, but what is good and just, and what he believeth so to be, and what he is able and resolved to perform. Yet it is a sin to refuse an Oath touching any thing that is good and just, being lawfully imposed by Authority. IV. An Oath is to be taken in the plain and common sense of the words, without equivocation or mental reservation: It cannot oblige to sin, but in any thing not sinful being ta∣ken it bindes to performance, although to a mans own hurt; nor is it to be violated, although made to Hereticks or infidels.
V. A Vow, which is not to be made to any Creature, but God alone, is of the like nature with a promissory Oath, and ought to be made with the like religious care, and to be performed with the like faithfulness. VI. Popish monasticall Vows of perpetual single life, professed poverty, and regular obedience, are so far from being degrees of higher perfection, that they are supersti∣tious and sinful snares, in which no Christian may intangle himself. CHAP. XXIV. Of the civil Magistrate. GOd the supreme Lord and King of all the world, hath ordained civil Magistrates to be under him, over the people for his own glory and the publique good; and to this end hath armed them with the power of the sword, for the defence and incouragement of them that do good, and for the punishment of evil doers. II. It is lawful for Christians to accept and execute the office of a Magistrate, when called thereunto: in the manage∣ment whereof, as they ought especially to maintain Ju∣stice and Peace, according to the wholsome Laws of each Commonwealth; so for that end they may lawfully now
under the new Testament wage war upon just and neces∣sary occasion. III. Although the Magistrate is bound to incourage, pro∣mote, and protect the professors and profession of the Go∣spel, and to manage and order civil administrations in a due subserviency to the interest of Christ in the world, and to that end to take care that men of corrupt mindes and conversations do not licentiously publish and divulge Blasphemies and Errors, in their own nature, subverting the faith, and inevitably destroying the souls of them that re∣ceive them: Yet in such differences about the Doctrines of the Gospel, or ways of the worship of God, as may be∣fal men exercising a good conscience, manifesting it in their conversation, and holding the foundation, not di∣sturbing others in their ways or worship that differ from them; there is no warrant for the Magistrate under the Gospel to abridge them of their liberty. IV. It is the duty of people to pray for Magistrates, to ho∣nor their persons, to pay them Tribute and other dues, to obey their lawful commands, and to be subject to their Authority for conscience sake. Infidelity, or difference in religion, doth not make void the Magistrates just and le∣gal Authority, nor free the people from their obedience to him: from which ecclesiastical persons are not exempted, much less hath the Pope any power or Jurisdiction over them in their dominions, or over any of their people, and least of all to deprive them of their Dominions or lives, if he shall judge them to be Hereticks, or upon any other pre∣tence whatsoever.
CHAP. XXV. Of Marriage. MArriage is to be between one man and one woman: neither is it lawful for any man to have more then one wife, nor for any woman to have more then one hus∣band at the same time. II. Marriage was ordained for the mutual help of husband and wife, for the increase of mankinde with a legitimate issue, and of the Church with an holy seed, and for pre∣venting of uncleanness. III. It is lawful for all sorts of people to marry, who are able with judgement to give their consent. Yet it is the duty of Christians to marry in the Lord, and therefore such as profess the true Reformed Religion, should not marry with Infidels, Papists, or other Idolaters: neither should such as are godly, be unequally yoaked by marrying with such as are wicked in their life, or maintain damnable Heresie. IV. Marriage ought not to be within the degrees of consan∣guinity or affinity forbidden in the Word; nor can such incestuous Marriages ever be made lawful by any law of man, or consent of parties, so as those persons may live together as man and wife.
CHAP. XXVI. Of the Church. THe Catholique or Universal Church, which is invi∣sible, consists of the whole number of the Elect, that have been, are, or shall be gathered into one under Christ, the Head thereof, and is the Spouse, the Body, the fulness of him that filleth all in all. II. The whole body of men throughout the world, profes∣sing the faith of the Gospel and obedience unto God by Christ according unto it, not destroying their own pro∣fession by any Errors everting the foundation, or unholi∣ness of conversation, are, and may be called the visible Ca∣tholique Church of Christ, although as such it is not in∣trusted with the administration of any Ordinances, or have any officers to rule or govern in, or over the whole Body. III. The purest Churches under heaven are subject both to mixture and error, and some have so degenerated as to be∣come no Churches of Christ, but Synagogues of Satan: Nevertheless Christ always hath had, and ever shall have a visible Kingdom in this world, to the end thereof, of such as believe in him, and make profession of his name. IV. There is no other Head of the Church but the Lord Jesus Christ, nor can the Pope of Rome in any sense be
Head thereof; but is that Antichrist, that man of sin, and son of perdition, that exalteth himself in the Church against Christ, and all that is called God, whom the Lord shall destroy with the brightness of his coming. V. As the Lord in his care and love towards his Church, hath in his infinite wise providence exercised it with great variety in all ages, for the good of them that love him, and his own Glory: so according to his promise, we ex∣pect that in the latter days, Antichrist being destroyed, the Jews called, and the adversaries of the Kingdom of his dear Son broken, the Churches of Christ being inlarged and edified through a free and plentiful communication of light and grace, shall enjoy in this world a more quiet, peaceable and glorious condition then they have enjoyed. CHAP. XXVII. Of the Communion of Saints. ALl Saints that are united to Jesus Christ their Head by his Spirit and Faith, although they are not made thereby one person with him, have fellowship in his Graces, Sufferings, Death, Resurrection and Glory▪ and being united to one another in love, they have commu∣nion in each others gifts and graces, and are obliged to the performance of such duties, publique and private, as do con∣duce to their mutual good, both in the inward and outward Man.
II. All Saints are bound to maintain an holy fellowship and communion in the Worship of God, and in performing such other spiritual services as tend to their mutual edification; as also in relieving each other in outward things, according to their several abilities and necessities: which communion, though especially to be exercised by them in the relations wherein they stand, whether in Families or Churches, yet as God offereth opportunity, is to be extended unto all those who in every place call upon the Name of the Lord Jesus. CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Sacraments. SAcraments are holy Signs and Seals of the Covenant of Grace, immediately instituted by Christ, to represent him and his benefits, and to confirm our interest in him, and so∣lemnly to engage us to the service of God in Christ, ac∣cording to his Word. II. There is in every Sacrament a spiritual relation, or sacra∣mental union between the sign and the thing signified; whence it comes to pass that the names and effects of the one are attributed to the other. III. The grace which is exhibited in or by the Sacraments rightly used, is not conferred by any power in them, neither
doth the efficacy of a Sacrament depend upon the piety or intention of him that doth administer it, but upon the work of the Spirit, and the word of Institution, which con∣tains together with a Precept authorizing the use thereof, a Promise of benefit to worthy receivers. IV. There be onely two Sacraments ordained by Christ our Lord in the Gospel, that is to say, Baptism and the Lords Supper; neither of which may be dispensed by any but by a Minister of the Word lawfully called. V. The Sacraments of the Old Testament, in regard of the spiritual things thereby signified and exhibited, were for substance the same with those of the New. CHAP. XXIX. Of Baptism. BAptism is a Sacrament of the New Testament, ordained by Jesus Christ to be unto the party baptized a sign and seal of the Covenant of Grace, of his ingraffing into Christ, of regeneration, of remission of sins, and of his gi∣ving up unto God through Jesus Christ to walk in newness of life; which Ordinance is by Christs own appointment to be continued in his Church until the end of the world. II. The outward Element to be used in this Ordinance, is
Water, wherewith the party is to be baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, by a Minister of the Gospel lawfully called. III. Dipping of the person into the water is not necessary, but Baptism is rightly administered by pouring or sprinkling water upon the person. IV. Not onely those that do actually profess faith in, and obedience unto Christ, but also the Infants of one or both believing parents are to be baptized, and those onely. V. Although it be a great sin to contemn or neglect this Ordinance, yet grace and salvation are not so inseparably annexed unto it, as that no person can be regenerated or sa∣ved without it; or that all that are baptized, are undoubtedly regenerated. VI. The efficacy of Baptism is not tied to that moment of time wherein it is administered, yet notwithstanding, by the right use of this Ordinance, the grace promised is not onely offered, but really exhibited and conferred by the holy Ghost to such (whether of age, or infants) as that grace be∣longeth unto, according to the counsel of Gods own Will in his appointed time. VII. Baptism is but once to be administered to any person.
CHAP. XXX. Of the Lords Supper. OUr Lord Jesus in the night wherein he was betrayed, instituted the Sacrament of his Body and Blood, called the Lords Supper, to be observed in his Churches unto the end of the world, for the perpetual remembrance, and shew∣ing forth of the Sacrifice of himself in his death, the seal∣ing of all benefits thereof unto true believers, their spiritu∣al nourishment, and growth in him, their further ingage∣ment in and to all duties which they owe unto him, and to be a bond and pledge of their communion with him, and with each other. II. In this Sacrament Christ is not offered up to his Father, nor any real Sacrifice made at all for remission of sin of the quick or dead, but onely a memorial of that one offering up of himself by himself upon the Cross once for all, and a spi∣ritual Oblation of all possible praise unto God for the same; so that the Popish Sacrifice of the Mass (as they call it) is most abominable, injurious to Christs own onely Sacrifice, the alone propitiation for all the sins of the Elect. III. The Lord Jesus hath in this Ordinance appointed his Ministers to pray and bless the Elements of Bread and Wine, and thereby to set them apart from a common to an holy use, and to take and break the Bread, to take the Cup, and (they communicating also themselves) to give
both to the Communicants, but to none who are not then present in the Congregation. IV. Private Masses, or receiving the Sacrament by a Priest, or any other alone, as likewise the denial of the Cup to the people, worshiping the Elements, the lifting them up, or car∣rying them about for adoration, and the reserving them for any pretended religious use, are all contrary to the nature of this Sacrament, and to the Institution of Christ. V. The outward Elements in this Sacrament duely set apart to the uses ordained by Christ, have such relation to him Crucified, as that truly, yet Sacramentally onely, they are sometimes called by the name of the things they represent, to wit, the Body and Blood of Christ; albeit in substance and nature they still remain truly and onely Bread and Wine as they were before. VI. That Doctrine which maintains a change of the sub∣stance of Bread and Wine into the substance of Christs Bo∣dy and Blood (commonly called Transubstantiation) by con∣secration of a Priest, or by any other way, is repugnant not to Scripture alone, but even to common sense and reason, over∣throweth the nature of the Sacrament, and hath been, and is the cause of manifold Superstitions, yea of gross Ido∣latries. VII. Worthy Receivers outwardly partaking of the visible
Elements in this Sacrament, do then also inwardly by Faith, really and indeed, yet not carnally and corporally, but spi∣ritually, receive and feed upon Christ crucified, and all be∣nefits of his death; the Body and Blood of Christ being then not corporally or carnally in, with, or under the Bread or Wine; yet as really, but spiritually present to the Faith of Believers in that Ordinance, as the Elements themselves are to their outward senses. VIII. All ignorant and ungodly persons, as they are unfit to enjoy communion with Christ, so are they unworthy of the Lords Table, and cannot without great sin against him, whilest they remain such, partake of these holy Mysteries, or be admitted thereunto; yea whosoever shall receive un∣worthily, are guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord, eating and drinking Judgement to themselves. CHAP. XXXI. Of the state of Man after Death, and of the Resurrection of the Dead. THe Bodies of men after death return to dust, and see corruption, but their souls (which neither die nor sleep) having an immortal subsistence, immediately return to God who gave them, the souls of the righteous being then made perfect in holiness, are received into the highest Hea∣vens, where they behold the face of God in light and glo∣ry, waiting for the full redemption of their bodies: And
the souls of the wicked are cast into Hell, where they re∣main in torment and utter darkness, reserved to the Judge∣ment of the great day: Besides these two places for souls separated from their bodies, the Scripture acknowledgeth none. II. At the last day such as are found alive shall not die, but be changed, and all the dead shall be raised up with the self-same bodies, and none other, although with different qua∣lities, which shall be united again to their souls for ever. III. The bodies of the unjust shall by the Power of Christ be raised to dishonor; the bodies of the just by his Spirit unto honor, and be made conformable to his own glorious Body. CHAP. XXXII. Of the last Judgement. GOd hath appointed a day wherein he will judge the World in righteousness by Jesus Christ, to whom all Power and Judgement is given of the Father; in which day not onely the Apostate Angels shall be judged, but likewise all persons that have lived upon earth, shall appear before the Tribunal of Christ, to give an account of their thoughts, words and deeds, and to receive according to what they have done in the body, whether good or evil.
II. The end of Gods appointing this day, is for the mani∣festation of the Glory of his Mercy in the eternal salvation of the Elect, and of his Justice in the damnation of the Reprobate, who are wicked and disobedient: for then shall the righteous go into everlasting Life, and receive that ful∣ness of joy and glory, with everlasting reward in the pre∣sence of the Lord; but the wicked who know not God, and obey not the Gospel of Jesus Christ, shall be cast into eternal torments, and be punished with everlasting destru∣ction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his Power. III. As Christ would have us to be certainly perswaded that there shall be a Judgement, both to deter all men from sin, and for the greater consolation of the godly in their adver∣sity; so will he have that day unknown to men, that they may shake off all carnal security, and be always watchful, because they know not at what hour the Lord will come, and may be ever prepared to say, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Amen.
Books sold by John Allen at the Sun Rising in Pauls Church-yard, viz. Mr. Caryl's fifth Volume on the Book of Job, in quarto. Mr. Caryl's seventh Volume on the Book of Job, in quarto. Beza Novum Testamentum, in folio. Mr. Allens Scripture Chronology, in quarto. Dr. Preston's Riches of Mercy, in quarto. Buxtorfius's Lexicon, the best sort, in large octavo. Mr. Baxter's Call to the Unconverted. Mr. Cotton on the Covenant, intended suddenly for the Press. Mr. Lukin's Practice of Godliness. Mr. Burgess of Original sin. Pareus on the Revelation, in folio. Mr. Gataker against Judicial Astrology, wherein he proves it to be the way and practice of Heathens, and ought not to be so much as named by them that profess the Name of Christ. Esay 47.12, 13. Jer. 10.2.
OF THE INSTITUTION OF CHURCHES, AND THE ORDER Appointed in them by JESUS CHRIST. I. BY the appointment of the Father all Power for the Calling, Institution, Order or Government of the Church, is invested in a Supreme and So∣veraign maner in the Lord Jesus Christ, as King and Head thereof. II. In the execution of this Power wherewith he is so en∣trusted, the Lord Jesus calleth out of the World unto com∣munion with himself, those that are given unto him by his Father, that they may walk before him in all the ways of obedience, which he prescribeth to them in his Word.
III. Those thus called (through the Ministry of the Word by his Spirit) he commandeth to walk together in particu∣lar Societies or Churches, for their mutual edification, and the due performance of that publique Worship, which he requireth of them in this world. IV. To each of these Churches thus gathered, according unto his minde declared in his Word, he hath given all that Power and Authority, which is any way needfull for their carrying on that Order in Worship and Discipline, which he hath instituted for them to observe with Commands and Rules, for the due and right exerting and executing of that Power. V. These particular Churches thus appointed by the Au∣thority of Christ, and intrusted with power from him for the ends before expressed, are each of them as unto those ends, the seat of that Power which he is pleased to com∣municate to his Saints or Subjects in this world, so that as such they receive it immediately from himself. VI. Besides these particular Churches, there is not instituted by Christ any Church more extensive or Catholique en∣trusted with power for the administration of his Ordinances, or the execution of any authority in his name.
VII. A particular Church gathered and compleated according to the minde of Christ, consists of Officers and Members: The Lord Christ having given to his called ones (united ac∣cording to his appointment in Church-order) Liberty and Power to choose Persons fitted by the holy Ghost for that purpose, to be over them and to minister to them in the Lord. VII. The Members of these Churches are Saints by Calling, visibly manifesting and evidencing (in and by their professi∣on and walking) their obedience unto that Call of Christ, who being further known to each other by their confession of the Faith wrought in them by the power of God, declared by themselves or otherwise manifested, do willingly consent, to walk together according to the appointment of Christ, giving up themselves to the Lord, and to one another by the will of God in professed subjection to the Ordinances of the Gospel. IX. The Officers appointed by Christ to be chosen and set apart by the Church so called, and gathered for the pecu∣liar administration of Ordinances, and execution of Power or Duty which he intrusts them with, or calls them to, to be continued to the end of the world, are Pastors, Teach∣ers, Elders, and Deacons. X. Churches thus gathered and assembling for the Worship of God, are thereby visible and publique, and their As∣semblies
(in what place soever they are, according as they have liberty or opportunity) are therefore Church or Pub∣lique Assemblies. XI. The way appointed by Christ for the calling of any per∣son, fitted and gifted by the holy Ghost, unto the Office of Pastor, Teacher or Elder in a Church, is, that he be cho∣sen thereunto by the common suffrage of the Church it self, and solemnly set apart by Fasting and Prayer, with Imposition of Hands of the Eldership of that Church, if there be any before constituted therein: And of a Deacon, that he be chosen by the like suffrage, and set apart by Prayer, and the like Imposition of Hands. XII. The Essence of this Call of a Pastor, Teacher or Elder unto Office, consists in the Election of the Church, toge∣ther with his acceptation of it, and separation by Fasting and Prayer: And those who are so chosen, though not set apart by Imposition of Hands, are rightly constituted Mi∣nisters of Jesus Christ, in whose Name and Authority they exercise the Ministery to them so committed. The Cal∣ling of Deacons consisteth in the like Election and accepta∣tion, with separation by Prayer. XIII. Although it be incumbent on the Pastors and Teachers of the Churches to be instant in Preaching the Word, by way of Office; yet the work of Preaching the Word is not so peculiarly confined to them, but that others also gifted and fitted by the holy Ghost for it, and approved
(being by lawful ways and means in the Providence of God called thereunto) may publiquely, ordinarily and constantly per∣form it; so that they give themselves up thereunto. XIV. However, they who are ingaged in the work of Pub∣lique Preaching, and enjoy the Publique Maintenance upon that account, are not thereby obliged to dispense the Seals to any other then such as (being Saints by Calling, and ga∣thered according to the Order of the Gospel) they stand re∣lated to, as Pastors or Teachers; yet ought they not to neg∣lect others living within their Parochial Bounds, but besides their constant publique Preaching to them, they ought to enquire after their profiting by the Word, instructing them in, and pressing upon them (whether young or old) the great Doctrines of the Gospel, even personally and parti∣cularly, so far as their strength and time will admit. XV. Ordination alone without the Election or precedent con∣sent of the Church, by those who formerly have been Or∣dained by vertue of that Power they have received by their Ordination, doth not constitute any person a Church Offi∣cer, or communicate Office power unto him. XVI. A Church furnished with Officers (according to the minde of Christ) hath full power to administer all his Ordi∣nances; and where there is want of any one or more Offi∣cers required, that Officer, or those which are in the Church, may administer all the Ordinances proper to their particular Duty and Offices, but where there are no teach∣ing
Officers, none may administer the Seals, nor can the Church authorize any so to do. XVII. In the carrying on of Church-administrations, no person ought to be added to the Church, but by the consent of the Church it self; that so love (without dissimulation) may be preserved between all the Members thereof. XVIII. Whereas the Lord Jesus Christ hath appointed and in∣stituted as a means of Edification, that those who walk not according to the Rules and Laws appointed by him (in re∣spect of Faith and Life, so that just offence doth arise to the Church thereby) be censured in his Name and Autho∣rity: Every Church hath Power in it self to exercise and execute all those Censures appointed by him in the way and Order prescribed in the Gospel. XIX. The Censures so appointed by Christ, are Admonition and Excommunication: and whereas some offences are or may be known onely to some, it is appointed by Christ, that those to whom they are so known, do first admonish the offender in private: in publique offences where any sin, before all; or in case of non-amendment upon private admo∣nition, the offence being related to the Church, and the offender not manifesting his repentance, he is to be duely admonished in the Name of Christ by the whole Church, by the Ministery of the Elders of the Church; and if this Censure prevail not for his repentance, then he is to be cast out by Excommunication with the consent of the Church.
XX. As all Belevers are bound to joyn themselves to particu∣lar Church, when and where they have opportunity so to do, so non are to be admitted unto the Priviledges of the Churches who do not submit themselves to the Rule of Christ in he Censures of the Government of them. XXI. This being the way prescribed by Christ in case of offence, no Church-members upon any offences taken by them, having performed their duty required of them in this mat∣ter, ought to disturb any Church-order, or absent them∣selvs from the publique Assemblies, or the Administration of any Ordinances upon that pretence, but to wait upon Christ in the further proceeding of the Church. XXII. The Power of Censures being seated by Christ in a par∣ticular Church, is to be exercised onely towards particular Members of each Church respectively as such; and there is no power given by him unto any Synods or Ecclesiastical Assemblies to Excommunicate, or by their publique Edicts to threaten Excommunication, or other Church-censures against Churches, Magistrates, or their people upon any ac∣count, no man being obnoxious to that Censure, but upon his personal miscarriage, as a Member of a particular Church. XXIII. Although the Church is a Society of men, assembling
for the celebration of the Ordinances according to the ap∣pointment of Christ, yet every Society assembling for that end or purpose, upon the account of cohabation within any civil Precincts and Bounds, is not thereby constituted a Church, seeing there may be wanting among hem, what is essentially required thereunto; and therefore a Believer living with others in such a Precinct, may joyn hmself with any Church for his edification. XXIV. For the avoiding of differences that may otherwise arise, for the greater Solemnity in the Celebration of the Ordi∣nances of Christ, and the opening a way for the large use∣fulness of the Gifts and Graces of the holy Ghost; Saints living in one City or Town, or within such distances as that they may conveniently assemble for divine Worship, ought rather to joyn in one Church for their mutual strengthning and edification, then to set up many distinct Societies. XXV. As all Churches and all the Members of them are bound to pray continually for the good or prosperity of all the Churches of Christ in all places, and upon all occasions to further it; (Every one within the bounds of their Places and Callings, in the exercise of their Gifts and Graces) So the Churches themselves (when planed by the providence of God, so as they may have opportunity and advantage for it) ought to hold communion amongst themselves for their peace, increase of love, and mutual edification.
XXVI. In cases o difficulties or differences, either in point of Doctrine, o n Administrations, wherein either the Churches in general e concerned or any one Church in their Peace, Union an Edification, or any Member or Members of any Church  injured in or by any proceeding in Censes, not agreable to Truth and Order: it is according to the minde o Christ, that many Churches holding communion togethr, do by their Messengers meet in a Synod or Coun∣cel, to consider and give their advice in, or about that mat∣ter in ifference to be reported to all the Churches concern∣ed. Howbeit these Synods so assembled are not entrusted with any Church-Power, properly so called, or with any Jurisdiction over the Churches themselves, to exercise any Censures, either over any Churches or Persons, or to im∣pose their determinations on the Churches or Officers. XXVII. Besides these occasional Synods or Councels, there are not instituted by Christ any stated Synods in a fixed Com∣bination of Churches, or their Officers in lesser or greater Assemblies; nor are there any Synods appointed by Christ in a way of Subordination to one another. XXVIII. Persons that are joyned in Church-fellowship, ought not lightly or without just cause to withdraw themselves from the communion of the Church whereunto they are so joyn∣ed: Nevertheless, where any person cannot continue in any Church without his sin, either for want of the Administra∣tion of any Ordinances instituted by Christ, or by his be∣ing
