R2300 11904478 50654
HIS HIGHNESS Prince Rupert's LETTER TO THE EARL OF ARLINGTON His Majesties Principal Secretary of State. From on Board the ROYAL CHARLES off the Osterbank, the XXIXth of May, 1673. Distant from East Capel Seven Leagues, at One of the Clock Afternoon, the Wind S. S. W. Published by Authority. In the SAVOY: Printed by Tho. Newcomb. 1673.
His Highness Prince Rupert's Letter to the Earl of Arlington, His Majesties Principal Secretary of State, from on Board the Royal Charles, off of the Oster-bank, the 29 of May, 1673. di∣stant from East Capel Seven Leagues, at One Afternoon, the Wind S. S. W. I Give you herein an account of our Acti∣on yesterday, being the 28. such as at present can be made, having not had time to learn the Particulars of the Enemies losses. The foul weather before having given us opportunity and leisure to sound all the Sands; on the 27. it was resolved at a Council of War, held here on board with the Flag Officers, to attack the Enemy Riding at Anchor in a Line between the Rand and the Stony-bank. Accordingly a Squadron was then ordered out of the several Divisions of the Fleet (whereof the Eldest Captain was to command each Party) consisting in all of 35 Frigars, and 13 Fireships, besides small Craft to sound be∣fore them. Yesterday morning about 8 of the Clock, they draw out of their Squadrons, and sailed towards the Enemy, the Wind at S. S. W. and by 12 a Clock at Noon Engaged the Van of them, Commanded by Trump: We were forced to Engage sooner then I intended, to prevent the Enemies get∣ting the Wind. That Squadron so commanded by Trump was
so prest by us, that it gave way, and retired as far as the Sands would give them leave. The Squadron commanded by De Ruyter fell to the share of Count-D' Estrees, and the French, who behaved themselves very bravely. Sir Edward Spragge also on his side maintained the Fight with so much courage and resolution, that their whole Body gave way to such de∣gree, that had it not been for fear of the Shoals, we had driven them into their Harbours, and the King would have had a better account of them. The case being thus, and the night approaching, I judged it fit to stand a little off, and to Anchor here where I now Ride. The Enemy have had a considerable Loss (which they will not easily repair having many Men Slain, many Ships Disabled, and some Destroyed, de Ruyter and Trump had run a great Hazard of being Burnt by some of our Fireships, if they had Behaved themselves as they ought to have done. Our Losses are very inconsiderable▪ two of our Ships onely being Disabled, viz. the Cambridge and the Resolution, which I shall send home to Refit; the rest of our Work will be easi∣ly done here. We have lost very few Common Men; as yet I have an account but of these Officers Slain, Captain Fowles, Captain Woerden, and Captain Finch; Colonel Hamilton has his Leg shot off. All the Officers and Common Men, ge∣nerally behaved themselves very well, of which I shall send the Particulars, when I am better informed; In my Squadron more especially Captain Leg, Sir John Holmes, Captain Wett∣wang, Captain Story, Sir Roger Strickland, and Sir William Reeves, the first took a Ship of the Enemies, and the lat∣ter brought up a Fireship, and layd himself to Leeward of Trump, and if the Captain of the Fireship had done his Duty, Trump had been certainly Burnt; Notwithstanding which, Story and Wettwang so Belaboured him, that Reeves cleared himself from the Crowd of the Enemy. I hope His Majesty will be Satisfied, that considering the Place we En∣gaged in, and the Sands, there was as much done as could be expected. And thus I leave it to His Majesties Favourable Construction, to whom I wish many happy Years to come, this being His Birth-day. FINIS.
