S12A 09602501 43795
Menippeus Rusticus. A Satyrical Epistle: From C. S. in the Country, to his Friend in the City. Difficile est Satyram non scribere— LONDON: Printed in the Year 1698.
Menippeus Rusticus. A Satyrical Epistle: From C. S. in the Country, to his Friend in the City. THanks, which is all poor Debtors can bestow, A grateful Heart, my Friend returns to you: To you whose kindness, tho too much mista'ne, Invites me kindly up to Town again. But even Nature here, forbids consent; For Nature would condemn the Experiment. The Gluttons Stomach will past Surfeits shun,
Nor can strong Hunger force the Potion down: No more can I, cloy'd with its filth and noyse, For the Lewd Town forsake my Country Joy's. Here a few Books, supply my daily use, Since like my Friend's and Conversation, chose: Tho often Read they still will Reading bear; Not like our modern Lines, or those I send you here. For Writing's now a chronical Disease, And some ought less to fear the Plague, then Press. For tho no Emperick with inverted Eyes, To the poor Authors swift destruction flyes; Want, the old Poets Vulture far exceeds, And he's by piecemeal starv'd, if no man Reads. Here, none dare Friendships sacred Virtue doubt, Tho like Joynt-Stocks with you 'tis jobb'd about. Nor are our pleasures interspers'd with Vice, Unless in Nooks, where your own Darnells rise: Here murdring Lords, who rob the poor Pultron Of merit and of mercenary crown,
Seek no concealment, for they know 'tis in vain, Our Roofs, are like our Hearts, secure and plain: Nor has the Mobbs wise Vote entrusted me To Pennyworth out my Country's Liberty; Nor am I honoured with the ill good word Of some in Favour (but designing) Lord Whose generous Commendam holds it Just, I see him cheat my King and slight his Trust; Nay, tho my Country, or Religion reel, I dare not hint the inward pangs I feel; But like a long vex'd Slave to get me ease, Break like a Brute, through the most sacred tyes: Nor am I loaden with the gives Law. Magnets which far beyond the  draw; I wrong not any, and were all like me, None at a Law-Suits price, the Town would see; Then paltry Nokes in shabby daggl'd Gown, Like Oars (as once) might Ply for poor Half Crown, While now he struts, and with a Spanish fleer,
Takes your Six Pounds, and whispers in your Eare; If ease and Claret will so far permit He'll read your Brief and sleep upon't at night. True Locusts on the Greens alone will prey, But with our quiet, These, take all away; Purchase our Lands, then get to make our Laws; Oh! how our Lambs thrive in the Lyons paw's? Posterity it self may curse their Care, While, Tinker like, our Kettles they Repair. Then why should I, who sacred Virtue love, Forsake my Cottage and to Town remove; Want you new Shrieves? faith Sir, I shan' not Fine Nor was the noble R yet fixt on mine. Your Sheriff Pollars, do it with respect, And to be theirs, we must be Heav'ns Elect, Lie, tho not Swear, and Cheat howe're precise, The Christian now's known by his Tongue and Eyes. And show you not the Tallies of the Cause, Y'are no ways qualify'd to break the Laws;
But THOSE apparent (the cant runs) we intreat ye Assume the CHAIR and banter God Almighty; Swear to be true to the Establish'd Church, And tho't be Cedar, Swear 'tis Birch ▪tis Birch: For Wiseman never yet took Oath, but when To his own mind he might that Oath explain, If otherwise, sure no man that has Ears But would consider somwhat, ere he Swears, And Sacrifice his Interest, to his fears. But would it not provoke all humane spleen, To view the Heads of these Electing Men, Where Pat—bustles with his empty pate, And of peculiar sweat compounds the Magistrate; Leaves Craving Lady, and the gilt Close-stool, To make his own Effigies, A Fool. Or Blinking Br—ly with his Crafty fleer, Leaves Wife more brittle, then his own crackt ware To prop up Cause and place a Knave i'th Chair. Such Men, to their own Calves will surely bow
Who not a GOD, above their INTEREST know. Mechanick Souls obey Mechanick Sense, Jack Straw would have a Thrasher for his Prince. What else gave thick-scull'd W—lls the golden Chain And of a Taylor made a Gentleman; His Wives broad Haunches, never could pretend The awkard Thing, their Mistress to commend; Else some Court Planet, might have bore the shame, Which now our wise Electors safely claim; How else could sneaking AMSTERDAMƲS slip The Pillory, as once before the Wip. When naughty Boy from a good Master ran And stole his Cash, to found the Gentleman Yet now they scratch the quondam beggars Itch, Lord Rustick Neck and worship Brawny Breech. Oh L—n far thy antient Glory's gone, Turn'd prostitute, and sold to every Clown; 'Tis not the merit of the Patriots Care But 'tis five hundred Pounds that fill the Chair; Verrtue or Vice admits not a Dispute,
So frail il Man, his Lust so absolute; Witness that choice which thou may'st well repent, A choice by Heaven for thy correction meant: When Israel, by like headstrong Passion led, A choice less scandalous in CORAH made; The wise Election, on swift ruin drew, And is not Heaven the Seat of Justice now? Perjur'd and false and on a great Record, Well do his mighty Pillars call him Lord; Without a blush well do his slaves Revere The Dagon they advanced to grace the Chair. So Nebats Calves, the humble Type of this, Kept Gadly Israelites from Schism and Vice: For solemn Worship had the Saints mislead, Heaven might have got the Converts, Hell had made His Wares, the cautious Tradesman to expose, Into back Shops the Cully'd Chapman draws; Their suited Lights his prying Eyes deceive, And keep the Tradesman, and his Trade, alive: But he more dubious of's conspicuous height,
To show his Colours opens all the Light. Bribes not, but rather braves the breath of Fame, To tell the list'ning World, his growing shame. So Aetna stretching wide her fiery Jawes Frights nature, for she such a prospect shows; Scarce his own favorites threats, his hands restrain, From violating all he should maintain: He swallows Oaths like Pills as Juglers would, Not for their Health, but to amuse the Crowd. Presto, 'tis gone; and yet Dissect his Heart, There's not its track in the minutest Part: Then who can urge its obligation, were Not the first shadows of the Thing appear. Yet see, the pious Pageant stalks about Like Jew, to find his lost Messiah out. But first like Jew, he well resolves to sind Nothing to fix the Weather-Cock his Mind. Divine CAMELEON! thou thy Colour takes t From every Priest, and every step thou mak'st True in the Morning to thy solemn Oath; To Pride at Noon, but false at Night to both. Next Morn, if kindly sleep has purg'd thy Brain,
To nothing true But the old round again. The cullied Tribe that raised THEE, hardly know Whether th'art TƲRK, MAHOMETAN, or JEW. Rejoicce Religious Patriots,Vox Populi Vox Dei.  Rejoice, For now the Peoples, is the Almighty Voice; The Proverbs sacred—or the Authors lie, He wants the sketches of Divinity: But Patriot, he is, a stanch one too, Hear how his Heroes, swear him Litchfield Blew; You Laugh, and think they have mista'n the place When 'twas but Zeal, that led them in the race. For name a Bishop, and they faster run With sceptick Zeal, to pull the Dagon down, Then when at Michaelmas a Poll comes on: And should I leave, my friend, what I possess, In Country shades, to taste such trash as this? Is chatting Treason oer a Dish of Tea Like living in the Country lov'd and free? What tho Republick Notions be the Theam, Which City Boobies, with authentick Hem, Applaud, and hug me dearly to maintain:
Straight the grave Cod's-Head, takes me home to Dine, Kills me with Chatt▪ and Poysons me with Wine, Which to complete, (for I was born to die) He drinks fresh Healths to New-Born Liberty. O then what Visions swell his Rolling Eyes, While his Dilirium, in a Frantick Dress, Paints him SƲCCESSION just expir'd or slain, And kindly turns (the better' way) his Brain. May Country Converse, howe're crude or dull, Be still my plague, e're thus I play the Fool. But since that fate is in my power to flie, I'le further wish my generous Friend and me. May no Divisions rend the weighty Peace Which WILLIAM'S Arms, through danger and distress, Procur'd those foes who yet regret his ease; May his great Smiles fall kindly on the Just, And only honest Hearts  be plac'd in Trust. May you, with me, despise the Vtious Town, This is a wish which I will always own. FINIS.
