S4348 11914764 50903
A full ACCOUNT Of the late Ship-wreck of the Ship called The PRESIDENT: Which was cast away in Montz-Bay in Cornwal On the 4th of February last, As it was deliver'd to HIS MAJESTY, (both in Writing and Discourse) By William Smith and John Harshfield, the only Persons that escaped in the said Wreck. TOGETHER, With all the remarkable Adventures in the said Voyage from their Sailing out of the Sound of Plimouth, on May-Day, 1682. PARTICULARLY Their Engagement with Six Pirate-Ships at once on the Coast of Malabar. The whole Relation Being taken in private Conference with the said William Smith. LONDON, Printed for Randal Taylor, near STATIONERS Hall, 1684.
An ACCOUNT Of the loss of the Ship called The PRESIDENT: Together with all the Remarkable Adventures of her Voyage, &c. SUCH is the Method of humane Affairs, that the greatest Hopes of Advantage are attended with the greatest Hazard and uncertainty. Of this we have a remarkable Instance in the late miserable Wreck of the Ship called the PRESIDENT; fitted out at the great charge of the Company for her Voyage to the East-Indies; and with no small expectation of her advantageous Return. If we consider the extremities to which the Persons on Board her were reduced, before they utterly perish'd, together with their gallant behaviour in a most desperate Engage∣ment, we shall scarce find Examples of either. This Ac∣count has been expected, but could not before be fully ga∣thered, by reason the two Persons who onely escaped, were so sick and disabled, that it was six weeks before they came up to give the Particulars to his Majesty. On the first day of May, 1682. the President (Burthen five hundred and fifty Tun or upwards, Captain Jonathan Hide Commander) sailed out of Plimouth Sound in Company with the Suratt-Merchant. But as soon as she was off the Canary Islands she lost Company with her. About three Months after the Captain found it necessary to refresh his Men, and accordingly touched at the Island call'd Mauritius. This is a Place of Parrots, and where Venison is in such plenty, that they surprized and killed several Deer as they lay asleep. Their continuance here was about a fortnight.
On the 28th of December, they fell in with the Coast of India, and touched at Car-war a Factory of the English. From hence they weighed after four days stay, and proceeded in their Voyage, having hitherto met with no considerable Adventure. But on the 15th of January following, on the Coast of Malabar, they met with six Sail of Ships, whom at first they took to be Friends. These Vessels they afterwards under∣stood to be Man'd chiefly with Arabians, who had revolted from their King and entred themselves into the Service of Savagee, a certain Prince in those parts, who is in continual War with the great Mogull. Or rather they were a Nest of Renegadoes there gotten together from all parts, and so desperate as seldom to give or take Quarter. Our Men however not having the least apprehension of Danger from them, stood with them, expecting some News from Suratt. But it seems these Barbarians had heard of such a rich Ship upon the Coast, and so came up with their six Sail, with great numbers of Men, resolv'd to carry her or sink by her side. As soon therefore as they came within shot they fired their Broadsides; The surprize amongst our People was very great, expecting no such Complement, nor having so much as clear'd their Decks, or cut down the Hammocks, The Enemy taking all Advantage of their unreadiness, im∣mediately fell to Grappling and laying them on Board. However, by encouragement and example of their Cap∣tain, they with chearful shouts betook themselves to their Work. The Encounter on both sides was with utmost Fierceness and Resolution: though with vast odds and Ad∣vantage on their part. Our Men therefore were very hard set till they had got out their lower Tire of Guns, which did them extraordinary Service, for with them they sunk two of the Enemies Ships by their side. The rest were so far from being discouraged hereby, that they pour'd in their Numbers with more Fury; Their Assault was so fierce that our Men were driven into their Fore-castle, the Enemy possessing himself of the Steerage. The Savagees made no doubt but they should presently be absolute Ma∣sters of the Prize. Our Captain therefore betook himself to his last Relief, which was to throw his Granadoes out amongst the Enemy. The Barbarians at first stood staring upon them (having never seen any such Things before) till the Balls
broke amongst them with so great surprize and Slaughter that our Decks were immediately clear'd of their new Guests. Yet were they so resolute (after a small respite) as to lay Aboard once more. Till by a chance shot from our Vessel that carry'd the Wadd along with it into one of their Ship's Powder-Room, the said Ship immediately blew up: Being foremost in the Service and so near the President as to set her Sails on Fire. Upon this Discouragement (two of their Ships having been sunk before) the remainder made off with so much haste that they left most of their Men who had boarded us, to shift for themselves: Part whereof were glad to get into the Long-boat of the Presi∣dent and make away in her as fast as they could. Before our Ship was quite clear of them; the Fire that had taken hold of her Sails grew dangerous. Whereupon William Smith (who afterwards escaped in the Wreck) first adventur'd up to the Main-Yard, to extinguish the Flame, receiving a Wound with an Arrow in his Leg, but the Pile was smooth and happened not to be poison'd. The behaviour of the Captain in this desperate Service was with all pos∣sible Conduct and Courage. And indeed the performance of every Individual Person was so extraordinary as must render the Fate that afterwards befel them more deplo∣rable: So that we must needs say of them (as Cicero did of Roscius after recital of his Merits) Videbantur planè mori non debuisse. Notwithstanding the Encounter was so sharp, yet the President lost but thirty Men, and the Enemy no less than five hundred. The great Mogull from whom these Savages had revolted, hearing of the Duspute that had past, imme∣diately sent on Board the President for a particular account of the Fight, with which he was extreamly well satisfi'd, and sent the Captain a Present of extraordinary rich Silks. The next Day they bore up for Goa, a chief City of the Portugeses where they lay to refresh their wounded Men: and in less than a fortnight after they arrived at Suratt. Here they met with an unfortunate Accident, for as the Gunner was clearing of a whole Culverin the Gun split in pieces by which he was killed, together with the Armourer and two common Seamen: several others being disabled. About the latter end of April they weighed from India, being in company with the Persia-Merchant, and in four months
time arrived again at Mauritius. Where they met with the Su∣ratt-Merchant their outwards-bound Consort. But the Season not permitting them to proceed in their Voyage, by reason of the Trade-Wind, which at that time of the year is always contrary off the Cape bon Esperance, they continu'd on the Island full three months. On the beginning of December following they lost sight of the Suratt-Merchant, supposing her to be af∣terwards cast away at St. Michael's on the Western Islands. From this time as they drew nearer home, they met with extraordinary rough Weather; yet they judged themselves within three days Sail of England when with violence of Tem∣pests (the Wind blowing continually at North-East) they were driven out again to Sea, their Provision being almost spent and their Men very faint and sick. What Port soever they attempted to make, whether Ireland or Portugal, the Wind was still in their Teeth. In this Distress they continu'd for eleven Weeks together; their Allowance being no more than one pound of Biscake a Week for each Man, and a piece of Beef of about three pound for twenty Men. Their Beef they ate raw being loth to waste any part of it in Boiling; at last they had but one Dog left aboard, which they kill'd, boyling the Head and purtenance for Broth, and of the rest they made a delicate Banquet. They call'd to a Jamaica Ship as she passed them, who durst not trust her Men aboard them with Relief, for fear they should not return, she having no more than were necessary for her Voyage. They met likewise with a French Mer∣chant-Ship, from whom they had some Stockfish, but were little the better for it, because they could get from her nei∣ther Oil nor Water. And indeed in this want consisted their greatest extremity, which was so much more tormenting as Thirst is more violent than Hunger. They were reduced to a Pint a day for each Man, and that of Rain-water gathered as it ran down their Ropes, from which it was tainted with so bitter a Tast, that they were scarce able to drink it. From this drought their sickness encreased so much, that at last there were not above fourteen of the fourscore Persons on Board, who were able to do business in the Ship. It is im∣possible to draw the Scene of Misery to the Life, to see the poor Wretches, at such time as any Rain fell, some wringing
of the Sails, some sucking at the Ropes as it trickled down; and others too sick and feeble to do either; but laid gasping on their backs, with their Mouths open to receive the little Refreshment as it rain'd in. After all this Distress it was their hard fortune to lose their Ship in Montz-Bay in Cornwall on the ninth of February last. After she had struck, she sat not an hour before she was beat in a thousand Pieces. Nor indeed could it be otherwise by reason of her falling on the Rock as she did, with her side to the Sea. Of the fourscore Persons, not one escaped beside the fore∣said William Smith and John Harshfield. This Harshfield they hapned to take up in the Indies, he ha∣ving been twice Wreck'd before in his Voyage thither; the last time was in the Johanna, very few Persons escaping with him: These were his Companions over the Desart Country from Cape de Gullis to Cape bon Esperance, Twenty and one days Journey, in which they were reduced to the extremity of eating Grass. Yet was it his fortune to be once more cast away, and what was more wonderful to be one of the Two that onely escaped. These two Persons sate on the fore-part of the Ship while the hinder-parts were broken, seeing most of their Compa∣nions drowned, before they quitted their Station. Smith at length was forced off on part of the Bow-Sprit, to which were fastened by Rings several Ropes wherewith he enfold∣ed himself to prevent his being washed off by the Sea. Harshfield followed him on a Plank, his Father being on Board and calling to him to take him on, which for fear of being incumbred he dared not to do. As he floated he was overtaken by a Third Person who thinking him better pro∣vided, quitted his own Plank and laid hold on Harshfield's Breeches. Harshfield finding himself endanger'd thereby, immediately loosed his Hose, letting him and his Breeches together into the Sea. After this he made a shift to recover Smith, who (being better mounted) hal'd him up to him, and gave him part of the Ropes to fasten himself withal: without which it had been impossible for them to have lived in so rough a Sea. By these most difficult means they made a shift at last to get to the side of a Rock at the Lands End, where they likewise
found a Third Person arrived. With much ado they climb'd up about the heighth of Two Stories, the Precipice above them being so steep that they could ascend no higher; they had now been no less than fourteen Hours in the Sea, yet were still so much expos'd to the violence of the Waves, that the foresaid third Person was wash'd off again and drown'd: Smith and Harshfield very hardly preserving themselves by wedging each other into an hollow of the Rock. As soon as the Tide was out they descended with no small danger to the Sands; but as they were crossing over to some place that was accessible they were inhumanely set upon by two Country Fellows, who perceiving that they had been Shipwreck'd, and supposing them to have saved about them something that was of most Value, attempted to knock them on the Head. Which they had certainly effected on these defenceless Wretches but for a Gentleman (Steward to Mr. Godolphin) who was then riding over the Sands and came up to their Relief. Thereupon seeing him approach they fled, but were since taken and thrown into a Goal. On the Sunday immediately following, in Sermon-Time, the People of the next Town first heard of the Wreck, whereupon with one consent they ran out from their Devo∣tion to the Spoil, leaving the Parson to Preach to the bare Walls. The Company sent down several Persons to recover what they could; which was scarce enough to pay for their Jour∣ney. The Vessel nevertheless was of very rich Lading, being modestly judged of no less than an hundred thousand pound Fraight; of the Companies; beside what belong'd to private Persons, with much Jewish Treasure of Pearl, and Dia∣monds. The said Smith and Harshfield having receiv'd Commen∣dation of His Majesty, are now preferr'd by the Company, and sent out again to Sea. FINIS.
