T1598A 15074065 103164
TO THE QUEENS MAJESTY ON HER Happy Arrival. NOw that the Winds and Seas so kind are grown For our Advantage to resign their own; Now you have quitted the Triumphant Fleet, And suffered English ground to kiss your feet; Whil'st your glad Subjects with impatience Throng To see a blessing they have begg'd so long; Whilst Nature (who in Complement to you Kept back till now her warmth and beauty too) Hath, to attend the lustre your eyes bring, Sent out her lov'd Embassadour the Spring; Whil'st in your praise Fames Eccho does conspire With the soft touches of the Sacred Lyre: Let an obscurer Muse upon her Knees Present you with such Offerings as These, And you as a Divinity Adore, That so your mercy may appear the more. Who though of those you should the best receive Can such imperfect ones as These forgive. Hayl Royal beauty! Virgin bright and Great, Who doe our hopes secure, and joyes compleat. We cannot reckon what to you we ow, Who make Him happy, who makes us be so. VVe did enjoy but half our King before, You as our Prince, and Him His Peace restore. But heaven for us this desperate debt hath paid, VVho such a Monarch hath your Trophy made. A Prince whose Vertue did alone subdue Armies of men, and of Offences too. So good, that from him all our blessings flow, Yet is a greater than he can bestow; So great, that he dispenses Life and Death, And Europestate depends upon His Breath. (For Fortune would her wrongs to him repair By Courtships greater than her mischeifs were; As Lovers that of Jelousy repent, Grow troublesome in fond acknowledgement.) VVho greater courage shew'd in wooing you, Than other Princes in their Battells doe. Never was Spain so generously defy'd, VVhere they design'd a Prey, He courts Bride. Hence they may guess what will His anger prove, VVhen He appear'd so brave in making Love; And be more wise than to provoke His Arms, VVho can submit to nothing but your Charmes, And till they give Him Leasure to subdue His Enemies, must owe their Peace to you. VVhilst He and you mixing illustrios Rayes, As much above our wishes as our praise, Such Heroes shall produce, as even they VVithout Regret or Blushes shall Obey. London, Printed for Henry Herringman. 1662.
