T587 12166348 55334
A TESTIMONY To the TRUE and Spiritual VVorship: AND A WORD of Consolation to the Children of LIGHT. Also a MESSAGE of TRUTH to PROFESSORS. By Tho. Tayler.. Printed in the Year, 1670.
A Testimony to the True and Spiri∣tual VVorship: And a VVord of Consolation to the Children of Light. GOD is a Spirit, all Pure, Holy, Just, and True; and therefore in Spirit, Purely, Holy, and Truly, will he be worshipped of all that come to him; and therefore all that Worship, which stands in the Impure and Unholy nature of the Flesh is of no acceptance with him: Cain may Sa∣crifice, and Israel may be Circumcised, and Iudas do something like an Apostle, but so long as the Murderous, Scoffing, Covetous, Trayterous Nature of the flesh stands, all is nothing. The Lord God, blessed for ever, hath in this day of his power∣ful Love made manifest himself, amongst the Children of men on Earth; and now Sons and Daughters do Prophesie, and Old and Young do Sing of his Praise, and Sound forth with joyful Hearts of the worthy noble Acts of his Right-hand; because his Kingdom is come, and his Glory in Sion is appeared; and the Tabernacle of God is indeed with men, and he himself, not a Shadow, or a Fi∣gure, or outward Representation of him, but he himself, who is over all God blessed for ever, dwells in, and with his People, his dearly beloved Seed, who have believed in his Light, that true Light, that lighteth every man that cometh into the World, and have not despised the day of Small Things, but have waited in the Light, in the Faith of his holy Power, for the fulfilling of his Promises, and so through FAITH and Patience have received the Promises of Everlasting Life, and Salvation fulfilled in them; whereby the Mountains are thrown down, and the Vallies lifted up, and all made plain, pure, and perfect for the Holy God and Father of all Mercy and Goodness to dwell in, and walk in: Glory, glory to his great Name, who hath not left himself without a Witness of his Faithful∣ness
this day, nor left the Throne of Davids Kingdom without an Heir to sit upon it, to Order and Establish it in Righteousness: And now, even now in this our day, the Day which the Lord hath made, is the blessed Fountain of the great Deepth of the Love of God in Christ Jesus truly opened; and the Waters of the Heaven∣ly Temple are so deep that a man may swim in them; and it is not now as sometimes in times past, here a line and there a line, here a little and there a little, but now hath the Lord our God, according to his excellent Loving-kindness, fully opened to Judah, and the Children of the Heavenly Mother Jerusalem, the Mystery of his Will, and Fountain of his Eternal Goodness, in Christ Jesus the Light, whereby our Souls are satisfied; and Sin and Transgression done away, and the Everlasting Righteousness▪ which makes Pure and Perfect the very Heart, Soul, and Conscience to God brought in; ever Blessed be his glorious Name for his unspeakable Gift, Amen, and amen. And now are all false Religions seen, and by the Light, which makes them manifest, judged; for the false Births, which are of the great Whore, (Mystery Babilon) whose Religions are carried on by the will of the Flesh, as by the fleshly wisdom they, were invented, stand all in the Curse, where nothing is perfect, but their own mi∣sery and wretchedness; and therefore it is that both Priest and Peo∣ple, in this wretched state, do all with one consent cry out against the perfect Work of Jesus Christ in his People, saying, None can be Perfect here; And so do in a word deny the very end for which Christ came, and the end for which the Ministry of Christ was given; for Christ give himself for his People, That he might wash them in the Word of Life, and so present them to himself a glorious Congregati∣on, without Spot or Wrinkle, or any such thing, Ephes. 5.25. &c. And thou art all Fair my Love, saith Christ to his Spouse, and no Spot in thee. And there is no spot in thee. And the Law made nothing per∣fect, but the bringing in of the better H O P E (Christ in us the Hope of Glory, Col. 1.27.) did, Heb. 7.19. And the very end of the Ministry was, for the Edifying and Perfecting the Saints, who are Christs Body, Eph. 4.12. And we labour to present every man per∣fect to God in Christ, Col. 1.28. And John 17.23. I in them and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one. But now the false Ministry, which stands in the Flesh, in which no good thing dwels
keeps People alwayes learning, and never brings any to the Know∣ledge of the perfecting Truth of the Lord Jesus; for how should it? For they have Run and I have not sent them, saith God, therefore they shall not profit the People at all. Jer. 23. And under this woful Con∣dition lieth all the World of unbelieving people, who believe not in the Truth, Christ Jesus, but follow their own dark spirits, which see nothing of the Kingdom of God, nor the holy Worshippers therein. A long and dark Night of Apostacy hath passed over the World since the Apostles time, wherein the spirit of Antichrist and Devils hath wrought effectually in the Children of Disobedience, as was foretold, to the blinding of their minds, and hardning their hearts against the everlasting Gospel of Truth, the Heavenly Light and Power of God unto Salvation; and hath so deluded them, that they have thought they were doing God service, when they were per∣secuting his Truth, and Members of his Body, as many in the same dark deluded state do at this day; but now the Lord is lifting up his Standard against that great Whore, Dragon, false Prophet, and their Armies, who Gog and Magog like, would devour the Lambs of Christ. And now no Weapon formed against Christ, his Truth and People shall ever prosper any more at all, but the Lamb shall have the Vi∣ctory; and the Kingdom, Dominion, and Greatness of it shall be given to the Saints of the Most High God, whose Kingdom is everlasting, and that Nation, Kingdom, and People, that will not bow to Truth, will moulder away, and come to nothing, as the Lord hath said: for now is the effect of every Vision fully to come, and no more at all to be prolonged. And therefore, Wo, wo to the Inhabitants of the Earth, and the Sea, who are putting the Day of the Lord afar off, cry∣ing Peace, Peace, when there is no Peace; for there is no Peace to any who will not have Jesus Christ (the true Light, that lighteth every man that cometh into the World) to rule in them, and over them; for his is the Kingdom, Glory, and Power, and he will reign for evermrre, in the midst of his Enemies. Glory to his Name without ceasing, Amen, and amen, saith my Soul, whom thou hast redeemed, O Holy One of Israel, to set forth thy Praise amongst the Living in Jerusalem, thy holy Hill, so be it.
So now O all ye that love Righteousness, and daily wait to see the heavenly Kingdom thereof, set up in you, and in all People; I T.T. your Brother, in the Joyes and Sufferings of the Gospel; having had through the mercifulness of our God and Father, per∣fect knowledge of his good Way from the beginning of this Day of his Love, which hath dawned upon his beloved Seed in these I∣lands, and in all the World, do declare and bear my Testimony for God amongst many Brethren, that there is no way to God the Father of Light, but by the Light Christ Jesus, that true Light that lighteth every man that cometh into the World with a Light that is Pure, Free, Spiritual, and Sufficient, that all men through it may believe, and so be led out of Darkness, Sin and Death (the wayes of sin) into the marvellous Light and Life, of Righteousness and true Holiness, and so into fellowship with the Holy God, with∣out which Holiness none can see him, nor enjoy him forever. For this Gift of God the Light is Holy, and in all that believe and re∣ceive it, it brings forth its own blessed Image, which is Holiness. And it is Free, and works according to its own blessed Nature in all that joyn to it, setting them free from all their spiritual Enemies whatsoever; and so making them Free-born Children of the Hea∣venly Jerusalem, which is free for evermore, from all the false and imbondaging impositions of the Man of sin whatsoever. And so also because this heavenly Gift of God, Christ Jesus the Light, who lighteth every man, John 1.9. is perfect, and shines in the heart, therefore it doth of its own Nature, make perfect every man that with their hearts receive it, and so come to God by it: It makes perfect to God, as pertaining to the very Heart and Con∣science all its Lovers; for if you love the Light you love God, from whence it comes; for he that loves him that is sent, loveth also him that sent him. And therefore I say unto all People upon the face of the Earth, that all that Faith, Hope, Worship, Religion, or whatever it may be called [That stands not in (and is not carried on in) this Power of God the Light, which lighteth every man,] is nothing worth. Every good, and every perfect Gift (saith James) cometh down from the Father of Light, who is unchangeable; and it shines out in the heart of every man, though the Darkness, which through the Fall hath gotten place there, and comprehends it not, yet the Light
is there a sure Foundation, a tryed Corner-Stone, Elect and Preci∣ous; blessed are all that fall upon it, so as to be broken into godly Sorrow, and Tenderness of heart; and blessed are all that build upon it, they shall be called the Elect of God, Precious Sons and Daughters of Zion, and their Building shall never fail them, nay, the Gates of Hell shall never prevail against their FAITH, be∣cause it standing in the Power of God Christ Jesus, the Light that ever liveth, to keep them in a good and safe Condition, that thus come to God by him. The Day is dawned, which makes all things manifest, praised be God forever; even the Spirit of Truth, which leadeth into all Truth, is come; and the holy Anointing is witnessed (in all that believe in the Name of the Living Unchangeable God) which teacheth all things, and it abideth in the faithful Hearts, and is sufficient. And he called the Light Day; and so the joyful DAY, which the Lord hath made, being come, we will Rejoyce, and be Glad in it, though the Children of Darkness be never so Angry; For the Lord, our Strength, will maintain our Cause against all his Foes for evermore, so be it. And now, though the Children of the Night be many, and Pro∣fessors of the Letter of Scripture, that want the Life of it, come forth as so many Armies, to plead for, and contend for their several formed Wayes, and invented Worships, against the Children of God this day, who Worship God in Spirit and in Truth, yet greater is he that is in us, then he that is in the World; and so, though we are forced to Build, in this our holy City, New Jerusalem, with our Spiritual Sword in our hand, yet we are well content, finding the Lord still with us in this Day of the Restauration of all things: And so though Tobiah and Sanballat, with all the Heathen mock, and carry false Reports, concerning us, to the Rulers of the Earth; yet through the Help of our God we are enabled to go on in our Ho∣ly Spiritual Work, in the Lords Holy City and Temple; and the Word of the Lord prospers in our Hand, and in our Hearts. And though they say we deny the Ordinances of God, because we cannot plead for, or put confidence in a Shadow or Figure; yet holding the Head Christ Jesus, the Light and Life eternal, we are safe enough, and have the Witness of God in our hearts justifying us, and sealing in our hearts our Acceptance with his Majesty, which is our Peace and
assurance forever; for praised be the Name of God for ever, who hath given us an understanding to know him that is true, the Son of God, and we are in him that is true, who is the Everlasting Or∣dinance of God; and in him are we baptized, with a Baptism made without hands; and our Supper is with the Lord in Spirit and Truth where we are daily given to feed feeely at his Table, whose Body is, Meat indeed; who said, I am the Living Bread that gives life for ever, John 6. And he that believeth in me, and feedeth on me, shall never die, chap. 6.50, 51. God gave the Children of Israel Manna in the Wil∣derness, and they died notwithstanding, but my Father giveth you the true Bread, For God so loved the World, that he gave his Son to be the Light and Life of man; and so to as many as received him then, and do receive him now, to dwell in their hearts by Faith, to them he gave, and daily doth give Power to become the Sons of God, whose Birth is not of the mortal seed, of Flesh and Blood, nor the mind or will, or words thereof, but of the incorruptible Seed of the Word of God, eternal, real, and essential, which lives and en∣dures for ever, which perishes not with the using, as mortal things do; but it lves and triumphs in its own creating, saving, sustaining, upholding, comforting, and satisfying vertue and power forever∣more, well witnessed in the hearts of the spiritual Believers this day; For in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God, and by it was all things made, and it was and is the Light and Life of man; and he delighted, and doth also this day greatly rejoyce and delight in the habitable parts of his creation; For I will dwell in them, and walk in them, who open unto me saith the Lord that Spirit, who by his Servant said, Behold I stand at the door and knock; and by his Servant also now saith, Behold the Lord God that Spirit stands at the door of your hearts [all people] and whosoever opens unto him, he will come in unto them, and the pure in heart shall see the pure and holy God supping with them, and they with him; and they shall drink abundantly of the hea∣venly Wine with Jesus Christ in the Fathers Kingdom fresh and living ever: for now is the Lord rending away the Vail, the Covering that hath been upon the hears of people, and making to all people the Feast of fat things, full of marrow, and of Wine upon the Lees well refined, so be it. And now is the Lord God blessed for ever fulfilling the Promises
of his great Love in Christ Jesus, which have been since the world began, in this day of the pouring forth of his holy Spirit, where∣by the holy City, New Ierusalem, is felt come down from God out of Heaven, and God himself dwelling with men, even the Taber∣nacle of God with man, as was said before; all holy praises to his Name: yes, he that sits upon the throne hath made, and is daily making all things new; it is done, and now the Lamb is known to be the Light of his People, and they need no other; for the Anoint∣ing which they have of him teacheth all things; and now is Jerusa∣lem a rejoycing indeed, and her people a joy; but now the Uncircum∣cised in heart and ear, who do alwayes resist the Holy Ghost, are greatly troubled and offended by reason of the great darkness and enmity of their hearts, because they cannot in their unclean mind en∣ter in; for into this City no unclean thing, nor any that loves or makes a Lye can enter; for now the Serpents meat is Dust, and his head is bruised, glory to God for ever. See Isa. 65.17. &c. Rev. 21.1. &c. Acts 7.51, 52. And now are all the Climers, who have not come in by the door, but are climed up another way, in their unclean minds, whom Christ calls Thieves and Robbers, seen, and by the same that discovers them judged and condemned; these are they that have taken away the Key of Knowledge, and will neither enter into the Kingdom of God themselves, nor suffer those that are entring in to enter: These are they whom Christ cries wo against, who love to be called of men Master; heady and high minded men, with the great Train of their seduced Followers, who plead for them, and fight for them, because they cry peace to them in their sins, and tell them they must never be perfect whilest they are here, but must carry about them a body of sin, without all hope of ever being freed from it, whilst on Earth, and so in effect deny the end of Christ's coming, who came to set free the Soul, by destroying the Body of Sin; also they deny the very end, the very end of Christ's Ministry; for when he assended up on high, he gave gifts to men, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ, for the perfecting of the Saints, Ephes. 4. Come, ye Contenders against Truth, Is not the perfecting of the Saints in holiness, by bringing them out of unholiness; and in Faith, out of unbelief; and into the Spi∣rit, out of the Flesh, and all fleshly and perishing observations?
And doth not the Ministry of Christ, which is the true Spiritual Ministry attain its end, and do its work to the utmost? yea, yea, though the Ministers of Antichrist free, and funie, and gainsay, and contradict, and blaspeme, and spend their strength in vain, and perfect nothing but their sins; yet the work of the Lord goes on, and prospers, and the Body of Christ is built up, and the Songs of Sion sung in the holy Land, and none can take part therein but the Redeemed of the Lord, who are redeemed from the Earth, into the heavenly Society, and Church of the First-born, whose names are written in Heaven, and who follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes; these are not defiled with the Cup of the great Whore, for they are Virgins, and have Oyl in their Lamps, and so need not go to the Merchants of Babylon to buy. And so all people bow to Truth in the inward parts, for obedience to that is the Sacrifice which God requireth, and better then all other Sacrifices; all your Sabboth out of this, are but meer druggeries, and all your Will∣worship, Ceremonies, and Traditions (being out of this) are but meer mock Services; yea, out of this, (to wit, the Light and Truth in the inward parts) your very Faith is vain, and your hope of none effect, and your prayers sin; for unto thee who wilt not have it to rule in thee, the Lord hath no respect, nor to thy Offer∣ing: So prize your time, O all ye Strangers to the Life of God, and make supplication to your Judge, the Light Christ Jesus, that Lights every man that comes into the World; for this is the con∣demnation, that Light is come Into the World, and men loved, and do love their evil deeds, and hate the Light; for every evil Doer hates the Light, saith Christ, yea, it is so, whatsoever the Hypo∣crite, the Evil-Doer with his mouth may say to the contrary. And all ye children of the Light, walk in the Light; and be thank∣full, for the Lord is arisen in mighty power to crown you with his Glory, his glorious Righteous, Wisdom, Holiness, and Salvation, he is come indeed to fulfil all his Promises in you, and for you, to the glorifying of the Arm of his own Power, and for your Souls endless comfort; and why should any of you be afraid of what man can do against you, seeing you fear God, and love the children of men, and you are not of them who seek to destroy mens lives, but to save them, as much as in you lieth. Arise, Arise, break forth into singing ye Sons and Daughters of
the Heavenly King, the Lord our Righteousness; for thy Light is come, and the Glory of the Lord is risen upon thee: And thou shalt no more be termed desolate; for thy Maker is thy Husband, and thy Land is married indeed: And thy Plants grow, and thy Gar∣dens cast a sweat smell: Oh happy are they who believe in thy Light, and walk in the clear Sun-shine of thy Day: No Stumbling nor oc∣casion of Stumbling is on thy Mountain, nor in thy Valleys, but on the dark Mountains, whereon the Haters of Christ walk, is all the stumbling of this present World. Thou who art come in at the true Door, Christ Jesus, the Light of the World, thy Kingdom is not of this World, but is a Kingdom without end, which cannot be shaken, wherein dwells Righteousness indeed; and thy Pasture is fresh and green all the Year long, being wet with the Dew of Heaven; yea, in thy happy Lot are both the upper and nether Springs, and Bread of Life for evermore, where rests with thee (in the purest Love) thy Brother in the Joys and Sufferings of the Gospel, In the 12th of the 6th Moneth, 1669 T. T.
A Message of Truth to Professors. WO to the Teachers of the People, that daub with untempored Morter, and cry, Peace, Peace, when the Lord hath not spoken Peace; For the Lord speaks Peace to none in their Sins; but they Teach for Do∣ctrine, That none can live out of Sin whilst on this side the Grave; and so they Minister for Antichrist, the Man of Sin, and not for Christ, who is without Sin, in Gods Righteousness. And he that keepeth Christs Commandments dwelleth in him, and he in him; and his Commandments are not grievous, saith John: And again, He that is Born of Christ sinneth not; for the everlasting Fa∣ther of the Vnspotted Generation is he. And herein (saith the same John, and all the living Members of Christ) is our Love made perfect that we may have Boldness in the day of Judgment; because as he is, so are we in this World. But the Masterly Teachers of this World cry out, O the Com∣mands of Christ (who is God) are hard, none can keep them, we must live in Sin whilst on Earth, no Perfection here, no Victory over all while on this side the outward Grave. These have their Eyes abroad, and judge after the Flesh; and the things of Gods Spirit are Foolishness to them: The Grave of Sin they lie dead in, and know not the Resurrection from it; and so are ignorant of Christ, who is the Resurrection and the Life: And the Eye in such is shut, as yet, that should hear the Sons Voice, whose Voice raiseth the Dead. O foolish and flow of Heart to beieve all that Christ and his Pro∣phets have spoken; Doth not Christ say, The hour is coming and now is, when the Dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live; For as the Father hath Life in himself, so hath he given to the Son, to have life in himself, John 5.25. And
in another place, He that Liveth and Believeth in me, shall never die for God is not the God of the Dead, but of the Living; for th Dead cannot Praise him. And I will Ransom them from the Power of the Grave; I will Redeem thee from Death; O Death I will be thy Plagues, O Grave I will be thy Destruction, Hos. 13.14. And again, Ezek. 37.12 , &c. Thus saith the Lord God, Behold, O my People, I will open your Graves, and cause you to come up out of your Graves, and ye shall know that I am the Lord; and I will place my San∣ctuary in the midst of you for evermore. These words are faithful and true, and the Israel of God, who are risen with Christ, know them; and in the Birth Immortal, being passed from Death to Life, do set to their Seal, That God is a Faithful Performer of his Promises this Day: For Life and Immortality is brought to Light through the Gospel, which is the Power of God to Salvation, in all that believe in God, and know his Christ in them, who is the D E A T H of Death, and Destruction of Sin, and Life Eternal to enjoy; Glory to his Name forever: And against this Living Faith and Quickning Power the Gates of Hell shall never be able to prevail. But as was said before, Wo to the Teachers of the People, who Daub with Untempered Morter; who look outward, and judge of things according to the Flesh, and outward appearance of things; and plead for the Life of Sin during the whole time of mans being upon Earth, and look at the Grave without, and Death without, and so lie dead in Sin, and buried in the Grave of their spiritual Wickedness themselves; and so lead about a People, silly as Women in Matters Spiritual, laden, like themselves with divers Sins and Lusts, alwayes learning, but never able to come to the Knowledge of the Truth: For who know the Truth, as it is in Jesus, are set free by it; For if you be set-free by the Truth then are ye free indeed, saith Christ. This is more then all outward Knowledge and Profession, to be so free, as not to be under the Power of any Sin, Lust, Temptation, Will of Man, nor any of the Powers of Darkness whatsoever, but Free, as Christ is Free, who is over all, God blessed forever. But now that Christ is come, to set up this his holy Glorious King∣dom in the Hearts of the Children of Men; Where is this Faith to be found on Earth? But all the Multitudes of Earthly Professors cry, The Kingdom of Heaven hereafter; The Kindom of Glory hereaf∣ter; no Perfection on this side the (outward) Grave; none cn over∣come,
or put off the Body of Sin, whilst here, and the like: Not know∣ing what they say, nor whereof they affirm, when they speak of such things; because, to the Kingdom of Heaven within, in man, they are wilful Strangers; Eyes they have, but see not; and Ears, but hear not; for the inward Eye, which should see, have they fast closed; and the Ear, which should hear, have they shut, lest they should see and hear, and be converted, and be saved. But Blessed is the Eye that sees the Kingdom of God, which he hath set up, and is setting up in his Trem∣bling People; and the Ear that hears the unutterable Word of the li∣ving Father, which raiseth the Dead; they shall never be Praising of him in the Congregation of the Righteous, where none can come to make afraid; for these Love and Fear the Lord, and that frees them from the Fear of Vain Man, whose Breath is in his No∣strils. But all whose Religion stands upon the Sandy Foundation of mans Wisdom, and Thoughts, and Doings, which perfects not to God, these will be like the Chaff, which the Wind scatters to and fro; the Rege∣nerating Power of Gods eternal Spirit they being ignorant of in them∣selves, all their shew of Religion is meer Hypocrisie, and the Religion of Hypocrites shall never be established; for all who gather not with Christ shall scatter, and every Plant that his Heavenly Spiritual Hand hath not planed, shall be rooted up. O! What Darkness have you rapt your Selves in? and how is the Understanding Part clouded in you, that you will neither see nor learn to know the things that pertain to Everlasting Life? Can you say the Branches of the faln Tree, the first Adam, are Unholy and Cor∣rupt, because of the Unholiness of the Root? And will you not see that the Members of the Heavenly Man, Christ Jesus, who never fell, are Holy, because of the Holiness of the Root? For if the Root be Holy, so are the Branches. Anoint your Eyes with Eye-Salve, that if possible you may see, and know a better Root in you, then the faln mans nature, to grow on, that the Kingdom of Holiness you may feel come near you; For they that are in the Flesh cannot please God, whatever they may Profess: And this adds to their misery, that when they have brought forth the deadly Works of the Flesh, they would charge them upon Gods Elect, and make their Works like their own: These Fleshly ones are great Enemies to Christ, & his Righteousness, and his Members; for they that are in Christ are New Creatures; and
to Abel and his Offering God hath still Respect, though Cain and his Offering was alwayes rejected, because polluted with Sin; as the Prayers and Performances of all Hypocrites are at this day: There∣fore for this purpose was the Son of God manifested, and is at this Day received of the Faithful, even to destroy Sin, which is the Devils Work. And in him, to wit (Christ Jesus the Ligh) is there no Sin, nor sinful Nature. So they who love Christ, and Walk in his Life, and Light, please God; For he is that Way undefiled, wherein no Unclean can walk: but the Redeemed are here: And what if I should set down the words of Jesus, to wit, Whosoever abideth in Christ, Sinneth not; whosoever Sinneth, hath not seen him nor known him, 1 John 3.6. Can you be∣lieve it? I know you cannot whilst you stand reasoning with Flesh and Blood, not believing in the Light, that lightneth every man that cometh into the World, but call the Light of Christ in man Natural; and then put the Letter (which only witnesses to the Light) instead of it: And then the Enemy works in your natural Earthly wis∣dom, causing you to wrest Scriptures to establish your empty Forms, which makes nothing perfect; and this was the sin of the old Jews, who though they talked of the Messiah, yet when he appeared they would not come to him, that they might be saved; and so under the dead Profession of the Letter, they lay slain: And though they had a Zeal for God, as you have now, yet it was not according to know∣ledge, and so stumble at the Stumbling-Stone; and so in their dark minds would needs keep up the Forms and Shaddows of things in op∣position to the Substance (the thing it self) Christ Jesus, when he ap∣peared, as you do now. O that you could be perswaded of this, how well would it be for your poor Souls in time to come. Therefore now that the True, Heavenly, Everlasting, Al-sufficient Light is broken forth again, from under the Clouds, after the long dark Night of Apostacy; turn your Minds in, to know a measure of it in you, and wait therein to be led out of all the dark Paths of Sin and Error by it: For I am the Way, saith Christ, the Light, that true Light which lighteth every man that cometh into the World; and I will send my holy Spirit of Truth to lead into all Truth: He i come, and his Promise fulfilled; Glory to his Name forever, And do you not know how that Christ is in you, except you be Reprobates, saith
the Apostle. And if we walk in the Light as he is in the Light, then have we fellowship one with another, and the Blood of this Innocent Lamb cleanseth from all Sin, and washeth from all Unrighteousness all real Commers thereunto, saith the same Spirit: Therefore go not sorth, for without are Doggs, and all Lyars; but Truth, and the Kingdom of it, is to be found within, nigh in the Heart, or never. O how Beautiful is the Way of the Just! Holiness is the Girdle of their Reins continually, their hearts ponder deep things in Holi∣ness; they do no Iniquity who walk in this Everlasting Undefiled WAY, Christ Jesus, the Light; for, by the Light are they led out of all Defilements; and to such there is no occasion of Stum∣bling. O stoop down low with your minds to the Light of Christ in you, that convinceth you of sin and evil, that through the Light, the true Door, and Daily-Cross to the Carnal Mind, you may come into the Sheep-fold; for all who clime up another Way, are but as Thieves and Robbers, and must be judged as Goats, and set on the left hand, because they would not hear Christ Voice, the Light in the Con∣science, to be led by it. Great Wo to the Climers over the Door; such neither receive Christ, nor his Servants whom he sends; but chose rather to follow such as love to be called of men Master, and live in the respect of Persons, and persecuting Nature, and daub over an old heart with fair Promises of Life, as it is amongst you this day; for what though some in the outward-stand against you for your Form, and Worlds sake; as the Heathen of old did the out∣ward Jews yet both those outward Jews then, as you outward Pro∣fessors do now, stood, and do stand, against Christ, and us for his Truth's sake: For we find it true from you all, That whosoever walketh in Christ, and holdeth forth his Life, and so Worship God in Spirit and Truth, shall be hated of all men, whether Professors or Prophane, who are out of that Life and holy Worship, even for Christs very Name and Life's sake, because it is a Cross and Offence to all the World, who are in their own Wills, under what Form or Profession soever, who are gotten into a Profession of Christ, with∣out Christ, and the daily Cross which his Followers bear. There∣fore all who are climed up into the Tree of an outward Profession without the true real feeling and spiritual acquaintance with the daily
Cross, and fiery Law of the Lord, and flaming Sword (which Guards the Tree of Life) which is in the Hand of the Angel of the Covenant, for the cutting down of the Man of Sin (that the Birth Immortal, which is Holy, may enter in and possess the Inheritance) must come down again; I say, they must come to the beginning, from which in their faln Wisdom they are wandred, to learn of him in Silence, who speaks from Heaven, whose Word is nigh in the heart, before ever they be established; for except you become as little Children, not in Talk, but in Truth, ye cannot enter Gods Kingdom. O ye People, hearken a while, whether Teachers or Hearers; You who have been feeding upon the Tree of Knowledge, and never came through Gods judgments, the Flaming Sword, to the Tree of Life: Your Food  Death, your Works will Burn, and your Fig∣leaf-Covers will fall off you, and you be left Naked and Bare to the shame of your Nakedness, as in the day that you were Born: For what is any Covering unless it be that of the Spirit of Christ. The Lord God, who is of purer Eyes then to behold Iniquity, will bring your Deeds to the Light of his Judgments within you, from which you cannot flee; and before him will nothing stand but that which is Pure. Your defiled Preachings, Prayings, Singings, Hearings, Read∣ings, will be rejected, and cast out as Dung from the Presence of the Pure Holy God, that is a consuming Fire: You have multiplied words without Knowledge: Ye have not been, neither yet are ye Doers of Gods Will (to the Witness of God in your Consciences I speak) therefore in vain do you say Lord, Lord; and he will not hold them guiltless that take his Name in vain. Your Garment is not of the Pure White Linnen, which is the Saints Righteousness; but Linnen and Woolen is your Covering, a thing forbidden by Gods Law. Your Field is not sowen with the one Heavenly kind of Grain (the good Wheat) but another Seed have you mingled with it, and the mixture is so great, that the bad hath almost choked and covered the good in you: If you will work you must into Gods Vineyard, and be exceeding Dilligent, and Laborious (in Spirit) in plucking up the Weeds by the Roots in you, The Light of Christ in the Conscience waiting in it) will give thee Understanding: But Wo will be to them who call the Light Darkness, and put Darkness
for Light; and so suffer the Good in them to wither, and nourish the Bad Part in them, which is like the Grane, that never hath enough; but is alwayes learning at man without, and not at Christ within, and ministring from the outward dead spirit of the World, and not from the measure of the living Spirit of Christ; & so not taking heed to the Word of Faith, which is nigh in the heart (the Word of Christ which is Spirit and Life) they never get victory over their sin, as is mani∣fest, but go laden Teacher, and Hearer, all their life long with divers sins and lusts, as was said before. So Wo to the selfish Workers, who speak their own words, and think their own thoughts on this the holy Sabbath day of the Lord God, wherein he hath given his People rest from all their weary labour and burdens: The outward day, the first day of the Week shall not cover you, nor be a Sabbath to you; but in the breach of Gods holy & everlasting spiritual Sabbath of Rest, you being found, you must bear his Judgment. Behold, all ye that kindle a Fire this day, and that compass about your selves with Sparks, walk in the light of your Fire, and in the Sparks that ye have kindled; yet know, that your reward from the Lords hand, is to lie down in sorrow. I say, all you who feed upon, and whose Faith stands in the wisdom of vain mans words, raised up in the subtilty to please the iching Ear, and not in the Power of God, which washeth the inside; a day of scattering cometh upon you, it cometh, and a grievous Whirle-wind from the Lord; and the pleasant Brests of Mystery Babylon, which you so much delight in, shall be dried up; for the Lord hath rejected your confidence, because you have rejected his good Word and Counsel, and chosen your own Delusion, and evil entreated his Servants, whom he sent, rising up early, and sending them time after time, to warn you to come out of all your dead Forms, and dead Faith, into the living vertue and power of his eternal Spirit of Truth, to worship him there, and to know it in you, but you would not; therefore the Lord will yet do that great Wrk and Wonder amongst you; he will confound the wisdom of your Wise, and bring to nought the understanding of your Prudent Men, and they shall be as Women, weak and feeble, the Mouth of the Lord hath spoken it; and the Songs of your Temple shall be Howlings in that day, because of the Vine of Sodom, that will bear no more Grapes, but so many as have drunk of the Wine of her Fornication, must drink of the Cup of Gods Wrath. And all you who talk of your Faith and suffering Condition, and yer live in your sin, you know not what spi∣rit
you are of; for the same mind, that you think to suffer in, is it which by Transgression grieves the Spirit of God, and stands against the setting up of his Kingdom in your selves, and the Testimony there∣of in his redeemed Ones this day: And so, if you could give your bo∣dies to be burnt in this your Unsaved and Unsanctified Condition, it would profit you nothing at all. Wherefore come out from amongst them, all you that would be happy, & touch no unclean thing, but give your hearts to the Lord, to know his Light in you, to teach you; and he will receive you, and hide you from the Wrath that is to come upon all that are not in him, as saith his Spirit in his Servant. This is a Message of Truth to all you in and about Stafford, and those of like Spirit with you elsewhere, who go under the name of Presbyteri∣ans, Teachers and Hearers, to read and ponder in the cool mind, that you may know what the Lords Mind is concerning you in this his day, wherein he is manifest with his Fan in his Hand, to purge the Floor, that he may gather to himself the good Wheat, and burn up the Chaff: For we know∣ing the Terrors of the Lord, perswade you, and all People, in love to your Soules, to take heed of dallying with God, who is a consuming Fire; for his Judgments are manifest, and who can stand before his Wrath? O be not Proud, lest your hands be made strong; but be meek, and lowly, and gentle in heart, to learn of him that is so, that you may find rest for your soules; for there is no Peace to the Wicked, saith my God the true God, that made Hea∣ven and Earth, whose Wrath from Heaven is perfect, revealed against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men (without respect of Persons or Pro∣fessions) who hold the Truth in any manner of Vnrighteousness, So be it. In the 2d Mo∣neth, 1670. T. T.
WEEP thou England, Houl, Houl ye People; for the Dreadful Day of the Lord God is at hand, it is at the Door, as an Armed Man, coming swiftly upon you, to break down and tread under feet thy Pomp, Glo∣ry, and Strength. Thou hast exceeded in thy Sins, and art grown monstrous in thine Iniquities; so the Lord will be exceeding Terrible unto thee. Thou hast suffered the Wicked in thee to have Liberty, and to take their fill of sin, when the Voice of the Righteous cannot be endured in thee; but he that departs from Iniquity, and would perswade others so to do, is even made a Prey of by Ungodly and Unreasonable Men; their Bodies Imprisoned and Banished, and Estates spoiled, and all sorts of Injuries done them for God's Name & Truths sake. And therefore will the Lord God arise to take Vengeance for these things; Yea, his Soul will certainly be avenged on such a Nation as this, saith this Spirit in his Servant. AND moreover, because you have said in your hearts, We have compassed them about with an Act, and none shall Worship God but as we please: Therefore will the Lord, the mighty God, compass you about with his Terrors, and you shall find no place to hide your selves in, from his Wrath, because of the Pride of your Hearts, and Evil of your Doings, O all ye People of the Land (saith the Lord God) who are guilty of these things. T. T.
THE Lord, even the Lord God of infinite endless glo∣rious Power and Truth, plead our Cause, our innocent Cause, against you the Rulers of this Nation, and of all the World who hate us, and persecute us without all cause. The Lord hath raised us up in Righteousness, ever praised be his Name, to bear our Testimony for God and his Christ, against all the Wayes and false Worships of faln man; and therefore it is that such as are in the fall, through the igno∣rance and evil that is in them, number us with the Transgres∣sors, and account all manner of Punishments and Grievan∣ces too little for us; yea, Banishment, Imprisonment, Spoi∣ling of our Goods, and Death it self is judged not less then we deserve: So the Scripture is fulfilled, see John 16.2, 3. And all this for no manner of evil at all, but meerly because we cannot cease to Worship and Serve the living and true God, our Father, as he hath taught us, and doth teach all that come to him: For our Worship to God is pure in Spirit and Truth: And this is the true, standing, and established Wor∣ship for evermore; and God is now mightily seeking such to worship him. And so the Lord, the Ever-blessed and True God, plead our holy Cause against you, who hate us without a Cause. We have laid before you the Truth and Righteous∣ness of our Cause, and our Good-will to all men, and how it is not in our hearts and hands in the least to injure you, or any; but to this day you will not hear, but stop your Ears to our in∣nocent Cryes: and therefore to the Lord God of Heaven and Earth do we call, and before him, who is the KING of Kings, and LORD of Lords, and RULER of Rulers, and JUDGE of Judges, do we lay our innocent Cause.
O that you had known at least in this your day, the things of your peace, but you will not, and therefore how can ye expect less then a Forsaking and Casting-off by the Lord, as the People of old (called Israel)-found, who would not hear the Voice of the Lord and his Servants, crying and calling unto them in those dayes: Read the Prophesie of Hosea, Hos. 1.6, 8, 9, and see what Lo-ruhaemah and Lo-ammi sig∣nifie, and humble your selves greatly before the Lord; for assuredly great wrath is gone out from the presence of the e∣ternal Majesty of Heaven and Earth against you; and nothing can stay it, but your ceasing from Persecuting the blessed Truth of God, which we, the People of God, in Scorn called Quakers, do love, and live in. It is so. T. T. THE END.
