W2582 17166046 106113
WR HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION, For Altering some of the Times Appointed for Holding the next Assizes. WILLIAM R. THeir Majesties Considering that by reason of the present great Smow the Highways in divers Parts of this Kingdom are Obstructed, and the Passage therein rendred to Difficult and Dangerous, that Persons concerned to give their Attendance at the next Assizes, cannot in many Places with Con∣venience and Safety, and in some not possibly Travel and Repair to the said Assizes at the Times now Appointed for Holding the same; And having Commanded Their Iudges for the respective Circuits to appoint other more Convenient Times where it should be found Necessary; And in Obe∣dience thereunto, the Iudges having found it Necessary to make Alterations in Four of the Circuits; And having Appointed the Times and Places for Holding the said Assizes in those Circuits in man∣ner following, Viz. Home Circuit. Lord Chief Justice Treby. Mr. Baron Lechmere. Essex Munday the Twentieth Day of March at Chelmsford. Hertford Thursday, the Twenty third Day of March at the Town of Hertford. Sussex, Munday, Twenty seventh Day of March at East-Grinsted. Surrey, Wednesday, Twenty ninth Day of March at Kingston upon Thames. Kent, Munday, Third Day of April at Maidston. Western Circuit. Mr. Justice Dolben. Mr. Justice Powell. Dorset Thursday, the Sixteenth Day of March at Dorchester. Cornwell, Wednesday, the Twenty second Day of March at Launceston. City of Exon, Munday, Twenty seventh of March at the Guildhall or the said City. Devon, The same Day at the Castle of Exon in the County of Devon. Somerset, Munday, Third Day of April at the Castle of Taunton. Wilts, Friday, Seventh Day of April at New Sarum. Southampton, Tuesday, Eleventh of April at the Castle of Winton. Midland Circuit. Mr. Justice Nevill. Mr. Justice Gregory. Northampton, Tuesday, the One and twentieth Day of March at Northampton. Rutland, Friday, the Four and twentieth Day of March at Okeham. Lincoln, Munday, the Seven and twentieth Day of March at the Castle of Lincoln. City of Lincoln, The same Day at the City of Lincoln. Nottingham, Saturday, The First Day of April at Nottingham. Town of Nottingham, The same Day at the Town of Nottingham. Derby, Munday, the Third Day of April at Derby. Leicester, Friday, the Seventh of April at the Castle. of Leicester. Borough of Leicester, Saturday, the eighth Day of April at the Borough of Leicester City of Coventry, Munday, the Tenth of April at the City of Coventry. Warwick, Tuesday, the Eleventh of April at Warwick. Northern Citcuit. Mr. Baron Turton. Mr. Baron Powell. Lancaster, Saturday, April the First at the Castle of Lancaster. City of York, Munday, April the Tenth at the Guildhall of the said City. York, The same Day at the Castle of York. But to not find it necessary to make any Alteration concerning the Norfolk Circuit, or the Oxford Circuit, in regard that the several Assizes in both those Circuits may be conveniently Holden at the Times before Appointed. All which Their Majesties Graciously Approving, have therefore thought fit, (by the Advice of Their Privy Council) to Issue this Their Proclamation, Hereby Declaring Their Royal Pleasurr, That all Their Loving Subjects be Dischargeb from At∣tendance at tfte Assizes, Sessions of Oyer and Terminer, and General Goal Delivery for the several Counties and Places in the said Home Circuit, Western Circuit, Midland Circuit, and Northern Circuit, at any other Times then as herein before is particularly mentioned. And all and singular Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, Headboroughs, and all other Their Majesties Officers, Ministers and Subjects whatsoever, whom it may concern, are required to take Notice hereof, and Order themselves accordingly. Provided always, and Their Majesties are hereby Graciously pleased to Direct and Command, That no more or fur∣ther Feés or Charges shall be paid by any of Their Subjects for or by reason of the Altering, Amending, Renewing or Sealing any Writs or Records of Nisi prius, or other Process or Records on this Occasion. Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Second Day of March 1692. In the Fifth year of Our Reign. God save King William and Queen Mary. LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceas'd, Printers to the King and Queens most Ex∣cellent Majesties. 1692.
