W266 12376575 60633
A SERMON Preach'd before the KING and QUEEN AT WHITE-HALL, MAY the 4th. M.DC.XC. By WILLIAM WAKE, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesties: And Preacher to the Honourable Society of GRAYS-INN. Published by Their Majesties Special Comand. . Chrysost. Conc. 2. de Lazar. LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church-yard: And W. Rogers at the Sun over-against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. 1690.
LUKE xvi. 25. But Abraham said; Son, Remember that Thou in thy life-time receivedst thy God things, and like∣wise Lazarus Evil things: But now, He is Comforted, and Thou art Tormented. THE words are part of a Parable, in which our Saviour Christ sets forth to us the different Me∣thods of God's Providence in his dispensations to Mankind, with relation to the Happiness of this life, and of the Other. That however he may here seem to scatter his Blessings at all adven∣tures, upon the Good and Bad indifferently, and permit the Wicked to triumph in their Impiety; Yet there is a time coming when He will call them to a severe account for all their Actions, and render to every man according to his Works. There was a certain rich Man,Vers. 19. which was cloath∣ed in purple and fine linnen, and fared sumptuously every day. And there was a certain Beggar, named Lazarus, which was laid at his Gate full of sores; And desiring to be fed with the Crumbs which fell from the rich mans table: moreover the dogs came and licked His sores. And it came to pass that the beg∣gar
died, and was carried by the Angels into Abra∣ham's bosome; The rich man also died, and was bu∣ried. And in Hell he lift up his Eyes, being in tor∣ments, and seeth Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosome. And he cried, and said, Father A∣braham, Have mercy on me; and send Lazarus that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue, for I am tormented in this flame. But Abraham said; Son, Remember, that Thou in thy life-time receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus, evil things: but now, He is comforted, and Thou art tormented. It has been one of the oldest Complaints that we any-where meet with against the Providence of God in his managing the Affairs of this lower World, That He so often permits the greatest Sin∣ners to be very easie and prosperous; whilst better men are forced many times to encounter with all the difficulties and discouragements, not only of a poor and despicable Fortune, but that too rendred yet more uneasie, by the Injuries and Oppressions which the wicked are suffered to bring upon him. If we look back into the state of the World before our Saviour; even then when it pleased God to make temporal blessings the encourage∣ment
to Obedience; yet we shall find neverthe∣less the best Men very frequently both won∣dring at, and complaining of the inequality of this procedure. Truly, says Holy David, Psal. lxxiii. 1. God is good unto Israel,Psal. lxxiii. 1, even to such as are of a clean heart:—2, But as for me, my feet were almost gone, my steps had well nigh slipp'd:—3. For I was envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked. And Job himself, thô so patient in his own suffe∣rings, yet could not forbear to expostulate with God,Job xxi. 7. about the flourishing condition of Evil Men; Job xxi. 7. Wherefore do the wicked live, become old, yea, are mighty in power? And the best ac∣count could then be given of this matter was; That thô Providence did permit them to flourish for a while, yet it commonly brought some se∣vere Judgment upon them at the last: And as the Heathens themselves sometimes observed, therefore raised them up to a height of fortune extraordinary, that their Fall might be the greater, and more remarkable. This was what the Prophet David, after all his search, acquiesced in, as the best Argument both to satisfy himself, and to vindicate God Almighty. Surely,Psal. lxxiii. 18, says He, thou dost set them in slippery places, and castest them into destruction:—19. How are they brought into desolation as in a moment? They are ut∣terly
consumed with terrors:—20. As a dream when one awaketh, so, O Lord, when thou awakest shalt thou despise their Image. And again, in another Psalm; He gives this as the reason, why we should not be troubled at the prosperity which wicked Men seem sometimes to enjoy.Psal. xxxvii. 1, Fret not thy self be∣cause of Evil-doers, neither be thou envious against the workers of Iniquity;—2. For they shall soon be cut down like the grass, and wither as the green herb. And Solomon not only insists upon the same Rea∣son, but almost transcribes the very same words: Prov. xxiv. 19.Prov. xxiv. 19, Fret not thy self because of Evil Men,—20. neither be thou envious at the Wicked; For there shall be no reward to the Evil Man, the Candle of the Wicked shall be put out. And the same was the Reflection which the rest of the Holy Men in those times contented themselves with upon this occasion. They saw but little of a future state, and of that Eternal Retribution God will hereafter make of Rewards and Punishments, to every one according to his works: And therefore they sought out that punishment for Sinners in this World, which they could not so certainly assign to them in the other. Nor indeed was this any more than what the Tenor of the Law it self directed them to. For it having pleased God to set before them the pro∣mises
of this present life, as the rewards of their Obedience; and by the threatnings of troubles and disappointments, of losses and afflictions now to be undergone, to affright them from sin: It was but natural for them to be surprised, when contrary to all this, they saw wicked men in great Prosperity; And to conclude according to what both the Law of God, and the Methods of his Dispensations, and their own Experience led them to do, that their happiness should not be of any long continuance; but, as the Psalmist expresses it,Psal. xxxvii. 36. in the Psalm I before mentioned, Ps. xxxvii. 35, 36. I have seen the wicked in great power, and spreading himself like a green bay-tree:—37. Yet he pas∣sed away, and lo, he was not; yea I sought him, but he could not be found. Such was the Case even of the best men here∣tofore under the Law: And I shall not need to say, how apt we all of us are, to complain of God's Providence upon the same account even now. And if not with the Sceptick, to take oc∣casion from hence to dispute whether he has any concern at all for the Affairs here below; yet at least with Jeremy to reason sometimes with him of his doings,Jer xii. 1. Jer. xii. 1. Righteous art thou, O LORD, when I plead with thee, yet let me talk with thee of thy judgments; Wherefore doth the way of the wicked prosper?
But the Instance of the Text explains the dif∣ficulty, gives a final satisfaction to all our doubts, and for ever silences our Complaints; and vindicates both the Justice and Goodness of God Almighty. Whilst drawing aside the vail which hung before their eyes, it gives us a clear prospect of a state of things, beyond the narrow bounds of this present World. A State where all these seeming Irregularities shall be set to rights: Where the Sinner shall be divested of all his present happiness; And the Greatness, the Riches, the Pleasures he now en∣joys, expire into the sad result of that Sarcastick Concession, which Solomon once made to the wicked in his days;Eccles. xi. 9. Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth; Walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: But know thou, that for all these things, God will bring thee to judgment. Nay, but the Text carries us yet farther: It not only sets before us the different state of the poor despised Lazarus, and the rich Volup∣tuary, in the other world; thô that had been suf∣ficient to justifie the Providence of God, both for all the Good which the One had received, and for all the Evil which the Other had suffer'd here on Earth: But seems in great measure to re∣present
to us their several conditions in this Life, as the very Ground and Reason of their different Portions in the other. Son, remember, that Thou in thy life-time hast received thy Good things, and likewise Lazarus Evil things; but now He is com∣forted, and Thou art tormented. He does not tell him of the Abuse he had made of his Riches, in employing them only upon his Pride and Sen∣suality. He reproaches him not with his Un∣charitableness, that could let this poor man lie and perish at his Gate, and not take so much no∣tice as his very Dogs did of him. No; he re∣presents to him only the Happiness he some∣time enjoyed whilst he was in this World; and the Grandeur and Jollity in which he lived in it: As if a continued state of Prosperity in the present life were almost incompatible with the Blessings and Glories of the other. And however I shall not presume to be so rash, as to make a general Rule of this Re∣mark; That those who are Great, and Rich, and Honourable now, are not to expect any further Portion hereafter: And, God be thanked! have Instances at this time before my eyes, that I am perswaded, would be sufficient to confute the uncharitableness of such a Conclusion: Yet thus much I may take leave to observe from it;
That such Persons as these, shall of all others the most hardly be saved. And therefore that we ought to be so far from censuring God's Provi∣dence for dispensing so large a share of these Bles∣sings to them, or from envying of them upon any such account; that we should rather pity their danger, who are beset with so many more and so much greater Temptations than other men; And must therefore take a great deal more care and pains, be much more watch∣ful over themselves, and zealous in their duty; or else what we falsly call their Happiness, may prove their ruin to all Eternity. It was a severe Censure which our Saviour once pass'd upon the Riches, and I fear I may ex∣tend it to all other the like advantages, to the Honours, the Power, the Pleasures of this world; Mat. xix. 23.Mat. xix. 23. Verily I say unto you, that a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven. And again,—24. ver. 24. I say unto you, It is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven. And when his Disciples thereupon began with some amazement to ask of him,—25. Who then can be sav'd? We do not find him at all moderating his Re∣flection. He tells them, that it was indeed pos∣sible for such a one to be saved: But it was like
removing a mountain, or raising a dead man to life. A work to be done only by a Miracle of God's Grace; not after the ordinary manner of other men, but by that mighty Power which makes nothing impossible to a Divine Agent:—26. Jesus said unto them, With men this is impossible, but with God all things are possible. And this is that which I shall now endeavour both from the Remark and the Example of the Text, more particularly to represent to you. I am sensible that I am now speaking to Per∣sons of a more than ordinary Fortune and Chara∣cter in the World. And I know how much hard∣er it will be, without great care, for such to be saved, than for those of an Inferiour degree: And therefore how necessary it is, that they should be fully convinced and persuaded of it. And I am not in the least apprehensive, that I shall at all discourage their Piety by such an Underta∣king. It is the Honour of Great and Generons minds to be brave and daring. The difficulties that would affright others, serve only to ani∣mate and encourage them the more to over∣come them. And this Promise they have from God Almighty, That as their task is more diffi∣cult than other mens, so shall his Grace be di∣spenced to them in a greater and more plenti∣ful
Degree. So that if they benot wanting to themselves, he will not fail to assist their En∣deavours: He will bless them with an extraor∣dinary measure of his Grace now, and will crown them with a more Exceeding and Eternal weight of glory hereafter. For the better clearing of all which, I shall observe this Method: Ist. I will shew, How much more difficult it is for those who are Great, and Rich, and Powerful, to be saved, than for other men? And upon what Grounds it is, that it becomes so? IIdly. I will consider what Influence such a Reflection ought to have upon all sorts of men, 1. Upon the One, to stir them up to a great∣er Care of their future Happiness. 2. Upon the Other, to engage them to a patient Acquiescence even in the meanest Condition. And, Ist. I am to shew, How much more dif∣ficult it is for those who are Great, and Rich, and Powerful, to be saved, than for other men? And upon what Grounds, and for what reason it is that it becomes so?
Now this will appear from these two Con∣siderations; 1st. Of that Obligation which those who en∣joy these Advantages lie under, to a more strict and careful Discharge of their duty, than other men. And 2dly. Of those Temptations which these very things many times bring along with them, to the ruining of such persons: Whilst instead of ministring to their Piety, and so encreasing their Reward, they serve rather to expose them the more to danger; and in the consequence thereof, become oftentimes the greatest Occasion of their Eternal Destruction. For if such Persons as these have a larger and more comprehensive Duty to fulfil, upon the ac∣count of these Advantages, than other men; And if these very things which thus encrease their duty, are also at the same time apt to prove the greatest Lets and Hindrances to them in the performance of it; nay perhaps become even Snares and Temptations to them to draw them aside from it: 'Tis then a plain case, that their condition must be more dangerous than that of ordinary Christians, who neither lie under such Engagements, nor are exposed to such Temptations.
And 1st. That those to whom God has given these Advantages above other men, do there∣by become engaged to a more strict and careful discharge of their duty than others. For proof whereof I shall need go no far∣ther than that great Evangelical Rule of our Bles∣sed Saviour,Luke xii. 48. Luke xii. 48. That unto whomsoever much is given, of him much shall be required; and unto whom men have committed much, of him they will ask the more. He was speaking in the Verse be∣fore, of the Difference which God would make in his exactions hereafter, according to the dif∣ferent degrees of mens Knowledg and Capacities now.Verse 47. That servant which knew his Lord's will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes; but he that knew not, and did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes. And the same is the case in all other Advantages whatsoever: Whether they be the internal assistances of Grace and Knowledg; or else the external Blessings of Honour, Riches, Authority, and the like; What∣ever the instance be, whereby it pleases God to enable us to do more good, and make a more plentiful return of Duty and Service to him than other men, our Account shall be required in proportion thereunto, and to whom God has com∣mitted much, of him he will ask the more.
So that now then to prove that there is a greater and more extensive Duty incumbent upon such Persons as these I am now speaking of, than upon the ordinary sort of Christians, I shall need only to shew, that God has given them a greater Capacity of doing Good; and that by consequence it must be their own fault, if they do not make a return, in some measure at least, proportionable thereunto. 1. And the First Advantage that I shall mention is that of Time: And which however I fear at present but little regarded by many of us, is yet without question not only a very valuable thing in it self, but such a Blessing as whatever we do now, yet the hour is coming when we shall All begin to put a just Estimate upon it. And when I consider the great business a Christian has to do in this World, What Duties to fulfil? What Lusts and Passions to overcome? How many Difficulties and Temptations to encounter with? And then think, How short our Life at the best is? What Accidents may arrive to throw us the next moment into the Grave? How much of our time the Necessities of our Nature deprive us of? How much more is stollen from us by the unavoidable Obligations which the Business and Conversation, and too often the Ceremonies and
Impertinence of the World lay upon us? To say nothing now of our very Vanities and Sins; Which yet I fear in all of us have their share, and in many of us a very large one too, to their Service: I must confess there is nothing wherein I could sooner chuse to envy the Happiness, of those above me, than in this one Advantage; tho' such as Most of them seem to put the least value of all upon, and suffer very little occasion to deprive them of. And for the Opportunity which such Persons hereby have the better to improve their Piety, and pay a more constant and regular Attendance upon the Offices of Religion; it is so very evident, that I shall not need to say any thing in proof of it. Whilst being freed from those Necessities under which Others labour; and the supplying where∣of not only fills up the greatest part of their time, but too much possesses their very Hearts and Affections too: Which being forced to converse so much with the Affairs of this World, become thereby not a little indisposed to entertain them∣selves with the Joys and Blessings of the other; They are infinitely more at liberty, as well as ex∣ceedingly more engaged to lift up their Minds and Desires to Heaven, and to bless that God who has so highly favour'd them above the rest of
Mankind; and to spend that time in the more ex∣cellent pursuits of the Glories of their future state, which they have no need to do in a solicitous care for the support of their present condition. But I must go yet farther: For such Persons as these have not only more Time, & so a greater Opportunity, as well as higher Engagements to serve God, and work out their Salvation, than the ordinary sort of Christians; but they have moreover better Capacities, and larger Abilities to do Good, than other Men. For, 2dly. If we consider them in themselves, and their personal Qualifications only, there is often seen another kind of Spirit in them, than what we find in the common and vulgar race of Mankind. Whether it be that from the begin∣ing they are accustomed to a more generous sort of Life, and bred up with other Maxims and Notions of things, than those of an Inferior Order: Or that it pleases God, to their greater Opportunities of serving him in all other re∣spects, to give a better and more excellent Ca∣pacity too, to these than to other Men: But this is plain, that something there is in the very Temper and Disposition of those of a higher Rank, more generous and excellent than what we or∣dinarily
meet with in those Below them. Their Thoughts are more elevated, their Desires more noble, their Reason more improv'd; And by stand∣ing upon a higher Ground, they see further than commonly Others do, whose very Hearts and Minds are many times as mean and groveling as their Fortunes and their Employments. And to all which if we add, what such Per∣sons for the most part have, the great happiness of a better and more ingenuous Education too: It cannot be doubted but as this must needs put a very great difference in all other respects between those of a Higher Quality, and the com∣mon Crowd of Mankind; so does it at the same time exceedingly better fit them for the Service of God, and for more high and extraordinary Attainments in the ways of Piety and Religion. It is indeed very sad to reflect how small a Sense too many of the Meaner sort of the World seem to have of Religion. And one would almost wonder how persons bred up in a Church where the Gospel of Christ is so duly and plainly preach'd to them; Where the Holy Scriptures are read to them in their own Tongue, and put into their Hands for their own private Use and Medita∣tion; should nevertheless so many of them re∣main
as ignorant of the first principles of their Religion, as if they had never enjoyed any of these opportunities of being instructed in it. But then there is this to be said for it; That neither their Parts nor their Education enable them, nor will the necessary affairs of their Lives permit them to have so distinct and thorough a knowledge of the Mysteries of the Gospel; Of the Love of God, and the Merits and Sa∣tisfaction of our Redeemer; Of the Terrors of the final judgment; And what the glories or miseries of another World import; And what mighty obligations all these things lay upon us to live well, and to depart from all iniquity. And yet even among these, we may find many who are zealous for God's service beyond what one could almost have expected from them. That im∣prove every Opportunity, suffer no Occasion to slip them that they can possibly steal from their present employments, to encrease their knowledge, and to exercise their piety. How much more ought those to whom God has given so many more and better opportunities to do this; Whose Souls are more raised, Whose Under∣standings more enlarged, Who know the My∣steries of Christ's Kingdom, What promises God has made to assist our piety, and What blessings he has prepared for ever to reward it, to be in an extra∣ordinary
manner careful of themselves: And not suffer these poor Souls to rise up in the judg∣ment against them and condemn them, for that being so much better fitted, to discharge their duty, and having so much more liberty to do it than they; they have nevertheless so grosly neglected their Souls, and taken no care to ex∣ceed, or it may be even to equal them in well∣doing. But 3dly, Such persons as these, have not on∣ly more Time, and a better capacity, than those of a lower degree; but what is yet more, they have in many respects, a greater Ability too of Doing Good, and of promoting the Interests of Piety and Religion. And that especially upon these Three Accounts, (1st) Of their Riches. (2dly) Of Their Authority. And in the consequence of both these, (3dly) Of their very Example. (1st) If we consider them as Persons of larger Fortunes, and more plentiful Estates, than other Men; How many Advantages will this one thing minister unto them for the better advancing the
Service of God, and the Interests of Christianity? What influence will this give them not only over their own Houses, but over multitudes a∣broad who some way or other depend up∣on them, and need only their encouragement to become religious? To pass by all other Benefits, and offer but one Instance instead of many. It can∣not be doubted but that the more it has pleased God to dispense to any one of these things, the more he not only is able, but ought in duty to lay out in the Exercise of that most ex∣cellent Vertue of Charity and Beneficence; and than which I know not whether there be any more acceptable to God, or more advantageous to our Eternal Salvation. And though there is scarce any state so mean as to be utterly exempt from all discharge of it; yet they are the Rich and Wealthy; Those to whom Providence has been free and liberal no less to set them an Example what they ought to do to others, than to enable them to Do it; whom we are to look upon as the chief Stewards of Heaven, and dispensers of its blessings to the poor and needy. And therefore S. Paul, though he recommends a Christian Charity to all, and passes by none in his Exhortations to it; yet we may observe that they are such as these whom he bids Timothy in a particular manner call
upon not to be wanting in it:1 Tim. vi. 17. Charge them that are rich in this world—that they be rich in good works;—18. ready to distribute,—19. willing to communicate; laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life. For the next instance, (2dly,) that of Power and Authority: I shall not need to say what a mighty Advantage this also gives to such persons of doing more than ordinary Good, by obliging Others to become so. And indeed I cannot tell whether there be any more truly beneficial; but sure I am, a more noble and worthy Use there can∣not be made of any Power or Authority we may have committed to us, than for the promoting the Glory of God, the Salvation of Mens Souls, and a publick sense of Piety and Religion in the World. And how those to whom God has given so glori∣ous an Advantage as this of serving him, in a more than Ordinary manner, will be able to excuse themselves at the last day, if they do not especially employ it to this best of Ends, I must confess I do not see: Nor can I perswade my self, that a private Piety is all God will exact of such persons, in whose power it was in some measure to have reformed the Age; and if not to have made it Good, yet at least to have kept it from being openly and scandalously wicked.
Nay, but (3dly,) And to close this Point: Should those whom we are now speaking of have no such Advantages as these, in point either of Riches or Authority; which nevertheless I be∣lieve but few of them want: yet still the very influence of a Great Mans Example is benefici∣al. It not only strikes mens Eyes, but for the most part, I know not how, charms their very Hearts and Affections into a Love first, and then into an Imitation of it. There is nothing more ordinary in the common practise of the World, than for those of an Inferiour Rank to take their measures from such as are above Them. 'Tis this makes Sin its self become reputable, when countenanced by the Examples of the Great and Honourable: And the Commands of God, and all the Terrors of Eternity are too weak to prevail against the Power of Vice, when got into Credit and Custome among such persons. How much more might we hope to see Piety and Religion re∣vive among us, would the Princes and Nobles of our Israel seriously resolve to set the Example: And make Vertue as necessary to a good Esteem, and Interest, and Reputation with Men, as it is to gain the Love of God, and the Blessings and Glories of Eternity?
And thus have I consider'd very briefly a few of those Advantages which oblige Persons of Great Authority, and Fortune and Quality in the World, to a more strict and careful discharge of their Duty than other men. Let us see, 2dly, What the Effect of all this generally is. And whether these very things at the same time that they thus lay a greater Obligation upon such Persons, are not apt, considering the evil Inclinations of corrupt Nature, to be perverted to a quite contrary purpose; both to tempt them first, and then to enable them to be more highly Criminal than other men? In speaking to which Point I presume no One will so far misunderstand me, as to think I have any design to make an Apology for the Sins of Great Men, by shewing what extraordinary Dan∣gers and Temptations their very condition often times exposes them to. For though where there is a sincere desire, and an hearty Endeavour to live Well, this Consideration perhaps may, and I doubt not shall prevail with God to make greater Allowances for the slips and infir∣mities of such persons, than of those who have
not so many Difficulties to encounter with; Yet cannot this be any Excuse for those who by this means suffer themselves to be utterly drawn a∣way from their Duty, and engaged in a Course and Habit of Sin: But on the contrary, will ag∣gravate their Guilt the more; for that knowing their Danger, They nevertheless neglected to look to themselves, and to take that due care they ought to have done to preserve their Innocence. And 1st, For the first Advantage, that of Time: I have before observed, that this is a Benefit which such persons seem to put the least Value of all up∣on, though one of the most considerable; and I must now add, that being thus neglected by them, it proves for the most part a Snare and a Temptation to them: And this is one of the chiefest Causes of their Sin and Ruine. The man who lives by his Industry,Gen. iii. 19. and in the sweat of his brow eats his bread; he wants indeed the Opportunity of paying that constant Atten∣dance which others may do, upon the Solemn Exercises of Piety and Devotion. His Thoughts are taken up with the Affairs of this Present Life, how to carry on his business, and supply his needs. And this hinders his Soul from having its Conversation so much in Heaven; whilst his con∣cerns
after the things of this lower World renders him very often unable, I had almost said unfit to contemplate the Joys and Glories of the other. But though he cannot therefore be so active in the more immediate Service of God Almighty, yet he spends his time in serving the Order of his Creation. He is Honest and Innocent; And his Business, though it hinders him from rising so high in Religious Attainments, as those who have Greater Leisure may; yet at the same time keeps him from their Temptations too, and from falling into any Great and Dangerous Irregularities. Whilst those who have more Time for the dis∣charge of their Duty, and whose Thoughts and Considerations have no need to be thus em∣ploy'd upon an anxious sollicitude after the things of this World, are yet oftentimes far enough from raising them up to those of a better. They are Idle and Lazy: They look upon it to be one part of their Birthright, indeed the great Priviledge and Characteristick of their Condition, to have no∣thing to do; And then the Tempter never fails to stand ready for them: And Experience shews how easie the Transition is, from the doing of No∣thing, or that which is as good as Nothing, to the doing Ill.
2. For the Second Benefit, that of Quicker Parts, and a more ingenuous Education; It is in∣deed an Advantage not so apt to prove a Snare to Men as the other; but yet such as may be abu∣sed to very wicked purposes. And the Church has in all Ages had but too many Instances of this kind, to shew how much more capable Men of a brisk Wit, and a Comprehensive Knowledge, are of being eminently Wicked, and doing a great deal of Mischief to Religion than other Men. What is it but this that has given Birth to most of those Satyrs and Pasquils, wherein we find not only the Mysteries of Christianity, but even the Practice of all Religion exposed to scorn and ridi∣cule? I shall not need to send you back to Julian and Porphyry, and the like profess'd Enemies to the Christian Faith for Witnesses of this. Our own Age, and even our own Country, has bred up those who at the same time that they have call'd them∣selves by the sacred Name of Christ, have never∣theless bid defiance to his Gospel; and esteem'd it a piece of Wit and Gallantry to burlesque Scrip∣ture, and laugh the greatest Articles of Religion out of Countenance. Who have employ'd their Parts only to find out some new Colours for Scep∣ticism and Infidelity: To free themselves from the Practice of Religion now, and to harden them∣selves
against the Fears of Damnation here∣after. But shall not God visit for these things?Jer. v. 9. Shall not his Soul be avenged on such Wretches as These? Yes, the time is coming when he shall turn all their Laughter into Mourning, and bring those Evils upon them they now pretend to scoff at the very Name of. And give them a sad and Eternal Conviction how much they were mista∣ken in their Notions, when they thought Pro∣faneness to be Sense; and to make a mock of Sin and Damnation the only sure and approved Evi∣dence of a Man of Depth and Knowledge: And that when all is done, what Job so long since ob∣served is indeed the very Truth;Job xxviii. 28. Behold, the Fear of the LORD that is Wisdom, and to depart from Evil that is Understanding. And when thus even Mens Parts and Educati∣on, those best Advantages to Vertue and Piety, may be turned into a Snare and a Temptation; much more, 3dly, Will those other Benefits yet remain∣ing, of Riches, and Power, and Greatness, be found to fall under this Reflection; which are both infi∣nitely more Easie to be abused, and not at all less able to minister to their greater Guilt, and in the
consequence of that, to their more certain de∣struction. The Truth is, whether we consult our Reason or our Experience; What Use such persons com∣monly do make of these things; or What, with∣out a great deal of Care, they will be apt to make of them; we shall find but too much cause to conclude what I am now asserting to be most true: That if on the one hand, Riches, and Greatness, and Power, and Advantages that both en∣able and engage those who have them, to do much more good in their Generation than other Men; yet they may, and without very great heed, will be apt to expose them to many Temp∣tations too; And instead of rendering them more excellently Good, make them only more ex∣ceedingly Wicked, than otherwise they either would, or could have been. And I shall not need to spend the time in a solemn proof of that which our Saviour thought to be so very plain, as to make it almost a General Rule, a kind of Apho∣rism in Christianity;Mat. xix. 23. That a rich man shall hardly en∣ter into the Kingdom of God: and of which, if you please, we will take the Instance of our Text for the Application; Son, remember, That thou in thy Life time receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus Evil things; But now, He is Com∣forted and Thou art Tormented.
And now to conclude this first Point: Is it thus evident, as we have seen, that persons of a greater Quality and higher Station in the world, do lie under much greater Obligations, and have an higher and more difficult duty to fulfil than other Men? And have we so much Reason to believe, that those very Advantages which encrease their Ob∣ligations, are at the same time but too apt to prove their greatest Lets and Hindrances in the fulfilling of them? It must then remain, that either such persons as these must take a great Care of themselves, or they shall more hardly be saved than those of an inferiour Rank: Whose Duty is more Easie, Whose Temptations are much fewer; Who have neither so great a Task to ful∣fil, nor so many Difficulties to encounter with in the fulfilling of it. Which being so, let us Consider, IIdly, What influence therefore this Reflection ought to have upon All of us: 1. Upon those who are Great, and Rich, and Honourable in the World, to stir them up to an Extraordinary Care of their fu∣ture Happiness.
2. Upon all others; to engage them to a patient acquiescence even in the lowest and meanest Condition. Ist, That the Consideration of what we have now been discoursing, ought to stir up all such persons as these, to a more than Or∣dinary Care of their future Happiness. This is a consequence, that if Men believe a∣ny thing at all of another Life after this, must be allow'd to be the natural result of what we have now been discoursing. For if both the Duty of such Persons be greater, and their Temptations stronger than other Mens; If God expects a more excellent Service from Them than from the Ordinary sort of Christians, and yet they are cer∣tainly exposed to more Lets and Hindrances than Others usually are, in the fulfilling of it: What then can we conclude but that it will un∣doubtedly concern them, as they tender their Eternal Welfare, to look very carefully to them∣selves, that they neither come short in their Duty, nor are carried away by the strength and force of their Temptations. But here therefore a Difficulty will arise; For if the Case be such as we have now shown, and as indeed our Saviour Christ himself hath set it out
to us: If such Persons as These shall hardly be saved; and again, It be easier for a Camel to go through the Eye of a Needle, than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: Will not this rather serve to discourage than to heighten their En∣deavours after it? And lead them sooner to the Epicure's Conclusion,1 Cor. xv. 32. Let us Eat and Drink, for to morrow we shall die; than to the Christian Resolu∣tion of striving to enter in at the Straight Gate;Luke xiii. 24. because many will seek to enter in, and shall not be Able? This indeed seems to be a very reasonable Ob∣jection, and which ought to have a fair and satis∣factory Answer made to it. And therefore, Ist, I reply: It is most certain, that were we to judge of this matter according to the Power of Corrupt Nature, there might be but too much Cause for such persons to give way to these kind of Reflections, and look upon their Condition as little better than Desperate. And so much our Saviour Christ himself implies,Mat. xix. 26. Mat. xix. 26. With men this is impossible; that is to say, Were we to look no farther than our own Natural Strength, without considering what the Grace of God, and the Power of his Holy Spirit is able to do, we might well reckon the Difficulties that arise to
hinder the Salvation of a Rich and Great Man to be insuperable. But With God, All things are possible; He can make that which is thus difficult of its self, become Easie to us, and remove all just cause not only of Despair, but even of Complaint from us, upon that account. And therefore, 2dly, I say, that such Persons as these ought not to be at all discouraged from the prospect of any of these Difficulties, because though their Du∣ty be indeed Greater, and their Temptations more dangerous than other Mens; yet if they do but add their earnest Endeavours, God will give them such a measure of his Grace, as shall be sufficient to enable them to overcome all their Difficulties, and to fulfil the duty that he requires of them. Je∣sus said, With men this is impossible, but with God all things are possible. As if He had said, To enable a rich man to despise his Wealth in comparison of his Duty; to support him against the Temptations it exposes him to, and to incline him to make that due use He ought of it: This is indeed a Work which Humane Strength either could not at all, or not without some extraordinary difficulty, be able to accomplish. But let not this therefore discourage any of you; for though Humane
Strength cannot do it, a Divine Power can. And if there must be a double portion of Gods Spirit be∣stow'd upon such persons, or they cannot be sa∣ved: Let them do their parts towards it; let them pray fervently, and labour sincerely to discharge their duty, and they shall have a double portion, ra∣ther than they shall perish for want of it. God will give them an Assistance suitable to their needs, and their Grace shall be as much greater than that of Ordinary Christians, as their duty and difficulties are Greater than Theirs. Nay, but this is not yet all: For, 3dly, Our Saviour not only assures us, that such persons shall have a measure of Grace proportionable to their needs, though that had been sufficient to remove all grounds of despair from their minds: But to encourage them yet more to a Carefulness in their duty, he has promised, that if they do thus hear∣tily labour to fulfil it, they shall not only have a sufficient assistance from God to support them now, but a more glorious Reward of their Piety here∣after. Ver. 27. Where when St. Peter remark'd to Him, how they had despised all their pre∣sent concerns to follow him, and become his Dis∣ciples;—27. Behold, we have forsaken all, and follow'd Thee: What shall we have therefore? He not only pronoun∣ces a Blessing upon them for their Piety,—28. ver. 28. Ve∣rily
I say unto you, that ye which have follow'd me in the regeneration, when the Son of Man shall sit in the Throne of his Glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the Twelve Tribes of Israel: But makes a General Promise to all others, that should not suffer any of those things they now have to draw them away from his Service, that they should receive a more exceeding reward for it, ver. 29.—29. And every One that hath forsaken, not only that has actually left them, but hath in his mind so given them up, as to resolve not to value any of these things in comparison of his duty; Every one that hath thus forsaken Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands for my Names sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit Everlasting Life. And now when this is the Case; When such per∣sons as these have not only a Promise, that God will endue them with a more plentiful portion of his Spirit than other men, and so render their duty, though so much Greater in its self than that of others, yet to them as easie as our Lesser Engagements are to us; Who as we have not their Difficulties, so nei∣ther have we the promises of such an Assistance, as we see they have, to support us: But are more∣over assur'd, that their Piety shall receive a pro∣portionable reward; They shall as much out shine
in us in the Firmament of Glory hereafter, as they now exceed us in their Power, and Riches, and in what is yet more valuable, their Ability of doing Good: It must certainly be very much their fault, and what will doubtless render them exceedingly more inexcusable than Other Men, if they be not in some measure as careful of themselves, and as zealous in their duty as all these excellent Advantages engage them to be; and as for other Mens sakes as well as their own, we ought to beseech them that they would become. But this is not yet all the Use we are to make of these Reflections; Which ought not only to en∣crease the Piety, and inflame the Zeal of those above us: But at the same time, 2dly, To teach us, whom it has pleased God to place in a lower, but if we knew our own Happi∣ness, a no less blessed Estate; to be perfectly content∣ed with our Condition, though it should chance to be never so low and mean in the World. For, since this present Life is but a time of Tryal, a State in which we are not to continue very long, and then whatever our portion here may be, if we do but manage our selves as we ought in it, we are sure we shall be exceedingly Happy in the other World: Wherefore should we murmur or repine a∣gainst
Gods Providence? As if Eternal Glory were not a sufficient recompence for a little trouble and misery in the pursuit of it. I confess, I am not so great a Sceptick, as to go about to perswade you, that there are not some Ad∣vantages in a plentiful portion of the Good things of this present World: Or that it is all one, whe∣ther a man be poor and despised, or else Rich and Ho∣nourable in it. But yet this I may affirm; that to him who is accustomed to think, and has a quick and lively apprehension of the Happiness of the other Life, the wants of this will be very suppor∣table. And while we can lookup to Heaven, and there see the poor Lazarus in Abraham's bosome, we shall be able to find an Argument not only of Contentedness, but even of Comfort too in the Reflection; though we should chance for the pre∣sent to lie, as he once did, at the rich mans door, and feed on the Crumbs that fall from his Table. And, Oh! that it would please God, we might all so seriously meditate on these things, that whatever our portion now be, we may have a bles∣sed reversion in Heaven; where alone true Happi∣ness is to be expected by us. Consider, I beseech you, the Time is coming, it cannot be far off, when we must all lie down in the Grave: When the Rich and Mighty shall as certainly die as the Poor and Miserable; and carry
none of their State and Grandeur along with them. When all titles and distinctions shall be forgotten; and the greatest Monarch stand with as little Advan∣tage before the Judgment-Seat of Christ, as the mea∣nest of his Vassals. And what will it then avail any of us, that we have been, it may be, Great or Honourable on Earth, if we must be from henceforth Miserable to all E∣ternity? How shall we then begin to envy the Blessed For∣tune of those men, whom we were wont to despise heretofore? We thought their Condition poor and miserable. We esteem'd them neglected of God, the scorn of Men, and out-cast of the people. But alas! now we see the difference; And how much more fortunate a poor Good Man is in the meanest E∣state, than the Sinner in all the heighth of his most flourishing Condition. And may we then every one of us so effectu∣ally ponder all these things, that whatever tem∣poral Blessings we now enjoy, yet our portion may not be in them: Nor that be ever objected to us, which Abraham here called the Rich Man in our Text to consider; Son, remember, that Thou in thy life-time hast recei∣ved thy Good things, and likewise Lazarus Evil things; but now He is comforted and Thou art tormented. FINIS.
