w3691 13534360 100026
Ʋiro honorabili & proeclaro Johanni Noel Armigero Tabula meritò dicata. frontispiece
ADDITIONS TO THE History and Antiquities OF RUTLANDSHIRE SInce the printing and publishing of the foresaid Book, the Honourable John Noel Esq Third Son (now li∣ving) of the Right Honourable Baptist late Viscount Campden, hath bestowed the Sum of One thousand Pounds in erecting a most Noble and Exquisite Monument in the North-side of Erton Church in this County, to the Memory of the said Lord his Father. It is in Height 22 Foot, and 14 Foot in Breadth, and contains, at a convenient distance from the Floor, two admirable Statues, of the said Viscount Campden, and Elizabeth his last Lady, standing upright, somthing bigger than the Life. Between these two Sta∣tues is a Pedestal supporting an Urne. On the outward sides of the Statues are placed two great Pyramids, each supporting a Vase of black Marble twisted about with Festoons of white. And in several parts of the Monu∣ment, are represented in Bas-releif, the seve∣ral Matches of the said Lord, and all the Is∣sue, as well living as dead, by those Matches. The whole is the Workmanship of that just∣ly admired Artist Mr. Grinlin Gibbon, whose Carving at Windsor, Whitehall, and elsewhere, not only in this Nation, but in Foreign parts, have caused him to be esteem'd the best of English Statuaries, and perhaps inferior to none beyond the Seas. On two Tables of black Marble, below the two Pyramids, are the following Inscri∣ptions in Letters of Gold, viz. on that on the Left Hand, these words: Here resteth Baptist Noel Lord Viscount Campden, Baron of Ridlington and Ilmington, Lord Lieutenant of the County of Rutland. His eminent Loy∣alty to his two Sovereigns, King Charles I. and II. his Conjugal Affection to Four Wives; his Paternal Indulgence to Nine∣teen Children; his Hospitality and Libe∣rality to all that desired or deserved it (notwithstanding inestimable Losses in his Estate, frequent Imprisonments of his Person, Spoil and Havock of several of his Houses, besides the Burning of that No∣ble Pile of Campden) have justly ren∣dred him the Admiration of his Contempo∣raries, and the Imitation of Posterity. He left this Life for the Exchange and Fruition of a better, the 29th day of Octo∣ber, in the LXXI year of his Age. A. D. MDCLXXXIII. And on that on the other Hand, these Words: He took to his First Wife Ann Fielding, 2d Daughter to William Earl of Denbigh, by whom he had Three Children, who Dy∣ed in their Infancy. By his Second Wife, Ann Countess of Bath, he had One Son Still-Born. By his Third Wife, Hester, One of the Four Daughters and Coheirs of Thomas Lord Wootton, he had Two Sons and Four Daughters; 1. Edward, present Earl of Gainesburgh, Governor of Portsmouth, Lord-Lieutenant of Hampshire and Rutland; 2d. Henry Noel, late of North-Luffenham Esq who Died in the 35 year of his Age; 3d. Ma∣ry present Countess of Northampton; 4th. Juliana, Wife of William Lord Allington; 5th. Hester, who Died an Infant; 6th. Elizabeth, Wife of Charles Lord Duresly, Son and Heir apparent of George Earl of Barkley. By his 4th Wife (who stand∣eth by his Side) Elizabeth Bertie, eldest Daughter of Mountagu Earl of Lindsey, Lord Great Chamberlain of England, he had Nine Children, 1st. Lindsey Noel, who Died in his Infancy; 2d. Catherine now Wife of John Earl of Rutland; 3d. Baptist Noel Esq now living; 4th. John Noel Esq likwise living; 5th. Bridget Noel also living; 6th. A Son, whose ear∣ly Birth prevented his Baptisme; 7th. James Noel Esq who died in the 18th year of his Age; 8th. Martha Penelope now living; 9th. A Son Still-Born. In the middle of the Pedestal which stands between the two Great Figures. To the Pious Memory of Her said Hus∣band, his Wives, their, and her own Chil∣dren, Elizabeth his last Wife in her Life time gave Monies, and left Orders for the Building this Monument, which by her Third Son and Executor, the Honourable John Noel was punctually perform'd, 1686.
HEre follow certain Ancient Epitaphs, and Monumental Inscriptions, not now in be∣ing, but totally decay'd, or in the times of Re∣bellion erazed and obliterated, mentioned in a Manuscript Collection of Church-Notes, long since read and observed in the several Churches under-named, by that skilful Herald Mr. Augustin Vincent; when in the year 1618, he Visited in Rutland, as Deputy to the fa∣mous Cambden Clarencieux: Which with ma∣ny other Manuscripts of the said Mr. Vincent's, formerly in the possession of Ralph Shelden of Beoly, in the County of Worcester Esq were, since his death, lately given to the He∣ralds-Office, where they now remain. In the Church at Glaston. Hic jacet Walterus Collie Dominus & Pa∣tronus hujus Villae, & Agnes Ʋxor ejus, qui obiit, Ann. Dom. 1407. On another Monument. In Lindon Natus, Johannes sic vocitatus, Linguae limatus, apud Oxoniam graduatus, Doctor formatus, Aulae Merton sociatus, Oxoniae gratus, Commissarius reputatus, Glastonae Praelatus, jacet sub marmore stratus Moribus ornatus, fit tecum, Christe, beatus. Annos millenos, quadringenos lege plenos Trinos & senos, nunc Caelos scandit anaenos. On Another. Here lieth Sir John Bramspath, which was made Knight; He died in the year of our Lord, 1443. On Another. Orate pro animabus Johannis Basset, & Agnetis Ʋxoris ejus. In the Chancel at Retton. Orate pro anima Roberti Whytbie quon∣dam Praebendarii de Ketton. In the Church of North-Luffenham. Upon a Monument, on the South-side of the Church. Simon Digby Esq Pensioner to King Henry the 8th. Second Son to Sir John Digby Knight-Marshal, which Simon Married Katherine Daughter of Christo∣pher Clapham of Beaumesly, in the Coun∣ty of York Esq and Roger Digby their Son and Heir, Married Mary Daughter of John Cheiney of Shordelous in Buck∣inghamshire, Ann. Dom. 1582. In the Church of Okeham. Upon a Grave-stone; in Brass, Hic jacet Willielmus Waren quondam hujus Villae Burgensis & Mercator Stapule Villae Calisiae, ac etiam Domina Agnes Ʋx∣or ejus & relicta, qui quidem Willielmus obijt Ann. 1499. Decimo die Septemb. On Another. Hic jacet Willielmus Dalby & Agnes Ʋxor ejus, qui quidem Willielmus obiit in vigilia Annuntiationis beatae Mariae Virgi∣nis. Ann. 1404. & praedicta Agnes— Painted on the Wall in the said Church. Mr. John Pooly of Martinsthorp Ann. 1557. Which lyeth Buried here, Ann. 1557. Hath given the Poor in Okeham Ann. 1557. Ten pounds by the year. Ann. 1557. Other Supplemental Additions. Pa. 14. In the List of Sheriffs. A. D. A. R. Jucobus 2. 1685 1 Johannes Bullingham, Arm. 1686 2 Eusebius Buswel, alias Pelsant. Arm. 1687 3 Clemens Breton, Armig. Pa. 16. In the List of the Knights of the Shire. A. R. Regn. Jacobi 2. 1 Baptista Noel Armiger. 1 Thomas Mackworth, Baronettus.
Pa. 27. OF the Priory of Canons here at Brook, I have this further to add, out of cer∣tain old Deeds and Grants now in my Possessi∣on. Their Estate lay at Brook, Braun∣ston, Knauston, Okeham and Langham, all Towns near adjoyning. As to what they held in Braunston, I find that Reginald, Son of Robert de Branteston, gave to God, and the Sacristy of the Church of the Blessed Mary of Brot, the yearly Rent of 12 d. which the Canons there did use to pay year∣ly to the said Reginald, as Capital Lord of Braunston for one Bouate of Land holden of him; which said Rent he did appoint for the maintaining of the 4th and 5th Lamp at our Ladys Vespers and Matins; And in like manner for the maintenance of the 4th and 5th Candle at the High Mass, and at our Ladies Morning Mass. A little before the Suppression, Robert Orwell Prior, and the Covent of this House, did by their Lease, Dated 12th of May 23. H. 8. Demise to Robert Reve, John his Son, and Joan his Wife, Dwelling in Knoston in the County of Leicester, a Mese place, and four Yard Lands, with all Houses, Measages, Pastures, Commons and Liberties, late in the Tenure of the said Robert Reve, lying in the Town and Fields of Knowsington and Braunston for their several Lives, at the yearly Rent of 43 s. 4 d. And besides usual Covenants, the Lessees obliged themselves to Set and Plant 100 Ashes upon the Lands and Ground so Demised, within the space of five years next ensuing from the Date of the Lease. This Lease was confirmed by Antho∣ny Coope Esq to whom the Lands belonging to this Priory were Granted after the Sup∣pression. The rest of the Lands, belonging to this House, with the Reversion upon this Lease, were Sold and Conveyed 20 Jan. 36, H. 8. By Anthony Coope of Hardwicke in the County of Oxford Esq to John Burton of Braunston: Yet some of the Lands being held in Capite, were not alienated till 30 Octob. 13 Eliz. At which time that Queen Granted her Licence of Alienation to Anthony Cope Esq, and John Peck, to Convey the same to William Burton, Son and Heir of the foresaid John Burton. This parcel was exprest by the Name of Flectmeadow, with the Appur∣tenances in Braunston, containing by esti∣mation 15 Acres, late in the tenure of Joan Ryve Widow. Their Estate in Okeham and Langham was of a very antient Grant, but of no great value; and as I believe, they lost the Possession of part of it long before the Suppression. Walkelinus de Ferrariis (who was Lord of Okeham, Langham, and Brook, in the time of King Hen. 2 d. and seems to be the First Founder of this House) Gave to God, and to the Church of St. Mary of Broch, and the Canons there, in pure and perpetual Alms, the Homage and Service of Jordanus de Saxonis, and whatsoever Right he had in him and his Tenement; and also the Tithes of the Profits arising from the Fair at Okeham, held at the Feast of the Decol∣lation of St. John Baptist; and of the Mills of the said Town of Okeham, and of Lang∣ham. Witnesses to which Deed were Simo∣ne Presbitero de Okeham, Gilberto Fratre ejus, Hgone de Ferrariis, Willielmo de Frenes, Galfrido de Carento, Magistro Johanne Medico, &c. This Deed was afterwards confirmed by Henry de Ferrariis, Son of Walkeline, and after that by Isabel de Mortuomari, Widow of Roger de Mortuomari, Sister and Heir of the said Henry de Ferrariis. Long after this, viz. At the Great Court of Edward Duke of York (who was also Earl of Rutland,) held at Oke∣ham on the Wednesday next after the Feast of St. Michael, in the 6th. H. 4. the then Prior of Brook exhibited his Claim to the Tithes of the Mills of Ocham and Lang∣ham, valued at 24 s. per Ann, which his Pre∣decessors had formerly enjoy'd, except for six years last past: But whether he ever en∣joy'd them afterwards, does not appear. The before-mentioned Isabel de Mortomari Granted to the Prior and Canons of Broke a Tenement in Langham, which Gilbert Ca∣recarius held of her, and directed her Precept under her Seal to William de Hampton, her then Bayliffe at Okeham, to deliver to the said Prior, full Seisin of the same. Of their Estate at Brook, I have already Treated, to which I shall only add, That in the place where the Priory of Brook formerly stood, viz. about a Flight-shot West of the Town, hath been since the Dissolution of the said Priory, erected a very fair House, which has been for many years past the Residence of the Noble Family of the Noels; and was, of late years, a noted Seat of Hospitality, during the Life of Julian late Viscountess Campden, Relict of Edward Viscount Camp∣den: which Lady was the eldest of the two Daughters and Co-Heirs of Sir Baptist Hicks Knight and Baronet, Lord Hicks of Ilming∣ton, and Viscount Campden; who at his own proper Charges built the Sessions-house in St. Iohn-street at London, well known by the name of Hicks's Hall. He also did divers other publick Works of Charity; Among the rest he Founded an Hospital for six poor Men, and Women, at Campden in Glou∣cestershire; wherein he appointed to each of them two Rooms, a little Garden, and two shil∣lings a week for their maintenance; which Endowment his said Daughter Julian Viscoun∣tess Campden did much enlarge, and departed this Life at Brooke her constant Residence, on the 25th of November, in the year 1680. being then about One hundred years of Age. She had Issue by her said Husband, Edward Viscount Campden, two Sons and two Daugh∣ters, viz. Baptist Viscount Campden, Henry Noel of Luffenham Esq Elizabeth Married to Sir Erasmus de la Fountaine Kt. and Penelope to John Viscount Chaworth.
Brook House on the South side Illustrissimo One  ENOARDO Coun de Ganest rgh   Campden, D. NOEL Hick Baroni de Ridlington & Ilming¦ton in Comilatibus Hanloni e Rlandior Locumlenenti Ne  Fore Gardiano, u∣ernatori de Portsmouth Hanc Tabulam. H.D. .W. depiction of house Pa. 50. WHich most Noble Lord, Robert Earl of Aylesbury, Our now Gracious Soveraign King JAMES II. as a further remuneration of Honor, did constitute Lord Chamberlain of His Majesties Houshold in July 1685. but he survived not long to en∣joy the Office, departing this Life at his Seat at Ampthill in Bedfordshire, on the 20th of October the same year, to the great grief of all that knew him. He being a Person of singular Merit for his constant Loyalty, un∣feigned Religion, Virtue and Honour; of great Learning Himself, and a Noble Me∣caenas to all the Learned; a lover of Hospi∣tality, and a constant Benefactor to the Poor. He Married the Lady Diana, Daughter of Henry Earl of Stamford, and by her left Issue surviving of both Sexes. Whose eldest Son and Heir, the Right Honourable Thomas now Earl of Aylesbury and Elgm. is the true Inheritor of both his Fathers Honours, and Virtues, and is one of the Gentlemen of His now Majesties Bed-Chamber, as he was also to His late Majesty King CHARLES II. of ever Glorious Memory. Pa. 78. OF late years Luffenham-House (which was in the War-time so Nobly held out against the Rebels by Henry Noel Esq) became the Seat and Residence of another Noble Gentleman of the same name, the Ho∣nourable Henry Noel Esq Second Son of the Right Honourable Baptist Viscount Campden. Which last Henry Married Elizabeth, Daugh∣ter and Co-heir of Sir William Wale Kt. but died without Issue-Male, in Septemb. 1677. leaving only one Daughter his sole Heir. Since when, this House is become the Seat of the Honourable Baptist Noel Esq another Son of the said Viscount Campden, who hath aug∣mented, and much beautified the Building.
Luffenham House On the East side Honoralilick. Praeclare Vre Baptist Noel Armigero Tabula meritò dicata. On the South side depiction of house
Pa. 98. THE Church at Okeham is Dedicated to All-Saints, as appears by an antient Will, Dated in the 15th year of King Henry VII. and Proved before the Official of the Arch Deacon of Northampton, 10 May 1501. Which Will containing several obser∣vable Matters relating to this Church, and the old Customs of those times, I have here transcribed at large, as follows: In Dei nomine Amen. Anno Domini M. quin∣centesimo, die vero mensis Maij primo. Ego Ro∣bertus Blakburn de Okeham condo Testamentum meum in hunc modum, primo lego animam me∣am Deo patri omnipotenti, beatae Mariae ae om∣nibus Sanctis ejus; Corpus{que} ad sepelien∣dum in Ecclesia Omnium Sanctorum de Okeham praedicta; Item lego pro Mortuario meo meum optimum animal quod justum est; Item lego sum∣mo altari pro decemis oblitis xij d. Item lego tres∣decem denarios ut dentur in Elimosina pro salute animae meae; Item lego pro obsequiis meis in primo die ij s. sex presbiteris, in secundo die hoc est ad septimum diem sex presbiteris istius villae ij s. & ad diem trigesimum taliter sex presbite∣ris ij s. & ad Clericos in quolibet die j d. Item lego Campanis Ecclesiae de Okeham iij s. iiij d. Item lego Guyldiis Omnium Sanctorum & Beatae Mariae de eadem villa praedicta xij d. Item le∣go ad vias communes xij d. Item lego Aliciae siliae meae de bonis meis propriis decem Marcas: Residuum vero omnium bonorum meorum do & lego Aliciae uxori meae & Willielmo Blakburn filio meo quos quidem Aliciam & Willielmum fa∣cio, constituo & ordino meos veros & legitimos Executores ut disponant pro salute animae meae, & sit laus Deo Amen. Hiis testibus Magistro Vi∣cario perpetuo Ecclesiae de Okeham pradicta, Thomas Wilkoks de Knoston, & Willielmo Man∣by alias Smyth de Okeham praedicta die prae∣dcto. IN this Town of Okeham did former∣ly reside divers wealthy Merchants of the Staple at Calais, who dealt in several Sta∣ple Commodities of this Kingdom, chiefly Wooll; a Trade of very great account, while that Town was possest by the English. Of what Quality and Condition these Merchants were, may be guest by the Charities exprest in their Wills, Registred in the Prerogative-Office. One of which I will here mention, as it may be seen in the said Office, Lib. Horn. 56. William Waryn of Okeham Merchant of the Staple at Calais (who lyeth Buried in our Ladies Isle, or Chappel, be∣ing on the South-side of the Chancel in the Parish Church at Okeham,) by his Will, Dated 1499. (14. H. 7.) among other things, gave to the High Altar of the said Parish-Church for Tithes and Duties forgotten, 5 l. To every Priest that helpeth at his Obse∣quies the First, Seventh, and Thirtieth days 4 d. each day; to every poor Man, Woman and Child present at the said Obsequies those three days, 1 d. To find two Priests to sing and say Masses and Service for the Souls of Him, his Father and Mother, and all Christi∣an Souls in the Parish Church of Okeham for 20 years next ensuing, 200 l. To the re∣paration of the said Church 10 Marks. For a suit of Vestments for the said Church 100 Marks. To provide Freese Cloth, and Li∣nen Cloth for Garments, Shirts and Sheets for poor People the space of five years 10 Marks. To every House of the four Orders of Fryers in Stanford 13 s. 4 d. To the Nuns there 13 s. 4 d. To the Gildes of the Holy Trinity, and of our Lady in Okeham, whereof he was a Brother 40 s. To the mending of High-ways and Brigs at Okeham 10 Marks. Towards the ma∣king of Rochester-Bridge 40 s. To the Pa∣rish-Church of Lydington in Rutland 20 s. To the Church of Uppingham 10 s. To the Church of Aston 6 s. 8 d. To the Church of Preston 10 s. To the Gilde in the said Church, of which he was a Brother 6 s. 8 d. To the Church of Pysbroke 10 s. To the Church of Somerby 13 s. 4 d. To the Church of Cottesmore 10 s. To the Church of Langham 10 s. To the Church of Broke 6 s. 8 d. To the repara∣tion of the Priory Church there 13 s. 4 d.
To the Abby of Osolweston in the County of Leicester, for the making of their Fray∣tour 40 l. And 40 l. more to find a Priest of their House, to sing for Him and his Wife for ever. As for his Lands and Tenements which he held in Okeham, he Devised them all to Agnes his Wife for her Life; the Remainder to his Son Francis Waryn in Tayl; The Re∣mainder to his Son James Waryn in Tayl; The Remainder to his Daughter Elizabeth Waryn in Tayl; the Remainder to be setled on Feoffees (if it conveniently might be) to the following Uses, viz. The House where∣in he dwelt, with the Appurtenances, to the Use of the Vicar and Wardens of the Parish Church of Okeham; conditionally, That the said Vicar and his Successors in the said Church, should for ever Commemorate his Soul, and the Souls of his Father and Mother at Mass, every Sunday in the year; otherwise, that the said Mansion be sold, and the Mo∣nies to be distributed in Works of Mercy, and Deeds of Charity, for the Wele of his Soul. Three other Tenements in the said Town, to the Use of the Abbot and Conent of Osol∣weston, conditionally, that they maintain in their Covent, a yearly Obit, or Anniversary for his Soul, his Fathers and Mothers, Wife, Children, and Benefactors, and all Christian Souls; And at the same Obit distribute to the Abbot there 20 d. to every Chanon of that House, being a Priest, 1 s. and to every Novice 8 d. &c. IN former times, before the Reformation there was a Pilgrimage of Devotion, in Ho∣nour of the Blessed Virgin, performed to a Spring in this Parish, about a Quarter of a Mile North of Okeham, which is still known by the name of Our Ladies Well; near which, one may yet perceive several places where have been the Foundations of a house or two; And this appears more plain from a Re∣cord. in the First-fruits Office, Inter communia de Term. Trin. 8 Eliz. rot. 5. containing among other things—Quod plurima Commoda & Emolumenta Vicariae de Okeham praedictae perti∣nentia & spectantia constabant in diversis Obla∣tionibus & Perigrationibus utpote nuper Imagini Beatae Mariae ad fontem, & etiam Sancti Micha∣elis Archangili, & aliis compluribus ritubus & Oblationibus—Quae jam una cum Com∣modis & Emolumentis inde Vicario praedicto re∣novantibus prorsus evannerunt. Pa. 103. BEsides these two Hospitals, there are other considerable Charities belonging to the Town of Okeham, viz. Anne Lady Harington gave in the year 1616. the sum of 32 l. per Ann. for ever, to the Poor of the Lords-Hold in this Town, as I have already mentioned, Pa. 52. Also Mrs. Parthenia Lowman of London, Widow, gave to the Town of Okeham, the sum of 100 l. for a perpetual Stock; The Pro∣fits or Interest of which Money was on the 6th of March 1662. thus setled, viz. Ten Shillings part of the same, for a Sermon in the Church of Okeham yearly, on Ashwednes∣day, the residue to be yearly disposed to such Poor People as are past their Work and Labour, or Sick, and not able to maintain themselves otherwise; Three Quarters of the Sum to be distributed to the Lords-Hold, and a Fourth Part to the Deans-Hold in the said Town of Okeham. HEre also ought to be remembred the Re∣markable Charity of Mr. Endymion Ca∣nyng, an old Cavalier, and a Captain of Horse in the Service of King Charles I. of ever Bles∣sed Memory. After the Civil Wars, he li∣ved for many years at Book in this Coun∣try, in the Family of the Right Honourable Julian, late Viscountess Campden, to which Lady he was Steward, and her Principal Ser∣vant. He Died a Batchelor at Brook in the year 1683. And by his Will, Dated on the 24th day of May, in the year 1681, gave to Pious Uses as follows, viz.
To the Poor of Chipping-Campden and Berrington, in the County of Gloucester.— 200 l. To the Poor of the Parish of Mo∣nysend in Esser, where he was Born and Baptized.— 50 l. To the Poor of Terback in the Coun∣ty of Worcester, where he was sometime an Inhabitant.— 50 l. To the Poor of Okeham in the Coun∣ty of Rutland.— 50 l. To the Poor of Vppingham in the said County.— 50 l. To the Poor of Brook in the said Coun∣ty.— 20 l. To the Poor of Ilmington in the County of Warwick.— 20 l. To the Poor of Aston-Subedge in the County of Glouceste.— 20 l. To the Poor of Bradfarton in the County of Worcester.— 20 l. And by a Codicel annext, Dated April 2. 1683. a little before his death he gave fur∣ther. To the Town of Castle-Bytham in the County of Lincoln, to buy a Clock for the use of the Town.— 6 l. To the Poor of the said Town.— 10 l. To the Poor of Exton in the County of Rutland.— 5 l. To the Poor of Whitwel in the said County.— 5 l. To the Poor of North-Luffenham in the said County.— 5 l. To the Poor of Ridlington in the said County.— 5 l. To the Poor of Belton in the said Coun∣ty.— 5 l. To the Poor of Braunston in the said County.— 5 l. To the Poor of Langham in the said County.— 5 l. To the Poor of Halsted in the County of Leicester.— 5 l. Besides other Legacies to his Relations, and Chief Friends, and to some Poor People par∣ticularly nam'd, of which I make no menti∣on here, but only of the Sums given as above exprest to Pious and Publick Uses, which in all amount to the Sum of 536 l. P. 108. WHich most Noble Lord Edward, Earl of Gainesborough, hath been twice Marri∣ed, First, to the Lady Elizabeth Wriothsley, Eldest Daughter and Co-Heir of Thomas late Earl of Southampton, Lord High Treasurer of Eng∣land, by whom he hath Issue, One Son, Wrioth∣sley-Baptist Lord Campden, who is joyn'd in Commission with his Father for the Lieu∣tenancies of Hampshire and Rutland; and Four Daughters; 1st. The Lady Frances Noel, late Wife of Simon Lord Digby, Baron of Geashil in Ireland, which Lady died in Child-Bed of her First Child, a Daughter; not long after whose death, her Husband also departed this Life at his House at Colshil in Warwickshire, on the 19th of Jan. 1685; whose Loss was much regretted by all that knew him, He being a Person of very great Honour and Virtue, and of Signal Charity; 2d. The Lady Jane Noel, Married to the Right Honourable William, now Lord Digby of Geashil, Brother and Heir-male of the foresaid Simon Lord Digby; 3d. The Lady Eli∣zabeth Noel; and 4th. The Lady Julian Noel. The said Earl's Second Wife, the present Countess of Gainesborough, is Mary Daugh∣ter of the Honourable James Herbert Esq Son of Philip Earl of Pembroke and Montgo∣mery, Widow of Sir Robert Wortesley Knight and Baronet.
Pa. 128. SIR William Burton here mentioned (who as I have already observed out of the de∣scription of Leicestershire, Pa. 108. is by that Author affirmed to be one of the Justices of the Kings-Bench, in the Reign of King Ed∣ward III.) was Lord of Foxton, and other Lands in the County of Leicester; But Tolethorp in Rutland was his chief Seat. I have seen a Pedigree setting forth his Issue; and their several Matches, as follows; Sir William Burton Knight. Ob. 49. E. 3.=Elleonor. Sir Thomas Burton Kt. Ob. 8. R. 2.=Margaret Daughter of Thomas Grenham. Sir Thomas Burton Kt.=...... Dau. of Simon Louthe. Thomas Burton Esq ........ Dau. of Sir Robert Brabeson Kt. Ux. 1.= Robert Burton Ob. S. M. =......Dau. of Sir Hugh Bushey Kt. Ux. 2. William Burton=......Dau. of John Foluille of Ashby Foluille, Com. Leic. John Burton of Vppingham. Com. Rutland.=......Dau. of Thomas Bassing. Thomas Burton=......Dau. of Ralph Lowe of Denbigh, Com. Derb. John Burton of Braunston. Com. Rut. Ob. 1 Mariae.=...... Da. of ...... Blackwell. William Burton of Braunston.=Alice Daugh. of Richard Peck. 1 John Burton=Ann Dau. and Heir of Thomas Dig∣by Esq Philip Dau. of Henry Cobham al. Brook vx. I. Sir Tho. Burton of Stocker∣son Co. Leic. Baronet. creat. 22. Jul. 20. Jac. 1.= Anne Wi. of Sr Abell Barker Baronet. Eliza∣beth Fran∣ces =Anne Da. of Robert Reinolds of London, Gent. Ux. 2. Sir Thomas Burton, Bar,=Elizabeth Da. of Sir John Prittyman Bar. Sir Thomas Burton Bar.=Anne eldest Dau. of Sir Thomas Clutterbuck Kt. 2 Bartin Burton of Okeham, Com. Rut.=Abigail Dau. of John Cholmley Esq Andrew Burton. of Okeham Esq=Ann Daught. of William Fairmedow of London, Merch. Cornelius Bur∣ton of Oke∣ham Esq Andrew Bur∣ton of Ex∣ton Gent. Anne Abigail Mabel Elizabeth Mary Sara. Mabell Wife of John Booth of Okeham Gent. 3 Simon Burton of Braunston.
Pa. 136. ROger Flower of Okeham, here named, who Married Catherine, Daughter and Cohe of William Dalby, was a Person of so great Note in this County, that I ought not to omit here what I find memorable of him, out of his Will, Registred in the Prerogative-Office, Lib. Luffnam, f. 69. By his said Will, Dated 15 April 1424, he appointed his Body to be Buried in the Church of All-Saints at Okeham. His best Animal he gave for a Mortuary. To the Vicar of Okeham for Tithes forgot, 10 s. To the Guilds of the Holy Trinity, the Blessed Vir∣gin, and St. Michael at Okeham, 40 s. To the Chaplain of the said Parish, 2 s. and to every other Chaplain of the said Town, 1 s. To every Order of Friers at Stanford, the Carthusians at Coventry, the Abby of West∣minster, and the Priory of Laund, 6 Marks, to pray for the Souls of Katherine his late Wife, William his Father, Ellen his Mother, William his Brother, William Dalby and Ag∣nes his Wife, William and John his Sons, Agnes Plessington his Daughter, and Edward late Duke of York. To certain Chaplains by his Executors to be appointed to celebrate for his Soul, the Soul of King Henry 5th, and the other Souls aforesaid, 40 l. To be di∣stributed to the Poor, and for the performing of his Exequies; 50 Marks. To the Alms-house of Okeham, towards the Repairs of the Chappel, and Ornaments of the Altar there, 50 s. To every poor Man of the said House, 4 d. To the mending of the High∣ways, Bridges, and Causeways at Okeham, 50 s. To every Monk of Westminster being a Priest 1 s. not a Priest, 8 d. To the great Guild at Coventry, 40 s. To the Prior and Canons of Brooke, 13 s. 4 d. To the Nuns of Langly and Huntington, and Prior, and Canons of Newsted near Stamford, each House 13 s. 4 d. To 20 poor People of Oke∣ham, each a Gown of Coventry Freese, and a new Shirt. To the Master of the Chan∣try at Manton (whom he made one of his Executors,) he gave his pair of Beads which he used himself, with the Ten Aves of Silver, and a Pater noster over-Gilt, praying him to be mindful of him somtimes when he saith our Ladies Sawter on them. It appears by the said Will, that he was the Principal (if not only,) Benefactor to the Building of the Voute (i. e. the Spire) of the Steeple at Okeham: And that he was the Farmer or Lessee of the Parsonage Tithes at Okeham, under the Ab∣bot and Covent of Westminster. Besides his Lands and Revenues in Okeham, Whit∣well, and Little-Hambleton, in this Coun∣ty, he had divers Lands in Lincolnshire; and in Leicestershire, Leesthorp, and the Mannours of Steneby and Braceby, which two last he devised to his Second Wife Ceci∣ly, during Widowhood, or (as the words of the Will are,) In case she take upon her the Mantle and Ring, and avow Chastity. He left Issue at his death five Sons, Thomas his Son and Heir, Robert designed to be a Priest, James, Roger, and John, and Agnes a Daughter. Pa. 38. Col. 2. l. 12. add, Which Ezekiel Johnson hath since, by Deed of Bargain and Sale, bearing Date 2. July 1686. and Inrolled in Chancery the 5th of the same Month, Sold, Granted, and Conveyed, the Mannor of Clipsham, with all the Lands, Tene∣ments, Pastures, and Wood-Grounds to him belonging in Clipsham, Pickworth, Stretton, and Thisleton in the County of Rutland, And the perpetual Advowson of the Church of Clipsham, to Richard Snow, Gentleman, (one of the Clerks in Chancery) his Heirs and Assigns for ever. Which Ri∣chard is the youngest Son of John Snow, here∣tofore of Gunnerby in the County of Lin∣coln, Gent. and hath Married Grace the el∣dest Daughter of Edmund Bolsworth, Citizen of London, by whom he hath had issue of both Sexes. P. 30. col. 2. l. 31. add, in August 1621. P. 43. col. 2. l. 17. add, These Antient Guilds in England were of the same nature with those Fraternities of Housholders, and others of both Sexes, which are now called Sodalities, be∣yond Seas. Corrigenda. IN the Pedigree p. 63. for, Elizabetha fil. & h. Will. Com. Rut. Ux. 1. read Eliza∣betha fil. & h. Edw. Com. Rut. Ux. 1. In the Ped. p. 79. for, Maurice Rich read Mau∣rice Roche. p. 96. col. 1. l. 29. for Henry read Edward. In the Pedigree, p. 109. for Eliz. f. & coh. Tho. Dom. Wotton. read Hester f. & coh. Tho. Dom. Wotton. In the same Pedigree these Letters [ob. s. m.] which by mistake are misplaced under the Name [Johannes Noel Arm.] should be removed, and stand under the Name [Henri∣cus Noel Arm.] who died without Issue Male. Licensed Jan. 4. 1686. Roger L'Estrange. LONDON, Printed for the Author by Edw Jones, 1687.
Farther ADDITIONS TO THE History and Antiquities OF THE COUNTY of RUTLAND. By the same Author.
