15533.3 99898913 151009
A Right profitable Booke for all diseases, called, The Pathway to Health. Wherein are to be founde most ex∣cellent & approued Medicines of great vertue: as also notable potions and drinks, and for the distilling of diuers precious waters, and making of Oyles, and other comfortable receits for the health of the body, neuer before imprinted. First gathered by Peter Leuens, Ma∣ster of Art of Oxford, and student in Phi∣sicke and Surgery: and now newly corrected and augmented. Ecclesiastes. 38. ¶ Giue vnto the Phisition that vnto him belongeth. AT LONDON, Printed by I. Roberts for Edward VVhite, and are to be solde at the little North doore of Paules Church, at the signe of the Gun. 1596.
TO THE READER. IN my opinion gentle Reader (which also is the say∣ing & writing of all the Philosophers,) those things are most principall to bee taught and maintained, which in the common wealth are most profitable and necessary, then may I say without iust cause of reproofe: if some thinke no shame to displeasure many, for the pleasuring of a few, then I neede not to blush, nor feare to pro∣fit many, by hurting of none, by the publishing of this my booke abroad: not pend without paine, nor drawne without diligence, nor ended with ease, wherein are such and so many notable, rare, profitable, and precious things, as neuer were yet set forth in any volume in our English tongue, nay, diuers of them were neuer hetherto imprinted. Although I haue giuen the onset to publish in our owne naturall tongue thys most excellent worke for all diseases, for the which cause it should not bee the lesse esteemed, although some, more curious then wise, esteeme of nothing but that which is most rare, or in hard or vnknowne languages. Cer∣tainly, these kinde of people cannot abide that good and lauda∣ble Arts should be common to many, fearing, that theyr name & practise should decay, or at the least should diminish: the inten∣tion truly of such persons, seemeth much like them that gape for all, and would all haue, leauing nothing to any body, but that which they must needes forgoe: not considering that we are not borne for our selues onely, as Plato sayth, but for the profite of our Country. Surely, if I did not feare to be too long in thys my Praeface, I would proue, how all Arts and Sciences may be pub∣lished in that tongue which is best to be vnderstood, as for exam∣ple. Gallen the Prince of this Art, being a Grecian, wrote in the Greeke. Also, King Auicene he wrote in the Arabian speech. Al∣so
Plinie, Celsus, Serenus, and other of the Latinists, wrote to the people in the Latine tongue. Marcillius Ficinus, whom all wri∣ters assent to be singulerly well learned, disdained not to write in the Italian language, generally to all men. If then the intent of all that euer set forth any notable studie, haue beene to be read of as many as would, what reason is it that we should keepe secrete a∣mong a few, the thing that was made to be common to all? Christ sayth, no man lighteth a Candle to couer it with a bushell, but set∣teth it to serue euery mans need: and these goe about not onely to couer it when it is lighted, but to quench it before it bee kind∣led, if they might by malice: which as it is a detestable thing in a∣ny godly Science, so me thinks in thys so necessary an Arte, it is exceeding damnable and deuillish, to debar the fruition of so in∣estimable benefits, which our heauenly Father hath prepared for our comfort and innumerable vses, wherewith he hath armed our impotent nature, against the assaults of so many sicknesses, where∣by his infinite mercy and aboundant goodnes., is in nothing else more apparantly confessed: by the which benefits, as it were with most sensible arguments spoken out of heauen, hee constraineth vs to thinke vpon our owne weakenes, and to acknowledge, that in all flesh is nothing found but misery, sicknes, sorrow, sinne, af∣fliction, & death: no, not so much strength as by our own power to releeue one member of our bodies diseased. As for the know∣ledge of medicines, comfort of hearbs, maintenaunce of health, prosperitie and life, they be his benefits & proceed of him, to the end that we should in common helpe one another; and so to liue together in his Lawes and commaundements: desiring all those which shall find any fault herein, that they will friendly amend that is amisse.
THE PATHWAY to Health. * For all the parts of the head. For to make the hayre to grow. TAke a Mollwarpe, skinne and all, and lap it in a cloute, and burne it to powder in an earthē pot, then take Does dirt, and lap it in a clout, and burne it to powder, & min∣gle these two powders together with Honney, and an∣noint the place where you would haue haire to grow. Also take and grind red Onions very small, and annoynt the place there∣with, and the haire will grow vp quickly. For to make hayre to grow where none is. ¶ Take Hasel nuts, with huskes and all, and burne them to powder, then take Beech mast, and the leaues of Enula cam∣pana, and stampe the hearbe and the mast together, then seeth them together with Honny, and annoynt the place therewith, then strew the powder thereon, this will make haire grow. Another experiment to make haire grow. ¶ Take Mallowes, and seeth them roots and all, and wash the place where haire wanteth, and it will grow in small time. Take Honny and Beares greace, and mingle them together, and make an oyntment thereof, and annoint the head therwith. Also take a good quantitie of Bées, and dry them in a siue by the fire, and make powder of them, and temper it with oyle Oliue, and annoynt the place where the haire should grow. An experiment for to wash the head, ¶ Take an ounce of Turpentine, & an ounce of white war, and a pottle of Burges wine, of Storax calamitae, an ounce, and a little Cerus, and Mastick, and so make good strong lye, and put therein those gummes, and so wash the head therewithall. Also take the oyle of Tartar, and warme it, and annoynt any balde head therewith, and it will restore the haire againe, and that in short space, this hath béene proued true.
Another for to wash the head, and to make the hayre yellow. ¶ Take the best and the strongest lye that can be made, then take a good handfull of red Fennell, of Margerum as much, of Sage a handfull, Violets as much, of Damaske Roses a hand∣full, of Red Roses as much, two Nutmegs, of Cloues & Mace one ounce of each, Enula campana, as much, Orice powder, as much, Licorice two or three sticks sliced, a handfull of Lauen∣der spike, and let the lye stand nine dayes, and then straine it, and seeth it one waue, and scum it, then put all the hearbs and spices therein, and so occupie it when you thinke good, with a spunge wet your haire, and then let it dry in of it selfe: this wil keepe your head from aking, and make your haire as yellowe as golde. Another to make the hayre yellow. ¶ Take the rinde or barke of Rubarbe, and take the scra∣pings thereof, and steepe it in white wine, or cleere Lye, and after that you haue washed your head therewith, you shall wet your haire with a Sponge, or some cloth kept for that purpose, then let your haire dry against the fire or sunne, and the oftner that you vse it, the better it will proue, as I haue often tryed. For to stay hayre from falling. ¶ Take and make strong standing Lye, and take a great company of Isope rootes, and burne them to ashes, and mingle the ashes and the Lie together, and therewith wash your head, and it will keepe the haire from falling of, and vse this often, it is well proued. Also if you take the ashes of little Frogs being burnt, it staieth the falling of the haire, and the ashes of Goats dung, mingled with oyle, doth increase haire. Another for the falling of hayre. ¶ Take the ashes of Culuer-dung in lie and wash the heade therewith. Also Walnut leaues beaten with Beares suet, re∣storeth the haire that it plucked away. Also the leaues and mid∣dle rind of an Oke sodden in water, and the head washed there∣with, is very good for this purpose.
For to kill Lyce in the head. ¶ Take Frankensence, and Barrowes greace, boyle them together in a pan of earth, and with this oyntment rub the head where the lyce is, and it will kill them. Another to kill Lyce in the head. ¶ Take Stauesaker, and beat it to powder, and mingle it with blacke Sope, and annoynt the head therewith, and it will be quicklie cleane. For the Nits in the head. ¶ Take the gall of a Calfe, and smere the head therwith, and it will kill the Nits. For woormes in the hayre. ¶ Take and rub Calamint on the head, and it will sley the woormes in the haire. For to doe away hayre. ¶ Take the head of Nettles, and stampe them, and temper it with Eysell, and annoynt the head therewith: but first shaue or pul away the haire, for it is better. After this you must sweat, and when that you are hote, then annoynt your head therwith, and doe this three daies, and there will growe no more haire in that place. Also take the gumme of Arabick, and annoynt the place where the haire groweth, and it shall quicklie fall awaie. For to take away hayre. ¶ Take the shells of two Egges, beate them small and still them with a good fire, and with that water annoynt the place. Or els take hard Cats dunge, dry it, and beate it to powder, and temper it with strong Vineger, then wash the place with the same, where you would haue no haire to grow. An experiment for to take away haire. ¶ Take the blood of a Snaile without a shell, and it hinde∣reth greatly the growing vp of haire. Also take Labdanum, the gum of an Iuie tree, Emmets Egges, Arsenick and Vinegar, and binde it to the place where you will haue no haire to grow.
Another for to take away hayre. ¶ Take the iuyce of Fumitory, and mixe it with gum Ara∣bick, then lay it on the place of the haires first plucked out by the rootes, and it will neuer permit any more haire to grow in that place. Also if you annoynt your heade with the iuyce of a Gloworme stamped, it hath the same vertue. For the scurffe in the head. ¶ Take of the decoction of Mallow rootes, and wash your head often therewith, and it will cause the scurffe to fall away. Also the decoction of the middle rinde of an Elme, the head bee∣ing washed therewith, doth mightily driue out the scurffe. Another for the scurffe in the head. ¶ Take Vinegar, and boyle it in wine lees a little, and an∣noynt all ouer the scurffe: but first clense it, and it will mightily heale and dry it. Also take the branch of a greene Fig trée, with the leaues, and stampe them in water, & it will heale the scurffe being washed therewith. If the scurffe be newe, vse this medi∣cine daily with Vineger, and annoynt the head therewith: this hath beene proued. For wheales or pushes in the head. ¶ Take and wash your head with Vineger, or with water wherein Camomell hath beene sodden. Also the leaues of Vio∣lets stampt with honny, doth lightly heale the same. Also towne Cresses stampt with Goose greace, dooth spéedily heale the pu∣shes or wheales that be in the head. For a scald head. ¶ Take a penny-worth of Lampe oyle, and halfe a pynte of faire water, and boyle it well together, and when it is cold, put thereto halfe a penny-worth of Quicksiluer, and temper it wel together, and annoynt the head therewith. For a scald head. ¶ Take the liuer of a Thornebacke, and séeth it by it selfe, then take six roots of Enula campana, and séeth thē by the space of
thrée howers in cleane water, of Houseléeke three handfulls, stampe them and mingle them altogeather, and strayne them through a linnen cloth, and make an oyntment of them, and an∣noint the head therewith, and if the haire be gone: take a hand∣full of wooll and burne it to powder, and annoint therewith the head that is pilde, and the haire shall growe as thicke as euer it was before. Another for a scald head. ¶ Take Groundsell, and Barrowes greace, and chopps the Groundsell small, and boyle it with a softe fier with the Barrowes greace, and so clip off the haire, and ther-withall an∣noynt the scald head. For to heale a white scald in the head. ¶ Take Houndstung and Borage rootes, of each a like quan∣titie, wash them faire and cleane, then shred them, & chop them small in péeces, séeth them in vineger about halfe a pint & more, then put in a little sweete Butter neuer salted, and let them boyle together till they be softe, then strayne them through a cleane cloth, and it will be a pleasant salue, then take a feather and annoynt the Patients head withall, but you must vse to wash the scald head with Cow pisse, or else with faire water: and this will heale the white scald head. Another for to heale the white scald. ¶ Take gréene coperis, rosen, waxe, shéepes suet, hony, and beat them small together, and boyle them well, and it will be a very faire salue, and this will heale any white scald: proued. For the brayne an experiment. ¶ Take the Sirope of red Roses, with the powder of Lyg∣num Aloes, and the bone in the Harts hart, cloues, & the leaues of red Roses, or the Cakes thereof, and séethe them all together with Snger, and giue the patient thereof to drink fasting, mor∣ning and euening. For the brayne another.
¶ Take the smoke of Lignum Aloes, and it comforteth the cold braine, and all weake parts of the braine, and the head. For to restore the braine. ¶ Take and make powder of Betony, and vse it in thy pot∣tage, and it will restore the braine. Also take and chew Mace in your mouth. Also put into thy nose the roote or iuice of Galin∣gall, and it is good for braine or memory. For the weaknes of the braine. ¶ Take and smell to muske, and for default of stoppings of the nose when it wringeth the hart and vpper limmes, and cau∣seth them in a manner to sound: take of the sume of the Muske beneath. Also to comfort the braine, vse both Cloues and Mace in your breths that they be sodden in, and also in your nosthrils. If the Patient haue the rume opose: put the powder of Car∣domonum, and the oyle of Muske into an Egs-shell till it séeth, and therewith annoynt the head. For the fleame in the braine. ¶ Take the iuice of red Docks, with the iuice of Rue, and put a little thereof into the nosthrils, and vse this in a stue or ve∣rie warme place. For him that hath lost his mind. ¶ Take the iuice of Marigolds, of Sage, of Wormewood, of each of them a spoonfull, and take as much white Wine and put it thereto, and let him drink it at euen, and as much in the mor∣ning cold: and vse it for fiue dayes. Another for him that hath lost his mind. ¶ Take and sheare off the haire of the mold of his head, then take. Archangell and stampe it, and bind it to his head where it is shauen, and let hun sléepe for a while, and when he awaketh: he shall be right méeke and sober inough.
For to keepe a good memorie. ¶ Take Mugwoort, and lay it in white Wine, and then take it and distill it, and vse to drinke of it fasting, and it shall pre∣serue the memory. Also to take the iuice of Zipulus & drinke it fasting: causeth a good memory. Another for memory. ¶ Take and grind Musterséede with Vineger, and rub it mightily on the plants of the féet: and it dooth quicken the me∣mory of such persons as haue béen long time sicke, and will stir them vp from all kind of forgetfulnes of memory, and maketh them mindfull of such busines that they take in hand. Against forgetfulnes. ¶ Take Rue, red Mints, oyle Oliue, and with very strong Vineger let thy nosthrils be holden ouer the smoke thereof. Also burne thine owne haire, and mingle it with vineger and a little pitch, and apply it to thy nosthrils, for it wonderfully stirreth and quickneth the persons diseased with forgetfulnes. Also take the lytes of a Hogge layde vnto thy head being shauen: is very good. Another for forgetfulnesse. ¶ Take the gall of a Crane, being made warme in a leaden vessell, it dooth throughly stirre vp the diseased body, if the nape of his necke be annoynted therewith. Also take the smoake of Galbanum, or of an Harts horne which is best of all for forget∣fulues. Also the skin of an Hare burnt, and the ashes thereof drunke with Calamint, healeth the disease of the Lytargy. Another for the same. ¶ Take Sauery and beat it and séeth it in Vineger, and lay it in the forme of a plaister to the hinder part of the head: it dooth méerely awaken those that are very heauy with sléepe, nothing dooth more and better quicken forgetfulnes in men or women. Also the fume of a Kidds skin dooth quicken forgetfull persons, and those that be infected with the falling sicknes. For the frensie in the head.
¶ Take oyle of Roses, oyle of Violets, of euery of them xx. poys, and as much of the water of a Cowturd, & put it in a new vessell of earth, and boyle it till all the water be boyled away: then put out that, and put in other: into the same vessell, as much of that water, and boyle it thus seuen times, and then put thereto halfe of the fourth part of the poys of Camphiere, and meddle it well together, and vse it on his head for the frensie when it is new shauen. Another for the frensie of the head. ¶ Take the iuice of Smallage, veriuice or vineger, oyle of Violets or Roses: being put together in a vessell of glasse ouer the fire, all hot lay it to the Patients head, and so annoynt the head all ouer being shauen. Another for the same. ¶ Take and annoynt the head with vineger, and with oyle of Roses put thereto, and it is very good against lytargie or fren∣sie, and for vomit of blood, the quantitie of foure drams taken with wine profiteth much. For the frensie in the head. ¶ Take the hot lights of a Goat, and clap it to the head of the Patient that is vexed with the frensie: and it taketh it away presently, and so doth a sponge dipt in warme wine, and put to the left pappe. Also the roote that is called Neproyal boyled and layd to the head, will draw forth all madnes. An experiment for the frensie in the head. ¶ Take a red stone that is found in a Swallow, and let the Patient carry it about him fast tyed in a linnen cloth, and put it vnder the left arme, and it dooth heale all frensie & lunatick per∣sons. Also a rosted mouse eaten, is very good for frensie. Also séeth Henbans in swéet wine, and therewith wash the frensies eares, temples, and nosthrils, and it proueketh sleepe. For the meigrim in the head. ¶ Take foure handfuls of red rose Flowers fresh in Sm∣mer, and in Winter: thrée handfull of Camomell, and as much
of veruen, and breake them small with your hande, and boyle them in a pottell of white wine or Gascoyne, if it may be had, and if not: in Rochell wine, till it come to a quart, and put them in thrée baggs, broched flat like a playster, and lay it where as the paine is, as hot as the patient may suffer it, and change them still hot and hot, during a day and a night, and longer if néed be. Another for the meigrim. ¶ Take halfe an vnce of Galingall, and an vnce of Ginger, Nutmegs halfe an vnce, Cloues a quarter of an vnce, Aniseede a peny waight, Enula Campana a quarter of an vnce, Licoris halfe and vnce, Suger halfe an vnce, and beat all these together, and let the sick vse of this powder first and last a spoonful at once and within foure daies God willing he shall be whole. Another for the meigrim in the head. ¶ Take an vnce of Stauesaker, and beat it to powder fine, then take the third part of the powder, and of the white of an Egge, and a Nutmeg, and a little Commin, a quantity of flaxe small hacked, beat them together, and lay it plaister wise on his forehead, when that he goeth to bed, if he bléed: he shal be quick∣lie whole, if not: lay it on the oftner vntill he bléed. Another for the meigrim. ¶ Take commin, & beat it as small as ye can, that so done: sift it through a fine cloth, and take the finest therof, & put therto the quantity of the gall of an Oxe, and beate them together till that they be thicke, and then make a plaister therof and lay it to the nape of the necke, and it shall help them. For the same a medicine. ¶ Take Daste roots, leaues and all, and beat them, & wring out the iuice, and put of the iuice into the nosthrils of the person that is troubled with the meigrim in the forepart of the head, so that the Patient may lye, that they may voide downe the iuice that discendeth from him or them.
For to know if that the braine pan be broke. ¶ If the flesh be whole aboue: take & shaue the head there as the sore is, and double a linnen cloth, and spred on the white of an Egge, and bind it too one night, and on the morrow take it away, and looke if the cloth be moist or dry, for if it be moist the panne is broken and in the same place carue the flesh, and let the blood out, and annoynt it with an oyntment made there∣fore, and thus thou shalt saue him, or else he is but dead. For the Fistula in the head. ¶ Against the Fistula in the head: take and séeth bitter Lu∣pines in salt-water: and put Vineger to them, and then straine it, and in the straining therof: put of the powder of Germander and wash the head therewith. For the Fistula in the head. ¶ Against the Fistula in the head, take and gather the roots of Egrimony, and dry them in the smoke, and after that it is dry: take and hang it about the neck of the Patient, and it will helpe him. For the meigrim and for the impostume in the head. ¶ Take the foure peny waight of the roote of Pellitory of Spaine, a ob. waight of Spicknard, and boyle them in good Vineger, and when it is cold: put therto a spoonfull of hony, and a saucer-full of Musterd, and mingle them well together, & held therof in thy mouth a spoonefull at once, and vse this nine times, and vse for to spit it out continually. For an impostume in the head. ¶ Take Galingall halse an vnce, Nutmegs a quarter of an vnce, Cloues a penny waight, the flowers of Canell, a penny waight of Spicknard, a ob. waight of Aniséede, a quarter of an vnce of Eoula Campana, halfe an vnce of Licoris, of Suger halfe an vnce, and beat them well together, and vse of this pouder first and last: a spoonfull at once.
Another for the impostume in the head. ¶ Take Betony, Sage, red Mints, red Fenell, of eath thrée crops, and eate them eight dayes together, or fourtéene dayes: and after take the greene rynde of the Elder sticke of one yéeres growing, and put the iuice thereof into thy nose thrée dayes, thrée times a day lying vpright, the space that one may goe a myle. For the head ache. ¶ Take Rose Cakes, and stamp them very small in a mor∣ter with a little Ale, and let them be dryed by the fier on a Tile∣shard, and lay it to the nape of the necke to bedward: proued. Another for the head ache. ¶ Take Hemlocks, and séethe them till they be as soft as pappe, lay it to the head where the paine is, & let it lye all night, and on the morning lay on another hot plaister of the same, and vse this foure or fiue times, and by Gods grace the Patient shall be eased. Another for the head ache. ¶ Take a Posset and lay it hot vpon the head, and let it oft be laid too, for so cured a Phisition diuers cures. And also take the oyle of Camomell, and anoint the browes and the forehead, and labour it very well, and lay the Patient downe, and make him sweat, and it shall helpe him. Also mingle a spoonfull of the iuice of Betony, with as much wine, and as much hony, and put thereto nine Pepper cornes, and drinke it foure dayes toge∣ther: proued. For the head ache. ¶ Take iuice of black Iuy, & iuice of Rue, the oyle of Roses, white wine, and Vineger, and mingle all together, and annoint the temples therewith. For the head ache. ¶ Take an handfull of red Sage, a handfull of redde Rose leaues sliced, a handfull of Camomell flowers dryed, a handfull of Bay-salt, a péece of leauened bread, two Nutmegges, beate them all together, and make as it were a quilt, and rub ouer the
hearbes, and then lay it ouer his head in the forme of a plaister. For the head ache proued. ¶ Take white earth-bind, and make iuice thereof, and put it into thy nose, and it shall purge thy head of rume, and it dooth away the headache. Also Leeks with leaues sodden in wine and emplaistred about the temples and the forehead, it dooth away all the head ache. Also take Musterd séede, Saffron, Rose flow∣ers, or the leaues, and mingle them with Sope, and make a plaister thereof, & bind it to the head. Also take Insence, Doues dung, Wheat meale, and temper them with the whites of Egs, and bind it to the forehead, and the temples, and it dooth away all aches of the head. Also wash the head with lye made of the powder of Colewoorts, of red nettells, and of white wine, and it dooth away the ache without doubt, for this is a true experi∣ment prooued. For aking of the head. ¶ Take and make Lye of Veruaine, or of Betony, or of woormewood, and therwith wash thy head thrice in the weeke, and it shall doo thée very much good. For the vanitie of the head. ¶ Take the iuice of wallwoort, Salt, hony, wax, & Ensence, boyle all them together, and therewith annoint the temples. For the vanitie of the head, and to wash the head, and to comfort the braine and memory, and for a fayre face. ¶ Take lye that is not so strong, and put two Pyls of Oren∣ges, the Pils of as many Citrons, the blossomes of Camomell, Bay leaues a handfull, of maiden-haire a handfull, of Egrimo∣nie two or three vnces, of barly-straw chopped in péeces, a dishful of Fenegréeke, a pound of Wine lyes, two or three dishfulls of broome blossoms, put all these into the lye, and mingle them to∣gether, and so wash the head therewith, and put a little Myrre and Cinamon: this is proued.
FOr the Lytargie in the head in the hinder part, which maleeth it for to shake. ¶ Take a pure blacke Cat, and flea her, and pull out her bowels, and pick away the fat from the gutts, and put them into the body againe, and fill the body full of Musterdséede, well stéeped in the iuice of Nep, and Sage, and then sow the body vp, and rost it vpon a spit, till it be so dry that it drop no more moy∣sture, then take the dripping that commeth thereof, and put it in bladders, and when you will occupy it, shaue the Patient in the neck, and annoint him by the fier in the ioynt next to the head, and it shall help the gréeued. Another experiment for the Lytargie in the head. ¶ Take and make the decoction of Tutsan, Smallage, and of Sage in salt-water, and wash the hinder part of the head ther∣with. Also take and séeth Castoreum in strong vineger, put ther∣to of the powder of Anacard, and annoint the hinder part of the head therewith. Another for the Lytargie in the hinder part of the head. ¶ Take and chop the rootes of Siperus very small, and séeth them in oyle till the oyle be nigh wasted, then lay the residus that is left on the hot coales, and let the Patient take the smoke thereof at his mouth and nose, and it will help him. Also bind the powder of Eustorbium in a fine cloth, and hold it so to his nose that he be constrained to neese. Or else take and make an oyntment of Eustorbium, of Pepper, and of Castore, with oyle of Muske, or common oyle with these powders, and iuyce of Gourds, and annoynt and rubb the hinder part of the Patients head: prooued. For to purge the head and to clense it. ¶ Take Pellitory of Spaine, and chew a good quantitie of the roote in thy mouth thrée seuerall daies, and it shall purge the head, doo away the ache, and fasten the gumms.
For to purge the head an experiment. ¶ Take the séede of Stoni sacrae, and beat it all to powder, and when it is beaten small, take a fine linnen cloth, and put the powder therein, and make therof a little ball, the quantity of a Hasell nut, and put it in thy mouth, and role it to and fro betwixt thy téeth, chawing and holding downe thy head the space of an houre, and it will purge the head, and thy gummes, and kéepe thy téeth from aking, this also clenseth all filthines out of the head and braine. For to purge the head of what cause so euer. ¶ Take a handfull of Betony, a handfull of Camomell, and a handfull of Veruaine leaues picked, stampe them, and seeth them in black Woort, or in Ale, and in the latter end of the sée thing, put to it a little Comin brayed, the pouder of Harts horne, and the yolks of two Eggs, and a little Saffron, and stir them well about, and lay a plaister thereof hote ouer all his forehead and temples Also if you put to it a little Vineger: it is a remedy for to purge the head, and for the Meigrim beside. Another for to clense the head, the brest, and the stomack. ¶ Take thrée handfull of Centory, and séeth it in a gallon of water, vnto a pottell, and then clense it, and put therto a pint of clarified hony, and séeth it softly to a quart, and drink therof two spoonfuls at once, early in the morning, and late in the euening. For all manner of head ache. ¶ Take Ʋeruaine, Betony, Wormwood, Celidony, Wall∣woort, Rue, and the bark of the Elder, Hony, and Pepper, and all whole stampe them together, and seeth them in water, and drink it early and late: prooued. Another experiment for the same. ¶ Take Rue, Hayhoue, Betony, Veruaine, Mintes, Hil∣woort, red Fenell, Wormwood, Sothernwood, of each a hand∣full,
wash them, and shred them small, then séethe them with water in an earthen pot, and wash thy head with some of the water, then mingle the hearbs with Wheat bran, and make a plaister thereof, and lay it on the mould of his head, as hote as may be suffered: then bind it too with a Kerchiefe, and within fiue times dressing of the Patient, he shall be whole. Another experiment for all manner of head ache. ¶ Take Rue, Veruaine, Wormwood, Sage, Walwoort, Heyhoue, red Fenell, Planten, the gréene of an Elder, between the bark and the trée, of each a handfull, wash them, and stamp them small, put them in a new earthen pot with a pottle of red Wine, and a pottle of stale Ale, seeth it to the halfe, put therunto a quarter of an vnce of Pepper beaten, and straine it through a cloth, and drink therof nine daies eight spoonfuls at once, at eue∣uing hot, and in the morning cold, and wash the Patients head with the liquor, and it will cure all manner of head ache. Against the turne or daseling in the head. ¶ Let thy head be washed with the water of the decoction of thrée leaued Grasse, and lay a playster of the hearbe to the Pa∣tients forehead. Also Mints laid to the head, taketh away the paines that come of a cold cause. Also Mistletow laid to the head draweth out the corrupt humors: and the iuyce of Onions cast into the nosthrils, cleanseth the head. Also séethe Peniriall, and lay it to the temples, or poure Bawlme into the eares thrée or foure times in the Sunne, and it will cure the Patient of dase∣ling in the head. Another for daseling or swimming in the head. ¶ Take and make a plaister of Culuer-dung and Wheate branne, temper them with the white of an Egge, and lay it to the contrary part of the head to that which is payned. Also the iuice of Iuie mingled with old Lard, is good for the swimming in the head. Also the pith of bread which was baken with Cori∣ander seede, laid to the head is good.
Against the rume in the head. ¶ Take and make a Pomander of the powder of Cucubes, Maces, Labdanum and Gréeke Pitch: it doth remoue from the braine all superfluous humers: Maces and Cucubes chewed in the mouth doo the same. A plaister made of Garlick and Cloues: stoppeth that humor which causeth the rume. Also Isop boyled in the embers and so laid to the head, stoppeth the rume, and a little bag full of Darnell, Salt and Aniseede is very good. A Gargell for the rume. ¶ Take Vineger, Musterd, a good quantity of Pepper, and boyle them all together, then let the party so gréeued put a spoon∣full in their mouth and walke vp and downe, and when it wax∣eth cold spit it out, and take an other: and vse it for a time, and for euery one spoonful, you shall voyd fiue: take it not in the frest: this hath beene prooued. For the rume an other experiment. ¶ Take iuice of Colewoorts, and draw it into the nosthrils, and it purgeth the head: Sorrell beaten with the oyle of Roses is good for the ache of the head. For the rume in the eyes, take Time and eate it, and it driueth away the rume. For the rume in the head, an other proued. ¶ Against cold rume, and other passions and swimming of the head, and such other quallities: take thrée Pills of Cassia, of Labdanum, and Storax Confecta, with the iuice of Wormwood, whē the cause commeth of the head, this comforteth the braine: also make a Fumigation of Cassia Ligna ouer hote coales, and receiue the smoake thereof at thy mouth. A quilt for the rume, a speedy remedie, proued often. ¶ Take of Olibanum, Bengeum, Storax Calamita, of each of these halfe a dram, of Labdanum two drams, of Nutmegs, and
Cloues, of each halfe a dram, of Commin a scruple, Masticke halfe a dram, of Maces half a scruple, of Iugula Romana a dram, of Bay berries a scruple, of the flower of Roses, of Camomell, of Violets, of each a dram: of the flowers of Betony a scruple, beat all these into grosse pouders, and so let them be quilted with good red Scarlet flocks, in a péece of black Sarcent, and so be laid vpon the head to the nape of the necke, and let it lye there the space of twenty houres, and then turne it, and thus for the rume it is most excellent. An experiment for wounds in the head. ¶ For to cease the ache and swelling wounds that be sore in the head, or in any other place, so that the bones be not broken. Take Mallowes, Wormwood, Betony, Egrimony, Hilwoort, of each of these a handfull, wash them and stamp them, and put therto thrée vnces of wheat flower, as much Hony, and as much Barrow greace, and stamp them together, and put thereto red Wine, and fry them, and lay them warme to the sore, but lay a red Cole leafe between the plaisters and the wound, and it shall cease the ache, and take away the swelling thereof. For all manner of euill aches in the head. ¶ Take Betony, Veruaine, Wormwood, Waybread, Rue, Wallwoort, Sage, the barke of the Elder trée, thrée cornes of Pepper, and temper them together in wine, and drinke thereof each day a draught, early and late, till that the Patient be well. Also take the gall of an Hare, and temper it with as much hony, and annoint therewith the temples. Also Rue, and Eysell, and smere thy head therewith, is wholsom. Also Camomell is good for the burning Feauer that holdeth a man or woman in the head. Also Feuell sodden in water, swageth the ache in man or womans head, when that the head is washed therwith. Another for all manner of euill aches in the head. ¶ Take the greace of an Hart, and mingle it with Barly meale and Sorrell, bind them and temper them all together,
and playster it to thy temples: for this hath béene proued a right good medicine. Also take the iuice of Primrose, and the milke of a Cow, and with a pen draw it vp into thy nosthrills, and it shall purge the head, and shall heale the partie so gréeued of the head ache. For to make a man to sleepe. ¶ Take the leaues of white Poppy and red Nettles, and stamp them together, and put to it a little Beane flower, and lay it on a cloth, and so bind it to the forehead, and he shall sléepe quietlie. To make one sleepe that slept not in a long time before. ¶ Take white Poppy seede, Aniséed, of each a like quantity, and beat them to fine powder: then take Rose-water, the white of an Egge, and womans milke, and mingle all these together: but first beate the white of an Egge very much: and take away the froth, then take flocks as many as will lye ouer your fore∣head, and wet them in the liquor aforesaid: then sprinkle of the powder vpon it, and then lay it in a pewter platter vpon a cha∣singdish of coles for to make it warme, and so lay it to the fore∣head, and the party shall take his rest and quiet sléepe. For to make a man to sleepe. ¶ Take the leaues of Elder, and warme them betwéen two tiles, and bind it to the nape of the necke, and it will make him to sléepe. Also take the leaues Scala caeli, put them in a pot, and séeth them well a good while, and at euen wash well thy féet and legs vp to the knées with that water, and no higher, then goe to bed, and thou shalt sléepe soundly. For to make a man to sleepe. ¶ Take a quart of Almonds blended, and halfe a pound of Hempséede, thrée times washed in cleane water, and sixtéene Dates, stamp them together, and put therto good stale Ale, and
take an vnce of Poppy séed brused, and lay it in Ale thrée or foure houres, and séeth them together, and straine them, and giue the sicke to eate of it, and it shall make him sléepe. For to make a man sleepe, and for to come to quiet rest. ¶ Take red Roses, Violets, the water of Mellilot, Lettice, of each a like quantity a handfull: white Poppy, white Hen∣bane, of each halfe a dram, a little Dill séede for to comfort the braine, bray all these together: then put them in a soft linnen cloth twelue inches long, & thrée inches broad, quilt it and tye it to his forehead. Also take oyle of water Lillies, Poppy, Night∣shade, Rose-water, Vineger, and womans milk, dip flaxe ther∣in, and bind it to his temples: this hath béen often proued. For paine in the eares. ¶ Take the iuice of wild Cowcumbers, and put it into the eares, and it asswageth the paine. Also put the wood of gréene Ashe in the fire, and saue the liquor that commeth out at the end, and put it into the eares, it causeth the paine for to cease, and amendeth the hearing. Also beate the iuice of Wormwood, and drop it into thy eares: proued. For paine in the eares. ¶ Take and mingle the iuice of Betony with oyle of Roses, and put it warme in the eares with a tent, and stop them well. Also take faire oyle Oliue, and let it be blowne out of a mans mouth that is cleane and fasting into the eares of a sick man, let this be doone thrée or foure times, and let that side of the head be turned downward, that the odour of the head may run out. Also take Almonds and the kernels of Peaches, & let them be cleane pilled in hote water, and make oyle of them, and let the oyle be put into the eares of the Patient so gréeued. For the paine in the eares. ¶ Take oyle of Roses, and a little Vineger, and put it to the eare: then make a bagg of Camomell and Mellilot, and lay it
thereunto. Also Goose greace béeing taken with a little hony, asswageth the paines of the eares. Also oyle of Almonds is very good for the payne in the eares: Also if there be water in the eares, take a little Goose greace, and the iuice of Onyons, com∣mixed together, and so lay it to the eares: proued. For deafnes in the eare. ¶ Take a péece of gréene Ashe and put it in she fire, and take the droppings of that water, and take the droppings of a fresh water Eele, the oyle of bitter Almonds, of euery one a equall portion, warme it by the fier, and let it drop two or thrée drops in the eare so gréeued, then take black Ewes wooll, and dip the wooll therein, and put it into the same eare, and it will help the Patient so gréeued, by Gods grace. Also take Betony, and Hore∣hound, stamp them in a morter, and wring out the iuice, and let the Patient lye on that side, and so poure it into his eare, and let him take his rest: this hath béene proued. For deafnes in the head. ¶ Take a Hedghog and rost it, and take the droppings ther∣of, and put it to the Patients eares so gréeued, and stop it with black wooll, et fiet. Somtime there chanceth deafnes by wind, which is in the eare, the which causeth tynkling in the head, then take a little Aloes in hot water, or in white Wine, and distill it into the Patients eare, then put a little Eustorbium in pouder into the parties nose so gréeued, to make him for to néese, and to auoyd as much filthy humors as you may. Another for deafnes in the head. ¶ Take Secados, Bay berries, Betony, Bay leaues, of each of them a handfull, séeth them in white Wine to the halfe, and for an old man in Maimsie, then put it in a vessell that hath a narrow mouth, and hold your eares ouer it béeing vnstopped, as hote as you may suffer it, beeing not too hote nor too cold: also thrée drops of the oyle of Almonds, dooth the same.
For woormes in the eares. ¶ Take the iuyce of Woorm-wood, Rue, So wthistle, & put it in the patients eare, and he shall be whole. Take the iuyce of Elder, and drop it into the eare of the patient gréeued. Or take the iuyce of Cockle, and mingle it with the iuyce of Arssmart, and put it into the eares so gréeued. For ach and wormes in the eares. ¶ Take the iuyce of Henbane and put it into thine eares, and it will take away the ach, and kill the woormes. Also take the powder of wilde Gourds, and the iuyce of Arssmart, and put it into thine eares: Also for the wormes in the eares, take Cen∣tory and Léekes, the iuyce of thē both, and put it into the eares, and stop it with black wooll of a Sheepe, that groweth betwéen the legges, and it will help the patient. For woormes in the eares. ¶ Take oyle of Roses, oyle Oliue, oyle of Exeter, Aqua composita, of each of them a like quantitie, and compound your Aqua vitae with other oyles on the fire: then take Rue, and the egges of Ants, beate them small, and compounde them altoge∣ther being well boyled, and then put it into the eares, dropping it in thrée or foure times, and he shall find ease. To cause a man to heare well. ¶ Take and make a rounde loafe, and fill it full of Sage, and bake it, and when it is baked, then breake or cut the loafe in the midst, and binde it to the eares as hote as you may suffer it: let this be vsed three or foure times, and it will cause the pa∣tient so gréeued, for to heare well. For the running in the eares. ¶ Take the iuyce of Elder, & drop it in the eare of the partie gréeued, and it clenseth the matter and the filth thereof. Also the iuyce of Violets vsed, is verie good for the running of the eares.
Also take the gall of a Weather, and Honny, of both a like por∣tion: mingle them and put them into the eares. For the running in the eares. ¶ Take the gall of a Goate & womans milke mingled with Honny and Mirrh, and it will help you. Also boyle the iuyce of Sengreene, and put it in a hollow Onyon in the fire, then put of the same iuyce strained into thine eare, and lay the Onyon like∣wise ouer thine eare in manner of a plaister. Also the vrine of a man child being poured into the eare, dryeth the humors, and taketh away the running of the eares. For the impostume behind the head. ¶ Take Beanes and mingle thē with meale, and the iuyce of Fenegreke, and it helpeth the patient so gréeued with the im∣postume behind the eare, but it must be laid plaister wise. Another for the same. ¶ Take Milke and Allom and make a posset, and when the Allom hath turnd the milke, lay the posset curd to ye impostume, and it will breake it. Also to destroy an imposiume in what place soeuer, take the roote of Hollock and wash it cleane, then seeth it till it be tender, then put out the water, and put to the roote Linséede and Fenegreke, and Barly meale, mingle them well together, and fry them with Bores greace, and lay it to the impostume plaister-wise, and it will cure the same. For all manner of sore eyes. ¶ Take Fennell, Rue, Verueine, Enfrance, Endiue, Be∣tony, and red Roses, lay all these a day & a night in white wine, the second day still them with a soft fire, then kéepe it in a glasse, this water is as good as Bawme, for all manner of euill eyes. Another for the same. ¶ Take Fennell, Rue, Verueine, Enfrance, Betony, En∣diue, Sengréene, Hill-woort, Peneriall, redde Roses, Maiden
haire, of each a like much, also foure ounces of oyle Oliue, stamp them, and put them in a vessell of glasse, and still them in a stil∣latory, and as it stilleth, part it in thrée parts, the first water you must keepe by it selfe, for it is as precious as siluer, the second as gold, the third as Bawme: all these waters must be kept in ve∣rie cleane glasses, close stopped, and so vse any of them. A precious water for the sight of the eyes, made by King Edward the sixt. ¶ Take Smallage, red Fennell, Rue, Verneine, Betonie, Egremony, Pimpernell, Enfrance, Sage, Selondine, of each a like quuntity, first wash them cleane, then stampe them, and put them in a faire brasen pan, with the powder of xv. Pepper cornes, faire serced into a pynt of good white wine, then put thē into the hearbs, with three spoonfuls of Honny, and fiue spoonfuls of the water of a man child that is an innocent, mingle all toge∣ther, and boile them ouer the fire: and when it is sod, straine it through a fine linnen cloth, and put it into a glasse, and stoppe it well and close till you will vse it, and when you néed, put a little thereof into the sore eyes with a feather: but if it wexe dry, then temper it with white wine, and it profiteth much all manner of sore eyes: this water was vsed by King Edward the sixt. For the pin and the web, and the fellon in the eye. ¶ Take the gall of a Hare, and Honny, of each a like much, mingle them together, and take a feather, and put a little into thine eyes, and it will heale thē within two or thrée dayes, and saue the sight on warrantise: thys hath béene often proued. For the pin and the web in the eye. ¶ Take a quart or a pynt of Strawberries when they bee ripe, and put thereto asmuch white Wine as Strawberries, then put them in a cleane vessell, and let them stand nine dayes hote, stirre them very well euery day twice or thrice, and the tenth day put it in a bag of Canuas, and let it goe through hote,
you must not wring it hote, let it goe through of it selfe, thē take the cléere, and put it in a viall of glasse, then take Calamint, that is, a stene, and put it in the fire, til it be red hote, and thē quench it in white Wine nine seuerall times, and when thou hast done thus, take the same stone and beate it to small powder in a bra∣sen morter: if you haue a pinte of Water, then put therein one ounce of the said powder, and mingle them well together, and keepe it well, for this is a precious water for the pinne and she webbe in the eye. Another for the same. ¶ Take Enstras a good quantitie, and stampe it well, and wring out the iuyce through a cloth, and vse it. Or take Bores greace, Capons greace, Goose greace, and melt them together in a pan, stir them well with a staffe till it be well boiled, then let it coole, and put it in a boxe, and at night vse to put a little there∣of in the eye when thou goest to bed, lying vpright. Another for the pin and web in the eye. ¶ Take an Egge and roste it hard, and in the white thereof put as much Coporas as a pease, then being hote, wring it tho∣row a cloth, and let it drop in the eye one good drop, this hath of∣ten been proued good both for old and young. For to cleere the eye-sight. ¶ Take and chafe the greace of any maner of fresh fish wa∣ter against the Sun, till that you haue the slime thereof, mingle it with Honny, and therewith annoynt thine eyes. For to cleere the eye-sight. ¶ Take and drinke the iuyce of Rew, and it will so cleer the eye-sight, that if the Sun doo shine ye shal see the starres at noone daie. Also take the gall of a Swine, or els the gall of a white Cock, and put it in a glasse, and annoynt the eyes therwith nine daies, and thy sight shall be as cleere and perfect as euer it was, this bath beene prooued.
For the pearle in the eye. ¶ Take white Ginger, and rub it on a whetslone of Nor∣way, into a pewter sawcer, and doo thereto white Wine, and then take a feather and wash the eyes therewith: proued. A precious water for the pearle in the eye, and for red bleered eyes, and for to keepe a man young. ¶ Take Lumuell of Gold, of Siluer, of Laten, of Lead, of Iron, of Steele, of Litargie, of siluer and gold, with a little Ca∣momill, and asmuch Colombine, put these into the vrine of a male child, and let it stand a day and a night, the second day, in warme white Wine, the third day in the iuyce of Fennell, the fourth day in the iuyce of Egges, the fift day in womans milke, the sixe day in red Wine, the seauenth day in the white of Egs, the eyght day put them together and still them, then put the wa∣ter very close in glasses for your vse. This water destroyeth all euill in the eyes. Also if it be drunke, it keepeth a man young, and is of wonderfull great vertue. For bleered eyes. ¶ The iuyce of Cowslips, and the water thereof distilled, being taken and the eyes annoynted therewith, helpeth all ble∣red eyes, and taketh away the rednes. For heate and swelling in the eyes. ¶ Take white Bread, and Southernwood sodden in water, and therewith bathe the eyes, and it will draw away the heate and swelling of the eyes without any paine. Also for swelling or running of bloody eyes, take and séeth red Snailes, and gather the greace thereof, and annoynt thy eyes therewith, and they will be whole by Gods grace. For smarting of the eyes. ¶ Take Womans milk, and the iuyce of Centory, & mingle them together, and wash well the eyes there-with. Also the iuyce of Betony is very good with white wine: proued.
For a mans eye that is blew or black, with a blow or a bruse. ¶ Take the white of an Egge and Parsly, and beat them to∣gether, and make it as thick as an oyntment, and lay it to the eye-lids all cold. Also take the gall of a Hare, & temper it with Honny, and annoynt the eyes therewith. Also take red Snailes in water with Capons grease, and annoynt the eyes therewith. For running or waterie eyes. ¶ Take of Betony and Hony, a like quantitie, fry thē, and straine them through a cloth, and annoynt the eyes there-with. Take also Colombine and wring out the iuyce and annoynt the eyes therewith. Also take a red Colwoort leafe, and the white of an Egge, and annoynt there-with the watery eyes when thou goest to bedde. Also to make the eyes cléere and bright, take the blood of small Birds and Honny, and annoynt the eyes there∣with, and thou shalt cleerely sée. For blood-shotten eyes. ¶ Take the tops of white Woormwoode, and the leaues of Filladane, stainpe them and mixe them with the white of an Egge and Rose-water, and make thereof a plaister, then binde the same to your eyes at night when you goe to bed, and it will helpe you. For to driue blood from the eyes. ¶ Take the powder of Commin, of Warmote, & the white of an Egge, make a plaister hereof vpon hard Flax, and lay it to the eyes. Also for to cléere the eyes, take Wall-woort, Rue, red Fennell, stampe them together: and temper them well with white Wine, and straine it through a linnen cloth, and so drop it at night into thine eyes, lying vpright in thy bed. For bloody or watery eyes. ¶ Take a quart of white Wine, and put thereto the fatte of xvi. péeces of Bacon, the breadth and thicknes of a groat, and a
good sawcer full of Honny, and put them in a Latin bason cléene scowred, and sir them well together, and couer them with ano∣ther bason the space of nine dayes: then take of the bason and ye shall find a creame, breake the creame a little, and poure out the water that is vnderneath softly into a glasse, & that water will helpe all manner of red eyes and watering, vse it daily, and put one drop into thine eyes twice a day. Another for bloody eyes. ¶ Take the iuyce of Rue, and powder of Commin, mingle them together, then take Cotten and dip it well therein, and lay it to the eyes, and also annoynt the temples, the browes, and the lids of the eyes therewith. Take also the rootes of red Feuell, stampe them and wring out the iuyce, then temper it with cla∣rified Honny, and make thereof an oyntment, and annoynt thy eyes therewith, and it will take away the rednes. For the eyes that are blasted. ¶ Take Tutty and Calamint, and wash them with white Wine nine times, then grinde them vpon a stone with some of white Wine, and with Goose greace, and Capons greace, put hereof in the eyes early and late: this hath béen proued. A medicine for a mans eye that is broken with a staffe, or brused with any stroke: this hath been often proued. ¶ Take a pinte of white Wine, and a handfull of red Rose∣leaues, and as much Commin as thou canst hold in thy hande, and put all together, then séeth it wel til most part be consumed, then take that licquor and put it into a glasse, and put thereof in∣to thine eyes, doo thus fiue or sixe dayes, also wash the sore eyes therewith: and at night make a plaister of the same leaues that be sod, and lay them likewise vpon the sore eyes, and thys will certainly heale the eye, though the ball thereof be cutte or hurt with a rod or staffe, or any other kind of bruse in the eye, com∣ming of what cause soeuer. Proued.
For the itching of the eye. ¶ Take the oyle of Tutly, and annoynt the eyes therwith. Also Sumace is good for the itching of the eyes caused of hote humors, and wash them with that water before expressed. A precious medicine proued, for man, woman, or chyld, that hath any sore eyes. And this medicine neuer fayleth, but restoreth the sight. ¶ Take a stone called Calamint, and make it red hote nine times, and quench it foure times in Rose water, and fiue times in white Wine, then take this stone that is thus quenched, and make of it small powder in a brasen morter: then take Fran∣kensence, as much as of the powder of the stone, and make it al∣so to powder, and looke that you haue of them two euen portiens, as much as you will, then take Rose water, and water of Rue, and water of Fennell, of each of these three two portions: of the water of Strawberries, and the water of Veruaine, and the water of Enstras, of each of these three, three portions, and put all these waters together in a cleane vessell, and then looke how many vnces thou hast of thy powder, to vnces of the afore∣said waters that be mingled. Grinde the powder of Calamint and of Frankensence on a Marble stone, as you would grinde Vermillion, but you must grinde each one by it selfe, then take fresh Swines greace of a Barrow-hog, and wring the same ve∣rie well through a cleane cloth, and looke that you haue asmuch weight of cold greace, as of the mingled waters: take then the powder of Calament, and boyle it with the greace, and with the mingled waters, ouer a soft fire of Char-coles, without anie smoake. And when thou hast boyled these well together, put vn∣to the same the powder of Frankensence, and then boile them all together, till the smoake of the boylings cease, and then take it from the sire and let it coole: but from the time that you sette it first to the fire for to seeth, be alwaies stirring it verie busily, till it be cold and thick. Then take Camphire, & pare it in small
péeces, then take of thy oyntment euen as much, and grind them together by parcels on a Marble stone, and when they be well mingled together, then put it in a boxe, with one vnce of Cala∣mint, and one vnce of Frankensence, Enfrance thrée pennie worth, and thrée peny worth of Camphire; and he that hath any gréeuance or sicknes in his eyes, at night sitting on his bed, let him take of this oyntment with his finger, as much as a Wheat corne, and hold it in his eye vntill it be relented, and then dip his finger with the oyntment softly betwéen the lids of his eyes, and then let him lye downe and sléepe, and on the morrow when he riseth, wash the eye with Rose-water, or with Enfrance wa∣ter, or with Fenell water, or with Rue water: these waters be good therefore, but ere thou wash the eyes therewith, heate the water a little ouer the fier, but looke that you wash not with fasting spittle, nor with no other thing, but with one of these waters before saide, and thou shalt be whole: this hath béene surely prooued. For the Impostumes in the head. ¶ Against the Impostume of the eyes, and web of the same, put the iuice of Hony-suckle often therin, or mingle it with pure hony and straine it, and it wasteth the Impostume and the web maruailously, and it was thus proued. One tooke a Cock and a Whelp, and pricked their eyes with a crooked Iron or néedle, so that they séemed that their eyes were out, and then hee brused this hearbe, and put it in their eyes, and they became faire and cleare as they were before, at the which he did maruaile: and proued it many times vpon diuers persons. For wormes in the eye lids. ¶ Take Salt and burne it in a cloute, and temper it with hony, and with a feather annoynt the eye lids, when the party goeth to bed. For wormes in the eye lyds. ¶ Take Bay-salt and burne it in the fire, and then stampe it: and doo thereto clarified hony, and the water of Allom, and
a little Copperas, and annoynt the eye lidds when thou goest to bed, and this medicine shall kill the wormes that be in the eye liddes: prooued. For stinking at the nose. ¶ Take Cloues, Ginger, and Calamint of each a like much, and séethe them in white Wine, and therewith wash thy nose. After that put in the powder Piritrum to prouoke one to néese, if there be replection fleam in the head: first you must purge the head with Pylls of Cochie, or of Hiera picra. Also if the stin∣king of the nose come from the stomacke: first purge the sto∣make, et fiet. For the polix of the nose. ¶ Against the polix of the nose, make a suppository or tent of a plaister called Apostolicon, and put powder of Copperas ther∣on, and put it into thy nose, or make that tent of cotton, and wet it in Salt-water, and lay of the said powder thereon, and put it in thy nose. The said powder is also good to fret the proud flesh of superfluitie of blood of the nose, but first burne it, then put it in olde Parchment and make powder thereof, and take Mastick, and then make a tent of Bursa pastoris, with part of a stone cal∣led Emachitas, and put it in thy nose. For the polix of the nose. ¶ To take and put the iuice of Iuy into thy nosthrils, is very good. The gum of Iuy made in an oyntment called Dialthera, hath power to chase and to consume. Also against the polix make a tent of Apostolicon, and the powder of burnt brasse, and lay it to the nose, et fiet. For the pose in the head. ¶ Against the rume or pose, mingle the powder of Comin∣séede, and Bay berries, and put them all hote in a bag, and lay them so to the head for the pose.
For the nosthrill a medicine. ¶ For the highnes of the nosthrils, and rednes caused in flux of humors: take the broth that Olibanum is sodden in, but first in the morning Pils of Olibanum, and at night to bedward the said broth: these Pylls comforteth digestion, and purgeth the stomack. For bleeding at the nose. ¶ Take and mingle the powder of Betony, with as much salt, and put as much as you can take betwéene two fingers and a thomb in the nesthrils, and the blood will staunch: also take and wet cotton in the iuice of Bursa pastoris, and cast powder of Antimonium vpon it, and the bléeding will frent. For bleeding at the nose. ¶ Take a dram of Bolae armoniacke washed, and mixe it in Rose-water, and Planten water, and drinke it, then bind the extreame parts as hard as you may, and after make a tent of gréene Nettles, and put into his nose. Moreouer if so be that the Patient doo hold in his hand Egrimony the roote and all, and drink the iuice of Knotgrasse, the blood will staunch. For bleeding at the nose. ¶ Against the bléeding of the nose that commeth by ebuliti∣on, or boyling of the blood in the lyuer and vaines: in Sommer make Beanes wet in the iuice of Rose-water, and lay them to the forehead, or temples: it hath been proued. Another for the same. ¶ Take Peruincle and chewe it in the mouth, and it will staunch the blood. Against the bleeding at the nose. ¶ Take and wet the pith of an Elder in the iuice of Bursa pastoris, and cast pouder of Sumac theron, and put it to thy nose. Also take and wet cotten in the iuice of Bloodwoort, and put it into thy nose, and it stauncheth blood. Also take the iuice of Net∣tles, and rub well thy forehead therwith, and it will staunch it.
Take the séede that hangeth vpon a Hasell bow and burne it, make powder and blow it into thy nose, with a Goose quill, or drinke the iuice of Planten, and the blood will stanch presently. An experiment for the tooth ache. ¶ Take Betony and wild Gourds, and put them in wine, or in Vineger, and then put it into thy mouth as hote as thou maist suffer it, and hold it a good while in thy mouth, and it will take away the paine. Also take Henbane and bruse it, and hold it betweene thy téethe a good while, or lay it also vpon the tooth that aketh, and it will asswage the paine. Take thrée or foure Rases of Ginger, and bruse them with halfe a pint of Ale, being sodden therein till it be wasted to a quarter, and put it into the parties mouth as hot as he may suffer it: and it will take away the tooth ache. For the tooth ache. ¶ Take strong Ale, and Musterd of the best, and gumme Elder, and put it in a Porrenger and set it ouer the fire, and stir it, and when it is thicke, take it and hold it on that side that the paine is. Also take Henbane séed, and séede of Léeks, and Fran∣kensence, of each a like much, and lay these thrée on a glowing hot Tilestone, then take a pipe of Laten that is wide at the lo∣wer end, and small aboue, then set the wide end to the stone, and the small vpward, and let the smoke goe into thy mouth: for this will kill all the wormes: it hath béene proued. For the tooth ache. ¶ Take the roote of Henbane, and séeth it in Vineger till the third part be sodden away, and with the same wash thy mouth, and hold it in thy mouth a good while, & it will kill the ache. Also take the roote of Henbane, and hold it betwéene thy aking téeth, and it will doo away the paine thereof. For hollow teeth. ¶ Take Assa fetida and put it in the hollow tooth, and it shal helpe them. Also take Rue and lay it to the hollowe téeth, and
chew it in your mouth, and lay thereof into the hole, and it shall asswage the paine thereof. For hollow teeth. ¶ Take Vineger and Mustard, pouder of Pepper, and Pel∣litory of Spaine, and the curnell of a Nut gall, and boile them all together, and put it in the hollow teeth, or els about the gums hot, and thou shalt be whole. Also take the séedes of Henbane, and beat it to small pouder, and mingle it with War, and make a little pellet that it may be full of powder, and put it in the hole of the tooth that aketh, and it will kill the tooth ache that is hol∣low: this hath béene proued. For wormes in the teeth. ¶ Take Pepper and stamp it, & temper it with good wine, and sup thereof warme, and hold it in thy mouth till it be cold, and then spit it out, and thou shalt be deliuered of all anguish of thy tooth ache. Also take the séede of Henbane, and cast it on a chafingdish of coles of Charcole fire, and hold thy mouth ouer the fire that the smoke may enter into thy mouth ouer a a bason of faire cleane water, and thou shalt sée vpon the water as it were small wormes, that shall come forth at thy mouth. Also take Tansie, bray it, and stop the hollow tooth therwith, and it will kill the wormes, and take away the paines thereof. Another for the same. ¶ Take the roote of Pellitory of Spaine, and wash it clean, and stampe it, and make thereof thrée small balls in thy hand, euery ball the greatnes of a plum, and lay the first ball betwéen the chéeke and the tooth that aketh, by the space that one may goe a mile, and euer as the water gathereth, spit it out, and when thou thinkest it hath béene there so long, put it out, and put in another, and so doe till thou haue spent all thrée, and then lay you vpon your bed, and couer you warme, and when you haue slept you will be whole: this hath béene often times proo∣ued true.
To make teeth to fall out of them selues. ¶ Take ground Wormes, and a red hote Tile-stone, and burne them to powder, and put the ashes into the hollow tooth, and couer it with war, and they will fall out themselues. Also take the root of Henbane, and make it in powder, and touch the tooth, and it will fall out, take héed that thou touch not any but that which is sore. Also burne to pouder a Harts horne, and rub thy téeth therewith, and they will fall out. Also make dowe of Wheat flower, with the milk of spurge, and lay it about the tooth that is pained, and it shall fall out. Also take a water Frog, and a gréene Frog, and seeth them together, and gather the greace, and smere therwith thy gums about the téeth, and they will fall out quickly. For yellow stinking teeth. ¶ Take Sage a quantity, and doo as much Salt therto, and then coffin it, as thou wouldest make a Pasty, and bake it in an Ouen all to coales, and therof make powder, and therwith rub thy téeth. Also take greene branches of Broome, and burne them, and make pouder therof, and doo therto of as much of the pouder of Allom burnt, then mingle them together, and temper them with water, and therewith rub well thy téeth, and that will doo away the yellownes and blacknes, and the stinking of the téeth. Also take a handfull of Comin, and stamp it small, and séeth it in Wine, and giue the party so gréeued to drink twenty daies, and it shall help them. Also Mastick chewed within a mans mouth taketh away the tooth ache. To make teeth white that be yellow or black. ¶ Take flower of Rye, and Salt, and Honey, and mingle them well together, and therwith rub well thy téeth euery day two or thrée times, and after wash thy mouth with water, this will doo away the yellownes, and make the téeth white. Also take white Marble, Cuttle bone, white Corall, Salgeme, Bay salt, Mastick, and the Pylls of Citeron, of each of these a like much, make them in very fine pouder, and rub the teeth therwith
euery morning, and afterward wash your mouth with white wine, wherin Dill or Camomell hath béene sodden. Also take Vineger of Squils, and dip a little péece of cloth therin, and rub thy téeth and gums withall, the said Vineger fastneth the ginns, and comforteth the roots of the téeth. Also scuruy Grasse dooth the same. Also distill a water in a Limbeck of two part of Salgeme, and the third part of Allom, & rub the téeth with a cloth dipped in the same, and it maketh the téeth white, and clenseth the gums. To make the teeth cleane. ¶ Take Rosemary, Sage, and a quarter of Allom and Ho∣ney, and boile them together in faire running water, and when it hath béen well boyled, straine out the faire water, and kéepe it in a glasse, and vse it somtime to wash your mouth and the teeth therwith, and it will make them clean. Also wash the teeth with the decoction of our Lady thistle root, and thy téeth shall be faste∣ned, and also kept cleane, and thy gums béeing sore about the teeth shalbe made whole. Also the roote of Horehound drunke or chewed of a man fasting, dooth quickly heale the gummes, and maketh the téeth cleane. Also Strawbury leaues taketh and clenseth the téeth and gums: a sure and tried experiment. For the gummes. ¶ Against swelling of the gums, wash them first with Vine∣ger and Allom confect together, but first set Ventoses, or bores with scarification on the neck or shoulder, or set the Ventoses in the hinder part of the head, and scarifie it thrée daies, then lay Horseleaches to the gums, and wash the gums with Vineger wherein Allom, Nutgalls and Roses hath béene sodden in, and with the same vineger wash thy mouth thrée or foure days twice or thrice a day; and it will ease thée. Also against the rottennes of the gums: take Cingstile and rub the cheeke therwith, and it taketh away the rotting of the gums. For the gummes that bleed. ¶ Against the bléeding of the gums take powder of Corall▪ and of Anthero that is in the middest of the Rose, and lay it
vpon the gummes: or confect it with Honey, and annoynt the gums therwith. The pouder of Corall put to the gums, healeth them. Also for the gums that rotteth: rub them with Myrrhe, and it will help them. Also the fume of Myrrhe receiued at the mouth comforteth and purgeth the braine. For the gummes that are gnawne. ¶ Take and séethe Cloues in water of Roses, and then dry them, and make therof powder, then temper the powder with Rose-water, or with Roses, and that is best, and then dry it a∣gaine in the Sunne, and doo so thrée or, foure times, and then temper the powder againe with Rose-water, or with the iuice of Roses, and annoynt the gummes therewith, and lay the powder on them. For Blisters in the mouth, and swelling of the lyps. ¶ Against the blisters in the mouth, and swelling of the lips: take and séeth the leaues of Mastick in Vineger, and with the same make a Gargorisme thereof. Also against fleaing or rawnesse of the mouth comming of Feauers, and against small blisters and swelling: séeth yolks of Egges in water, and then fry them till oyle come out of them, and with the oyle confect the powder of Pennets, of Dragagant and Amidon, and an∣noynt the gréefe: this powder Confect with sirop of Roses or Violets, is also very good therefore. For chapping of the lyps. ¶ For the chapping of the lippes: take Pennets and delay them in water of Dragagant, and annoynt the lips therewith. Also for lippes that bee broken with the wind, take the oyle of Almonds and Propolio, boyle them ouer the fire, and let it be fomwhat hard, and therewith annoynt thy lips so chapped with wind. Also for new clifts or chapping of the lips: lay the pouder of Canell in the clifts, and kéepe well thy lippes together, and bind a cloth thereto.
For swelling of the cheeke that commeth of the tooth ache. ¶ Take the iuice of the séede of Nettles, and the white of an Egge, Frankensence, and Wheat flower, and make thereof a plaister, and lay it to the sore chéeke, and it will doo away the swelling thereof. For the great heat in the mouth. ¶ Take a pint of water, and as much as a Nut of white Allom, and as much of Sage, and a spoonfull of hony, and boile all these together, and wash thy mouth with it. For the canker in the mouth. ¶ Take a pint of white wine, and as much running water, and the crops of Sage, two spoonfull of life honey, and as much Allom as an Egge, boyle all these together, and skim it well, clarifie it till the Allom be consumed, and when it is somewhat cold, put it in a glasse, and vse it. Also take the root of Selendine, and séeth it in white wine, and when it is well sod, take the pot down, and let the sicke hold ouer his mouth, and let the breath goe into the body, and it shall kill the canker. For the canker in the mouth. ¶ Take the iuice of Woodbind, and the iuice of red Woorts, Hony, powder of Camomell, and powder of wild Sage burnt, also take red Wine a pint, a quarter of a pint of honey, and as much Allom as a Doues Egge, and séeth them till the third part thereof be wasted: proued. Another for the same. ¶ Take Vineger, Allom, Musterd, Rue, Auence, Isope, hearb Robert, and seeth and straine them through a cloth as hot as you may suffer it, and wash your mouth oftentimes therwith, and it will heale the canker.
For the canker in the mouth, and for stin∣king breath. ¶ Take a handfull of Woodbind, as much Planten, and bray them small, then take a pint of Eysell, and another of water, and a quantity of hony, another of Allom, kéepe all these waters together in a glasse, and wash well thy mouth therewith, and holde it in thy mouth, and it shall destroy all cankers and slin∣king breath, and saue the téeth from rotting. A very good medicine for a canker or sore mouth. ¶ Take a handfull of Woodbind, as much Planten, and halfe a handfull of Lauender cotten, as much Sage, an vnce of white roch Allom, and thrée spoonfull of hony, bray all these in Vineger, let these be moderatly warmed, and put into a still with the hearbs and softly distilled, and after meales wash your mouth therwith thrée or foure times a day. Proued. Against clifts and sores in the mouth, stéepe Dragagant in Rose-water, and wring it in a cloth, & with a glewy substance that commeth out, mingle the powder of Amidum, and with a feather wet therin, annoynt the sore mouth therwith, and it will heale quickly. Also for a man that cannot well eate, take Ambrose, Pe∣niriall, Aunce, Ach, Organum, Rue, swill these together with water, and drinke the water morning and euening till thou be whole. Proued. For euill in the mouth or throat. ¶ Take the leaues of the white Vine, and boyle them in faire water, and when it is well boyled, hold thy mouth ouer, that the ayre may goe into thy mouth, and then sup of the wa∣ter, and hold it in thy mouth till it be cold, and then put it out and take more, and doo so seauen or eight times a day, and vse this two dayes together. Also doe in lyke manuer with the fiue
leaued Grasse, and vse it seauen or eyght times in a day, and thrée dayes together, but it must be sodden somwhat more then the leafe of the Vine, in fayre water, and it will heale the Pa∣tient: this hath béen often times proued. For vnsauery mouthes. ¶ Take the iuice of Endiue with Suger, and if the iuice be thick or troubled, clarifie it, and so may all other iuices in this wise. Séeth the iuice of Endiue a little, and let it stand, and that which is thick will goe to the bottom, then take the thin liquor, and straine it often through a cloth, and wring it, and with that iuice in the bottom, make Syrop with Suger: if you will make it thinner, put the white of an Egge therto. For stinke in the mouth. ¶ Take and make Pils of Cassia lingua and eat of them, and they be good for the stinke of the mouth. Also for the stinke of the mouth caused of rottennes of the gums and téeth: take and wash the mouth with water that garden Mints be sodden in, and rub the téeth with the Mints, or else with the powder thereof. Also chew Muske, and it will doo away the stinke of the mouth. Also take the iuice of Vorueine, and bruse it, and put it in thy mouth, and hold it a good while close in thy mouth, and it will take a∣way the slinke. Proued. To take away the stinking of the mouth. ¶ Take and wash thy mouth with water and Vineger, and chew Mastick a good while, and then wash thy mouth with the decoction of Aniséeds, Mints, Cloues, sodden in Wine. If the stinking of the mouth come of a rotten tooth, the best is for to haue it drawne out. Also you must wash your mouth before meat and after with warme water. For to clense the mouth, and to purge the humors from the mouth, which descend out of the head, it is good euery morning fasting to wash your mouth, and to rub your teeth with a Sage leafe, Pils of citron, or with powder made with Cloues or Nut∣megs,
You must forbeare all meates of euill digestion, and rawe fruites. For a stinking breath. ¶ Take oyle Doret, Turpentine, Hony, oyle Oliue, Virgin wax, as much of the one as of the other, and boyle them all toge∣ther, and make an oyntment therof, and vse it euery day in the Patients nosthrills, and let it be put into the nose euerie day with tents made of lynt scraped of fine linnen cloath, and hee shall be whole. For a stinking breath. ¶ Take the iuice of Hilwoort, or else take Butter, and the iuice of Featherfoy, and temper them with Honey, and euery day giue the Patient a spoonfull. Another for the same. ¶ Take two handfuls of Comin, and stampe it to powder, and boyle it in Wine, and drinke the Syrope thereof morning and euening warme, the space of fiftéene dayes, and thou shalt amend: this hath been proued. For a good breath. ¶ Take and wash thy mouth with the water that the shels of Citeron haue béen sodden in, and thou shalt haue a good breath. Also these confections make the breath swéet, the electuarie of Aromatikes, and the pils of Citrons. Against letting of the breth caused of cold humors: take and drink the hearb Dawke, or the liquor that dry Figs haue béen sodden in, and it will make the breath sweet and wholsom. Also take red Mints and Rue, wring the iuice in the sick bodies nosthrils when he goeth to bed. For the tongue. ¶ Against the sharpnes and drynesse of the tongue, put this gum in water which is called gum Arabike, till the water be slymie, and with that slyme moist the tongue, or bind the gum in a thin cloth, and put it in water till it begin to melt, and with
she same cloth rub thy tongue, and it will take away the paine thereof. Also for the roughnesse of the tongue, put the séedes of Quinces, or the curnells in a fine cloth, and wash thy tongue therwith: also Psillium or the séede thereof. For drynesse of the tongue, and for thirst. ¶ Against drinesse of the tongue of the Feauer Ague, put the séede of Fleawoort, and bind it in a fine linnen cloth, and then put it in cold water, and therwith wash and rub thy tongue, and scrape it with a knife. Also for thirst put the séede of Fleawoort in a bag, and lay it on the tongue. For thirst in the tongue. ¶ Against thirst in the tongue, giue Ptysan or Dragagant, and it will be dissolued in a night, or make syrope with water that Barly and Dragagant is sod in, and it is conueniable for Feauer Agues, or if Dragagant be holden vnder the tongue. For the palsie in the tongue. ¶ Take and vse great strong ground Musterd, the powder of Piones well scalled, pouder of Sage, Nutmegs, and Suger, doo these powders in the Musterd, and eate euery day at meales therof, and it will take away the palsie of the tongue. Also Mu∣sterd seede sodden in oyle or wine, is very good against the palsie. Also take the powder of Casterium, and hold it vnder the tongue till it be molten or dissolued. For the palsie in the tongue. ¶ Against the palsie of the tongue, that is, when the tongue is full of holes, and the Patient cannot speake, because the si∣newes of the tongue is full of humors, as it appeareth often in Feauer Agues, for the same, chew the séed of Cresses, and hold it vnder the tongue: proued. For him that hath lost his speech. ¶ Take Sage, Pimpernel, stamp them well, & annoint his tong vnderneath with the iuice therof, els take the iuice of Sage
and Pimpernell and doo it in his mouth. Also take Ach, Mints, red Betony, and lay them into Goats milke, drinke it morning and euening. Also take thrée vnces of Betony, and swéet milke of a Goat, temper them together, and drinke it thrée daies toge∣ther, this for the palsie is most pretious. To restore speech that is lost sodenly. ¶ Take Peniriall, and temper it with Eysell, and giue the sicke to drinke it: lay also a playster of this to his nosthrills so gréeued. For a man that sleepeth and cannot speake. ¶ Take Galbanum and set it ouer the fire with a candle, and make it smoke, and put the smoke to his nose, and thou shalt cause him for to speake. Also take the iuice of Sage and Print∣rose, and doo it in his mouth, and he shall speake by Gods grace. Also take the iuice of greene Morrell berries, and clarifie it wel, and drink therof, and thou shalt speake. Another for the same. ¶ Take the iuice of Sothernwood, and temper it with wine, and drinke it when thou goest to bed. Another for the same. ¶ Take the crops of Rue, and the crops of Verueine, of each a like much, and drink the iuice therof when thou goest to bed. For Sunne burning. ¶ Take the iuice of Lemons, with a little bay-salt, and wash your face therewith, and let it dry in, and doo so thrée or foure times, and it will helpe you. Also take halfe a pot full of raine water, and fill it vp with Veriuice, and séeth it till it be consumed away, and in the time that it is a boyling, fill it with the iuice of Lemons, and when it is sodden, take it off and let it coole, and then take eight new laid Egs the whites of them, and beat them fine, and put fine Suger to it, and so occupy it for Sun burning.
For red pimples in the face. ¶ Take a little Roch Allom, and breake it in small péeces, then take the white of a new laid Egge, and put it in a pan that is leaded within, set it to the fire till you see it boile, and stir it all the while with a little stick till you sée it wax hard, take this and wash your face therewith. Also take Rose-water, and water of wild Tansie, and mingle them together, and therwith wash thy face, and thou shalt be whole. For pimples in the face. ¶ Take and wash your face whē you goe to bed with warme water, and let it dry in: take the white of an Egge, and put it into a Saucer, and set it vpon a chasingdish of coles, and put in∣to it a péece of Allom, beat it together with a spoone till it become thick, then make a round ball, and therwith anoynt the parties face where the pimples be. For heate and blaines in the face. ¶ Take the whites of two Egs, and beat them with an Al∣lom stone till they come to curd, then take it, and set it vpon a few embers, and alwaies stir it as it doth gather to a curd, then take it off, and put it vpon a Painters stone, and put thereon Vnguentum populeon halfe the portion, and of Allom as much as your thomb, so fine beaten as may be, and this grind with all the other ingrediens a long while, and put it in a glasse or pot, and therewith annoynt thy face. For a rich face. ¶ Take thrée yolks of Eggs rawe, as much in quantity of fresh butter, or Capons greace without salt, Camphire, two peny worth, red Rose-water halfe a pint, two graines of Siuet, and boile all these together in a dish, & then strain them through a clean cloth, and so set it to kéele, and take the vppermost and box it. Also take Populeon, Brimstone, and fresh butter, and à handfull of red Sage, and stamp and strain them, and then melt
all together, and put it in a boxe. Also take white Copperas one vnce, one pint of running water, and boile them altogether to the halse, and skim it clean, and straine it, and put it in a glasse, and set it in the Sunne, then wash thy face with a feather, and annoint thy face therwith morning and euening till it be whole. For a sauce flamed face. ¶ To annoynt it by day, take eight penny worth of Cam∣phire, and as much of Bores greace as a costard Aple, and min∣gle them together finely till you can perceiue none of the Cam∣phire, then put it into a box, and keepe it as close as you can from the ayre. Also to annoynt the face by night, take a quantitie of Deares suet, and put therto a little Bores greace, and a quantity of Brimstone, and boile them together with a quantity of Cop∣peras, and a pint of Vineger, or claret Wine, and after they haue béen boyled, vse to annoynt thy face therwith. To make a good oyntment for a sauceflamed face. ¶ Take an vnce of oyle of Bayes, and an vnce of Quicksil∣uer, and doo them in a bladder together, with a spoonfull of fasting spittle, and then rub them well together, that nothing of the Quicksiluer be seene, and then take of this oyntment when that it is made, and anoynt the sauceflame face therwith, and it will heale it well and faire, on war rantise, proued true. Another oyntment for the sauceflame face. ¶ Take the rootes of Louach, and of Dock roots, the tops of Nettles, and Cellendine a like much, the quantity of thrée vn∣ces, halfe a pound of the beanes of Parsley, and bray them well in water, and doo therto two pound of Bores greace, and stamp them well together, and let them stand still foure daies, after set it ouer the fire till it séeth, then straine it through a faire cleane cloth, and then put therto fine Frankensence, Myrrh, and Ma∣stick, of each an vnce, and let it boile eftsone with a easie fire, and stir it well with a slyce, and then let it kéele, and when it is cold put thereon two vnces of Quicksiluer, and mingle them toge∣ther,
and therewith annoynt the saucefleame face, and this will heale the same, as it hath béen oft proued. Another medicine for a saucefleame face. ¶ Take the ptty Morell and still thereof a quart of water, and take a quarter of a pounde of Camphier, and heate the wa∣ter a little, then put the Camphire therein and mingle thēm ve∣rie well together, then put it in a glasse and stop it well, but you must bruse the Morell a little in a Morter before you still it, af∣terward with thys water vse to annoynt the sausefleame face, and it will heale the same. Also with thys water you may heale anie manner of sausefleame face whatsoeuer, as by experience hath often béen proued. For heate or swelling in the face. ¶ Take and boyle the leaues or the blossoms of Rosemarie eyther in white Wine or faire water, and vse to wash thy face and hands therewith, and it will preserue thée from all incon∣ueniences, and also make both thy hand and face verie smooth. For wrincles in the face. ¶ Take white Wine, and a little Brionie, and a drie Figge that is fatte, and annoynt your face therewith, then trauaile vp∣on the same till you sweat. For a man that sweateth too much. Take Linseede and Lettice and stampe them together, and lay it to the stomack of the partie that vseth to sweat much, and it will helpe him. For to make the face fayre. ¶ Take the flowers of Rosemarie and seeth them in white Wine, with the which wash your face: also if you drinke here∣of it will make you haue a sweet breath. Also to make the face white, put the powder of Sepia in oyntment Citerium, and an∣noynt the face: Or make powder of the roote of Serpentine,
and of this bone, and mingle the same with Rose-water, and let it drie: and then put it to the same water againe, and let it like∣wise dry, doe this foure or fiue times, and then vse to annornt the face therewith. For a chylde that is iaw-fallne, or mold-fallne, or rooffallne. ¶ Take a handfull of Chickwéede, and wrap it in a red Col∣woort leafe, or els a linnen cloth, and rost it in the hote embers in the fire, and it will become a gréene salue, then lay thereof to the bone of the necke as hote as may be suffered, and take soure leauen of white Bread, and crum it on the molde of the childes head as a plaister, and it will raise vp the bone or molde, by the grace of God within nine howres. For shortnesse of breath. ¶ Take a gallon of Ale, & put therto a penny-worth of Ly∣coris scraped, and a halfe penny-worth of Annyseed, a little Lin∣séed, and a handfull of Isope, and asmuch Penneriall cleane wa∣shed: let them séeth to fiue pints, and drinke hereof morning and euening till you haue ease. For a hoarce voyce. ¶ Take the broth that red Colwoorts haue béene sodden in, and mingle it with seauen or eyght Penydis, and one ounce of sirrop of Maiden-haire, and giue it the patient when hee goeth to bed. Take Dyairis simple, and a losing of the same at mor∣ning, and also at night. Another remedy for a hoarce voyce. ¶ Take great Raisons, Figges, Sugar, Cinamon, and Cloues, of each a small quantitie, séeth them in good Wine, and giue the patient to drinke thereof morning and euening, two ounces at a time, except hee haue a Feauer. It is also good to take morning and euening a spoonfull of the strrop of Iniubes, mixed with a roote of Licoris in manner of a Locsanum, if with
the saide hoarcenes there discende aboundance of water to the mouth. Also it is good for to make an clectuarie of halfe Dyairis, and halfe Diadrigantum, and vse hereof first in the morning, and last at night. A very good medicine for to open the pypes, and to make the voyce cleere. ¶ Take a Figge, and put it in the powder of Isope, and eate euerie morning one at a time till you be well. Thys will help you on warrantise. For a sore throat or mouth. ¶ Take Cinckfoile a good quantitie & stampe it, and boyle it in faire water in a posnet, then hold thy mouth open ouer the fume thereof as hote as possible thou canst suffer it, that it may enter into thy throat, and still as it cooleth in thy mouth, spitte it out, and so take fresh and fresh. A sirrop for a sore throat. ¶ Take halfe a pynte of the iuyce of Mulberries, a pynte of clarified Honny, and a quarter of a pinte of good Claret Wine, séeth them altogether till the liquor be cōsumed: take also sage, Suger, Woodbine and Roses, of each a handfull, seeth them in faire water till the strength of the hearbes be sodden, then take tenne or twelue spoonfulls of the fore-said strrop of Mulberries, and put therein, and with thys vse to gargell your throat luke∣warme oftentimes, and spit it out againe: proued. For a sore throate. ¶ Take oyle of Camomile & oyle of Violets, and the oyle of Almonds, and the greace of a Hen asmuch as of all the others, first wash it well and picke it, then mingle all together, and an∣noynt the throat therewith. Take the dunge of an Asse, and the dunge of Swallowes, and make it in powder, and put the same in wine, and gargel it in your mouth and throat as hote as may be suffered, Take also the Swallowes in the nest, and a pounde
of the oyle of Cammomile, and the oyle of Almonds, as much of the one as of the other, and lay it to the place. For the swelling in the throate. ¶ Take the greene barke of the Elder trée, and a little Bay salte, beate them well together till they be somwhat small, thou lay the same to the swelling of the throat. For the Quinsie in the throate. ¶ Take Cinckfoile, and seeth the same in running Water, and put it in a pot with a narrow mouth, and let the party grée∣ued hold his mouth ouer the mouth of the potte, so that the fume may passe into his throat, and when the water waxeth colde, wash the throat well with the same, both within and without, and the disease will vanish away: prooued. Another for the same. ¶ First let the partie thus diseased, bee let blood on the left arme or in the liuer vaine, three or foure ounces, and let him gargase it with Wine-vinegar and water warmed together, of each a like quantitie, gargase it often times, and spet it out, and let him haue Methridatum in white Wine, and let him sweat vpon it an howre or two. And if the Quinsie be swolne already in his throat, then let him vse this remedie following. Take a Swallowes nest as you finde it, with Birds, or with Egges, or without eyther of them, and put to the same eyght handfulls of Mallowes, with asmuch Water-cresses, boyle them all toge∣ther in milke vntill they become soft, and till the milk be cleane consumed, then beate it in a bowle vntill it come to a plaister, then take asmuch as your fist of the same and while it is warme spread it like a plaister, and binde it as hote as may be suffered about the place where the swelling is, and so change it often til the paine be gone. Another for the same. ¶ Take hote Bread and put it in Honny, and lay it to the place as hote as may be suffered, and it will drinke it vp. Take
also the iuyce of Planten, & gargell it vp and downe thy throat and it will case the paine thereof. Also take the berries of the Mulberrie tree and make iuyce thereof, then seeth them in a lit∣tle Oyle and Wine, and put Vineger thereto, and so gargle it. Also an electuarie made of the iuyce of the same Berries, with a quantitie of scummed Honny, is good for the same: and it may be kept tenne yéeres in séedes of Dianorum, for the Quinsie. For the Cough. ¶ Take Isope, great Raisens, and Figges, of each a little handfull, and one eunce of Liceris: boyle them in faire water till the third part be consumed, then giue the partie gréeued for to drinke thereof twise a day, in the morning two houres before meate, and at night two howres before supper: also it is good for to eate a losing of Diairis or Diapeaideon. If you will haue it stronger, put thereto the decoction of a little Colewoorts, Anny∣seedes, and Fennell seedes, with the séedes of Nettles, of each two drams. Another for the cough. ¶ Take Sage, Rue, red Fennell, Isope, Comin, and the powder of Pepper, of each like much by weight, and seeth them well together in Honny, and make thereof an electuarie, and vse thereof a spoonefull in the euening, and another in the mor∣ning till the cough be gone. Another medicine against the cough. ¶ Take the roote of Enula campana, Horehound, Holihock, of eath of them a like much, séeth thē all together in white wine, with a dozen of fatte Figges, and with a little Licoris, and vse to drinke hereof a draught at a time euerie day twise. For a dry cough. ¶ Take Annyséedes, Ashe séedes, and Violets, and beate them to powder, and stampe them with euen portion, then seeth them together in faire water till they waxe thicke, then put the
same into a bore, and as you neede, let the sicke eate first & last of the same till he be well. For the Cough or stoppings. ¶ Take the powder of Isope, the powder of Anny-seed, the powder of Ginger, the powder of Licoris, and mingle thē with clarified Honny, and eate dailie hereof till thou bee whole. Also for the cough take a little Brimstone, and make powder there∣of, and put a little of the same vpon a borde or trencher, and take a stick or coale of fire, and put it in the Brimstone, and let the partie greeued, holde his nose ouer the fume of the Brimstone, and it shall breake the force of the cough and stoppings. Also this is good for the pose and the rewme in the head, as hath oft beene pooued. To make a powder for the Cough. ¶ Take Sugar-candie, Enula Campana rootes dryed, but nothing so much Enula campana as Sugar-candie, thē take two or three crops of dryed Isope, and one race of Ginger, and beate all these together, and afterwarde vse to eate of these powders till thou be whole. To make a sirrop for the Cough. ¶ Take a pynt of Isope water, halfe a pynt of clipped Rose∣mary, a quarter of a pound of Sugar-candie, three spoonfuls of Anniséedes brused, thrée sponfuls of Licoris sliced, séeth al these together vpon a soft fire vntill it come to a sirrop, then straine it, and take a spoonfull thereof morning and euening, and let it goe softly downe by gowlpes. For the perrillous Cough. ¶ Take white Horehound and stampe it, and wring out the iuyce, and mingle the iuyce with Honny and seeth it, and gyue the sicke to drinke hereof. Take also a Garlike head and rost it, then take away the pills and eate it. Also take a Colwoort leafe and strike the inner side thereof with May butter, and lay it to the sicke mans stomacke or belly euery morning and euening,
and giue him no Milke, Butter, nor Cheese, nor any kinde of salte meate, nor fatte pottage, nor Nuts, nor Apples, but make the partie pottage with leaues, and rost him an Onyon, and let him eate it with a little Pepper and Honny put therein, and vse it osten, and it will helpe him. Another for the same. ¶ Take the iuyce of Sage, and the iuyce of Rue, of each like much, and a quantitie of Commin, and asmuch of the powder of Pepper, and seeth them all very well in clarified Honny, and so make an electuarie thereof, and let the partie greeued, vse of thys medicine daily, thrée spoonfuls at night & three in the mor∣ning vntill he be whole. A good medicine to helpe the cough speedily. ¶ Take two or thrée Garlick heads well pilled, stamp them, and put them into Hogs-greace or suet, and stamp them well to∣gether, and at night when thou goest to bedde warme well the soles of your féete, and annoynt them with the said confection as hote as may be suffered, and also the small of your legs, and put a warme cloth about your feete, and within thrée nights he shal be holpen. Also take Brimstone and put it into powder, and put a little thereof into a new layde Egge soft rosted, and mingle it well together: then put thereto of Bengemin as much as a fitch pease lightly stamped, & drinke it in the morning at your break∣fast, and at night. A remedie for the dry cough. ¶ Take a pound of Licoris, and scrape it cleane, then stampe it in a morter, and put it in an earthen pot, and put thereto three quarts of the best woort that may be gotten, & one ounce of Su∣gar, and a quarter of an ounce of Ginger in powder, & a pynt of clarified Honny, and seeth them all together till they bee halfe wasted, then straine it through a cleane cloth into a faire vessell, and let the party gréeued vse thereof first and last, at night hote, and in the morning cold, till he be whole.
Another for the dry cough. ¶ Take Anny-séedes, Smallage seedes, and Violet séedes, of each a like much, beate them all together in powder, & tem∣per them with wine as the quantitie gyueth, then seeth thē well till they wexe thicke, and so vse it. Also if you take the seedes of Nettles, and seeth them in Oyle, and afterward annoynt your hands and your féete therewith, it will doe away the cough. Al∣so take the strrop of Violets and of Iniubes, and drinke thereof. Also it is very good to take first in the morning and last at night, a losing of Diadragagant, and after ward to drinke a draught of good Pisan, and thys is a present remedie for the cough when it procéedeth of a hote cause. A dyer for them that haue the cold cough. ¶ Yée must abstaine from Vineger, and all salt meats, from fruits and raw hearbes, from Fish, Lemmons, and all kinde of grosse meats, and too much replexion. Also ye must drinke no Wine betwéene meales, nor sléepe in the day time, especiallie after meate. For the stopping of the pypes, and for fleame, a medicine proued. ¶ Take a good bowle-full of Barlie, and put to the same a gallon of cleane Well water, and boyle them together till the Barly be as soft as any Wheate or Formentie, then straine it through a cleane cloth, and take that water, and put thereunto asmuch good Woort, with a penny-worth of Licoris brused, but not made into powder, and a good handfull of Isope, another of Sage, and boyle them altogether till one halfe of the liquor bee boyled in: then straine that liquor through a cloth, and that that commeth through the cloth, put into a close vessell, and let it stand a day, and then let the patient drinke thereof a spoonefull or two euerie morning, and so much likewise euery euening vntill he be well. This hath béene often prooued.
For straitnesse in the pypes. ¶ For straitnesse in the pypes or in the breast, take dry I∣sope, rootes of Enula campana, of each one handfull: sticks of Licoris scraped and soft brused foure vnces, and boyle altoge∣ther in a gallon of running water, till halfe be wasted, then straine it, and to all the aboue said liquor hote, put halfe a pint of clarified hony, and drinke therof milk warme, a good draught euery day first and last. A medicine for to stay a vomit. ¶ Take halfe a pinte of running water, an vnce of Suger, and a good race of Ginger, pick it and scrape it cleane, and shred it in good handsome péeces, and so put it to the water and the Suger, and boile them together from halfe a pint to a quarter of a pint, and so giue it to the party to drink, for it will stay the vomit in a very little space. For them that may not digest their meat. ¶ Take Horshoue and Hilwate, of each of these a like much, wash them cleane, and stamp them, and put therto the powder of Pepper, and séeth them together in faire water, and let the Patient drink therof luke warme, first and last. For a vomit a remedy. ¶ For them that haue vomit, and for them that haue not their breath at will, and hath stopping in their breasts: take a dram and a halfe of the powder of Betony, with a Goblet full of water, and drink it fasting. Another for the same. ¶ Against the vomit caused of weakenesse, heate, or odor chollerick, mingle the pouder of the thrée leaued Grasse with the white of an Egg, and rost them on a tyle, and giue it to the Pa∣tient to eate. Also for the vomit caused of retentiue weaknes: take the pouder of gum Arabick, and pouder of Canell.
For a man that vomiteth too much. ¶ Take Roses and boyle them with strong Vineger, and make a plaister therof, and lay it to his stomack all hot. Also vo∣miting commeth somtimes without great violence, and therby one getteth health, wherfore ye néed not giue him any remedy, for it is a good action of the naturall vertue of the stomack, som∣time vomiting commeth by a great violent mouing of the ver∣tue expulsiue of the stomack. For the euill things contayned in the same, a remedy: one may well help a man to vomit, giuing him water warme with a little oyle to drinke, or else to put thy singer in his mouth very lowe, or a feather wet in oyle the bet∣ter to vomit, and to mundifie the stomack, if so be the person haue a wide throat, and that vomiting dooth not hurt him much, as they be that haue but small and strait throats, and long necks and leane, for all these are euill to vomit. Somtimes vomiting commeth by weaknes of the stomack, caused of a hot and euill complection, ye shall cure it after this manner: take sirop of Roses, Quinces, Mirtles, with water sodden and cold againe, or else water of Pursian to quench the thirst. Also it is good to annoynt the stomack before dinner and supper, with an oynt∣ment of the oyle of Roses, and Quinces, and the iuice of Mints, and a little wax, or els make a plaister of Mints, Roses, Worm∣wood, and oyle of Roses, & lay to his stomack as hot as ye may. For to make a man cast and perbreake. ¶ Take two parts of the iuice of Fenell, and one part of ho∣ny, and séeth it till it be thick, and drink therof morning and eue∣ning, and it will cause a man for to cast or perbreake. Another for the same. ¶ Take the iuice of spurge, and vse to drinke thereof, and it will cause you to cast. Also the iuice of Stoncrop put into white wine, causeth a man for to cast presently. For to comfort the Patient after his vomiting. ¶ Take and giue the Patient in the morning an vnce of the sirop of Wormwood, or Mints, in stéed of which it is conuenient
to take a losing of Aromaticū rosatum, or Diagalanga. Also take euening and morning three houres before meate two Cloues in powder, with a spoonfull of the iuice of Mints, or half a spoonfull of Rue dried with a little wine. Also it is good to take powder of Cloues, and Lignum aloes the weight of a crown, two houres before meate. For one that abhorreth his meate. ¶ Somtime there chaunceth in the stomack a disease called Fastidium, or abhorring of meat, wherby the person against his will taketh in hate all maner of meats that is offered vnto him, like as the whole man taketh pleasure and delight in the same. The cause of his disease is replection of chollerick humors, or flegmatick, grosse and viscouse which are in the stomack: and the Patient hath great thirst, a dry tongue, the mouth bitter, and sometime dooth vomit yellow choller. And if the vaines be full, let the Patient be let blood on the right arme, and giue him to eat and drink such things as are fit for a party so gréeued, also you may giue him the iuice of Pomgranets. For to prouoke an appetite. ¶ Take Sage, Parsly, Pepper, and Mints, and stampe them, and temper them with Vineger, as you doo make sauce for shes, it will cause appetite: also flesh eaten with Vineger, comforteth and giueth appetite. If Vineger be vsed with a full stomacke, it vnbindeth the wombe, with an emptie stomacke bindeth it. It is good for them that be weake with sicknes, if it be taken in this manner: tost bread, and wet it in Vineger, and with the tost rub the mouth and nosthrils, and bind it on the pul∣sable vaines, for it comforteth the Patient, and the appetite, but for the appetite onely, it were better wet in the iuice of Mints. Also to them that haue lost their appetite by sicknes, two drams of the powder of Betony, with foure Ciote roots in drink, taketh away both sadnes and euill tast of meats. Also take and confect Cardomomum, with the iuice of Mints, and vse for to wet your meat therin, it prouoketh appetite.
Against the letting of the breath. ¶ Take and lay Orpiment vpon hote embers, and let the Patient stoope downe, and receiue the smoke therof through a pipe or funnell. Also take three drams of Orpiment, with reare Egs, or with wine or womans milk, once or twice in the wéek. Against paine of the breath called Asma, caused of cold, take the powder of Philixendula, with the powder of Gentiana, and vse it in his meat and drink. Another for the same. ¶ Against the paine of the breath if it be of a long continu∣ance: take the powder of Gentiana with Wine, and Barly wa∣ter, or else with meats or with new bread. Also take two drams of Galbanum, with a rere Egge, or with Barly water. Also to take Figs and seeth them in wine, is good against the letting of the breath, and against cold rume or humors in the breast. Also Pancakes made of Docks with meat or Eggs, is very good for letting of the breath called Asma, if you cate therof. An oyntment for the shortnes of the breath. ¶ Take two vnces of the oyle of swéet Almonds, and one vnce of May butter vnsalted, a little Saffron, and new Waxe, and make an oyntment therwith, and annoynt the breast euc∣ning and morning. Also for him that lacketh wind. ¶ Take Mallowes, Mercury, and Borage, séeth them to∣gether in a péece of Pork, and make therof pottage, and eat and drink of this broth with wine, or with Whey that is good. For armes being consumed and fallen away. ¶ Take Deare suet, and thine owne water being dissolued in a basen warme, then therewith wash thy armes euery day morning and euening. For the mary being cold and numd in the armes. ¶ Take thrée spoonfull of Mace, thrée spoonfull of Aqua vita, and three spoonfull of Vrine, and thrée spoonful of Capons greace,
and put them all in a Porrenger, and warme them on the sire and wash your armes morning and euening. Also if that you be sore in any part of the armes, take Roch Allom, and Madder, and boyle them with Conduit water, from a pottell to a pint, and so wash your armes. For aking of the hands and deadnes of the fingers. ¶ Take a handfull of red Sage, as much red Fennell, as much red Nettles with a quantity of Bay leaues in pouder, and long Pepper, stamp all these together in a Morter, then straine the same through a Canuas cloth with Aqua vita, and with this liquor annoynt thy hands when you goe to bed. For swelling of wounds in the hand. ¶ Take Wormwood, stampe it, and straine it, and boyle it with Vineger, and put therto Wheat bran, and make a plaister and lay it to the sore hands. For wormes or heat in the hands. ¶ Take Chickwéed and bruse it a little, and séeth it in run∣ning water till the halfe be wasted, and wash your hands as hot as the party can suffer it, for the space of sixe daies, and it will driue away the heat or wormes in the hands. For to make your hands white. ¶ To make the hands white and soft, take Affodill in clean water till it wax thick, and put therto powder of Cantarium, and stir them together, then put thereto rawe Eggs, and stir them well together, and with this oyntment annoynt your hands, and within three or foure daies vsing thereof they will be white and cleane. For itching of the hands with wormes. ¶ Take and annoynt the place that itcheth with the iuice of Mints, or of Rue, and it shall put away the wormes. Or else take the berries of the lesse Morrell, and therwith annoyist the wormes and the hands.
For to make nailes to grow. ¶ Take Wheate flower, and mingle the same with honey, and lay it to the nailes, and it will help them. For nailes that doe fall off. ¶ Take powder of Egrimony, and lay it there as the nayle was, and it shall put away the aking, and it will make the nails for to grow. For clouen nailes. ¶ Take Virgin Wax, and Turpentine, and mingle them together, and lay it on the naile, and as it waxeth or groweth, cut it away, and it will heale. For nailes that are rent from the flesh. ¶ Take the lesser Violet, and stamp it, and fry it with Vir∣gin waxe, and Frankensence, and make a plaister, and lay it to the naile all whole. Also anoint the fingers with the pouder of Brimston, Arsnick, and Vineger, and in short time you shall find great ease. For stinch vnder the arme holes. ¶ First pluck away the haires of the arme holes, and wash them with white Wine, and Rose-water that Cassia ligna hath béen sodden in, and vse it thrée or foure times. For to destroy the heat of the stomack. ¶ Take faire cleare water, and boyle it well, and skim it, and put therin shiuers of brown Bread, and let them lye therin an houre, till the water be almost cold, and drink therof two or thrée dayes, the oftner a day, the better, and eat gréene Parsly, and Galingall, and it shall help thée. For to auoid fleame out of the stomack. ¶ Take the pouder of Pellitory of Spaine, and the pouder of Comin, powder of long Pepper, pouder of Ginger, Musterd Vi∣neger,
and mingle them together, and chafe them. en. the fier till they waxe thicke, and then as hot as you can suffer it, put part thereof in your mouth, gargling it in your throat vp and down, but let none enter into your stomack, doo this diuers times, spet∣ting it out by the space of an hower, and this is a Gargarisme prooued. For the stomack that is hot and swolne. ¶ Take the roote of Smallage, stamp it, and put it in swéet Wine, or in other good wine all a day and a night, and straine it through a faire linnen cloth, and put it in a cleane vessell, and vse to drink a little thereof euery day fasting, take this eight or nine dayes. For rysing vnder the stomack. ¶ Take long Pepper, Graines, Saffron, Ginger, Aniséed, Licoris, and Suger, and séeth them al in good Ale till it be thick, and giue it to the party to drink, and he shall be whole. A plaister for rysing vnder the stomack. ¶ Take Yarrow, Milfoyle, red Fenell, red Mints, Rue, Borage, Fetherfoy, Cloteler, Pellitory, Egrimony, of each of these a like much, and the greace of a barow Hog, that is a Sow kind, and séeth them all together in good Ale, and make thereof a plaister, and lay it to the stomack as hot as it may be suffered, two or thrée times, and he shall be whole God willing, the het∣ter the better for to be taken: this hath béen proued. For the gnawing of the stomack. ¶ Take and séethe Betony in the iuice of Wormwood, and let the party drinke it with warme water, if his stomacke be not well. Also drink wine that Nep hath béen sodden in next to the hart fasting very early. For the stomack that aketh. ¶ Take an hearb that is called Poleo, and dry leaues, and a handfull of Houseléeke, and as much of this Poleo, and put it
in a vessell. with faire water, and let it boile on the fire till the third part of the water be sodden away, and put therto stone Su∣ger, and a little honey, and let the Patient drinke thereof sixe dayes fasting, and he shall be whole. For to force the stomack. ¶ Take thrée parts of Cannell, and one part of Mastick, and one part of the parings of Pomgranets, and halfe a part of Ga∣lingall, and stamp all these together, and temper it with hony that hath béen clarified on the fire, and well scummed, then vse as much of this as a Nut, euery day during ten dayes together: this hath béen proued. For the wind chollick in the stomack. ¶ Take a handfull of Time and wash it cleane, and put it into a cup of Ale or Béere, and let it stand all night, then take thrée sticks of Licoris brused, and let the party so gréeued drinke therof morning and euening. Another for the same. ¶ Take Onyons and put them into running water, and change them into foure waters séething, and when they are ten∣der sod, take them and wring them betwéen two trenchers, and butter them, and put theren grosse Pepper, and so eate of them morning and euening, vntill you doo find your selfe eased of your stomacke. For fleame in the stomack. ¶ Take red Nettles a good quantity, a good quantity of cla∣rified Butter, and séethe them in faire running water, till the hearbs be tender, then take them vp, and eate the hearbs, and drinke the liquor: proued. For to make losings to comfort the stomack. ¶ Take a pint of Rose-water, a quantity of Rubarb, grate it vpon a Grater, twice as much Setwell, as much Calomus
aromaticus, asmuch Spignard, a little Sinamon, asmuch Enu∣la campana, as much Ginger, and a little cleane water: put to these Spices one penny-worth of Sugar, and let all séeth on the fire till it waxe verie thicke, and be well sodden, then vse here∣of both morning and euening. For all manner of euill in the stomack. ¶ Take Ashe seedes, Linséedes, Comin, of euery of them a like much, giue these to the sick to drink with hot Woort, or else with faire hot water. For the Feauer in the stomack. ¶ Conserue of Roses, is very good for the Feauer in the sto∣mack: also it is good for all euils in the stomack, that is ingen∣dred of hot humors. For the swelling in the stomack. ¶ Take the rootes of Fennell, and the rootes of Smallage, of each of them a like quantitie, then stampe them and straine out the iuyce, and temper the same with good Wine, and vse to drinke thereof first and last, in the euening warme, and in the morning cold. For impostumes in the stomack. ¶ Against the impostumes in the stomack and of the bow∣els, séeth Fenegreke verie soft, with water that Mallowes haue béene sodden in, and lay it to the stomacke in manner of a plai∣ster, and this will ripen and breake the impostumes that be in the stomack. Prooued. For impostumes that be in the stomack, or in the liuer, or in the bowels. ¶ Take the iuyce of Morrell with Prisome and Barly, and giue it to the patient to drinke, and it wil both ripen and destroy the impostume in the stomack. Also take the oyle of Mandrake and annoynt the gréeued stomacke therewith.
For an impostume in the stomacke. ¶ Take Barlie, dryed Beanes, and Lycoris, and let them boyle all together, of each of these a like much, drinke thereof with Sugar euerie day fasting, and at night when thou goest to bedde, let the patient vse this seauen or eyght dayes together, and it will cast out the impostume in his stomack. For to cleanse the filth in the stomack. ¶ For the filth and dyrt in the stomack, which resteth there by reason of the impostume that hath béene in the stomack or in the bowels, take the powder of Salnatry with warme water, or else with Hony. For a stomack ouer-charged with raw meat. ¶ Take Stonecrop that groweth on the wal, and it purgeth both vpward and downe ward: it purgeth the stomacke of euill humors, and helpeth the Dropsie, the Stone, and the Flix. Also for the Spléene, for the Tissick, and for the Feauer, it is a pre∣cious medicine. For the stomack and head, and for a man that may not well speake. ¶ Take and giue the sick to eate nine daies in May, Scab∣bias, Mugwoort, Smallage, Morsus diaboli, Iuie, Mylfoyle, Wormewood, and Fetherfoy, stampe all these together, then séeth them, and when they be well sodden, take whites of Egs, and purge the patient euening and morning. For a man that cannot digest his meate in his stomacke. ¶ Take Centorie, and seeth it in water, and drinke thereof warme euerie night when thou goest to bedde. Also take Sage, Rue, Commin, and Pepper, séeth them together with Honny, and eate euery day a spoonful thereof. Also drinke the wine that Nep hath béen sodden in, Or séeth Betony in the iuyce of worm∣wood, and drinke it with warme water.
For winde in the stomack and bowels. ¶ Take three vnces of Scene, halfe an vnce of Ginger in powder, Commin and Anniséedes, three pound weight of both, mingle all these together, and eate thereof euery day a spoone∣full. Also take Calamint ginger an vnce made in powder, with a little Honny, and eate thereof first and last. For vnkinde heate in the stomack. ¶ Take Lettice, and drinke it with Wine euery day, or else eate thereof, and it will take away the heat of the stomack, also to eate Rue euery morning, is good for the stomack. For the weakenes of the stomack. ¶ Take Mastick and Labdanum of each one vnce, take also a dramme of the powder of Wormewood, and Turpentine as much as néedes to encorporate them together, make a plaister hereof and spread it vpon Leather, then lay it to the stomacke. It is good to annoynt the stomacke with the oyle of Spignard, and Mastick, or to lay vpon it hote bread stéeped in good wine, on the which bread strew the powder of Cloues and Nutmegs. Also it is wholsome to eate afore your meate, Anniseedes, and Fennell-séedes: and when you begin to eate, take a toste dipped in sodden wine, or els in good Malmste, without drinking of the same Wine, except it be a very little draught after meat. A medicine for the bulke. ¶ Against paine of the members in the bulke, as the longs, and other that serue to the breath, and against apilation of the liuer and Milke of the bladder, and paine of the stomack, drinke the Wine that the roote of Ireos hath béen sodden in. Another for the same. ¶ Take and make a manner of pottage with Barly & wa∣ter, and put the powder of Bawme-mint thereto, and giue it to the patient: and it will helpe him.
For the bulke and the stomack. ¶ Vse to drinke the Wine that is sodden with Dragagant, it warmeth the parts of the bulke and clenseth them. Also it war∣meth the stomack and the bowels, and is very good against the Collick, and to open the milt, also it is verie good against the hinderance of vrine, be it either Strangurie or Dissury. There be two kinds of Secadors, that is to wit, Arabick and Cytrine, and both of them approoued to the sinnewes and braine. For spetting of blood. ¶ For the partie that vseth to spet blood, caused in the bulk, make Pills of the powder of Dragons blood, and gumme Ara∣bick, and Ptysome that Dragagant hath béen molten in, and let the patient hold it on his tongue, and whē it is all relented swal∣low it downe. Also for them that spet blood because of the dis∣ease in the bulke, take Pills made of the powder of Sumac, and gumme Arabick confect in Rose-water. Also for them that spet blood, take Honny and Vinegar, and it helpeth the same. Another medicine for the spetting of blood. ¶ Take Pilles confect with the powder of Mummy, & with a little Mastick, and confect them in water that gum Arabicke hath béene molten or laid in: and hold these Pills in thy mouth till they melt, and then swallow them downe. And if the blood come to thy mouth by reason of the nutritine members, as the stomacke, the liuer and the milt, eate this powder with a rawe Egge, and drinke it with the iuyce of Plantine. Another for the same. ¶ For them that vse to spet blood at the mouth, out of the bel∣lie and stomack, and against the paine thereof, take and beate the roote of Sowthistle small to powder, & drinke it with wine. Or els take two drams of the powder of Betony, with Ciats of olde Wine for three dayes, and it will helpe the patient that is gréeued here-with.
For spetting of blood. ¶ Take Ach, Mints, Rue, and Betony, of each a like quan∣titie, and seeth them well in good Milke, then giue the patient thereof to drinke, and it shall helpe him. Another for the same. ¶ Take the iuyce of Betonie, and temper the same wel with Goates milke, and let the partie troubled, drinke thereof three dayes together. Also take Smallage, Mints, Rue, and Be∣tony, and giue thereof to the patient to drinke in Goates milk, and let him sup vp a good draught at a time, as hote as hée may well suffer it. For straightnes of the breast. ¶ Take a quarte of good stale Ale, and a quart of fine Woort, take also halfe a handfull of Liuer-wort, & halfe a penny-worth of Licoris sliced very fine, and scraped cleane, then bruse it, take also a halfe penny-worth of Figges, and wash them cleane, and halfe a handful of Isope, a quantitie of clarified Honny, a quan∣tity of Set well, and thrée rootes of Parslie, and cut them smal, with halfe a roote of Fennell, cut likewise very small, boyle all these together till halfe be consumed, then vse to drinke heereof morning and euening reasonable hote. For the partie that is incombred in the brest with any kind of fleame or glart. ¶ Take the powder of Betonie, and drinke it with warme water, it voideth and purgeth the fleame wondrously, and doth awaie the glart or fleame. For paine in the breast. ¶ Take and gather a good quantity of ripe Slowes, & grinde them small in a morter, then put them in an earthen potte, and sill it full of new Ale, and so drinke thereof.
Another for the same. ¶ Take Isope, Parsly, and Sage, stampe them and lay thē to the breast of the patient verie hote. Take also the marrowe of a Calfe, Fenegreke, Linséedes, bray them small in a morter, and mingle the powder with the yolkes of Egges, then temper all these together with fresh greace or Oyle, and lay it to the sore as hote as you may suffer it. For the breast that is incombred. ¶ Take Isope, and seeth it in a pottle of Wine till it come to a quarte, and let the patient vse thereof first in the morning colde, and last in the euening hote. Another for the same. ¶ Take three pottles of running water of a Well that springs, and boyle it to a pottell, then take halfe a pint of Hony, and one pounde of the powder of Anniseedes, a pounde of the powder of Licoris, one penny-worth of Sugar, and cast all these into the liquor, and let them boyle well, then put it into a vessel and stop the mouth thereof close that the ayre goe not out, and let the patient drinke thereof in the morning, but not fasting at night, and he shall be whole. For the breast and the lunges. ¶ Take a quantity of clarified Hony and boyle it, and when it is boyled, put thereto an vnce of the powder of Enula campa∣na, and one vnce of the powder of Licoris, and let them boyle till they be somwhat thick, then take it from the fire, and when it is cold put thereto an vnce of the powder of Ginger, and stirre it well together, and vse this first and last. For a man that is stopped in his breast or pypes. ¶ Take Enula campana, Isope, and Licoris, dry them wel, then beat them in a morter as fine as flower, then take Ginger, Anniséeds Sinamon and Galingall, beate them also, and when
thou hast done, take a quantity of Hony & boile it wel, and seum it cleane, then take the Enula campana, the Isope and the Li∣coris, and boyle them wel together in the Hony, afterward, take the Ginger, Anniseedes, Galingall, and Sinamon, put them al in Hony, and let them seeth together: then put it in a dish, then take Sugar and put vpon it while it is hote, and eate a quantity thereof morning and euening, but drinke not till two howers after, and it will helpe thee. Also if you take and séeth Rue in Vinegar and drinke thereof, it will likewise helpe you. For swelling of the breasts. ¶ Take Wormwood, Sage, and Calamint, of each a like much, and stampe them well, put thereto a quantitie of Vine∣gar, and temper them well together: then take white Breade, and toste it till it be browne, and grind it small: then boile them together, and stir it that it burne not to, and lay thereof to the patients breast as hote as may be suffered. Another for the same. ¶ Also if a plaister be made of Chesnuts with Barly meale, and Vinegar or Wine, and layd to the pappes, it will asswage both the swelling and the paine thereof. For all manner of euills and paine in the breast or the ribbes. ¶ Take and bruse Mugwoort with Vinegar, and lay it to the breast, and it will be whole in thrée dayes. Also take the wa∣ter that guin Arabick and Mirth hath been sodden in, and wash the breast therewith. Also take the electuary called Diapeni∣dion, made into pennets, it is verie good for the same purpose, as hath oft been proued. Also for drought in the breasts and the members in it, and for them that be Costisse, so that the breast be not stopped, nor the brath short, lay Psilium in water a certaine space, and then poure out the water, and take the same séedes with other cleane water that is cold, and vse it to the patient.
Also take and make a plaister of Knotgrasse and Butter, and lay it to the sore breast, and it helpeth the same. For vaines broken in the breast. ¶ Take the roote of Camphire and secth it, and when it is sodden slice it with a knife, then hange it in the Sunne to dry, thys may be kept thrée yeeres in goodnes and vertue, and if a vaine be broken in the breast or guttes, it will resound and knit it, and reioyne it meruailously, if that the powder thereof be ta∣ken greene with Wine or water: or if you fry the roote greene like a fritture with Egges or Meale, and so cate thereof. For impostumes in the breast. ¶ Take and fill a bagge with meale of Fenegreke, and séeth it in water that Lysmachie and Hollihock hath been sodden in, and lay it often to the impostume of the breast. Another for the same. ¶ Take the water that Licoris hath béene sodden in, or the iuyce thereof, and it is very good being vsed, against the impo∣stumes of the breasts or ribbes, called the Plurisie. For blood of the breasts. ¶ Take two drammes of Leekes seede and Mirth, it stan∣cheth the blood that commeth out of the breast by spetting, al∣though it be griefe to the teeth and throat. For the Canker in a womans pappes. ¶ Take picked Garlicke, and Rye-meale, or Barly-meale, and bray them together wish Vinegar, till they become as thick as a plaister, then lay it to the sore till it bee white, then take Pimpernell and beate it small, and put thereto Life-honny, and lay the plaister to the sore pappe, and it will heale it faire. Or else take the fenne of a white Goose, and the iuyce of Ellidonie, and bray them well together, and lay it to the pappe, and it wil kill the Canker, and heale it soundly.
Another for the same. ¶ Take Wormwood, and the white of an Egge, and skinne it, then temper it with oyle of Violets, and let her blood on the vaines about the paps. For the fester in the breast. ¶ Take the iuice of the roote of Foxe gloues, and temper it with mans vrine, and wring it through a cloth, and wash the sore oftentimes therwith, and it will cure it. To make a woman to haue soft breasts. ¶ Let the party that desireth to haue soft breasts drinke in Ale, Nettle séede, and Salt, and it shall quickly help her. For a woman that hath her breasts rancled. ¶ Take Lint séede, and bray it with the white of an Egge, and lay it on her breasts, and then take the iuice of Ache, and of Rye meale, and lay it on her breasts, and let her drink the iuice of Veruaine, Fenell seed, and Amber. For to make a drinke for womans paps that are rancled, and be full of ache. ¶ Take Groundsell, and two times as much of Brouswort, and wash them both, and stamp them, and temper them with stale Ale, and straine it through a cloth, and giue to the Patient thereof first in the morning, and last at night. For the euill swelling in a womans breast. ¶ Take Oake apples, and stamp them in powder, and put them in oyle of Roses, and lay it to the swelling: or else take the iuice of pety Morrell, and Dasies, and the dregs of Vineger, and a hard Egge sodden with the shell, and Barly flower, and so make therof a plaister, and lay it on the sore. For biles on a womans breasts. ¶ Take the iuice of Morrell, the oyle of an Egg, and Beane flower, make therof a plaister, and lay it cold thereto.
For a woman that desireth to haue great plenty of milke in her breasts. ¶ Let her take the iuice of Veruaine or Fenell, and vse to drink oftentimes therof, and she shall haue great plenty of milk. Also if she drink the broth that Whitings haue béen sodden in, it is very good for the same purpose. For paines in the breast with ouer too much milke. ¶ Take very clean water without any grauell in the same, and mingle it with Vineger, and the yolke of an Egge, and a little Saffron, then lay it vpon a cloth plaister wise, and lay it to the breast, and when it is dry take it away, and lay another in the place. Another for the same. ¶ Take Vineger and honey hoyled together, and spread it vpon a cloth, then lay vpon it a little powder of Comin, it will asswage the milke. For the milke that is curded in a womans breast. ¶ Take Wheat mingled with Rue, and sodden in water, and lay it to a womans hard breasts that be curded with milke, and it will soften them. Another for the same. ¶ If the séeds of Lentiles be mingled with water of the Sea, they be good for milk that is curded in womens breasts. For the hart burning. ¶ Take a crop of Fennell, and chewe it in thy mouth, and suck the iuice therof, then spet it out, and take another, vse this very often, and it will help him that is hart burnt.
For the paine at the hart. ¶ Take Centuary & séeth it in stale Ale, and when it is well sodden, stamp it in a morter, and seeth it againe with the same liquor, then clense it through a cloth with two spoonfuls of the iuice, and thrée spoonfulls of Honey, and then boyle it well to∣gether againe, and put it in a boxe, and giue it to the Patient euery day thrée spoonfuls fasting till he be whole, and this shall doo away the glut from him, and make him haue an appetite to his meate. For weaknesse of the hart. ¶ Take Rose-water, and mother of Pearle beaten small to powder, and mingle it with Suger, and giue it to the Patient to drink three or foure daies, and he shall be whole. For faintnes at the hart. ¶ Take the filings of Gold, and the powder of the bone of a Harts hart, and mingle them with the iuice of Borage, and Suger made in sirop, for it is very good for sowning. For all sicknesses about the hart. ¶ Take Rosemary, Isope, Centory, Betony, and Iris, and séeth them in faire water, and straine the water and the iuice of the hearbs, and put therto hony, and boile it againe, and scum it, and put therto as much butter as hony in the séething, and min∣gle them together, and take it downe and couer it well, and drink therof at euen hot, and in the morning cold. An Electuary for the hart. ¶ Diantes: this Electuary is good for the heauines in the hart, and for féeblenes of complection in a mans stomacke, for the Cardiakle, and for the had lungs, et alia causa. For euils at the hart. ¶ Take Hartwoort, Galingall, Harts tongue, and Sauine, stampe them, and wring out the iuice, and temper them with
good Wine, a good quantity of Roses, and giue it to the party so gréeued to drinke first in the morning, and last at night, and he shall be whole God willing. A sirop for the paine of the hart. ¶ Take and stamp Betony, and hearb Benet, Horehound, and Veruaine, séeth them in faire water, to the third part, then put therto hony, and make therof a sirop. For all diseases in a mans hart. ¶ Take Sage, & Mints, by euen portion, séeth them in white Wine, and make a plaister thereof, and lay it to his hart till he be whole: take also the Wine that it was sodden in, and giue it to the Patient to drink euening and morning, and he shall haue good desire to his meat within sixe daies after at the furthest. For to comfort the hart. ¶ Take the powder of Setwall, and put it in the sick mans meat, it comforteth the hart, and is very good for them that haue weake harts, and be disposed to sowning. Another for the same. ¶ Temper the Patients Wine with water that Spicknard is sodden in, and with the same water make a sirop, and let the sick drink therof, it is good against the disease of the hart, and for sowning. And for weakenes of the braine, smell it at thy nose. Also séeth the flowers of Rosemary leaues mingled with Rose∣water, and giue it to the Patient to drinke. Another for the same. ¶ Take the iuice of Rosemary leaues mingled with Rose∣water, and a little of the iuice of Panay, and make sirop therof: it will also be good if some of the bone in the hart of an Hart be put therunto, and giuen to the Patient.
For all paines in the hart ¶ Take the powder of Galingall, with the iuice of Borage, and the seeds of Ireos with the milke of a Goate, and drinke it warme: it will asswage the paine of the hart. Another for the same. ¶ Take the pouder of Cannel, with the pouder of the leaues of Ielliflowers, it is very good against the passion and sowning of the hart being giuen to the party. Against the passions of the hart. ¶ Take and make sirop with the iuice of Borage, and put therto of the powder of the Harts bone in the hart of a Hart. Also take Buglosse, and eate it often eyther rawe or sodden, it driueth out the noysome humors. Also against the passion of the hart and sowning: take sirop made with Cassia ligna and Roses, and the bone of a Harts hart, and giue it the sick to eate. For feeblenes of the hart. ¶ For them that are weake in the hart, and doo take their breaths in manner of sighes: take and giue them the iuice of Buglosse with hony, and it shall help them. Against the fainting of the hart. ¶ Take and make Pils with a dram of Amber, and an vnce of Lignum aloes, and two drams of the bone of a Harts hart beat to powder, and beat the Pils in Rose-water, and giue two or thrée of the said Pils to the Patient when he goeth to bed. Also to take the quantity of foure drams of Cucubes, with the iuice of the root or the leaues of Parsneps is very good. Also for them that be faint at the hart or be like to sown: giue them Rose-water for to drinke, and also bedew their faces ther∣with. Also if the faintnes come from the braine or liuer, or paine
of the stomack caused of cold: take two Wheat cornes of Musk in wine, and it will help the same. Against sowning. Against sowning and faintnes of the hart: take Rose-water, that this hearb Bassell is sodden in, and for the same: take wine that the hearb is laid in all night. Also against sowning take the powder of Roses, and put it in∣to a reare Egge. Also take the powder of Ginger in your meats, and it is good against sowning. Against sowning: make sirop with the iuice of Borage, and Suger. Also against sowning of the hart comming of cold: take and séeth this hearb, Cardomomum in sweet smelling wine, with a little Rose-water, and vse it. For sowning. ¶ For sowning and weaknes of the hart, be it in Feauers or sicknesses, or if it come of either cause, stampe Mints with Vineger, and a litle Wine: if the Patient haue no Feauer, then tost a shiuer till it be almost burnt, and put it therein till it be well stéeped, then put of it in his nose, and rub his lips, his tong, gums, teeth, and the temples, and let him chewe it, and sucke the moistnes therof, and swallow it. For the paine of the lungs. ¶ Take Figs, and let them be sodden with Isop: they clense the lungs, and heale the old cough. Also take the root of the wild Rape, and séeth it with Licoris, and the water that it is sodden in giuen to the Patient to drink, is very good to clense the lungs. Also take this hearb Southernwood, and mingle it with Isop, and sodden in wine or water, make it swéet with Suger, and so drunken, is very good for al diseases of the lungs, and the breast: when sicknes commeth of cold, annoynt the breast.
Another for the same. ¶ If you take the broth of Creues, it is good for paine in the lungs, named Perpleumonia, vr consuming of a man called Pro∣sis, because when a man hath a swelling about the lungs: then he commeth to drinesse, and consuming of that naturall moy∣sture till he dyeth. For the lyuer and lungs. ¶ For the lyuer and the lungs wasting with ouer vnkind heats, take water made of Borage, and of red Fenell roots, Ach, Isop, Endiue, Betony, Calamint, Lettice, Nutmegs, Mace, flo∣wers of Camomel, Cloues, Aniseeds, by euen portions: one vnce of Licoris, and Aniséeds halfe a pound, make of all these hearbs and spices a water, and it shall restore you meruailously, and if you cannot get all these hearbs, then take the more of Borage. Also to restore his kind, make a confection of the flowers of Bo∣rage, and of red Roses with the foresaid spires, and with Suger. For the heat of the lyuer. ¶ Take Spodium vt eborij in rose, Corall, Barly meale, Triacendaly thrée peny worth, mingle all these with the iuice of Endiue, S. Mary berry, and Housléeke. Another for the same. ¶ Take red Roses Sandalorum cum Iuery, and water of Lillies an vnce, stamp them small, and put therto Barly meale, and the iuice of Marigolds & Vineger, and the iuice of Worm∣wood, and make a plaister therof, and lay it to the lyuer. For chafing of the lyuer, and of the spleene. ¶ Take yellow Rubarb, Barly meale, and Vineger, and temper them together, and make therof a plaister, and lay that plaister to a mans right side, let him blood in the vaine of the spléene, and giue him to drinke in Winter Suger rosset, and in Sommer Scabious.
For the chafing of the lyuer. ¶ For the chafing of the lyuer and opilation of the milt cau∣sed of humor: take Rubarb with warme water, but it is better to mingle it with Trifera sarazenica, and this you may vse with the iuice of Endiue, and so giue it to the Patient. Also take and annoynt the lyuer with the oyle of Roses, for the chafing of the lyuer. Against chafing or heat of the lyuer: take and wet a cloth ma∣ny times double, and lay it to the lyuer. Also the oyle of Violets is good against the chafing of the ly∣uer. Prooued. Against the chafing of the lyuer: scrape the vppermost of the Gourd, stamp the said scraping and wring out the iuice, and put Vineger thereto, wet a cloth therin, and lay it to the lyuer out∣wardlie. Also take Endiue, and lay it in water, and vse it in your bro∣thes for the Patient so gréeued. For the heat of the lyuer. ¶ Take Fenell, Endiue, Succory, Planten, of each a like much, and still them with red Wine or milke, and vse it euerie morning nine spoonfuls at a time, with a draught of Wine and Suger, or else fiue spoonfuls therof alone. For the lyuer wasting, which causeth a scab∣bid face. ¶ Take thrée gallons of sweet Woort, and put thereto foure handfull of Lyuerwoort, and foure handfuls of Violets, two handfuls of Harts tongue, foure handfuls of Marigolds, foure handfuls of Matfelon, and stamp all these together, and boyle them a prety while in the Woort, then take them vp, and when they are cold strain them, and put therto Barly meale: vse this fasting at night, the space of a moneth, then take an oyntment that is made for a dry scab, and therwith daily annoynt thy face, and vsing of this drink aforesaid: the party shall find help.
For the vnkinde heate of a mans liuer, which causeth his collour to waxe yellow. ¶ Take the water of Chiccorie, and the water of Lettice, and the water of the leaues & small branches of a Moryer tree, take the hearbs and stampe them all together, as much of the one as of the other, & take the iuyce thereof, and asmuch Sugar as will suffise, boyle all these together till they be as thicke as a sirrop, and put vnto the same a poys and a halfe of Rewbarbe, and vse a quantitie of this sirrop in colde water euerie day fa∣sting, till he be whole. For the liuer that is corrupted and wasted. ¶ Take a quantitie of Liuerwoort, and bruse it a little, then séeth it in good strong Woort with a quantitie of Rewbarb, and vse this medicine till thou be whole. A drinke for the Splene. ¶ Take Harts-tongue, wilde Hoppe leaues, and Borage, with the flowers of Femitory, and Parflie rootes, seeth them in Whey and clarifie them with the white of an Egge, & strain it, drinke thereof morning and euening, and so continue a fort∣night, and it will helpe you many waies. A playster for the Splene. ¶ Take three or foure Hollihocke rootes, two handfulls of Mallowes, and seeth them well together, then stampe ye rootes by themselues, and straine them with the same water wherein they were sodden, then stampe the Mallowes together with the iuyce of the Hollihock rootes, and put in eyght or nine Figges, and two vnces of Sugar, a little leauened Breade, and halfe a dish of sweet Butter, then lay part of the same vppon a wollen cloth, and as hote as may bee suffered lay the same to the side, and rowle it verie fast with a strong rowler, and euerie day once renew the same with a fresh plaister verie hote, vntil such time as the partie be well.
Another plaister for the Spleene. ¶ Take Wormwood, Mallowes, Cammomile and Meli∣lot, of each of these a good handfull, boyle them in faire water till the liquor be halfe consumed, then put vnto the same halfe a handful of Wheate branne or more, and boyle it to the thicknes of a plaister, then quilt it, and as hote as you may suffer it, lay it to your left side. An aluarie for the Spleene. ¶ Take a pinte of Ale clarified, and put therein a crust of Breade, then take the powder of Gentiana, Spignard, Gallin∣gall, of each two penny-woorth, let them haue a boyling or a waulme, then take it off the fire, and drinke thereof morning and euening, and it will cure the Spléene. A restoritie for the liuer, lungs, and spleene. ¶ Take two parts of Fennell, and three parts of Honnie, séeth them together till they be as thicke as a lectuarie, and let the sicke vse this morning and euening. For the stopping of the Spleene. ¶ Take the Elder roote, and seeth the same in white wine, vntill the third part thereof, and drinke of the same, and it cu∣reth the Spléene meruailously. Another for the same. ¶ Take the lunges of a Foxe, and make it into powder, and vse to drinke thereof, and it will certainly cure the Spléene. For the Spleene a good experiment. ¶ Take two pounde of Bores greace, and two pounde of ashes made of Ashen wood, and one gallon of faire running wa∣ter, and séeth them all together til halfe be consumed, thē straine them through a cloth, and let it stand all night, and in the mor∣ning fléete of the greace, and cast away the water, and mingle
the greace well together, and put it in a boxe, and there-with-annoynt vpon the Spléene. You must likewise giue the patient this drinke following: Take the reotes of young Ashen plants, and a good quantity of Wormwood, and seeth them well toge∣ther in a gallon of Wine till the one halfe be wasted, and let the patient drinke thereof in the euening hote, and in the morning cold: and let the patient vse of this oyntment, and drink of thys drinke the space of nine dayes, and it will helpe him: proued. Another for the Spleene, proued. ¶ Take the inner rine of the Ashe trée, stamp it and seeth it in Wine, and it will doubtles helpe the Spléene. For the heate of the liuer. ¶ Take the inyce of sowre Apples, and swéet Apples, of each a pynt or more, and two pound of Sugar, and mingle these to∣gether, and let it boyle on a soft fire till it be as thick as a sirop, and vse of this a little euery day fasting, beeing first made luke warme at the fire. To purge the liuer of choller and salt sleame. ¶ Take the waight of a gold Noble of Rubarbe, and cut it in small péeces, and a halfe penny-worth of Spignard, and the weight of two groats of Scene in the codds, lay all these in soke in nine spoonfuls of Whey, by the space of twelue howres, and so giue it to the patient. For the liuer that is chafed. ¶ Take and vse Saunders in thy pottage or broth, & drinke it, and wash thy right side with cold vrine, but first boyle it and scum it, and put thereto Vinegar, and lay it to thy right side, but not hote, for it will chafe the liuer. For wasting of the liuer. ¶ Take Water-cresses, Red Fennell, and Sorrell, with a Chicken in a pot nine dayes, and vse it.
Another for the heate of the liuer. ¶ Take a quart of Barlie, and put thereto a gallon of well water, and boyle them together till the Barly be as soft as any Wheate or Formentie, then straine it through a cleane cloth, and take the same water, and put thereto asmuch good woorte, with a penny-worth of Licoris beaten, but not to powder, and take a good handfull of Isope, and a good handfull of Sage, and boyle all these together, till the one halfe thereof be wasted, then straine them againe through another cleane cloth, and that which commeth forth, put it into a cleane vessell, and let it stand a day and a night, and drinke of the same first in the morning, and last at night when you goe to bed. For stoppings in the liuer and the milt. ¶ Take and seeth Harts-tongue in water or Wine, and drinke it: or if the herbe bee eaten, it is very good for the same. Also to vnstop the pypes of the liuer and of the milt, take Smal∣lage and seeth the same with a like quantitie of Elder leaues, then straine it, and drinke the broth thereof. Another for the same. ¶ If you vse to drinke the iuyce of Chiccorie, it openeth the oppilation of the liuer and milt caused of heate. Or if you take the Wine that Silios hath beene sodden in, and drinke thereof fasting, it is a very good medicine against the stopping of the Liuer, Milte, and Raines, and against the let of vrine. Another for the same. ¶ Take and drinke the Wine that wilde Time hath béene sodden in, and you shall finde it very good against the stopping of the Liuer, Milte and Raines, and the hinderance of vrine, as hath oft been proued. ¶ Also if you take the iuyce of the bearbe called Witminte with Honny, and the Wine that it hath been sodden in, it is ve∣rie good to vnstop the conduit of the Milt, and the liuer & vrine.
Against the oppilation of the Liuer, the Milte, the vrine, and the bladder, vse the decoction of Cassia ligna, or the sirrop that it is made with. To vse also the iuyce of Night-shade made in sirrop with a little Sugar, is very good for the liuer and the milte. Also if you make sirrop of the iuyce of Fennell, and the de∣coction of the hearbe called Dawke, it is good against the stop∣ping of the Liuer, and the Milt, and against the Dropsie. For the liuer and the milt. ¶ Against the opilation of the liuer or of the milt, take Aloe Epatick, with the iuyce of Smallage warme. Or make a de∣coction of the rootes of Smallage, Parssie, Fenel, Bomwoort, and Spurge, with two orammes of Mastick, and vse this two or thrée times in the weeke till you be well. Another for the liuer and the milt. ¶ Also who so vseth often to eate the hearb Cheruell, it cau∣seth the stopping of the liuer and the milt to cease. Or if the pa∣tient take the seedes thereof and make them into powder, and afterward eyther eate or drinke of the same, it will help him. Also if the iuyce of Wolst-thistle be drunken with Wine, it is verie good for the liuer. Also to drinke the water that Louage hath been sodden in, is likewise good for the liuer and the milt. Also against the stopping of the liuer and milt, take the pow∣der of Barbaries, with the iuyce of Morrell, and drinke often of the same. For the liuer, milt, raines, and bladder. ¶ Against the opilation of the liuer, milt, and raines, and the hinderance of vrine, take and seeth the hearbe Germander and Canuphithis in oyle, and lay it to the place where the party is greeued. Also take an electuary confect with Honny, and two parts of these hearbes, and so vse it.
For the liuer, the milt, and the Iaundise. ¶ Against the opilation of the liuer, milt, and Iaundise, take the iuyce of Wormwood and Sirrill, or else make them in sir∣rop, and vse it with warme water: also against opilation of the milt, take the iuyce of Worm-wood, and the powder of Costy, it is also good for the same. For all paynes in the milt. ¶ Take of the drinke that Gold hath beene quenched in red hote, and it helpeth the paine in the milt. Also an oyntment made of Assa armonia, and Wax, softneth the hard milt, and it dissolueth the milke curded in the paps. Also make iuyce with Smallage, and put thereto Oyle and Waxe, and confect it into a sirrop. Also for the Milt, take Annoniacke and Galbane, of each of these a like much, soften them well in Vinegar and with waxe, then put thereto powder of Coste and of Wormwood, and make thereof an oyntment, and vse therewith to annoynt the place a∣gainst the milt, and it will help the same. Also take Egrimonie, and eate thereof often-times, and it healeth the paine of the milt. Against the opilation of the milt or Dropsie, take the Wine that Abrosiana hath beene sodden in, for beeing often-times drunke, it healeth the paine of the milt comming of cold. Also against the ache of the milt, drinke the wine that Be∣tonie hath been sodden in, and it profiteth. Also make an oyntment with the hearbe called Bears-foote beaten, and then lay it long in Oyle, and with waxe make an oyntment: the leaues ought to be vsed while they be greene. Also the hearbe Amios, with the rootes of Ciats in wine hel∣peth much the paine of the milt. Also for the milt and liuer, take the iuyce of Fennell sodden in an Apple, and take the powder thereof. Also for the paine of the milt and liuer, take the Wine that Coperis hath been sodden in.
Also for the payne of the milt and the liuer, drinke the wine that Cassia ligna hath beene sodden in. Also for the paine of the milte and liuer, take the electuarie that Diocostum hath been sodden in. Also for the paine of the milt, vse a dramme of Cammomile in powder with Wine, forty dayes. Also for the paine of the milte, vse to drinke the Wine that Honny-suckle hath been sodden in. Also seeth Iuie in Wine, and then straine out the iuyce, and drinke thereof, it helpeth greatly. Also the water that the roote of Fearne hath been sodden in, is very good for the same. Also you may vse the water or Wine that the rinde of Fen∣nell rootes hath beene sodden in. Also the Water or wine that the bough of an Ashe hath béen sodden in, is good for this purpose. For to soften the milt that is hard. ¶ Take the roote of the wilde Vine & stampe it with Porks greace, then melt it on the fire, and straine it, and take meale of Linseede, and oyle, and put thereto: and thys oyntment is very good for the hardnesse of the milt and liuer, and to ripen unpostumes. Another for the same. ¶ Take the rinde of the roote of Hore-hound, and stéepe the same a fortnight in Wine and Oyle, and then let it bee sodden and strained, and in the straining, put thereto water and Oyle, and make thereof an oyntment, and vse the same at your neede, for thys purpose. For ache in the gutts and belly. ¶ Take the powder of Mugwoort, and let it be drunk with Wine and Honny, it easeth greatly the ache in the bowels, and is good against diuers other diseases. And for the paines in the guts, take a ciate of the iuyce of Clot leaues, and it wil ease thée.
For paynes in the belly. ¶ Take and stampe Mugwoort, and lay it to the bellie, it helpeth the same meruailously, take also an vnce and a halfe of Wartwoort, with asmuch wine, and it will likewise asswage the paine in the belly. For the paines in the belly. ¶ Take and make an electuarie of Honny, and seeth it with water to keepe it from cleauing to, then put to the same two vnces of Hermodates, and one vnce of Fennell seedes, and giue thereof to the partie so greeued that hath the paine in his bellie, and it will helpe him: proued. For the payne in the belly. ¶ Take wilde Time, and seeth the same with Wine and Oyle, and it is verie good against the paine in the belly. Also if you take the braine of a Hare rosted, & eate thereof, and drink some good Wine afterward, it is good for the paine in the belly. For the paine in the belly. ¶ Take three pynts of Malmesey, and a handfull of Oris powder, and a handfull of Commin, with a handfull of Red-rose leaues dryed, a handfull of Cammomile flowers, and one dish∣full of Wheate branne, seeth all these together, and put them in a bagge, and make it plaister-wise, then lay it to the belly of the patient some-what warme. For the griping or pulling in the belly. ¶ Take halfe a pinte of Malmesie, a big roote of Turmen∣tile, and grinde the roote into powder with a little Treacle, and make it blood-warme, and so giue it to the partie to drinke. Or els take a penny-pot of Malmesie, and a little Treacle, and two penny-worth of Mirrh, and grinde it to powder, and so put the Treacle and Mirrh into the Malmesie, and make it reasonable warme, and giue it to the patient.
Another for the same. ¶ Take a little quantitie of the earth that wormes cast vp out of the ground, (which most commonly you shall find in some soft foote-path-waie, or els in some Garden path,) and when you haue gathered the same, mingle therewith a like quantitie of Honny, and giue the patient halfe a spoonfull in the morning, causing him to fast two howres after: this within foure mor∣nings eating thereof, will certainlie helpe the same, as hath beene by sundry persons proued. To breake wind in the belly, and for wringing in the same. ¶ Take Commin seedes, Fennell seedes, Anni-seedes bru∣sed, and seeth all in Wine, and drinke thereof in the morning, at noone, and at night. Also take Pellitory and boyle it in broth, and giue the sicke thereof to drinke. For Women that haue very great bellyes, beeing not with childe. ¶ Take a handfull of Isope, a handfull of Hearbe-grace, a handfull of Arsmert, and seeth all these hearbes in a quarte of Ale till it come to a pynt, then preserue the same in a glasse, and giue the woman so greeued, a quarter of a pynte at once, first in the morning, and last at night. Another for the same. ¶ Take Sauerie and stampe it, and put thereto good Ale, with a little Iet & white Amber made into powder very small, and giue the woman thereof to drinke with the Sauery: also make a plaister of Sauerie, of Isope, and of Léekes fryed with fresh Butter, and lay it to her bellie, and to her raines, and shee shall be whole. For a woman that her wombe is hard. ¶ Let the partie gréeued, drink the iuyce of Waybread with old Wine, and shee shall bee eased.
Another for the same. ¶ Take Cinckfoyle, that is to say fiue leaued Grasse, and stampe it, and straine it with hote Milke, and giue the woman thereof to drinke, and it will helpe her. For a swolne or aking wombe. ¶ Take the iuyce of Rue, and let the patient drinke thereof with Wine or Ale, and it will help her on warrantise. Proued. Also take Sothernwood, Tansie, Rew, and eate thē with salt, and shee shall be whole. For to vnbinde the belly and the wombe. ¶ Take Honny and séeth it till it waxe black, and put there∣to powder of salt, and mingle them both together, poure it vpon an euen stone, or some other euen thing, & then beeing made an oyntment, put thereof into the parties fundament, and it will cause him to goe to stoole very well. Sundry other medicines for to vnbind the belly. ¶ Seeth the roote of Mulberry in water, and drinke there∣of, and it will losen the wombe and the belly, and driue out the wormes that be rough and short. Also you may vse a Gargarisme of Vinegar & water, where∣in Assa fedita hath beene sodden, it abateth the swelling of the wombe or bellie. Also if you lay the leaues of Hollihocke very hote vppon the wombe, it helpeth the same. Also you may vse the Wine that Rosemary and Comin hath been sodden in, against the ache of the wombe. Also to take Peares and dresse them in your meate, comfor∣teth the wombe and vnbindeth the same. For to lose the belly and wombe. ¶ Take the iuyce of the hearb called Britanica, asmuch ther∣of as you thinke necessarie for the strength of the patient, and it
will loose the wombe without any danger. Also if you take Mal∣lowes and seeth them, and make pottage of them, it looseth the wombe, as hath oft beene proued. Also the heads of Leeks be∣ing sodden in the oyle of sweet Almonds, or of oyle Cockil, cal∣led Zizanium, loseth the wombe and keepeth it moist. Against wormes in the belly. ¶ Take and make pancake or frittures of meale, with the leaues of small Tapsebarbe, and eate thereof, for they are very good against wormes in the belly. Also the iuyce of Scabbious beeing drunke, is very good for the same. Also a plaister made of parcht Beanes, with a little Vinegar, Mints and Worme∣wood, and layd to the nauell, is good against the wormes in the wombe. Likewise the iuyce of Plantaine being drunke, killeth wormes in the wombe. The iuyce of Mints and of Horehound beeing drunke, doth the same. For wormes in the belly. ¶ Take Bettonie and Sauine, and dry thē, and make pou∣der of them, and let the patient drinke thereof in hote water, and assoone as the pouder is in the belly, it will kill the wormes and bring them out on warrantise. Proued. Another for the same. Take Sengréene, Fetherfoy, and Mints, stampe them and drinke the iuyce thereof in warme Wine, and it will kill the wormes, and bring them out. For wormes in the belly. ¶ Against wormes in the belly, take Garlick, Pepper, a lit∣tle Parsly, and the iuyce of Mints, make of them sauce, and wet your bread therein. Also for wormes in the belly, make Pilles of Galbanum, and annoynt them with Honny, and vse thereof. Also for the wormes in the belly, take Armoniack made in pou∣der, with the iuyce of Wormewood and Arsmert, and it will helpe the same.
Against the Fluxe of the belly. ¶ Take small Reysons, and vse to eate of them often with your meate, it taketh away the belching, and helpeth greatly to stop the fluxe in the belly. Also for the fluxe in the bellie, let the patient take the roote of Turmentile and stampe it and straine out the iuyce thereof, and drinke thereof warme, with the Water of Plantaine, and it will helpe him. Also, if the partie gréeued take the rootes or beards of Léekes dryed on a hote Tyle-stone, and receiue the smake thereof be∣neath, it is good for to close the fluxe of the belly. Also the iuyce of the crops of Bryers taken with a glister, is very good for the same purpose. Also the iuyce of Sloes giuen to the patient to drink in wine, helpeth the paine thereof. The powder of fiue leaued Grasse, beeing put into the iuyce of Plantaine, and giuen vnto the patient to drinke thereof fa∣sting, stoppeth the fluxe in the belly. A verie good experiment to stop the fluxe of the belly. ¶ Take the rootes of Fearne, Roses, wild Cresses, Figge∣tree leaues, and flowers of Camomile, of each a like much, and beate them together, and seeth them in raine water til the halfe be wasted, and then receiue the smoake thereof beneath, and wash your feete also in the same water. For wormes in little chyldren. ¶ Take the hearbe called Rodalia, and stampe it, and make a plaister thereof, and lay it to the childs belly, and it will helpe the same. Prooued. For the wormes in childrens bellyes. ¶ Take a penny-worth of Aloes siccatrina, and asmuch of Colla curtadia, and make them both in fine powder, and boyle
these two powders on the fire with halfe a pounde of swéet But∣ter, and so dresse the child three or foure times ouer the stomack and the belly, against a good fire, but remember first to straine this medicine through a fine cloth after it is boyled, and thē vse the  in manner as is afore-said. A drinke for wormes in chyldren. ¶ Take of Wheate flower asmuch as will couer a French crowne heaped three times, and put it into a goblet, then take of faire water almost a pynt, and sette it to the fire and let it seeth, and scumme it verie cleane, then take of Penidis two vnces in powder, and put it into the water, and let it boyle well, then take the same from the fire, and poure thereof in the flower, and stirre it alwaies in the pouring, that it may be as thick as milk, and no thinner, then gyue the partie to drinke thereof warme, a good draught at a time. A playster for wormes in chyldren. ¶ Take of Aloes siccatrina, the quantitie of two Beanes beaten into verie small powder, and put it into a spoone, with as much of the iuyce of Wormewood as will make the same moist like vnto a salue, then take a peece of red Leather, asmuch in breadth as your three fingers, and smere the oyntment thereon, then warme it a little, and lay it vpon the nauell, and binde it fast, letting it lye there vnremoued the space of three dayes, and then take it away, for it will helpe the child on warrantise, as hath oft been proued. For a stitch in a mans side. ¶ Take a reasonable peece of white leauened Breade, and toste the same on both sides, and then spread it on the one ūde with the best Treacle you can get, and couer it with a fine lin∣nen cloth, and so lay it warme to the sore side where the payne is, and it will helpe you God willing. Thys medicine cost fiue pound the learning.
Another for the same. ¶ Take Oates, and fry them with Vinegar, then put them in a cloth, and lay them verie hote to the parties side, and it will helpe the Stitch. Proued. For broken sides. ¶ Take and stampe the rootes of Mallowes, and put there∣to the blood of a Goate, and frie it together, and lay it hote to the side, renue it but once in three dayes. For sore sides within or without. ¶ Take Alisanders, Parsly, Louage, Red-fennell, Smal∣lage, Burnet, and Gromell, and seeth them in white Wine till the one halfe be consumed or wasted, then straine it, and let the patient drinke thereof first and last, in the euening colde, and in the morning hote. An oyntment for sore sides. ¶ Take a handfull of Mallowes, a handfull of Groundsell, a handfull of Sowthistle, as much of Nightshade, a quantity of Varuaine and Dill, these hearbs must be stamped as small as may bee, and tempered well with May butter or Sheepes suet ouer the fire, and so make it an oyntment, and annoynt the bo∣die or side that is stiffe by the fire, the oftner the better: proued. For the Impostume in a mans side. ¶ Take Wormewood, Mint, Calamint, hearbe Bennet, Mallowes, Cheruell, Sage, Rosemary flowers, pounde them together, and put thereto Commin, and crummes of leauened Bread, and boyle them in Wine or pisse, and make a plaister thereof, and lay it to the side. For the Impostume in the sides. ¶ Take Rue and drinke it often-times. Also stampe Figs with oyle Oliue, or with greace, and plaister it to the sore side.
Another for the same. ¶ Take the iuyce of Scabious, and halfe a pounde of the powder of Corrall, and mingle them together, and drink ther∣of, a good draught, and it shall breake the impostume of the side. Another for the same. ¶ Take March Radish, Rue, Wormwood, Centory, Sa∣uine, stampe all these together, and drinke it fasting, and thou shalt breake the impostume inwardly, and auoyd it outwardly. For ache in the side or ribbes. ¶ Take and annoynt the sides and ribbes with the iuyce of Knotgrasse, and with the oyle of Roses, and it will helpe them. For ache vnder the sides. ¶ Drinke Sage with Wine a little warmed, and it will ease the ache vnder the sides, and of the wombe, and it is good for the Dropsie, or the Palsie. Also Cheruile drunk with wine, easeth greatly the paine in the sides. For all diseases in the sides. ¶ Take Woorts, and make balles thereof beeing sodden, and grinde them to powder, and brew them in a newe earthen pot, and after that gather them together with Hony, and smere them well together, and make a plaister for the sore side. For womens sides that be sore. ¶ Take Hilwate, Alisander, Parsly, Louage, red Fennell, Radish, Enula campana, and seeth all these hearbs together in white Wine, from a pottle to a quart, and let the patient drinke thereof morning and euening, till the paine be gone. For the plurisie, and for such as are vsed to be let blood, to saue them from letting of blood, and to dissolue all ill blood. ¶ Take Rye-bread, and cut it in small shiuers, & set it in the wind for to dry, and when ye shall be pained with the Spléene,
put the Bread in the strongest Vinegar that you can get, and let it steepe therein foure howrs, till it is well soked, then sette it on the fire and seeth it together, and make a plaister therof, and lay it on the side whereas the greefe is, as hote as the party may suffer it, and it shall dissolue ill blood, and take away the paine in their ordure: thys hath beene proued for the Plurisie. A notable plaister for the Plurisie. ¶ Take the rootes of wilde Mallowes, the greace of a hog, the greace of a Fexe, and of a Goose or a Ducke, of each a like much, but not aboue an ouce of eyther: of fresh Butter, halfe an vnce, of Terrebanthium halfe an vnce, of the fatte of Veale sixe drammes, of the oyle of Dyll halfe an vnce, of the mary of a Deere, halfe an vnce, the powder of the seedes of Flaxe, Vine∣gar and Bay berries, of each three drammes, and eyght Figs, beate all in a morter, then put all in a pan, putting Flaxe ther∣in to binde it together, and stirre it with a stick vpon the coales, then take the whole, or part thereof, and spread it vppon Lea∣ther, and couer it with silke, and bast it with thread like a quilt, and so apply the plaister to the place so greeued, as close as may be: and by Gods grace you shall find great ease. Proued. For the ache in a mans back. ¶ Take Burre rootes, and make them cleane, and stampe them, and temper them with stale Ale, and boyle it well, and straine it, & drinke thereof in the morning cold, & at night hote. For the paines in the back of either man or woman. ¶ Take Walwoort and seeth it, and presse out the Water, and ray it in a morter, then fry it with Shéepes tallow, & put thereto cleane bran, and plaister it to the backe either of man or woman, and it shall helpe them by Gods grace. For the raines of the backe. ¶ Take two newe layd Eggs, and put away the white, and fill the shell with the iuyce of Clarie, beate it well and straine
it, and stir well the yolkes and the iuice together, ouer a fewe coles for the time it is boyling, and then take one and eat it, and vse this nine dayes fasting and it shall strength your raines, and comfort nature, although the Patient be right feeble, it hath béene prooued. For a sore back. ¶ Take Mallowes and séeth them in faire water, and lay it vpon a red cloth to the sore as hot as ye may suffer it. Another for the same. ¶ Take kernels of Hasell nuts, and the dung of the house Pidgion, and May butter, stampe them together, and it shall make any sore for to breake and to heale, and for the great paine in the back: often prooued. For the raines of the back. ¶ Take two gallons of strong pisse, and still it, and take a handfull of sappy Sage and Hemlocks, Mallows, Rue, Egri∣mony, Scabious, and still all these together to a pint, and when it is stilled put therto foure spoonfuls of oyle Oliue: this is made principally for the raines of the back. For the raines a good drinke. ¶ Take the iuice of Betony, of Wine an vnce, and of the Betony a spoonfull, and the powder of Pepper, mingle these to∣gether, and drink it for three dayes fasting. For the wasting of the kidneyes, and for paines of the back. ¶ Take a handfull of Planten, a handfull of Parsly, a hand∣full of Betony, a handfull of water Betony, a handfull of Sor∣rell, a dosen crops of Rosemary, séeth these in three pints of Ale, till it be wasted, and strain them, and put therto a pint of Sack, and a good péece of Suger, and burne it well together, and so giue it to the party all hot euening and morning: proued.
For the whites or the running in the raines. ¶ Take white washed Turpentine, and make it vp in balls like Pyls, then take Cinamon, & Ginger, and rowle the balls in it, and take them as you would doo Pylls morning and eue∣ning. Prooued. For the whites. ¶ For the whites or weaknes in the back: take an earthen vessell, and put it in a quart pot of faire water wherin you must quench two or thrée gads of sréele being red hot, then stéepe ther∣in an vnce of Lettice séeds foure and twenty houres, then strain the same, and séeth it halfe away, and scum it very cleane, and keepe it in a couered cup, and drinke this morning and euening with powder of Iuory. Another for the same. ¶ Take Archangell and séeth it in drinke, and drink it mor∣ning and euening, it is very good, the red for the woman, and the white for the man. For all manner of aches in the back. ¶ Take Egrimony, Mugwoort, both the leaues and rootes, and stamp them with Swines greace and Vineger, and séethe them, and lay it to the back. Another for the same. ¶ Take a good quantity of Peniriall, and put therto Vine∣ger, and oyle Oliue that is gréene, and lay it to thy backe plai∣ster wise. For him that hath lost his complexion from the back. ¶ Take Linséed and stamp it smal, and temper it with Goats milk, and straine it all warme, and drink it thrée or foure times fasting, and thy complexion will come againe.
For the paines in the back. ¶ Take Vnguentum rosarum, and chafe your backe mor∣ning and euening, and lay to this plaister following: take Fe∣thersoy, Tansie, Housleeke, of each a handfull shreded and stam∣ped fine, then fry them well together with a saucer full of hony, and two vnces of Deues dung, of the newest you can get, when it is thick like a plaister, put it in the end of a small sléeue, and so lay it to your back all warme. For all manner af ache in the back. ¶ Take Smallage, Egrimony, Mouseare, and stamp them all together, but wash them well first, and temper them with Ginger, and fry them well in Bores greace, and make a play∣ster, and as hote as the sicke may suffer, lay it on the ache, and he shall haue ease. Another for the same. ¶ Take Lilly rootes, Camomell, Anniséedes, and stampe them all together, and fry them in Bores greace, and put a lit∣tle Wine therete, and in manner of a plaister lay it on a cloth, and bind it fast to the backe or raines all hot, and after thrée or foure daies remoue it, with renuing of the plaister therto, with more fresh. For the running of the raines. ¶ Take Pellitory of the wall and stampe it and straine it, and drink it with Malmsie or white Wine or Ale, and doo this often till that thou be all whole. Also if the Patient make a Tansie of Clary, and eate thereof, is very good for the same disease: as hath béene proued. For womens termes. ¶ Take Selondine and let a woman put it in her hose vnder the soles of her féete, and it will help her.
Also Mollet leaues, and the red flowers of Hollihocks is very good for this purpose. Also the great leaues of Burres béeing sodden in strong Ale, and the same afterward drunk, is very good. For wasting of nature. ¶ Take a pint of Malmsie, and put therto a peny woorth of Sinamon and another of cleane Mace, and boyle them ouer the fier with Wine, but first make powder of your spices, then take Treakle as much as a Damson, and put therto, and stir altoge∣ther, and let the sick drink therof hot at all times, and it shall a∣uoide all fleame and wind in the interior parts of man to restore his nature: prooued. For all Impostumes in the body. ¶ Take Centory, Rosemary, Wormwood, Horthound, and make it in sirop with white Wine, and let the sick take therof, and it shall cause the Impostume to goe downe, and when it is broken: let him vse to drink of the same sirop warme. For to destroy all Impostumes either in man or woman. ¶ Take the root of Hollihock, and wash it cleane, and séeth it till it be tender, and then put the water into a vessell, and then take Linséed and Fenegreke, of each of them a like much, and sée that thou haue as much of them two as the root that is sodden, then séeth them in the same water till it rope as it were Bird∣lime, then stamp the root and doo therto Barly meale, and min∣gle them well together, and fry them with Bores greace, and lay it to the sore, plaister wise, as hote as you may suffer it, and within nine daies ye shall be whole. Also take Turmentile, and let the Patient drinke often of the iuice therof, and it shall cure him: prooued. An experiment to take away the mother. ¶ Take a great deale of Mugwoort, and as you gather it, sliue the leaues downward, then wash them cleane, and boyle
them in running water till they be soft, and when the party go∣eth to bed let him or her wash themselues therewith, from the nauell downward both flanks and members, and also the mo∣ther so hote as is possible to be suffered, remember the parties that they wash not vpward at any time, and within thrée daies washing, the parties eyther hee or shée shall be whole God wil∣ling. Prooued. Another medicine for the mother. ¶ Take a handfull of Mother-time, a handfull of Mother∣woort, a handfull of Isop, a handfull of Sage, séeth all these in a gallon of faire water vntill it be halfe consumed, then mash it vpon halfe a peck of Malt, so let it stand an houre, then take the woort of it as you doo for drink, and put yéest to it, and being thus made, let the party drink it morning and euening. A drink for the paine of the mother. ¶ Take a dram of Methridatum, and dissolue it in an vnce and a halfe of water of Wormwood, and giue it to the woman for to drinke before that she goeth to meat foure houres, and let her not drink a good while afterward: proued. A most excellent medicine for the mother, the chollick and stone. ¶ Take Fenell séed, Coriander seed, Carroways séed, Pars∣ly séed, Galingall séed, Gromwell seed, an vnce of each of these: also an vnce of leaues and cods of Scene, a quarter of an vnce of Spignall, a quarter of an vnce of Time: take al these and make them into powder, and searce them through a searcer, and drink them in white Wine or good Ale first and last, and in all maner of sauces that you eat with your meat: and this medicine shall cure the mother, the stone, and the chollick: proued. Another for the mother. ¶ Take Mugwoort, and hearb Sunonde, Saudry, and red Mints, and siraine all these iuyees with red Wine, and giue it to the woman that is pained with the mother to drink.
A good medicine for the mother comming of what cause so euer. ¶ Take the rasing of Iuery, and the rasing of an Hartes horne, with the haire of a Hare dryed, and made in powder, and as much of Geats clawes burnt, and poudered if they may be gotten, or in stéed therof, Shéepes clawes: take all these and vse to eat of them in your pottage, or otherwise in your drinks. For the genitories. ¶ For the paine and swelling of the genitories, sée the well the root of Bruse, and make a plaister therof, and put swet to it and bind it fast therto with a band, and it will cease the paine, and swelling of the cods. For the swelling of the cods. ¶ For them that haue swolne cods with fleame, so that they shine, stampe Doues-foote with small greene Lettice, and lay it plaister-wise thereto. Another for the same. ¶ Take Barly meale, and Honey, and fry them together, and make a plaister thereof, and let the party so gréeued lay it warme to the gréefe of the cods. For swelling of a mans cods. ¶ Take Rue, and Wormwood, and srampe them together, and put therto hony, and make therof a cold plaister, and lay all about the cod, and when you will take the plaister away, then wash the cod with Vineger, and he shall be whole. For a man that is brused, or that his cods be sore. ¶ Take the wooll of a blacke Rams cod, and put that wooll into oyle, and powder of Comin, and heate it hote, and thereof make a plaister, and as hote as the party can suffer it, lay it to his cods, and it will doo away the aking, and make it whole within thrée or foure times dressing therwith.
For swelling of the cods. ¶ Take Rose leaues, Rose-water, red Wine, Camomell, or Camomell flowers, and Beane flower, let them boyle toge∣ther, and make a plaister of it, and lay it to the cods as hote as he may suffer it. Another for the same. ¶ Take the iuice of Walwoort, Vineger, and Honey, put therto Barly flower, and séeth them till they be thick, and bind it to the sore all hot, For a mans yard that is scalded. ¶ Take Bruse, Woort, Veruaine, hearb Robert, Pimper∣nell, of each of all these a good quantity, and most of all of Pim∣pernell, stamp them all together as small as you may, then fry them with Butter, and straine it through a cloth, and put it in a bore, and therwith annoynt your yard cold, and of these hearbs make a plaister, then lay it all about the yard cold, dressing it e∣uery day two or three times a day. For a mans yard that is burnt. ¶ Take a linnen cloth and burne it to powder, and take oyle of Eggs, and annoynt the sore, and fill the gréefe with the sayd powder. Also for a mans yard that is sore, and full of holes: take a good company of Dasies, and stampe them, and change them often. Also take Linséed and burne it, and make powder therof, and doo it in a cloth, and lay it to the sore. For a sore in a mans yard. ¶ Take Swinismore, Hocke leaues, Ambrose leaues, Ver∣uaine, Peritory, Cherfaile, Mastick, bruse these hearbs toge∣ther in a morter, and mingle them together with Mastick, and Swines greace, and oyle Oliue, and boyle them, and straine it through a cloth, and with this Vnguent annoynt the sore yard so gréeued.
For the swelling of a mans yard. ¶ Take Léekes and bray them in a morter, and fry them in fresh greace of a Bore, and make a plaister, then lay it all about the yard, and it shall asswage and heale it: proued. Another for the same. ¶ Take Clay and beate it to powder, and sifte it, and take wine Vineger, and seethe them together, and make a plaister therof, and it will take away the swelling therof. For paine in the bladder. ¶ Take fcure drams of Betony, and foure rootes of Smal∣lage sodden in water, but first séethe the rootes till the water be halfe wasted, then seeth the Betony therin, and drink therof. A decoction for to drink with Wine, for them that make bloody water by fracture of any vaine within the body, as in the lyuer, raines, and bladder. ¶ Take of Knotgrasse, Bursa pastoris of each a handfull, the cups of Acornes, of Camphire one lease, of Cinamon a dram waight, of Licoris cleane scraped and sliced, one dram waight, of water a quart, of Suger two vnces, all this must boyle to the consumption of the third part, and then let it run through a faire cloth into a clean vessell, and when it is cold put it into a glasse, and in your drink vse therof, eyther in Ale or Béere, and it shall ease the bladder of payne. For him that pisseth blood. ¶ Take Ambrose, Bursa pastoris, Parsly séede, stamp them, and temper them with Goats milk, and giue the party to drink, and it will quickly help him. For a man that pisseth blood. ¶ Take of the earth that is on the Swallowes nest, and put it into hot water, and giue the sick for to drink, and the bléeding shall staunch within a while.
For a man that may not hold his water. ¶ Take the clawes of a Goate, and burne them in the fier, and make therof powder, and let the sicke vse of this powder in pottage a spoonfull at once, and he shall be whole. For a man that may not pisse. ¶ Take Mallowes, a good quantity of Gromell, and séethe them in Vineger a good while, and then let the sick drink therof warme: and he shall pisse soone after. Another for the same. ¶ Take Lanberd, and make powder therof, and then let the ficke drink therof with white Wine, and he shall quickly pisse, for this medicine hath béen proued. For a hard womb, and for to pisse. ¶ Take Parfly séede, Ache, and Spurge, of euery of them foure vnces: stamp them to powder, and put it either into wine or water, and drink it morning and euening. For to make a man to pisse well. ¶ Take Peritory, stamp it, and fry it, and lay it all hot to a mans yard. Also make a plaister of the flower of Cockle, and water, and so lay it to the sicks yard. Also Linseede béeing sodden well in hony, and applyed to the place, causeth the man to pisse well. Prooued. For a woman that may not hold her water. ¶ For a woman that may not kéepe her water, take Egri∣mony, and Salt, and stampe them together very small, then séeth it in olde Wine, vntill the third part thereof be consumed, and then giue her thereof to drinke. For a man or woman that may not well pisse. ¶ Take Galbanum, and lay it to the end of a mans yard, and for a woman lay it to her nauell, and being thus applyed, it will help eyther man or woman.
Another for the same. ¶ Take a fewe of the crops of red Nettles, Shéeps tallow, Senson of a house top, and fry it well together, and as hot as the man may suffer it, lay it to his yard, and for the woman lay it on her nauell all hot: proued. For one that may not well pisse. ¶ Take a quart of white Wine, and a good péece of stone Pitch, Aniséeds, Parsly séeds, and a péece of Suger, let it séeth from a quart to a pint, and drinke it warme euening and mor∣ning: and it shall help the party so gréeued. For straightnes of pissing. ¶ Take and séethe Camomell in wine or water, and often∣times drink thereof, it easeth and profiteth greatly for the stop∣ping of the milt, and of the lyuer. Proued. Another for the same. ¶ Take the leaues of Stamarch, or Alisander, and put them on a Tyle-stone beeing warme, and lay it all hote to the priuie members, and it will raise the straightnes of the pissing, and abate the paine ther-withall: prooued. For Gomora passio. ¶ Gomora passio is flowing of a mans séed against his will, and commeth of diuers causes, eyther for féeblenes of the rains, or of plenty of blood, or of a palsie in man: this passion is perri∣lous, for it maketh a man or woman vnlusty, and their ioynts as sore as a man that is wery with trauailing, and hath no will vnto a woman. Take the séed of Lettice, and make it in powder, and drink it with water, for it stoppeth the fluxe of kind, that passeth forth in the Patients water against his will. Also the powder of Mintes dryed in an Ouen, best restoreth kind, and restrayneth the errours of the flux.
Also Castorium boyled in the iuice of Agnus castus that is cal∣led Tutson, and being drunk is good for the passion. Also Amber orientall is a precious thing, and Caldo plaiste∣red and layd on the raines of the back. Also temper the pouder of Camphire with Mustilage or Ver∣iuice, or the iuice of Morell, and therewith annoynt clothes, and lay to the yard. For all euils in the bladder. ¶ Take Ach, Parsly, Fenell, and Pimpernell, and by euen portions, bray them together, and temper it with warme wa∣ter, and drinke it, for it will make the euils to passe, and for to cast out the stone that is in the bladder: proued. Another for the same. ¶ Take Porrets that neuer was set, root and all, bray them, and temper them with Wine, or with stale Ale, and séethe it from a pottell to a quart, and take of the powder of Philopendu∣la an vnce, and vse this nine dayes till thou féele thy selfe eased, and this God willing will help you. For a priuy malady that a man taketh of a woman. ¶ Take a dead mans bones, and burne them, and make powder of them, and lay the powder on the haire, and thou shalt he whole by Gods grace. Also if a mans flesh rise too much let him drink often Veruain, and his flesh shall not rise, nor he shall haue any liking vnto a woman. Prooued. A water for a canker in the nature of a woman, or in the yard of a man. ¶ Take an vnce of roch Allom, and halfe an vnce of Verdi∣greace, and put therein Smithes water into a glasse, and let them boyle for the space of two houres, and wash the sore place therewith.
To prouoke flowers in women. ¶ To prouoke the flowers in women, make a Fomentation of the decoction of the hearb called Tutson, and of the hearb cal∣led Gentrum Galli. Also take a gum that is called Serapini, and mingle it with powder of Centory, and lay it to the nauell. Also let the woman bath her selfe in the water that Camomel hath béen sodden in, and it will help her. Also take the iuice of Marigolds drunken or eaten with a rere Egge, and Meale made in Fritters dooth the like. Also to cause the flowers to flowe in women: take the iuice of Nettles, and her vrine, and put it in the matrice. Also make a fume or smoake of Storax calamitae vpon coales, and let the woman receiue the smoke with a Fonnell. Also Wine mingled with the powder of Mirrh and Sothern∣wood causeth the flowers to flowe in women. For the excessiue flowing of womens flowers. ¶ The woman that is troubled héerewith, must be bathed with the water that the hearb called Wooddip is sodden in, and it will help her. Another for the same. ¶ Take and make a Suppository of the powder of Bole ar∣moniacke, and the powder of Sumac, of Mastick, and the iuice of Planten, and put it into the conduit. Another for the same. ¶ Oaken leaues eaten, stoppeth the lungs, and excessiue flux in women, and chéefly the water drunke that the middle rind is sodden in, or the party therwith bathed. Also to stop the flowers that flow aboundantly: take and séeth fiue leaued Grasse with raiue water, and so let the party bathe her selfe therwith.
For a woman that is in trauell with child. ¶ Take Léeke blades and scald them in hot water, and bind them to her nauell as hot as she may suffer it, and it will doo out the dead child, and when the child is forth, say thrée times Qui∣cunque vult ouer the woman, and she shall be safe. For sicknes that causeth a woman that she may not conceiue with child. ¶ Take a Harts horne and burne it to powder, and then take Goats milke, and set it ouer the fire, then cast of the pow∣der afore said, a quantity into the milke, and drinke it off as hot as she may suffer it, and this will ease her of her paine. To make a woman soone to conceiue with child. ¶ Take the wine that Nep hath been sodden in, till the third part therof be consumed, and giue it to the woman to drinke fa∣sting, for three dayes together, and shée shall soone conceiue with child. Prooued. Also Ipocras saith, that a woman being conceiued with a man childe is ruddy, and her right side is corny about, but if she be conceiued with a maid child, shee is blacke, and her left pap is corny about. For a woman in trauell of child. ¶ For the after throwes of a woman if it be the first childe, take the house or bed that the child was in when it came out of the Mothers womb, and wash that bed faire and cleane, and then cast away that water, and then take faire water, and ther∣with séethe the house of the child, and let it seethe a great while, then take it out of the water, and bury it where you will, and the woman a quantity of that water to drink that it was sodden in, and she shall neuer haue the after throwes againe. A powder for women labouring with child. ¶ Take Betony and make it in fine powder, and giue the party therof for to drink, and it will cause her to haue good deli∣uerance quickly.
For the whites in women. ¶ Take Galbanum an vnce, Mastick two peny worth, Ga∣lingall one vnce, Cinamon two vnces, Calamus aromaticus thrée vnces, Cucubes two vnces, long Pepper two peny worth, white Pepper two peny worth, beat all these together in a mor∣ter, with a quarter and a halfe of white Suger, and let it be fine powdered, and let the Patient take it in the morning in warme posset Ale clarisied, and one peny worth of Maces boiled in the Ale, and at noone in her broth, and at night with a little boyled milk, the waight of a dram at a time. To bring down womens flowers. ¶ Take a spoonfull of the iuice of Isop, and a spoonfull of the iuice of Germaunder and Sothernwood, in like manner take the wild Tansy, and wild Time, and boile them in white wine, and giue the Patient for to drink till she be whole. For to make a woman to conceiue a child speedily. ¶ Take Time, and make oyle of the crops and braunches, and it is good to anoynt the woman about the nauell, the womb and the raines, that is to comfort her, and to make her cenceiue with child quickly. Also to restore nature, take Permaceti and Burras, and grind them together, and giue it her to drinke in Wine, or Ale. For to make a womans paps small, that be great. ¶ Take the séeds of Hemlocks, and séeth them in Vineger, and annoynt oftentimes the breast and papps, and mingle the powder of Incence there-withall. A medicine for paps that run, and be sore. ¶ Take Sorrell debays, lap it in Woort leaues, and put it in the embers halfe an houre, then stampe it as small as you
may, and doo thereto Honey, and Vineger, and mingle them to∣gether, and doo it in a boxe, first lay a plaister of Garlicke vpon the sore, so boyle it in Vineger thrée or foure times, and it shall cease the running thereof. For a woman that is troubled after her trauell with loose∣nes of her priuy parts. ¶ Take a quantity of Venice Turpentine, and roll it in Suger, and giue it to her, and cause her to swollow it downe, not chewing it at all. After that, cause an Alebery to be made for her, and put into it the powder of Camphire, and giue it to her to eate, and the Turpentine shall clense, and the Camphire shall close: your Camphire must be dryed in the shadow, so that the wind and Sunne doo not come to it: proued. For to deliuer a dead child forth of the Mother. ¶ To deliuer a dead child, séeth this root of Aristologia longa in Wine and Oyle, and make therwith a Fomentation. Also to deliuer a dead child out of the Mothers womb, and the web that is in the woman, make an Inection or Pessaire of the iuice of this hearb Dittany, and mingle the powder of the root therwith. Also make a plaister of Hollihocks, with a little Salt and Goose greace, and lay it to the matrice. For a mans fundament that goeth out. ¶ Take the red Nettle crops, and bray them small in a mor∣ter, and doo them in an earthen pot, and doo therto a good portion of white Wine, and séeth them well together to the halfe, and giue therof to the sick to drink first and last warme, and lay the substance of the hearb to the fundament, as hot as he may suffer it, till he be whole. Another for the same. ¶ Take March and drink the iuice, and lay a plaister ther∣to for ihat disease. Also against the paine of the fundament, or of the matrice, and of the bowels, seeth the leaues of Hollihock in
water, and make a stew of that water, and wash shée oftentimes. Also make a plaister of Scabious, and lay theron, but the Pati∣ent must first receiue the smoake therof beneath. For the fundament another. ¶ For the small cliftes that bléedeth in the fundament, lay thereto the powder of Anthera, and annoynt them with water that Dragagant hath béen chafed in. Another for the same. ¶ Take blacke Beanes, and grind them very small, and searce them well, and powder it on the fundament, and then put it in againe, then séeth the said meale in a panne, and mingle it with white Wine, and let it seethe till it be thicke, and then spread it on a cloth plaister-wise, and lay it as hot on the funda∣ment as may be suffered, and remoue it twice or thrice a day: and renue it alwayes with fresh meale, and you shall be whole God willing. For the Pils and the Emerods, and for the euils of the fundament. ¶ Take Ekespire, Tapsebarbe, and bath the Patient in the same to the nauell, or bind the hearb hote in a cloth, and let the Patient sit thereon. Also take dry Bulbecks, and put into the fundament, and it shall be all whole. Also heale the fundament close with a leafe of S. Mary Cap∣per, and when one is dry then take another, and it shall helpe you quickly by Gods grace. For to help the piles. ¶ Take English hony, and the iuice of Wormwood, or the small leaues, or the rootes of Dasies pund very small, and put them in a linnen cloth, and put to the sore place, and so vse it thus till thou be whole.
For the Pyles and Emerodes. ¶ Take Muskle shelles and burne them in the fire, and then take the white of them and make it in fine powder, and put in a little English Homy, and temper them together, then lay it vp∣on a little linnen cloth, and so lay it vpon the sore Piles. To stanch the bleeding of the Pyles. ¶ Drinke the iuyce of Milfoyle, and it will helpe you. Pro∣ned. Or the powder of burn. Garlicke, and the Piles shall die. Also take blacke Wooll & black Sops, and binde it to the piles, and it will helpe you. To destroy the Pyles. ¶ Take oyle of Roses, Frankensence & Honny, and make an oyntment of them, and put it in with thy finger into the fun∣dament, and put Mirrh vnto the same, and vse often to annoynt the fundament therewith, and let the fume thereof goe vp into the fundament. For pyles that doe greeue a man or woman. ¶ Take the reddest and the newest Tarre that you can get, and make it in a plaister vpō a new Lockeram cloth, and make bolsters of some other thing, and so put two tapes to euerie cor∣ner to tye about the patient, and once a day dresse the same with cleane clothes. Another for the Piles. ¶ Take a great Onyon, and cut out the core thereof, and fill it full of Sugar, and stoppe the hole againe, and wrappe it in a browne paper, and binde it fast with a pack-thred, and roste it as you would rost a Warden: and when it is rosted, open it, and lay it to the sore place as hote as the partie may suffer it. Another for the pyles. ¶ Take the rootes of Verueine, and the rootes of the Bur, and stampe them & séeth them, and so lay thē hote to the place,
but first take a little fire, and on the same put powder of Fran∣kensence, and let the heate goe vp into the sore. For the Piles. ¶ Take Mollet leaues, and séeth them in faire water till they be soft, then take May butter, and make an oyntment of the same, then vse thereof for the Piles, for it is a Medicine ve∣rie well and often prooued. For the Emerods. Take Inde Sope, and make a plaister thereof, and lay it to the pyles or emerods, or to the Fistula, till such time as they doo fall awaie of themselues. For the Emerods. ¶ Take newe Milke, and a little fine flower, and séeth them together, and make a plaister of the same, and burne an Oyster shell, and make it into powder, then strewe it thicke vpon the plaister, and as hote as yee may lay it to the place. Also let the partie that hath them, blowe his nose vpon a cloth, and strewe Soote vpon the same, and as hote as he may suffer it, lay it vn∣to the place, and it will helpe the same. For the emerods. ¶ The Emerods be fiue vaines that come to the fundament, that voideth mellanchollie blood, & may not be stopped too soone, it is good for this disease to bléede in the liuer vaine on the arme, and vnder the ancle, and let him drinke morning & euening the iuyce of Milfoyle, mingled with warme Wine, and plaister the hearbe to the fundament: if the matter be plentious, then hee must be purged before that yee close vp all, for feare of a Drop∣sie or a breaking out. Also take the roote of Flonny, and make powder of it, and take the yolke of an Egge, and wheat meale, and mingle the powder and them together, then fry them well with greace or oyle, and vse the same nine or tenne times, and the partie shall be whole.
For the Emerodes. ¶ Take the crops of Elders and stampe them, and lay them to the place. Also Leekes & salt is good, and if they rise againe, lay them to againe. Also take the roote of wilde Pellitory, and grinde it, and put thereto the powder of Arsenick, and lay it to the place. proued. Also Vinegar, Allom, and Deeres suet, of each a like much being boiled together, is verie good. For the paine of the emerods. ¶ Take Housléeke and Sheepes dunge, and stampe them both together in a morter verie small, then take of sheepes suet and chop it very small, and put it in a panne, and let it séeth vp∣on the fire, then put in the Housleeke, and the shéeps dunge, and boyle all together, and when it is well boyled, take it off, and straine it through a linnen cloth into a deepe dishe, and then an∣noynt the patient there-with, as hote as hee may well endure, this hath been proued. For the Emerodes. ¶ Take a stoole with a séege, & let it be closed to the ground, and then take a panne with Charcole, and set it vnder the stoole, and as hote as may be suffered sit thereon, then take Franken∣sence beaten into powder, and cast a good quantitie thereof into the fire, and sit on the stoole as close as you can, and when the smoke is gone, cast in more powder in the fire, and sitte thereon in this order as long as ye may. Another for the same. ¶ Take an Onyon, and cutte away the top, of a reasonable breadth, then pull out the hart thereof, and take powder of pep∣per and put therein a good quantitie, and set on the top againe, and take a great linnen cloth, and wet it in water, and wringe it well with your hand, and wrap the Onyon therein, and lay it in the fire till it be soft, and then take it out, and put it in another cloth, and lay it as hote as may bee suffered to your fundament,
and when it is colde lay another on the place, and so haue al∣waies readie fiue or sixe to serue your turne, or as manie as you thinke needfull. Another for the same. ¶ Take an Egge and rost it harde, and lay it to the funda∣ment, and when it is colde, take another, as you did by the O∣nyons: and if you put Verdegreace in your Onyons, some think it better then Pepper, likewise, you may cut the Egges in the midst, and take out the yolkes, and put in Verdegreace, and so lay them to the sore. Another for the same. ¶ Take Neates-foote Oyle, and a little Harts-suet, and annoynt the sore well therewith, and then take a Tyle-stone, and heate it in the fire as hote as ye may well sitte thereon, and if you haue no Tile-stone, then take a stoole and heate it verie hote, and so sitte thereon: and if the place bleede, take a quan∣titie of Bole armoniack and asmuch of the Harts-suct, and so vse them both together. Another for the same. ¶ Take the gumme that commeth of the Iuie tree, and an∣noynt the sore well therewith, and take a Tile-stone or a stoole as I said before, & sit vpon the same verie hote: but if you bleed, take a good quantitie of Mouseare, and a little Betony, & stamp them together, and drinke the iuyce thereof with a little stale Ale, first, three or foure mornings together, & last at night when you goe to bed. Another for the emerods, proued. ¶ First take a good quantitie of Shoomakers péeces, and burne them on a Tyle-stone verie small, so that powder may be made thereof, then take a little quantitie of Allom, and burne it likewise, and make powder thereof, then mixe them together, and put thereunto the liquor of a Swines-gall, and if it happen
that the Swines-gall be dryed vppe by reason of long keeping, then lay it in faire water all night, and it will returne againe into a ruddy collour: if you can get no Swines-gall, then take a little of the Oyle that Corriours vse, to dresse their Leather, and mixe it with your powder, so that it may be somwhat thick like a plaister, and if you thinke it smart too much, take more li∣quor and lesse Allom, and if you thinke it bite not sore enough, then put more Allom thereto: and when this medicine is thus made, annoynt the sore therewith: and if there bee any pappes comming out of the Tuell when the sore is annoynted, take a peece of the skinne of the gall, and lay the inner side of the skin vpon the paps, and it shall ease them greatlie: but if the sore be within the Tuell, take and annoynt it within with your finger as farre as you can, and it will helpe the same. For to destroy the emerods. ¶ Take olde shooes and burne them to powder, then take a saucerfull of Honnie, and then take asmuch oyle Oliue that is olde, and temper them till they be thicke, and lay this medicine, to the sore place, either for the Piles or Emerods. For the emerodes. ¶ Take redde Worts, and séeth them in a pot, then take the pot, and set the same vnder a close Chayre, and sitte ouer it, and wrap your clothes so close that no ayre come forth, and sit so still till it waxe colde, then take of the same liquor and there-with annoynt the partie. Also take a plate of Lead, and rub thereon a quantitie of Bores-greace for a man, and Swines-greace for a woman, and wash it out with white Wine, and annoynt the Emerods, and it will heale the same. For all euill in the flankes. ¶ Take nine Bay leaues and dry them, and make them in∣to powder, and mingle them with what liquor you will, and drinke thereof euening and morning.
Another remedy for to helpe the flanks. ¶ Take Capons greace, and make an oyntment thereof, and annoynt the sore flanks therewith. Also the roote of the Fower-deluce beeing dryed, red Reses dryed, Gallingall and Mustick of each a like quantitie, these be∣ing beaten to powder and made into oyntment with a little oyle of Roses or oyle of Linseeds, easeth the paine. Also the decoction of Plantaine, Buria pastoris, Horsetaile, and Knotgrasse, all these are exceeding good to helpe the chafing of the skinne and flankes. For chasing of the flanks. ¶ Take Beane flower, Barlie flower, and the flower of Fit∣ches, tempered with a little oyle of Roses, it maketh a precious oyntment for the same. Also if the chasing be verie great, it is good to make a bath of Hollihocks, Dill, Violets, and Linseedes, with a little Bran, and then to wash the place often therewith. For sore knees that doe swell and ake. ¶ Take Rue and Louage, and stampe them together, and put thereto Honnie, and make thereof a plaister, and lay it to the sore knees, and it shall put away the swelling and the ache within three or foure times vsing thereof. For the swelling of the knees. ¶ Take the water of the partie greeued, after that it hath stoode three or foure dayes made, then seeth it and scum it verie cleane, and wash the place as hote as may be suffered therwith. Also Milfoyle fried either with Deers suet or Sheepes suet, and laid hote to, is very good for the same. For the ache or swelling in the knees. ¶ Take two handfuls of Lauender leaues, or the flowers, or both together, stampe them in a morter very small, and stéepe
the Lauender two houres in a pint of Malinesie, then straine it through a cloth, and boyle it well, and then with a Spunge all to bathe the swelling of the knees, or the ache thereof, and with∣in sixe or eight dayes vsing, it will helpe you God willing. For the ache or swelling in the knees. ¶ Take Sorrell, Vinegar, Smallage, and Sheepes suet, and melt the suet, and put in these hearbes, and make a plaister thereof, and lay it to the sore knee. Also against the ache and swelling thereof, bruse the flowers of Plantaine with salt, and lay it thereto. Also the leaues of Plantaine stamped and laid thereto, helpeth. Also the iuyce of an Onyon beeing mingled with the greace of a Henne, and made in manner of an oyntment, and so vsed, helpeth the same. Also bathe your knees in the water that Elder leaues haue beene sodden in, and it will helpe you. For him or her that is diseased in their knees, or in their ioynts, that they may not goe. ¶ Take a blacke Sheepes head, and smite it all to peeces, wooll and all, and put it into a potte with water, and seeth it till it be as soft as pappe, and then plucke out all the bones, and set it on the fire againe, and put vnto the same a good quantitie of Oatenreale, and let them seeth till they be thicke, and then lay it vpon a peece of Leather, and while it is very hote, lay it to the parties ioynts, and they shall find great ease of the swelling of their ioynts. Proued. For a sore knee. ¶ Take and seeth Beanes and Honny, and rawe Ege, and make a plaister, and lay it vppon the sore knee as hote as you may suffer the same. For the swelling in a mans knee. ¶ Take a blew wollen blanket of cloth, as much as wil lap about the knee, then take the white of two or three Hennes.
Egges, and beate them well in a dish, and spread it vppon the cloth, this doone, put the yolkes of the Egges into a dish & beate them, and put thereto asmuch or more of black Sope, and beate them well together, and when they be well beaten make ther∣of a faire salue, and spread it thicke vpon the cloth, & the white of the Egges thereon reasonable thicke: then lay this vpon the sore knee, and role it fast thereon for thrée dayes, and it will put awaie the swelling and the ach thereof. Proued. For aches and swelling in the knees. ¶ Take a quart of Malmesie and a handfull of Time, boyle them verie well together, and when it is halfe boyled, put ther∣in a good peece of sweet Butter, and let them boyle together frō a quart till it come to a pint, and when you doe goe to bed, bathe your knees well therewith, and also wet a cloth thrée or foure times double therein, and lay it also vpon them as hote as may be suffered, letting it lye on all night, and vse this sixe or seauen times, and it will helpe you by the grace of God. For a great ache in the knees. ¶ Take Ground-Iuie, which hath leaues like Catmint, and hath a red flower, and the leaues of Peneriall, and the leaues of Elder, and let them be sodden in Swines-greace, and the mar∣row of a Mare, and annoynt the partie so greeued there-with. For ache of the legges. ¶ Take the leaues of the Elder tree, and Penneriall, and Cinckfoyle, and make therof a plaister with Barrowes greace, and lay it to the ache of the legges, and it shall helpe them. For ache of the legges. ¶ Take and drinke the iuyce of fiue-leaued Grasse. Also you may vse Sow-thistle, Chickweed, Elder-leaues, Ground∣sell, and Cleauers, of each of these a handfull, dry all these be∣tween two Tiles, and lay them to the place that is pained, but let the hearbs be first washed ere they be dryed, and it helpeth.
For ache or swelling of the legges. ¶ Take Otemeale and Milke, and put thereto the iuyce of Housleeke, and Sheepes-tallowe, and let them boile altogether till it be thick, and make a plaister thereof, and lay it about the sore, and that shall ease the aking, and take away the swelling of the legges, proued. For all manner of ache in the legges. ¶ Take Sage, Rew, Worm-wood, Sorrell leaues, Hore∣hound, Redde-netles, and stampe them all together, and min∣gle them with May-butter, and let it stand so tenne dayes, and fry them often, and straine them cleane, and melt there-with Incense, and this serueth for all manner of aches in the legges, if you vse thereof when you stand in neede. For blacke horrible swolne legges. ¶ Take Selondine, Hore-hound, Hearbe-bennet, and seeth these together in water till the halfe be wasted, and there-with washe the fore legges euery day three or foure times, and make as much at a time as will serue sixe or seauen times. For a hote sore legge. ¶ Take petty Morrell, Plantaine, Smalladge, Hearbe bennet, Sengreene, Violet leaues, and the leaues of Tutseine, Marigolds, and grinde all these together, and wring out the iuyce, and put it in a little Wheat-flower and Honny, and the white of an Egge, and meddle all these together, and lay it vp∣the sore all cold. For swelling in the legges. ¶ Take three spoonefuls of Rose-water, and thrée spoone∣fuls of Fennell water, and three spoonefulls of good Wine vi∣negar, and put them together colde, and skimme off the fome of it, and then take a linnen cloth and dip it in, and lay it to the sore place.
For a leg be it neuer so sore. ¶ Take the most part of a Cow-turd, and lay it vpon a cloth plaister-wise, and lay it to the sore place, and if there be a hole in the legge, make a tent of the same, and put it into the hole, and lay the plaister thereto, and let it lye till that it doo come off it selfe, and you shall finde great ease. For a sore legge. ¶ Take the flowers of Cammomell, a handfull of Sothern∣wood, Mallowes, Groundsel, Sage, a handfull of each of these, beate them small in a morter, and boyle them in milke, and put in the séething thereof, the seede of Fenicréeke in powder halfe an ounce, Anniséedes, Fennell séede in powder, of each an ounce, and a little May butter, boyle all these together, and when it is but warme, put into it foure or fiue yolks of Eggs, and mingle them all together, and lay it to the sore legge, and in the boyling, put thereto a pinte of good red Wine, and it will be the better. Another for a sore legge, proued. ¶ Take Celondine, Sage, and Woodbind a handfull, séethe them in a gallon of running water, to a pottell, and then straine it, and séethe it againe, and put thereto a pint of boney, a hand∣full of the powder of Allom, a penny-worth of Graines beaten in fine powder, and skimme it till it be very cleare, and then kéepe it in a glasse, till such time as you shall haue néede to vse it, then take a cloth and wet it therein, and wash the sore there∣with oftentimes. For paine in the feete. ¶ Against the paine of the féete, if any hath béene brused or erushed, take and eate the roote of the middle Mugwoort with honey, and it will ease the paine thereof. Also let the party annoynt his féete with the iuyce of Clary very often, and it will helpe him.
For the swelling of the feete. ¶ Against swelling, and aches of the féete, bruse the flow∣ers of Plantaine with Salt, and lay thereto. Also stamp the leaues of Plantaine, and lay thereon. Also take the iuyce of an Onyon, beeing mingled with the greace of a Hen in manner of an oyntment, and annoynt your feete often therewith. Also bathe your féete in the water that Elder leaues was sodden in. For cornes in the toes. ¶ Take of vnslaked Lime a little, and quench it with strong Vineger, and when you will occupie it, pare the corne, and mingle it with Rose water, and lay it too. Also take the gall of a Swine being dried, but first wash it with hot water, and strew the powder thereon. Also take and cutte away the corne, and drop into it a drop or two of a black Snayle, and put thereto the powder of Sand∣fer, and it taketh away the corne. Also take Marigolds stamped, and lay vpon the sore euening and morning, and it profiteth, or else pare your corne, and lay thereto Turpentine, and red Waxe boyled together, and make a plaister therof, and it helpeth the corne of the toe. Rules for blood letting. GAlien, Ipocias, and Auicenna, and other May∣sters of Phisicke, accord and say, that letting blood of the veine, and that is called Fleobato∣matum, or it is ventosing, caruing, or cutting, and letting blood of any of these wise, is good for mans health of body, for blood immingled with other humors that is too much, or else corrupted by the cause of much sicknes: it is therefore good to know which veines in a man should be let blood, and for what sicknes.
The veine in the forehead is good for the frensie, and aking of the head, and for the Meigrim, and for the Morphew, and seab in the face, for the Postumes in the eyes both hot and cold. The veine in the hart is good for a mans minde, and for the Rume that is within the forehead, and for the watring eyes. The veines in the temple is good for the Meigrim, and for the head ache of the eyes, and that hath long lasted, for the sick∣nes of the eyes, for ache in the eyes, and for the great heate in the temples. The veines behind the eares is good for the blaines and pim∣pels of the head, for the Meigrim and ache of the head, it hel∣peth mans minde, it is good for Tooth-ache, and for the gums, and for all vices in the mouth, and it purgeth the rume of the head. The veines in the corner of the eyes next the nose, is good for the Meigrim, and for all the sicknes of the eyes, and for the sight Cephica tum prius apta. The veine in the toppe of the nose, it purgeth the braine, it is good for ache, and flux of the eyes, and for the ache of the nose. The veine in the chéekes is good for the Meigrim, and for spots or scabs in the head. The veine in the mold is best for to bléed, and for to wash thy head with the same blood. The veines of the ouer-lippe, and the nether, be good for hot blaines in the mouth, and for apostums, and for hot euils in the mouth or gums. The veine vnder the tongue is good for postumes, and rumes of the head, and gums, and all maner of vice of the eyes, mouth, tongue, tooth-aking, & blaines of the nese, mouth, gums, and for the apostumes and swellings vnder the throat. The veines vnder the chinne is good for the Kings euill, and for Sauce-fleane, for spots and blains in the face, and other ache of the eyes, the gums, and for ache in the nose. The veins of the neck before, is good for the Squinancie, and for all manner of apostumes and swellings that come from the head to the eares, or to the gums, that causeth the toothach, whē
the breath beginneth to be short. The veine of the liuer that is called Basilica, it is good for the Iaundise, and for chafing of the lyuer, and for all manner of dropsie, and it is good for all euils in the breast, and aking of the backe, shoulders, sides, and slomack, and for the Postume that is called Pleusis. The head veine that is called Cephanica, it is good for the Meigrim, and for head ache, and for madnes of the minde, for ache, and all other vices in the eyes, téeth, tongue, the Squi∣nancie, and other euils that come to the throat. The hart veine that is called Cardieca vt medium. it is gentle Purgations, for it draweth blood and humors of all the body, but namely it is good for sicknes, and Purgations of the hart, breast, stomack, lyuer, and lungs. The veine aboue the thumb is good against all Feauers, and most Feauer quartaine, and for all euils of the gall, and for straightnes of the breast. The veine betwéene the thumb and the fore-finger, let blood for the hot head ache, for freusie, and madnes of wit, and for sicknes of the head, Cephanica, let the blood of the veine in the forehead if it be néede. The same veine of the left hand is good for Litargy, and after∣ward bléede in the forehead. The veine which is betwéene the little finger and the next thereto, is called Salua cella, you must let blood in the right hand for Postumes and sicknes in the stomacke, and for all euill hu∣mors about the lyuer. The same veine on the left hand is to let blood for Impostums and gathering of euill humors about the milt and spléene: it is good for the black Iaunders. The ouer veine in the yard is good for the Crampe, and for Sciarica passio, for swelling of the womb, for the dropsie, and for the stone. The nether veine of the yard is good for the sides, for ye rains, bladder, for swelling of the stones, and for the emerods. The veine beneath the knée helpeth the knées: and it is good
for aking of the thighes and the ioynts, that is called Sciatica passio. The veines beneath the knees both within and without, is good for the liuer, sides, and thighes, and for the matter that is aboue, and for to drawe downeward, The veine in the hammes is best for with-holding of Wo∣mens purgations, for it is the next matter as saith Aucen, and also it clenseth mans bodie. The veine that is vnder the knockle which is called Sophe∣na, it is good for postumes, swellings and akings, and other e∣uils that come to mans body from the head to the foote, it asswa∣geth them, it is good for the stone and letting of vrine, it helpeth the matrice and womens purgations, it is good for the scab that is called Malum mortum de basilica. The veine that is vnder the knockell without, that is called Sianca, it is good for aking that is in the thighes, & goeth downe to the legs and to the feete, and for the Podagar, and for the scab, it helpeth most the aking of the thighes and ioynts, that is called Scrattica passio. The veine that commeth to the great toe en eyther foote, it is good for the goute in the eyes, for blaines and spottes in the face, and for postumes and euils of the stones, for the bloode, for cankers, festers, and sores in the thighes and legges, and for with-holding of womens purgations. As for the time of letting blood, to wit, that neither in hote weather, nor yet in great colde, nor in rainie weather, nor in mistie weather, nor in the weather of great tempest, nor in the old Moone, nor in the new: that is to say, foure dayes be fore the change, neither foure dayes after, but the three first quarters be good, see that the Moone bee in a good signe, and from S. Bar∣tholme we tide to Saint Peters tide: till February let the blood on the left arme, and in Ianuarie on the right, that is to say, Ver or Sommer, from the xxv. day of Iuly to the fift of Sep∣tember let no blood, for then the caniculer dayes bee, after the teaching of Galien and Auicenna.
Rules concerning blood-letting to bee obserued. Also be yée alwaies well aduised, and warie, that yee let no bloode, nor open no vaine, except the Moone be eyther in Aries, Cancer, the first halfe of Libra, the last halfe of Scorpio, or in Sagitarius, Aquarius, or Pisces, remembring also that you ought not to doo it in the day of the changing, nor in the day next before, nor next after the same, or when the signe is in the place where the incision should be made: neither in the heate of Som∣mer, as from middle Iuly vnto the middle of September, nor in the cold time of Winter, when there is much frost and snowe, except vrgent necessitie sorceth you there-vnto. Also if you choose out these signes following, appointed vnto each complexion, doubtlesse you shall doo the better, so that time and occasion will suffer it, as thus. Open a veine in the flegmatique person, when the Moone is in Aries, sauing in the head. In a melanchollicke man, the Moone being in the first halfe or fiftéene degrées of Libra, except in the hips, or when ye Moone is in Aquary, sauing in the leggs. In a cholericke body, it is best to let bloode what time the Moone is in Cancer, sauing in the breast, the last halfe of Scor∣pio. sauing in the priuie members, or in Pisces, sauing in ye féete. The sanguine man may bleed in any of the fore-said signes, so that he doo it not what time the signe is in the member, or the season inconuenient therefore. Beware also yee Chirurgians, that you make no notable incision, as to cut Ruptures, take out the Stone in the bladder, deuoyde from the body any naturall Excrescentes, Wennes, or Nodes, to dipart, deplorate or rot∣ten members, to roote out the Canker in the breast, let out the water collected in the belly through the disease Ascites: to bee short, to make an incision or cautherization in any member, or to remooue the Catricle from the eye, or to attempt any other
like thing by manuall working vpon the body of man, when the signe gouerning the same is in the member in the which such attempts are to be made for the remedie of any of these diseases aboue-said: or when the Lorde of the ascendent or first house, is the same signe that gouerneth part of the body at that tune, or when there is any oppositions, coniunctions, or quartile aspects of Saturne and Mars, or when any Plannet is cuill aspected vn∣to another, or when the Moene is in the signe of Leo, or in the day of the change, or full, except great necessitie require it. Moreouer, I would wish no incission to bee made about the full of the Moone, where-after any great fluxe of blood may bee feared to ensue, though the signe be neuer so meete, but rather let it be done in the wane of the Moone. As touching the stone ruptures, Dropsies, to bee helpen by way of incission, I haue rather mentioned them in this place, because that the rude and ignorant Chirurgian may be brought to the true practise and knewledge heereof. I doubt not but to make many partakers of the benefit thereof, whose good intent, I would wishe either to follow in those attempts, and so to vse it in vtter refuge, when other meanes will take no place in that case, it béeing a most assured remedie for the true and due obser∣uations of letting blood, right well allowed, and practised at all times. Rules for purging. ALso it is good to take purgations when the Moene is in Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces to giue pilles especially whē the Moone is in Pisces. Purge by drinkes, electuaries, boles, when the Moone is in Cancer or Scorpio, remem∣ber that you purge not in the change, nor in any vnfortunate a∣spect of the Plannets vnto any other, neither in the extreame heate or cold of the yeere. Now, if any man would know what commoditie purging or bleeding bringeth, beeing rightly vsed, and doone in such sort as it ought to be doone, or what dyet and exercise shoulde bee vsed
after bleeding, and order obscrued in purging with the incon∣uenience and harme, which may and doth dailie procéede of the negligence and vnskilfulnes in the contempt of the same. For all diseases through the body, and for all kind of Agues. TAke Purslaine, Gentill, Bursa pastoris, and stamp them all together, and doo thereto Vinegar, and binde it to the pulses, & it will greatly helpe you. Also take the pow∣der of Cloues and Pepper, of each a like quantitie, and eate fasting at one time as much as will lie vpon a sixe-pence, and drinke not in on howre after. Also let the partie so greeued with the Ague, take halfe a pint of his owne water, and a penny-worth of Pepper brused, and put therein: and let the parfie so greeued, drinke thereof all, an howre before that the fitte dooth come vpon him, and let him lie downe and sweat as much as hée may. Another for the Ague. ¶ Take a pottle of thinne Ale, and put thereto a handfull of Parsley, as much redde Fennell, as much Centorie, as much Pimpernell, and let the Ale be halfe consumed awaie, and then take and drinke thereof. Another for the Ague. ¶ Take thrée Burre-rootes, and wash them, and straine them, séethe them with halfe a pinte of Ale, and so drinke ther∣of luke-warme before the fitte dooth come. Another for the same. ¶ Take Endiue, Sowthistle, Dandelion, Lettice, Sorrel, of each a like much, and still them altogether, and giue it to the partie so gréeued, it is very good against the Ague.
Another experiment for the Ague. ¶ Take foure handfuls of Groundswellie, and stampe it small in a Morter, and put thereto thrée spoonesuls of Vinegar, and thrée spoonefuls of Bay-salt, grinde them all together, then put them in a pewter dish, and set them on a Chafindish of coles and stirre them together till the liquor is almost dry: then lay it to the wrists as hote as the partie can suffer it, euery tune an howre before the fitte dooth come. For the ague another medicine. ¶ Take a handfull of redde Sage, and a handfull of Redde Nettles, and a handfull of Hearbe-grace, and two spoonefuls of Bay-salt, and a spoonefull of strong Vinegar, and a peece of lea∣uened bread, and let all these be well beate together: and bind it to the pulces of your wrists before that the fit doth come, and it shall helpe you by the power of God: proued. For the hote ague a remedie. ¶ Take the iuyce of Sengréene and the whites of 4. Egs; and faire flower of Wheat, and meddle it well together, and make thereof a plaister, and lay it to the patients sides, thē take the water of Betony, the water of Pimpernell, Scabious wa∣ter, water of Turmentill, the water of Radish, of each of these a like much, and meddle all these together, and giue the patient to drinke all hote, before that his fitte doth come. Another for the same, proued. ¶ Take a pynt of the iuyce of Sorrell, and put it into a pot of Milke, when it beginneth to séeth vpon the sire, then take it off the fire, and let it stand, and it will haue a curde vpon the same, like vnto a posset-curde: then take the curde off, and let the pa∣tient drinke thereof a good draught at a time, as hote as he can possible endure to drinke it, and by Gods grace it will help him within two or thrée times seuerally drinking. Thys Medicine hath beene proued.
Another for the same. ¶ Take a handfull of Smallage, a handfull of Bursa pasto∣ris, and so much white Frankensence, as will couer two shil∣lings at thrice, and asmuch Bay salt, and bray them in a Mor∣ter, and so lay them vpon a thinne cloth to the wrist, and about the arme at night when you goe to bed, an howre or two before that your fitte dooth come vpon you. For the burning ague. ¶ Take a handfull of Smalladge, a handfull of Fetherfew, a handfull of Redde sage, stampe them all together, and take thrée or foure spoonefuls of the parties water, and asmuch Vine∣ger, and boile them altogether on the fire a little while, & take a quantitie of the same Hearbes, and wringing the liquor out of them, lay thē vpon a cloth, and binde it hote vppon your tem∣ples, and not vpon your fore-head, then take the rest, and binde it to the parties wristes as hote as he may suffer it, before that the fitte commeth, and within three or foure times dressing, hée shall finde great ease, and be helped of his Ague. Another for the same. ¶ Take a pottle of Water, with halfe a pinte of Vinegar, take also Endiue, Suckorie, Violet-leaues, fine leaued grasse, and Straw-berrie leaues, of each of them a good quantitie, and seeth them to a quart, and put thereto halfe a pounde of Sugar, and drinke thereof morning and euening. For the quartaine ague. ¶ Take Ribwoort, Beet rootes, and the leaues, to the quan∣titie of three or foure handfuls, washe the hearbes cleane, then stampe them in a woodden dish, with a woodden pestle, & straine the iuyce from the hearbes, and drinke it Milke warme, and this taketh away the humors of the stomacke, and frō the hart, within fiue or sixe times vsing: it cureth and helpeth the sicke partie so gréeued with the ague: prooued.
For the Ague comming with colde. ¶ Take fiue crops of Rosemary, and fiue cropps of Sage, and fiue crops of Marigolds, nine Bay leaues, and a quart of strong Ale, séethe all these together well, and drinke it with Pepper being warme, and vse it. For feauer Agues in children. ¶ Take the powder of Christall, and lay it in soke in Wine, and giue it to the Child to drink, and the sucking Child shall be whole. Also take Morsus diabolie the roote and the hearbe, and hang it about the necke of the Child. For all manner of aches a Seare-cloth. ¶ Take Waxe, Turpentine, Rozin, hard Pitch, Bores greace, powder of Commin, powder of Bayes, Frankensence, oyle de vte de popilion, and take all these things saue the peuder, and set it ouer the fire, and stir it fast till it be molten, and set it downe and skim it not nor straine it not at all, stir it fast till it be nye cold, and then strew in thy powder with thy hand, as thou wouldest strew flower into a Childs papp, and when it is all in and welnie cold, spread it with a slice vpon a péece of leather, and when it is spread vpon the leather, take a new linnen cloth, and lay it vpon, and couch it fast, and at your néed vse it. For a cold and ache of the lims. ¶ Take a handfull of Suger, a handfull of Endiue, a hand∣full of the red flowers of Archangell, and a quantity of Dande∣lion, and seethe the same in Mutton, and cate the Mutton, and drinke the Broth, and you shall finde ease. Another for the same. ¶ Take a handfull of Balme, a handfull of Rosemary, a handfull of Mallowes, a handfull of Smallage, a handfull of
Walflowers, and all manner of swéet herbes that ye can finde and seeth them in a tankerd of water with halfe a pecke of wheaten branne: and when it is sodden, straine the hearbes through a cloth as you would doo a bucke, and set it on the fier and with other water straine it: and so bath you and sweate and you shall be whole God willing. For aking of the ioynts. ¶ Take March Mallowes, and sweete milke, Linséedes, powder of Comin, the whites of Egges, Saffron, and white greace, and fry all these together, and lay it to the aking of the toynts: this hath been proued. For ache in any place, an oyntment. ¶ Take and chafe a Stere till he scummer: then take that dung and fry it with Shéepes sewet, or else with Sallet oyle, and it will come to a fine oyntment, and then annoynt the place therewith: proued. Also take the oyle of Mace and annoynt the ache with-all, and it will helpe you. For ache in the bone or ioynt. ¶ Take a pricked Harts skinne, sliuer or draw him, and cut it in small péeces, bones, flesh and all: take that and wash it clcane that no blood be therein, then take cleane water, and set it ouer the fire, and as it séethes scum away the fat and saue it, and let it seeth till that no fat will ceme of him, and then cast away the flesh and put it in a boxe, and annoynt the greace where the ache is, and it shall be whole: and doo this thrée or foure times. A medicine for all aches. ¶ Take halfe a pinte of Wooll oyle, a quarter of a pinte of Neates-foote oyle, and halfe a pound of Barrowes greace, first set the Barrowes greace vpon the fire, and skum it cleane, put in your Neates-foot oyle, and beate them all thrée together being
on the fire, then scum it cleane, and put in your Wooll oyle, and beate them all together, then boyle them together, and take them off the fire, and vse it at your neede. A medicine for all aches in the bones. ¶ Take the gall of an Ore and set it on the fire, and seeth it, and scumme it till it be very cleane, and put it into a glasse, and stoppe it close, then take Neates-foote oyle, and gather it very fine, and put it into a glasse also, and stop it close: then take Aqua vitae in an other glasse, and stop it close: then take of the oyle and waters aforesaid, of each euen portioned, & two times so much portion of the Aqua vitae, and put them together in one vessell, so warme it and annoynt your gréefe, and it shall helpe you God willing. Another medicine for the ache. ¶ Take Swans greace, Goose greace, Heus, or Capons greace, of each of these a quantity, but the more of Swanns greace then of all the rest, and when they are mingled together, then take a pinte of Malmesie, and a handfull of Lauender spike, Rosemary as much, and let your Malmesie seethe till it be almost wasted, and then put all together with a little Bores greace, and so boyle them, and vse them for your ache, and it shall ease you. For him that is fallen broken. ¶ Take a Trusse and trusse the party so straight as he can, and it will very much helpe him. Also take the iuyce of Madder, the iuyce of redde Nettles, the iuyce of Hemp, the iuyce of Bugle, the iuyce of Camphire, the iuyce of Cawle, of each of these two Sawcerfuls, of Wine foure Sawcerfuls, of Honey three Sawcerfuls, boyle them all together, and skimme them well, and then take it downe, and dunke thereof daily, first, and last, sixe spoonefuls at once, the space of fouretéene dayes.
A plaister for a man that is broken. ¶ Take of Bugle, of Cawle, of each a like much, stampe them small with a little of the haire of a Hares skin, then take an vnce of Wax, and melt it with a spoonfull of butter, and put to your Bugle, and Cawle, and the haire: and stampe it with a little Bole armoniack, and fry them all together, and stir it, and make therof a plaister, and lay it on a péece of leather, and lay it straight vpon the place of your sore, and so serue it three or foure dayes, and so giuen the space of twelue dayes. For a man or a child that is welnie broken, and to heale them. ¶ First make sixe pellets in this manner, take the roote of Polipodij, and the roote of Betony, the crop and roote of Dai∣sies, of euery one an vnce, and make powder thereof, then take Bole armoniacke an vnce and a halfe, of Honey clarified an vnce, of these make a plaister, and if it be too thinne put more powder thereto, and if it be too thicke put thereto more Honey, and take and rowle it and make pellets thereof as many as yee may make thereof: then take more of the roote of Polipodij, and the roote of Betony, and the crops and rootes of Daisies, of each two vnces, and punne them as you doo Gréene-sawce, and put that iuyce into a quart or more of Ale that is stale, and boile it to a pinte, and straine it through a cloth, then boyle it againe with Suger thrée penny-woorth, and when the Suger is molt then put it in a glasse, and euery day eate a pellet thereof mor∣ning and euening last, and drinke euery time the quantity of three spoonrfull of your drinke in the glasse, then if your drinke be doone, you must make more: but you must vnderstand that the sicke man must lye vpright sixe dayes, and that he be bound wisely and faire, and that hée eate laxatiue meates for stray∣ning of the humours, and it shall heale him mightily: and sure∣lie prooued.
If a man childe bee newe broken, this will cure him. ¶ Take the roote of Camphiere, and the leafe of Osmond, and the young roote of Elme leaues, Auence, and leaues of Madder, and the leaues of Castire, of each of all these a like much, these must be sodde altogether in newe Ale, with a good quantitie of clarified Honny, and skimme it, and put it into a pot, and euery day drinke thereof fasting, and also at euening: and binde it vp very straight. For broken bones, in what place soeuer they bee. ¶ Take a newe tyle, and maile him in the fire, and make it all to pouder, then tye it in the fire againe till it be redde, let it kéele, and take that pouder, the iuyce of Daisies, and the iuyce of Camphire by euen portions: and melt al together, and make a plaister thereof, and lay it to the bone that is broken, and eue∣rie day renew it thereto. Item take Daifie and Camphier, and Egrimonie, and temper them with Vinegar, and lay thē there∣to, and it shall helpe them so greeued. For the bone ache and to take it away. ¶ Take Sperewort, Oliues, Crofoote, hearbe Christo∣pher, Walwoort, Henbane, Hony-suckle-flowers, Culrage, Rosemarie, Mallowes, redde Woort-leaues, red Onions, and Ribwoort, still all them by themselues, and after meddle alto∣gether, saue onely the Sperewoort, which must be medled with halfe a part of the other Waters, meddle them before the heate of the fire with your hande, and annoynt the place there-with oftentimes. To knit a broken bone. ¶ Take Auence, Camphire, Egrimonie, and temper them with Vinegar, and lay it to the bone▪ Also take Daisies, the
crops of Hempe and redde Colewoorts, and redde Nettles, and Bramble-leaues, Sothern-wood, Tansie, Pimpernell, Beto∣nie, Buglosse, Madder, wash them and beate them small, and drinke the iuyce thereof both morning and euening. For all manner of bones that aketh. ¶ Take a pinte of White-wine, and the gall of an Ore, boyle them well, and skimme them cleare, then take crummes of white Bread, and put them thereto, and make thereof a plai∣ster, and lay the same to the gréefe foure or fiue times: and it shall helpe you. For broken bones. ¶ Take Crey-land that is burnt, and grinde the same to powder, and put thereto the iuyce of Daisies, and the iuyce of Camphier, and strew on the powder till it be thicke, and lay it to the place plaister-wise, and the broken bone shall knit againe verie shortlie, and become whole. To make an oyntment for burning of Gunpowder, or for scalding with water. ¶ Take a quarte of Bores greace, and two handfulls of Groundswell, and two or thrée heads of Housleeke, and stampe the hearbes together, and then put to it of newe shéepes dunge two handfuls, and as much of Goose dunge, and stampe altoge∣ther, and fry them, and being hote, straine them through a cloth into an earthen pot, and with the same liquor annoint the sore that is burnt with Gun-powder. To take away a heate or burning with Gunpowder. ¶ Take a good quantitie of House-leeke, stampe it, and wring out the iuyce: then take the white of sixe Egges, and beate them in a dish till they be thin, and then take off the scum and put the rest together, and wash ye sores with a linnen cloth, and after, lay a wet cloth on the sore.
A remedy for burning or scalding, or any hurt with an hand-gunne. ¶ Take the dunge of Geese of one nights making, and fresh Butter vnsalted, or else clarified Sheepes suet, & frie the same in a frying panne a good while, vntill your suet be almost con∣sumed, then put them in a course liunen cloth, and straine them into a small vessell, then take a feather, and dip it in the liquor, and annoynt the place where the patient is so burned or scalded, and when you haue so doone, wette a fine linnen cloth in the sayde liquour, and couer the sore withall, and vse to doe thys twice or thrice a day. For burning or scalding. ¶ Take halfe a pounde of Sheepes suet, and as much of the erindels of Sheepes dunge, and a quarter of a pound of the in∣ner rindes of Elder-trees, and fry them altogether, and drawe it through a cloth into a pewter dish, and it will be fast, chafe it against the sore. For burning, a medicine proued. ¶ Take the white of Hennes dunge, and of shéepes dunge, of grounde Iuie, of House-leeke, sheepes suet, and boyle them all together, and straine them, and so annoynt the burning sore, and take a Rose-campion leafe, and lay it aloft vpon the place, and a thinne cloth vpon that, and it shall helpe it. For burning, a remedie. ¶ Take a quantitie of Bores greace, and put the same into a frying panne, and wring out the greace reseruing the suet, then take not fullie halfe so much Rape-oyle, and put it thereto, with two or thrée spoonefuls of cleere Vinegar and Water, la∣bouring them all very well together: and so reserue it to your vse, but stoppe it very close till such time as you neede, and this shall helpe you.
For burning with sire. ¶ Take blacke Varnish, and all to annoynt the place with a feather, and it will both stay the heate and heale it as faire as euer it was, this you may vse till you be whole. For burning or scalding. ¶ Take a good handfull of auence, and asmuch of Sheepes dunge, and frye them well together in May butter, and straine it, and vse to annoynt the greeued place with the same colde twise a day, and annoynt it first with gray or blacke Sope, and it will helpe thee: this oyntment must bee spred vpon a flaren cloth it you can get it. Another for burning or scalding. ¶ Take Oyle-oliue, and beate the same with water till it were verie white, and annoynt the sore place there-with. For burning or scalding. ¶ Take Snowe-water, and that will asswage the heate, and then take the white of an Egge, and clippe the haires of a Cunnies skinne, and dip them in the white of the Egge, and lay it to the burnt place, and it will heale it, and it will cause the skinne to be more faire then all the other: proued. For all bruzes a Medicine. ¶ Take Planten, Drpin, Camphire, Holli-hocke, and flower, and make a plaister, and lay it to the sore. Also take the grounds of Ale or Beere, and Wheate-branne, and Chicke-weede, and lay it to the greefe three or foure times a day, vpon a redde cloth, not too thinne. For a bruze. ¶ Take Pitch, Rozen, and wrought Waxe, and Bores greace, or Swines greace, of each a like much: boile all these together in a pan till it come to a salue, and then strike it vppon
a linnen cloth, and lay it to the bruse, and let it lie foure or fiue dayes thereto, and you shall finde great ease. Another medicine for a bruse. ¶ Take halfe a pound of Shéeps sewet cleane tried, and as much vnwrought War, two vnces of Rezen, and a spoonfull of Frankensence in fine powder, and well searced, then boyle them all together, and skim it cleane with a feather, and when it is boyled take it from the fire, and when it is halfe cold then wet or dip a linnen cloth in the same, so that euery part be through wet, and lay it abreade till it be through cold, and role it vp, and it may be kept all the yeare, and vse it as neede shall require, for this is a precious Seare-cloth for all manner of ache or bruses: Prooued. Another for the same. ¶ Take Mallowes, Smallage, bruse Wort, Planten, the more of Smallage, and temper it with Shéeps sewet, and make this salue in May, and you may kéepe it all the yeare after, and vse it as your néede doth require. For all manner of botches. ¶ Against botches, mingle this hearbe Timbalaria with Sheeps dung, and lay it thereto plaister wise, and it shall ripen the botch quickly. Another for the same. ¶ Also to ripe botches, confect fiue or sixe dramms of Elec∣trium with Barly meale, and the white of an Egge, and lay it to the botch, and it will ripen the same. For to breake the botch. ¶ Take Bramble leaues, Elder leaues, and Musterd séed, and stampe them all together, and then take of it and make a plaister thereof, and lay it to the sore, and it will draw out all the venome.
Another for the same. ¶ Take one spoonfull of Honey, the iuyce of Spurge two spoonfuls and a halfe, of Wheaten flower a good quantity, and one spoonfull of Turpentine, temper all these together, and lay it to the botch, and it helpeth. For byting of a Serpent. ¶ Against byting of a Serpent or venemous Beast, take two drams of the powder of Egrimony, with two measures of Wine that is called Ciates, and it will cast out the venome. Another for the same. ¶ Take Centory and stampe it with his owne water, and giue the sick to drinke, it is as good for Beast as men, for the bi∣ting of an Adder. Also beare Veruaine about thée, and the Ser∣pent as some report shall haue no power to hurt thee. Another for the byting of a Serpent. ¶ Take and seethe two or thrée handfull of Veruaine, and wash the place therwith, and stamp the leaues, and lay therto, and it will abate the swelling therof, and bray this hear be Ver∣uaine with Honey, and lay it often therto, and it will resounder and heale it faire againe. Also the iuyce of Cinkfoyle being drunk, putteth out all ve∣nome, so dooth the iuyce of Plantaine. For the byting of a mad dogge. ¶ Take of the séede of Boxe, and stampe it, and temper it with water, and giue it to the party so gréeued, and it helpeth them God willing. Also take Sauery and temper it with bread, and lay it ther∣vnto, and it hath the same vertue. Also stampe long Plantaine, and lay it to the gréeued place, and will cure the sore: Proued.
Another for the same. ¶ Take Walnuts, and stampe them with salt, and an O∣nion, they be good for the biting of a mad doggs béeing layed thereto. Also Betony that is gréene being laide thereto, helpeth the biting of a mad dogge, in very short space. For biting of venomous Beasts. ¶ Take Garlicke and bray it, and lay it to the place so bit∣ten, and it will in short time cure the same. Also if Garlick be eaten, it putteth foorth the venome in the body, and clenseth the same. Also take the powder of Aristialogia rounda, with the iuice of Mints. Also if the roote of Brusewoort be brused and laide thereto, it healeth the biting of venomous Beasts. For a man or woman that is in a con∣sumption. ¶ Take a brasse pot, and fill it with water, and set it on the fire, and put a great carthen pot within that pot, and then put in these parcels following. Take a Cock and pull him aliue, then slea off his skin, then beate him in peeces: take Dates a pound, & slit out the stones, and lay a layer ouer them in the bottoms of the pot, and then lay a péece of the Cocke, and vpon that some more of the Dates, then take Succory, Endiue, and Parsly roots, and so euery lay∣er one vpon an other, and put in fine gold, and some pearle, and couer the pot as close as may be with corse dowe, and so let him distill a good while, and so reserue it to your vse, till such time as you haue néede thereof. For a weake person in a consumption. ¶ Take a quart of red Rose-water, and a pottell of the stra∣pings of the milk of a Cowe, 2. d. of fine Manchets, the yolkes
of thirty Egs, halfe a pound of Raisons of the sunne, Cinamon one vnce, Nutmegs one vnce, Mace halfe an vnce, Cloues a quarter of on vnce, of long Pepper halfe an vnce, your bread must be fine grated, and your Raisons stoned, and your Dates scraped, and all your other spices beaten all together, then put in your Eggs and milke so stirred together, and then last of all your Rose-water, and so distill it in a Limbeck of glasse, and so reserue it to your vse, and as neede requireth to vse it. For to restore health in a consumption. ¶ Take a handfull of Yarrow and slampe it, and straine it into a dish, and put thereto the yolke of an Egge, and a little Suger fine beaten, and with this iuice being heate luke warm, temper therwith as much of Wheat flower as will make Past, then the Past being well wrought, make thereof little cakes, as bigge and as thick as an old testorne, and bake them vpon a a little shard, and being baked, let the Patient eate one of the cakes euery day thrée times, or as much as he or she can cate, and by the prouidence of God it shall make them strong and mighty, this hath béen proued. For a consumption in the raines. ¶ Take Clary leaues and prick them, and fry them with two or thrée yolkes of Egs, and put thereto Saffron dried vpon a stone, and grind it small, and put all together, and fry them with fresh butter and eate it warme next your hart, and it will helpe you God willing. For one that is in a consumption. ¶ Take a great number of young Nettles that springeth at the roote, and wash them cleane, and stampe them and straine them, till you haue a pinte of the iuice therof, then put them in a faire skillet, and set it ouer the fire, and let it séethe till it waxe
some-what redde: then take it from the fire, and put thereto a quart of Malmesey, and brew them together a good space, then take the yolkes of sixe newe layde Egges, and beate them toge∣ther, then brew it againe, and put therto as much sugar as wil make it sweet: then let the partie so groeued, take euery night and morning a reasonable draught thereof blood-warme, and by the grace of GOD, it shall ease the partie so greeued in ve∣rie short space. ¶ To helpe to restore him that is in a consumption. ¶ Take a Cocke which is neither fat nor leane, and wring his necke, and hang him vp by the legges, and let him beat him selfe to death with his winges, and when hee is colde flea him, and take out the bowels, then cut off his neeke and legges, and sée that his body within he well dryd with a cloth, and quarter him, and at foure stills still the quarters beeing first well hac∣ked and chopped, and the water that shall come out of the Cock béeing stilled, you must giue the patient in his brothes or drinks beeing blood-warme, and within short time by Gods grace, it will restore him or her. But remember that the partie gréeued, doo neither eate nor drinke in all the time, any meats or brothes dressed with hote spices, or sharpe sauces. A notable restoritie and electuarie for a man that is wasted or consumed, called the electuary of life, practi∣zed by M. Baltazar. ¶ Take two pounde of Dates, and wash them cleane in Ale or Beere, then cut them and take out the stones, and the white skinnes, and cut them small, and bray them very small and fine till they be as tough as waxe, then take a quart of cla∣risted Honny, and cast the Dates therein till they bee dissolued, then take halfe an ounce of long Pepper, as much of Mace and Cloues, and Nutmegs beaten in fiue powder, then seeth the
Dates and Honny ouer a soft fire, then cast on the powder by little and little, and stirre it very fast, and let it seeth long, till it wexe thicke, then set it to ecole, and put it in close Boxes, and eate therefore first and last: and it shall restore a man bee hee neuer so weake or lowe brought: vse this some-times vppon a full stomacke, and you shall not surfet, proued by M. Baltazer Chirurgian. ¶ An Electuarie most soueraine for all manner of diseases in the body: proued by G. K. ¶ Take foure pound of Sugar, and boyle it in a pint and a halfe of Malmesey, and put thereto a pint of Rose-water, and a pint and a halfe of White-wine, halfe a pinte of Aqua vitae, and of running water a pint: boyle all these together, and when it is well sodden, take of the powder of Enula campana an ounce and a halfe, of Calamus aromaticus and Licoris, of each halfe an ounce, pepper thrée penny waight, one halfe penny worth of A∣lisander seedes in powder, sixe pence waight, of conserue of Ro∣ses and Violets, of each foure ounces, boyle all these to a mea∣surable thicknes, then put thereto of folliater golde, and all to cut it with a knife, and mingle it with the aforesaide Electua∣rie, and vse it as your need requireth, and by Gods grace it will helpe you. A restoritie for the weake and feeble. ¶ Take a pinte of running Water, and heate it ouer the fire, and put in it a handful of Rose-mary, let it boile to the halfe and then straine it: then take a pint of White wine, or Claret wine, and a good peece of Sugar, and powder of Ginger, & Si∣namon, a little Mace and Cloues, and put them altogether, thē lay sops in a dish, and poure thereon the broth, and giue it to the ficke and féeble persons fasting in the morning, proued.
For a consumption, proued. ¶ Take halfe an ounce of Manus Christi, one ounce of white fugar Candy, and a penny worth of Anniseedes, and halfe a pinte of Redde-rose water, and a pint of Muscadine, foure new layde Egges, a quarter of Nutmegges, halfe a quarter of Cap Dates, and stone your Dates, and wash them before that you doo put them in, and boile them altogether, and so vse them, for this hath béene proued. A Ielly prooued for a consumption. ¶ Take a well fleshed Capon and scald him, and draw him, and put into his belly a handfull of Barly, and as much Rey∣sons, Currons and Dates, and put him in an earthen pot with a gallon of Claret wine, then put therein some Sinamon and Ginger: let it seeth till the flesh be fallen from the bones, then beate him in a Morter, and put him into an Ipocras bag, and let the Ielly runne into a faire Vessell, and giue the patient of that ielly euening & morning: and within the spending of three Capons, by the grace of God, the patient shal recouer much his health: and to comfort his stomack, giue him Rorax aromati∣cum, made in losings at the Apoticaries. A present remedy for the Sciatica. ¶ Take a handfull of Violet leaues, and wash them in good Ale, then take an other pint of good Ale, and set it on the fire in a skillet, and then beate the Violet leaues very small, and so boyle them in the Ale, and then when it is halfe boyled, take out the leaues, and straine the iuyce into the afore-said Ale againe, and boyle it very well vntill that it bee thicke, and then take a péece of sheepes leather, as broad as the place which is gréeued, and pricke it full of heles, and spread the same on the rough side of the leather, and lay it to the place xxiiij. howres, and then change it, and lay to it new, and so vse it thrée dayes, and you shall be well: the oftner the better.
To make a water for the Sciatica. ¶ Take a peece of Porke of a male Hogge which is leane, and perboyle it in water vntill the blood be cleane out, thē boyle it in strong Ale a good while, and after that take it and distill it with a soft fire, and then kéepe the water, and wash the places so gréeued two or thrée times against the fire. For a Sciatica another medicine. ¶ Take an Oxe gall, and red Allam, Rosemarie-tops, bay Salt, Aqua vitae, and Vinegar, bray them well together, and set them on the fire, and alwaies stirre it, but let it not seeth, and so vse it as neede requireth. Another for the same. ¶ Take Auence, Comin, and asmuch white salt, a handful of Red nettles, and seeth them in pisse, and when they be well boyled, put thereto Aqua vitae, and annoynt well the sore there∣with thrée or foure times. A medicine for the Sciatica. ¶ Take Time, Lauender Cotten, the runnings or out-la∣ces of Straw-berries, of each a like quantitie, a nest or two of young Swallowes aliue, with the feathers and the gutts, and stampe them very small, and so fry them in May-butter that is swéete and newe, boile them on the fire, then straine it through a cloth, and put it into a pot, and so vse it at your pleasure. For the Crampe. ¶ The Crampe commeth commonly of contractions, of ner∣ues, or els it commeth of too much fulnes of the body, or too much leannesse: and note well that in the Palsie the members be more longer then they should be by relaxation, and in the cramp the members are shorter then they should be by shrinking of the nerues, but the Crampe that commeth of wasting, is seldome cured, if the paine be great, & withal, cease it with oyle of roses,
or of Camemile hote, and of yolks of Egges and Saffron toge∣ther, and wet Bread in swéet hote Milke, for this ceaseth the a∣king of the Nerues. Also make a garter of an Hares skin, but the liuer is said to be full good for the Crampe, prooued. For the Crampe, a remedy. ¶ Take oyle of Camemile, and Fenegréeke, and annoynt the place where the Crampe is, and it helpeth. Another for the same. ¶ Séeth these hearbes, Betony, Worme-wood, Veruaine, and Time, these are exceeding good for to wash the party so trou∣bled with the Crampe, if he make it in a bath. Another for the same. ¶ If you say these words thrée times when the Cramp com∣meth vpon you, Bero, baro, battora, it may hap to help you. To make one to haue a good colour. ¶ Take and drinke the iuyce of Isope fasting, warme it, and it will make you to haue a good cullour, it is good for the sight, it destroyeth wormes, it is also good for the Romake, the liuer; and the lunges. For the Canker a remedie. ¶ Take lentils of the Water, which be called Frogs féete, or Emets meate: it is of great vertue if it be stamped, and the iuyce medled with Porkes greace, and lay it plaister-wise on the Canker, it sleieth and healeth mightily. Another remedy for the Canker. ¶ Take as much Allam as a Nut, halfe a glasse full of Ho∣nie, and a pint of Red wine, and seeth them together till it come to the third part, then straine it through a cloth, and wash the sores there-with.
Another for the same. ¶ Take a handfull of vnset Leekes, with the rootes, and a small quantitie of Yarrow, ten or twentie branches therof, and boile them in white-wine vntill they be all very softe, and then straine them and clarifie them: and let the patient drinke of it morning and euening, blood warme. For to kill the Canker in a mans bodie. ¶ Take the roote of Dragons, and breake it in small pee∣ces, and dry it, and make it in powder, and take nine pennie waight of the powder and put it in Wine, and séeth it well, and then let the sicke drinke thereof warme a good draught fasting in the morning for thrée daies together. Another for the same. ¶ Take two handfulls of Sage, and as much Wood-binde leaues, with the rootes of a wilde Vine, this beeing stamped and strained, take a little Honny with a peece of Alam beeing warmed, and so wash the sore place where the Canker is. For the Canker another remedie. ¶ Take Christall, and make it in fine powder, and the pow∣der of Harts-horne burnt, with asmuch of the rinde of a Poun∣granet, and the iuyce of Night-shade, and giue all these to the partie, eyther man, woman, or child. For the Chollick and the stone. ¶ Take a handfull of Sapifrags, a handfull of Pellitorie of the Wall, a handfull of vnset Isope, a handfull of vnset Time, and seeth all these hearbes well together with a quarte of good Malmesey to a pint, and the powder of whole Egge-shels, and as much of the powder of Hasell-nut shells: when you haue put the liquor from the hearbes, then put in the powder to the same, and let the patient drinke thereof warme in the morning fa∣sting, and it will helpe him.
For the collick a remedy. ¶ Take white Time, Parsley, bruse them, and strayne them with stale Ale, and set it to the fire, and make it warme, and put thereto a good quantity of Graines, and so drinke it. Also take Broome seede that is gréene: and giue it to the party to drinke being dried and made in powder, and when the paine is vpon him vse it. A medicine for the collick. ¶ Take a pint of Sallet oyle, halfe a handfull of white salt, and séethe them: then dippe in two or thrée handfuls of blacke Shéeps wooll, and bind the same from the nauell to the bottome of your belly as warme as you can suffer it. For the collica passio. ¶ Take the roote of Quintfoyle and long Pepper, & grind them small in powder, and drinke it in good Ale. Also take Time and Saffron, stampe them together, and put thereto a little good Ale, and straine it through a cloth, and then giue it to the Patient to drinke, and it shall ease him forthwith. Also make a plaister of the hearbe Philopendula being sodden with the afore-said hearbes. For the collica passio. ¶ Take the crums of cleane wheaten bread, and white Vineger, and the pouder of Comin, & boile all them together, and make a plaister therof: and as hot as the sicke may suffer it lay it néere to the belly, and he shall soone be eased of his paine. Also take Turmentile and Treakle de bayes, and eate it, and drinke of the water of Elderne flowers stilled. Another for the same. ¶ Take vnset Léekes and cut away the faces and all, then take the white of the Léeke and bray it small with May butter, and fry it, & lay it very hot to ye nauell being bound with a cloth.
For the collick and the stone. ¶ Take the gréene pith of an Elder stalke that is betwéene the barke and the stalke, and stamp it small, and drinke it with good stale Ale, and it shall breake winde. For a man that is costife. ¶ Take Mallowes, Mercury, and séethe them with Pork, and make therof pottage, and let the party eate therof, and drink Whay, and it shall make him sollible. Also take the iuyce of Walwoort and mingle it with honey, and drink it. For the dropsie, proued. ¶ Take two pound of sage Ryall, and two pound of water Carsen, and two pound of Isope, take these hearbes, and bray them in a morter, and wring out the iuyce thereof, and then take Wheate flower, and blend it with the iuyce, and make a loafe thereof, and bake it in an Ouen, and all hot breake him into two or three gallons of good stale Ale, and let there be no dregs therein, and so let it stand all night, and stop it close, and let the sicke drinke thereof at all times, and he shall be whole. Also take Borage, and Langdebéefe, and Parsly, and Scabi∣us, and of water Cresses as much as of the other hearbes, a handfull of Smerewoort, and vse this pottage with that drink, and he shall be whole. Another for the dropsie proued. ¶ Take foure penny waight of Scamony, and two penny waight of Rubarb, & sixe penny waight of Scene, and a penny waight of Setwell, and a penny waight of Spignard, and a penny waight of the pouder of Camomell, and an vnce of Su∣ger, and bray all these spices in a morter of brasse, and mingle therwith the Suger, & then let the sicke vse this medicine thrée daies fasting, a good spoonfull at once, and it will make him for to haue a good stomack, and doo away all euils.
For the Dropsie if it be curable or no. ¶ Take Barly meale and the iuyce of Spinage and of Ma∣rigolds and make thereof a plaister, and lay it three times, vn∣to a mans liuer, and if the plaister be dry soone, hée is curable, and if it dry not, hee is vncurable. For the Dropsie, another, proued. ¶ Take a handfull of the tender crops of Broome, and stampe them and straine them in a quart of stale Ale, and boyle it till it be halfe wasted: then put thereto some Sinamon, and Ginger, and set the patient vpright in a chaire, so that his feete touch not the grounde by two foote and a halfe, then put vnder his feete a panne of coales, and lay ouerthwart the pan a payre of tonges, or two, and lay thereon geene Broome, and let him sette the soles of his feete thereon, and giue him of the drinke blood warme, and so let him sweat well when he goeth to bed, and by Gods grace it will helpe him. For a Dormitorie. ¶ Take a quarter of a pounde of Almonds blended, and a halfe pound of Hempseede, three times washed in cleane wa∣ter, and sixe Dates, and stampe them altogether, and put there∣to good stale Ale, and take an ounce and a halfe of Poppy seede brused, and let it lie in Ale three or foure howres, and then séeth them together and straine them, and giue the sick to cate there∣of warme: and it shall quickly make him sleep by Gods grace. To draw a Bile from one place to another. ¶ Take Oculus Christi, and Veruaine, and make a plai∣ster of them, and let the same be layde from the Byle, two sin∣gers broade: and when it hath line a good while, renew it, and so remoue it still from place to place, vntill it bee layde in the place where you would haue it breake.
To drawe out arrowes out of a mans body. ¶ Take Polipodion and grinde it with fresh greace that is olde, and bind the same vpon the place, and it will soone draw it out, be it arrow, or thorne, or any other euill thing. To draw out an arrow head. ¶ For to draw an arrow head out of a mans flesh, take red Spere roote, temper the same and seeth it with Honny, and then lay it on a cloth, and lay it to the wound, and it shall draw it out by the grace of God quickly. For a Dart in a mans body. ¶ Take a Worme that is called Picher, that is as great as a Beane, and is cleane blew or sender, & it hath many small féete, and is white vnder the belly, and when a man toucheth it, it will be as round as a button: take thys Worme, and rubbe it well against the Dart, till it be all broken, and doo this euery day three or foure times, and at euery time take thrée or foure Wormes. For all manner of falling euills. ¶ Take the blood of his little finger that is ficke, and write these thrée verses following, and hang it about his neck, Iasper fert mirram, thus melchior balthazar aurum, hec quicum secum porta tria nomina regum, soluiter a morbo domini pictate caduca, and it shall helpe the party so gréeued. For the falling euill. ¶ Take the powder of Osmond, and the roote of pilny, and and take the powder of Mortegan, and drinke all these with stale Ale, and let them say theyr prayers: and as soone as the party falleth downe, take the gall of a Dogge, and giue the sick to drinke with good Ale that is stale, and by Gods grace he shal neuer haue the falling euill any more: proued.
For to cure the falling euill in foure dayes. ¶ Take Swallowes, and beate them feathers guts and all, Castorry, Vineger, and some Iermander, distilled first in water, and some Cardus benedictus water, and then still all, and giue the sicke to drink therof. Also take the roote of Piony, and make it in powder, and put it into pappe for a child, and let him or them lick it with a little Suger, and they that be of age may eate the more quantity therof. Also the black séede of Pio∣ny is good therfore. For the falling euill. ¶ The filling of gold being taken in meate and drinke, is good against that euill, and if the Patients backe be annoynted with the oyle of Iiniper in the very chine, and so is a dram of Castoreum very good therfore. Also take the powder of Gentiana, with the iuice of wilde Sage, is good for the falling euill. The manner and vse to be obserued and kept in the time of curing of a fistula. ¶ First you must search the vlcer with your tonte, to know the depth and the length thereof, that you may knowe of what fise to make your tente, and annoynt the sore onlie with Popu∣lion, and your tent also, and dippe the ende therof in the powder following for two daies, once a day dresse it with your powder, and other two daies with nothing but Populion to remooue the aker, and thus inlarge your tent till the worke be knowne vn∣to you, so long as it casteth a blocky, maulte gory, stinking, or bloodie water, still vse your powder vntill it come grosse, thick, and white, and then apply mundisters or clensers, and the vl∣cer clensed, then vse incarnatiues, as the gréene balme before written, & other that followe: alwaies rather shortening your tent, and making of it lesse till you be assured of the victory for sigilation, sealing or sinking of the water that hereafter shall follow termed mother and the congelour.
The powder for the Fistusta. ¶ Take two ounces of greene Copperas, and burne it in a Goldsmithes potte, called a crusible, Mercurij subblimati an ounce, grinde them small on a Marble stone, till that it bee ve∣ry fine powder, and vse it when neede requireth. A skinning water for the Fistula. ¶ Take strong Vinegar that is white, for that is best, a quart of Litarge of gold finely beaten, & finely searced a pound, mingle them together, and let them infuse in a glasse thrée or foure daies, stirring them together twice in a day: then let it settle a day, and take the cleared thereof, and put it into a viall or glasse: and so you haue the mother. The congelour in a Fistula. ¶ Take faire water a pint, salte genne two ounces, com∣mon salt a good spoonefull, boyle all till the salts bee dissolued, then put the cleerest thereof into a glasse, and this is the conge∣lour. The vse of the congelour. ¶ Take of the mother thrée parts, of the congelour 2. parts and a little more, put them together, and it will be an oyntment or a thick creame, lay it on the place that you would haue skin∣ned, or the créeping tetter, and it shall doo wonderfully for the long vlcers that lack nothing but skinning, and it will skin in very short time. For the Fistula. ¶ In what place soeuer it be, take the inyce of Turmentil, and drop it into the hole, and it helpeth, and so doth a tent dipped in the sayd iuyce, & layd to the Fistula. Also take gréene Be∣tonie with salt, and make a tent, and put to it a plaister of the same, and it will heale it.
Another for the same. ¶ Take of the powder of Copperis with two parts of beane meale, and confect them with french sope, and shape a tent ther∣of, and put it into the hole of the Fistula, it will clense it in such manner, that if there be any bones corrupt or broken, that they may be taken out, and it will consume the euill moistures. To stop a very great flixe. ¶ Take halfe a pound of Almonds and blanch them, and stampe them very small in a Morter, and then take twelue yolkes of newe layde Egges rosted harde, and put them into a Morter, and bray altogether, and then take a pint of strong red vinegar, for that is best, and put it into the same stuffe, and min∣gle thē well together, and then put all into a faire pot of earth, and stampe it well, then take thereof fiue or sixe spoonefulls at once, but first warme it, and then drinke three or foure times vpon a day, if neede be. Another for the same. ¶ Take the roote of a great Docke that beareth the Burre, and the leaues of Oake, and ground-Iuie, and make a bath of them, and put thy féete therein vp to the ankles, but no higher, and let thy feete stand long therein, as hote as yee may suffer it, and then keepe them warme. A medicine for to stope the flixe or laxe. ¶ Take three Nutmegs and rost them, take of Sinamon thrée ounces, three new layd Egges, and rost them very harde till they be blew, then take the yolke from the white, as much of Bole armoniack as a Doues Egge, then beate the spices verie fine, that doone take altogether and beate them: then put them in a quart of strong Ale, sturring all these together, then straine them, and seeth the same till it come to a pint, then giue the par∣tie so grieued, to drinke thereof first and last.
Also take Alligant and thicken it with Rice flower, as you would make pappe, then spread it vpon a peece of redde leather as broade as your hand: and for a child lay it beneath the nauel somewhat warme, and it helpeth. For the flixe or laxe. ¶ Take Redde-rose buddes, and clippe off the whites from the leaues, and dry them, and make powder of them, and giue it to the partie so grieued in a cawdell, and at three times drink∣ing it shall ease him. And if the partie be weake, to make him a Tansie of Camphier, Planten and Archangell, a little at a time, asmuch as an Egge. You may gather these hearbes in Sommer to serue in Winter. To helpe the bloody flixe. ¶ Take two handfull of Plantaine leaues, and séeth them in faire water, and let it seeth till it bee sodden to the one halfe, then take the same water, and straine it through a cloth with out any wringing thereof, then with the same water make rice pottage, and let the patient eate thereof a good messe, and it will stop the bloody flie. Another for the same. ¶ Take Henne crossen, and the crops of Wood-bine, and stampe them, and temper them with warme Redde-wine, and giue the sicke thereof to drinke, and let him eate for thrée dayes together each day fine Léekes with bread that is hote, and drink no drinke but Red-wine warme, and he shall be whole, and let the sicke haue a stoole with a siedge, and make there-vnder a little Char-cole fire, and let it be closed round about with a cloth that no ayre may enter: proued. For to fret away dead flesh. ¶ Take Hennes bones and burne them, and the shelles of tenne Egges, stampe them and make powder of them, and lay it to the dead flesh, and it will fret it away.
Another for the same. ¶ Take gréene Copperis and burne it, and as much burnt Allam, and asmuch Verdigreace, and grind them altogether, and vse thereof as you neede, and it helpeth: proued. To abate proude flesh. ¶ Take Honny and clarifie it, and skimme it with a sea∣ther, and take the white of, and take a quantitie of Verdigreace till it be gréene, and lay thereto. To rayse vp flesh. ¶ Take red nettles and bray them small, and put thereto thrée or foure cornes of Salt, and mixe it with Butter, and lay it to the sore, and it will make the flesh to grow, and to be more fairer then euer it was before. To take the fire out of any sore. ¶ Take a quantitie of Rose-water, Sallet-oyle, an Ore gall, Housléeke, the iuyce of each a like quantitie, and so beate thē altogether till that they be all one, and so annoint the place, and it will take away the fire. For the Gout, a most precious medicine. ¶ Take a good handfull of Rewe, as much of Plantaine, and asmuch of Redde Sage, and stampe them as small as you can, then take halfe a pound of black Sope, and a penny-worth of the Treacle of Iane, and meddle all these together: then put them in a close vessell, and when the paine beginnes to come, make thereof a plaíster, and lay it thereto, and hee or shée shall be eased within an hower: prooued. For the red Goute. ¶ This experiment is prooued best. Take Quicksiluer, Brimstone thrée parts, and two of Quicksiluer quenched with fresh greace, and the iuyce of Earth-bind, and a little of swines
gall, and meddle altogether: and put it into boxes, and when neede requireth, annoynt the place, and you shall be whole. For the Gout that is bolning. ¶ Take Beane leaues sodden in water, then meddle it with Swines greace, and lay it to the sore place, and it doth awaie all the boluing. Also for the same you may take a Foxe and make oyle there∣of, and therewith annoynt the patient. For the Gout that is in the bones. ¶ Take three tostes of Rie-bread, and tost them well, and then lay on a dishfull of Garlicke, and stampe them, and lay it on the Gout as hote as may bee suffered. Also Walwort sod∣den in Wine till it be well thicked, and the sore annointed with the same, is very good. Also Nettles stampt and layd vpon the Gout, helpeth it. An oyntment for the Goute. ¶ Take an olde fat Cat and flea her, and draw foorth her guttes, and bray the Cat, and put her altogether in a fat Gan∣ders belly, and put thereto halfe a pound of Pepper, Mustard∣séede, and Parsly seede, of each foure ounces, Worme-wood and Garlicke a good quantitie, Bole armoniack sixe peny waight, then rost it, and the greace that droppeth from the same keepe it, and annoynt the Patient withall, and by the grace of God the ache will goe away, for being throughly annoynted there∣with, it presently helpeth him. For the Gout a remedy. ¶ Take a handfull of Rue, as much Canell, as much Tur∣pentine, of red Sage, of each of these a like much, stamp them all as small as you can, then take halfe a pound of black Sope, and mingle all these together, and put them in a close vessell, and when the paine beginneth for to come, make a plaister thereof, and lay it thereto, and the party so gréeued shall haue ease within one houre.
For the Goute in the toes. ¶ Take the roote of Fragon, Matselon, and the roote of Launceroy, stampe them and drinke them with White-wine euery day a pottle fasting. For the Greene-sicknes. ¶ Take Betonie, Harts-tongue, Liuerwoort, of each a good handfull, a Fennell roote, washe them and bruse them, and put them in a skillet with a quart of Ale, two spoonefuls of Alisan∣der seedes, and foure good sticks of Licoris, let all be brused, and boyle all in the Ale till it bee halfe wasted, then straine it, and make it sweete with Sugar, and put into it a little Maces and Nutmegs, and vse to drinke thereof warme, morning and eue∣ning, thrée or foure spoonefuls, and like-wise when your fit doth come vpon you. Another for the same. ¶ Take the keyes of an Ashen trée being dryed and made in∣to powder, and take of Red-Fennel, Red-sage, and Marierum, and Betony, and seeth them in running water from a pottle to a quart, then straine them, and drinke thereof a good draught with Sugar, morning and euening luke warme. For gnawing and aking in ioynts. ¶ Take hearbe Bennet, Sheepes suet, and Oyle Oliue, frie them together, then take it off the fire, and make thereof a playster, and lay it to the sore, and it will ease you. For a hardnes in the body. ¶ Against the hardnes of the body, take a good quantitie of Lilly rootes, with an hearbe called Brancha vrsina, and the roote of Mallowes, and Holly-hock, and temper them altogether in Wine, and Oyle twelue dayes, and then straine it, and in strat∣ning put thereto waxe and oyle, and make an oyntment therof, and therewith annoynt the hard-bound body.
Against heate in the bodie. ¶ Take and eate ripe Berries, and drinke the iuyce there∣of, it is very good for them that haue ouer-much heate, for it cooleth them: and an electuary made of these Berries, is verie good for them that is gréeued with ouermuch heate in the body. Also take the distilled water of Oxe dunge, it is very good and profitable for the same. A medicine for the Blacke Iaundies. ¶ Take Gentiana, long Pepper, Calomus aromaticus, A∣nence, Reysons, Currons, white Sope of Spaine, of each of these one ounce, and two spoonefuls of Musterd-séed, and boyls all them in a quart of Wine till the third part be wasted. Another for the same. ¶ Take Angell towchis, and grinde them small, but first wash them as cleane as ye may, then put thereto a quantitie of Neates-foote oyle, and a quantitie of Vineger, drinke this me∣dicine cold thrée times, and it will cause you to cast out all the sicknes in your body presently. Another for the same. ¶ Take Fennell, Sage, Parsely, Gromwell, of each a like much, and make pottage thereof with a péece of good Porke, and eate no other meate that day: prooued. For the yellow Iaundies and greene sicknes. ¶ Take of Iuorie made into small powder, halfe an ounce, of Turmericke thrée quarters of an ounce, as much of Saffron as the weight of a groate, compounde all these well together, and vse to drinke of thys potion first in the morning, and last in the euening, with a draught of good stale Ale: but if you take it for the blacke Iaundies, you must first purge melancholy, and for she gréene Iaundies without purging: and this medicine will helpe both, as hath béene proued.
For the yellow Iaundies. ¶ Take a great white Onion, and make a hole where the blads goeth out, to the bignes of a Chesnut, and then take Tre∣acle of Iane, asmuch as will fill the hole, then take halfe an ounce of English-Hony being beaten, & so compound the Trea∣cle and Saffron together, and put it into the Onion, and sette them against the fire, and rost it well that it doo not burne, and when it is rosted, straine it through a cloth, and giue the iuyce thereof to the sicke thrée dayes together, and it shall help them. Another for the same. ¶ Take a redde Docke roote and scrape it, and lay it in a quart of strong Ale all night. Another for the same. ¶ If the patient drinke the Sope of Spaine, and the sha∣uings of Iuory, it is very good for the yellow Iaundies, being either olde, or young. To expell the venim of the Iaundies. ¶ Take of running water a pint, of Endiue and Succory, of each halfe a handfull, let them boyle till the halfe be wasted, then straine it: and put thereto of Rubarbe one dramme and a halfe, and of Spignard a halfe-penny weight fine beaten, of Sugar three ounces, and let it boyle a little and then take it off, and let it stande close couered all night, and the next day earlie strains it, and giue the sicke to driuke thereof fasting, and ab∣staine from meate two howres after. For the Iaundies in young children. ¶ Take of Rubarbe, of Turmericke the waight of tenne pence, of white sugar Candy as much, of Spignard the waight of three pence, make all these in fine powder, and mixe it toge∣ther, and thrée dayes together take thereof in white Wine, or Rennish Wine.
Another for the same. ¶ Take Turmerick, Saffron a penny waight, the shauing of Iuory foure pence weight, the shauing of Harts-horne as much, a spoonefull of the iuyce of Capilly veneris, made into powder, and drinke it in Wine, and put thereto a pretty quan∣titie of Sugar, and it helpeth the same. For an Impostume. ¶ An Impostume is a swelling or aking out of kind, and it is either of a corrupt humor that must be broken out, or else of superfluitie of a humor that should nourish that limme. First there must bee giuen a Purgation, after that reper∣cussions a maturatiue. The remedie. ¶ Take Holly-hock, Licoris, Lintséede, dry Figges, Lillie∣rootes, and Iiniper berries, séeth them long in water, after doe away the licoris & the Iiniper berries, and bray well the other, then put thereto Barly meale, Lintseed, Fenegréek, and boile al these together well, and annoynt it first with fresh Butter, and this ripeth postumes within & without, and it is good in an harde and dry impostume though it waxe as hard as a stone: repercu∣tions to smite inward, the matter againe shoulde not be vsed in children nor in old men, neither where matter is wooddish or seruent, nor where the water is much, now and then in the bur∣ning of sicknes, in the nigreforiis as gréeueth, when the postume or botch commeth of nobler lim or member then it is on, then shal he be riped there, and not driuen away frō destinary dread of the better member, the which abréeding of the postume, and of the venimous matter thereof, repercutions must be taken in time ere that the matter be ful seged, and ere it be corrupt and rotten, and that is good commonly with the iuyce of cold hearbs as petty morrell, purslaine of the wood, and vmbelicus veneris, with oyle of roses, and a little aysell, a little Bole armoniack, and cold oyntments, as Popilion or vnguentum album, or the colde
oyntment Iusquinianus, and Poppy and lead, and seeth greene Plantaine, and Vinegar, and the white of an Egge. To breake an impostume. ¶ Take a Lilly roote, and an Onion, and boyle them in cleane water, till they be soft, and then stampe them & fry them with Swines greace, and lay it to the impostume as hote as the patient may suffer it. To ripen an impostume. ¶ Take Worme-wood, Mallowes, Mugwoort, of each a good handfull, stampe them, and mingle them with a quarter of a pounde of Swines greace, and fry them: and put to it a handfull of Wheaten branne, and a little White wine, of Ho∣ney foure ounces, boyle them till they be thicke, and lay it hote to the sore place. For an Itch or breaking out. ¶ Take an ounce of Quick-siluer, two ounces of Baies, and mingle them well together vntill that you can see no Quicksil∣uer, and put it into a boxe, and annoynt the patience once in 24 howres, and it shall kill the itch. Another for the same. ¶ Take Frankensence and bray it small in a Morter, and meddle it with Oyle de Bay, and there-with annoynt thee all ouer, and it will destroy the itch. For all itches. ¶ If the itch be in the heate of the wriste, then let the par∣tie drinke euery day, or other day, of the iuyce of Femitory, v∣sed fasting, and in the Winter let him drinke the sirrop of Fe∣mitory with warme water, for it clenseth all scabbes and other corrupt humors that ensueth, as leprosie: and clenseth the blood in the vaines.
For the itch another remedy. ¶ Take the iuyce of Peniriall, the iuyce of Sauen, and the iuyce of Scabions, the iuyce of Sage, the iuyce of Pellitorie, and Barrous greace, and black Sope, temper all these toge∣ther, and make a salue for the itch. Also, take Femitory or Earth-gall, and seeth the same in Wine, and it is very good for the itch. Against grieuous itches, eyther in men or women. ¶ Take the iuyce of Calidon, Tapsi Barbasti, of Hony puri∣sted, an ounce, beate them altogether till they bee wasted, and set them on the fire, and when they haue simpered take it from the fire, and reserue it to thy vse, and when thou wilt vse there∣of against itching, take thereof as much as thou wilt, and put thereto of burnt powder of Vitriall, of burnt Allam, of each a like much, and vse this till that thou be well. For the Ring worme. ¶ Take of the gumme of a Cherry trée, a good quantitie, of the gumme of a Plum-trée as much, and dissolue it in Vinegar that is verie good, and oftentimes annoynt the sore place ther∣with, and it helpeth. For kernells, or Kings euill. ¶ Take two ounces of the water of Broome-flowers stil∣led, and giue it to the patient in the morning fasting, and it wil purge the euill humour downe-ward, and wasteth and healeth the kirnels without breaking them out-wardly. Also if you séeth the water of Broome-flowers, and put it in the patients Wine, it will doe him great ease. Also if you stampe Cuccow pintle with Bores-greace, and lay the same to the place, it helpeth. Also if you make a plaister of redde Docke, and stampe old greace therewith, it helpeth.
For the Kings euill. ¶ Take the roote of Briony or of Aristologia longa, or Smerewort a like much, and beate them with Honny, and old greace, and lay it there-unto. Also take Beanes, and mingle them after they bee beaten, with the gleare of an Egge, or old Oyle, and it will dissolue the kernels or kings enill. Also if Darnell be sodden in wine with the dunge of an Asse and Linseedes, and being drunke it helpeth mightily. Take of the decoction of the barkes or pilles of Copporis, and Sperage, and annoynt it with this oyntment. Take a gray Serpent and cut off his head and tayle, about foure inches thereof, and afterwarde, with the greace of that Serpent annoynt the said sore, For a Laxe. ¶ Take Scene an ounce, Rubarbe two penny-woorth, spignard a penny weight, infuse the same with white Wine, or water of Englasse or Borage, of each halfe a pint, and warme them scalding hote, or boyle them a little, and so let it stande al night, then warme it in the morning and straine them, put in a little Ginger, and Sugar, and so drinke it all warme, till that thou be well eased thereof. A powder laxatiue. ¶ Take halfe an ounce of Scene in powder, a quanty of Spignard brused, and an ounce of Ginger in powder, bruse all these very well, and put this into the soft pappe of an Apple, and so vse to take a pretty quantitie of this to bedward. A powder for a laxatiue person. ¶ Take in Sommer the white flowers of Elders, asmuch as yée will occupie all the yeere, and dry it two or three dayes in the Sunne, and then put the same into a bladder, and when you will occupie it, dry it as you doo Saffron, and put a little in
an Ale berry, or in a messe of pottage, and incontiuent he shall haue thrée or soure stooles. For the Leaper, a medicine. ¶ Take the iuyce of black Berries, and temper it with fir∣rop made of wilde Sage, it is good for them that bee leaprous, and they that feare the comming of it, shold vse euery morning to drinke halfe an ounce thereof. Another medicine for the Leaper. ¶ Take and make a bath of strong Wine that the leaues and flowers of Elder is sodden in, for it greatly profiteth them that be like to fall into lepry by reason of fleame. Also a bath made in water that Scabbious and Moleyne is sodden in, is good for them that haue the spice of the Leaprie, called Alopice, in the which the hayres fall. To make a man leane. ¶ Take and fill a panne full of Filberds flowers, and seeth them a night and a day, and put thereto Wine that they dry not, then let the Wine be strained, and let the patient drinke it fiue dayes together in the month of February. For the lunges. ¶ Take Southernwood, and meddle it with Licoris and Isope, seeth it in Wine or water, make it swéete with Sugar, and so drunke, is very good for all diseases of the lungs & breast, when the sicknes commeth of cold, the breast shall be annoyn∣ted with vnguentum dialthea, and it easeth. Also the broth of a Creues is good for the paine in the lungs consuming, as when a man hath a swelling about the lunges, then he commeth to drynes and consuming of the naturall moi∣sture till he dieth. Also the roote of wilde Rapes are good to clense the lunges, if it be sodden with Licoris, and drunke. Al∣so, if Figges be sodden with Isope, it clenseth the lunges and healeth the old cough.
For the Morphew. ¶ Take water of Elder, and drinke thereof thrée spoonefuls in the morning, and when you haue drunke thereof walke vp and downe till you catch you a good heate, and then take a pint of white Vinegar, and nine Oake apples, and cut them and lay them thrée dayes and thrée nights in the same Vinegar, and af∣ter take a faire linnen cloth, and put the Apples therein and then straine them, and with the licour thereof annoynt thy bo∣die thrée dayes. Also take the iuyce of Selidon, and mingle it with the pow∣der of Brimstone, and doe it to the Morphew all cold. Also for the Morphew white or black, take Musterd-seede and salt, and stampe them together: then temper them with Vinegar, and annoynt the Morphew therewith. For the Morphew, white or blacke. ¶ Take an ounce of fine Verdigreace, and one ounce of Brimstone, and make them both into small powder, then take two sheepes heads that are fat, and flea them, and cleaue them and take out the braine and cast it away, then wash thē cleane, and séeth them til they be tender, and then take them of the fire, and let them stand till the next day, and then gather off all the greace thereof, and mingle the foresaid powder therwith, and then put it in a boxe, and let it come neere no fire after thou hast doone them together, but worke them all cold: and it will heale the Morphew, bée it white or blacke, if you annoynt the sicke therewith against the fire euery night when he goes to bed, and in the morning wash it away with Vinegar. Another for the Morphew. ¶ Take blacke Sope, and put it in a cleane Cloth, and put it in your owne vrine, and there-with annoint the Morphew. Also let the partie gréeued, drinke morning and euening, water of Femitory, and water of Borage, mingled together, in like portions, and within foure-teene dayes it will helpe him clean.
Also take greene Copperas, and put it in cleane water, and let it stand a day, and then clense the water, and then annoynt the Morphew with the water. A mechcine for the Marmole. ¶ Take Broome flowers and dry them and beate them to powder, and temper the powder with oyle made of Mints, and a little Vinegar there-with: and annoynt the sore there-with. Take great Wall nuts as they grow, huskes and all, and bray them in a Morter, and temper it with oyle Oliue, and fry it in a pan, and put thereto a quantitie of pitch in the frying thereof, and straine it through a linnen cloth, and there-with annoynt the sore, and lay Plantaine leaues about the back towarde the sore, and euery morning wash the sore with Madder water. For to heale a Marmole. ¶ Take a pinte of clarified Honny, and a quart of running water, and a great quantitie of Sage, and seeth them together as well as thou canst, and wash the wound with the licour, and lay a Sage leafe on the wound. Another for the same. ¶ Take oyle Oliue, and annoynt the sore there-with, and lay thereon a Plantine leafe, and euery morning wash the sore with Madder water. For to cure a Marmole. ¶ Take fresh Seame, and the kernels of ripe Nutts, and stampe them small as may be, and blende them together with Aqua vitae, and Honny, and make them thick as a plaister, and lay it on a linnen cloth, and put to the Marmole, and as often as yee shall change the plaister, ye shall find it full of red wormes, and therfore kéepe this medicine thereto fresh and fresh, til such time as the wormes be cleane out, but looke that you claw not your legges to make them bleede.
A maturatiue to ripen a botch or a bile. ¶ Take sower dow, and white of old Swines greace, and beate them together, and put thereto salte, and the powder of Comin, and mingle them well together, and make a plaister thereof, this ripeth and breaketh impostumes, but my Maister did put thereto powder of Fenegréeke, and the yolke of an Eg at one time, if there be much, for failing of the hart. How to make Neruaile for all akings. ¶ Take two pound of wild mersh, and a pounde of Ambro∣sen, and a pound of Camemile, a pound of Betony, and a pound of Sage, a pound of Mints, and a pound of Hawhew, & a pound of Southernewood, a pound of Mugwort, and a pound of worm∣wood, a pound of Mallowes, and a pound of Holly-hock, a pound of Hore-hound, and a pound of red Nettles, a pound of Lorrell leaues, and a pound of Liuerwort, then take all these hearbes and stampe thē in a morter small, and doo thereto three or foure pound of May butter, and a quart of oyle Oliue, and stampe thē together, then doe them in an earthen pot, and couer it wel, and set the pot in a moist place, and let it stand nine dayes, and the tenth day take it out of the pot, and put it in a pan, and set it on the fire to séeth, and stirre it that it doo not cleane to the pan, and when it hath well boiled, take it from the fire, and straine it through a cloath, a little and a little into a faire vessell, thē take that licour, and put it in a cleane pan, and sette it ouer the fire, and doo thereto a quarter of a pound of shéepes tallow, melted, and asmuch Frankensence well broken in powder, and stirre them well together, till it be molten, and then take if from the fire, and let it stand and coole, and make thereon a hole, and let out the water thereof: and turne it on the other side, and doe a∣waie the foulenes thereof: then take it, and doo it in the panne againe: and set it ouer the fire till that it be molten, and then doo therto a pint of the greace of a Gray, if you may haue it, then with a feather scum it cleane, and put it in boxes, and this is the kindly making of Neruaile, and this oyntment is hote.
To make Neruaile to helpe all sinnewes, and to put them in theyr strength. ¶ Take Ambrosen, Camemile, hearbe Iohn, hearbe Wa∣ter, hearbe Robert, Eglantine, the leaues of Crosse wood, Fe∣negreke, Laurell leaues, as much thereof as of all the other, breake them and lay them in white Wine, and let them lye so fourteene dayes, then take a pottle of greace & a quarte of May butter, and of oyle Oliue, and boile them together, and straine them, and let them coole: and so vse it to the shrunck sinewes. Heere followeth the making of diuers kindes of oyles, and it showes which be hote, which be cold, according to the opinion of Ipocras and Gallen. Oyle of Roses. ¶ Take and fill a glasse full of Rose leaues, and put thereto one pound of oyle Oliue, and stop it well, and set it in the sunne, stirring it euery day once for the space of xv. dayes, then straine it through a cloth, and put it vpon cold water, and stirre it with Hasell wood, but take the barke off, and this is moist and colde. Oyle of yolkes of Egges. ¶ Take yolkes of Egges, and put them in a pot ouer the fire, and let them so stand ouer the heate of the fire till you per∣ceiue they are become black, then put them in a presse, & presse out the oyle, and this oyle is good for all manner of burnings or scaldings what soeuer. Oyle of Henbane. ¶ Take the séede of Henbane and fry it in oyle, and presse it through a cloth, and afterward put the same for your vse into some glasse, for this oyle is good for all maner of swellings, and burnings in the ioynts.
Oyle of Mandrakes. ¶ Take and cut them in diuers péeces, and séeth them in a double vessell of glasse, and set them in the Sunne, and let it standnine dayes, then set them on a small fire till they be thiek, and keepe that oyle, for it is good for all festures. Oyle of Lorrell. ¶ Take Lorrell leaues and bray them in a Morter, and let it stand two or thrée dayes, and then seeth them, and straine thē through a cloth, and that which heaueth aboue, is the oyle. Also take Lorrell Berries when they be gréene, and seeth them in oyle, and straine them, and it is good oyle. Also take Lorrell berries when they be ripe, and seeth them with Lorrell leaues, and thereof thou shalt haue the best Oyle, and this oyle is good for diuers cold causes. Another sort of oyle, very necessary for diuers purposes. ¶ Take Almonds or Nuts blaunched into a pot ful of holes in the bottome, and set that pot vpon a séething potte, that the breath of the séething pot may enter into the other potte, and wring these kirnels & receiue that oyle, and keepe it in a glasse, and this is good for diuers purposes. To make oyle of Mustard-seede. ¶ Take foure pound of Mustard-séede, and foure pounde of oyle, grinde them together, and let them stande so nine dayes, then stir it and keepe it in boxes: thys oyle is good for the pal∣sie, the goute, the stitch, and also for the Podagra. To make oyle of Fennell. ¶ Take a quantitie of Fennell betwéene two Tile stones, or plates of yron, make them very hote, and presse out the ly∣cour, and this oyle will keepe a great while, for it is good for Tissick, dry scab, and for burning or scalding.
To make Oyle of Rew. ¶ Take rew leaues and cut them small, then put them in a pot with common oyle, the space of nine or twelue dayes, then séeth them till they be wasted to the third part, then straine it, and this oyle is very good for to restraine from all manner of priuie causes of pestilence, which are remaining within a man, woman, or child. To make oyle of Iuie. ¶ Take Iuie leaues and bruse them, and put them in wine and oyle in the same manner as you doo Lorrell berries, and so make thys oyle of Iuie berries. Another for the same. ¶ Take Iuie berries with the leaues, and séeth them after the same manner as you doo the Lorrell berries, euen so doo by the Iuie berries. To make oyle of Cammemile. ¶ Take the flowers of Cammemile and stampe them in a Morter, and put thereto oyle Oliue, and let it lie in the iuyce twelue dayes, and let it seeth ouer the fire, then let it boyle a lit∣tle, and take it off and presse out the iuyce, and put it into small glasses, and put thereto the flowers of Camemile beeing stam∣ped small, and let it stand 16. dayes, and so this oyle is made. To make oyle of Roses. ¶ Take red Rose leaues a good quantitie, and stamp them in a Morter, and put thereto oyle Oliue, and let it stande in the Sunne twelue dayes, and then put it in a glasse, and binde fast the glasse about with ropes of Hay, and set it in a panne full of water, and let it boyle softly two howres, and then let it keele, then put it in small glasses, and put thereto the leaues of redde Roses all whole, and stop it fast, and set it in the sunne for six∣teene dayes, and so vse it at your neede.
To make oyle of Olibanum. ¶ Take Bawme flowers a bushell, and picke away the buds, and beat them, and put thereto fresh butter, and a quarte of swines greace, and a pottle of oyle Oliue, & put it in an ear∣then pot or panne of three gallons, and stop the mouth fast with dowe, and set it in the ground, and take a tile and doe it vppon the mouth, that nothing doe come thereto, and let it stand fortie dayes vnder the ground, and at the fortie dayes end see that you be not fasting, then take a pan with a ladell and put it therein, and set it ouer the fire, and giue it thrée waumes vpon the fire till it be greene, then take it from the fire, and straine it into a pewter Bason, and doo it in an carthen vessell where you will kéepe it. This is the true making of oyle of Olibanum, and it is moist in working: it is good for all manner of sores, but especi∣ally for the morimall and Canker, and for Noli me tangere, or for any other sore, proued by many Maisters of Chirurgery. To make the oyle of Exceter. ¶ Take two pounde of Cowslip flowers in May, and put them in oyle Oliue, and then put them in an Earthen pot close, vntill the month of Iune, then take these hearbes following, Lorrell, Ambrose, calamint, pellitorie of Spaine, Sage, Peri∣tory, Scabions, Lauender, hearbe Iohn, Lilly roetes, Rosema∣rie, of each a handfull: bray all these in a Morter, then take the Cowslips out of the oyle, and bray them as you doe the other hearbes, then put them in a pan and boyle them together softly, till all the water be cleane sodden away, for if the water bee in the bottome, let it seeth till it be wasted, and then straine them through a cloth with cleane hands, and when your oyle is kind∣ly wrought, then put it in pots or glasses, and stop it from the ayre. This oyle is good for all aches, except the Gout. To make an oyle for many greefes. ¶ Take Mirrhe, Aloes exaticum, Spignard, Sandragon, Incense, Sarazens flesh, Bedilium, Balme séede, gum Aroma∣tick,
Siracell, Mastick, Saffron, gum Arabek, Storax liquida, of each of these two ounces, Labdanum, Castor, of each 2. oun∣ces, Muske, and Turpentine, as much, make powder of all that wil be powdered, and meddle them with Turpentine, and still them in a glasse as you doo Rosewater, and keepe it in a ve∣ry strong glasse. This oyle kéepeth the substance of mans lims and the sinewes, and keepeth dead folkes from rotting, béeing medled with the oyle of Roses, and annoynt all thy back from the hart of the fore-head to the raynes, and it maketh a leane body fat: and if the backe be annoynted before the axis, it hel∣peth the Feauers, and for him that may not speake: it is good for the rising of the Mother, for the falling euill, for to be put in his eares, and in his nose. Also it is good for them that be sorry without a cause, and for them that be drunke with Wine: and it is comfortable for all diseases be they hote or cold. prooued. To make a greene oyntment. ¶ Take a pounde of Swines greace, an ounce of Verdi∣greace, halfe an ounce of Salgeme, and make thereof an oynt∣ment, and it may bee kept forty Winters: and this oyntment is good for the Canker and for running holes, and for to heale all wounds old and new it fretteth away dead flesh, and brin∣geth new: and put of this into a wound & it shall not fester, and this oyntment is good for the rising of the yard or morimal, and there is no oyntment that worketh so especially as this doth. To make a greene oyntment. ¶ Take one pound of Sage, of Bayes halfe a pound, of rew halfe a pound, of Worme wood as much, and choppe them very small altogether: take thrée pound of sheepes sewet, beate the hearbes and the sewet together till they be all one, then take three pints of Sallet oyle, the herbes & the sewet mingle them together, and let it stand two dayes, and then sette it on the fire and stir it together till the hearbs be somewhat hard, thē straine them, and preserue them to their vse that haue néed thereof.
To make a precious oyntment, called Deweto. ¶ Take the rasing of Harts-horne 2. pound, of Fenegreke 1. pound, of oyle Oliue 4. pound, sheepes tallow 1. pounde, and 2. ounces of Galbanum. 2. ounces of the gum of Iuie, and two ounces of Perrossen, and bray them together, and doo thereto a portion of white Wine, or of water: and so let it stand 3. dayes, and on the 4. day let it seeth ouer the fire till it waxe thick, then take it off and straine it through a cloth, and put thereto a little hote water for the thicknes, and straine it as harde as you may betwéene your hands, and take the third deale of that licour and put thereto two pounde of oyle Oliue, and let them boyle well, till they be some-what wasted, & put thereto a portion of waxe and of Turmentill, and doo it to the other licour, and let them seeth well till it waxe thick, then doo it off the fire, and let it keele, and then put it in boxes. This oyntment is good for great gréeuaunce of the stone, and for the aking of the ribbes, and all hard greeuaunce: it maketh them nesh, but the partie must bée annoynted against the fire, for this hath been proued. To make a good oyntment. ¶ Take of Smallage and Mallowes, and put thereto two pound of Bores greace, one pound of May butter, and oyle of Neates feete a good quantity: stampe them well together, then fry them, and straine them into an earthen vessell. A medicine for the palsie. ¶ Take oyle Oliue and the slowers of Cowslips, out them together, and still them in a glasse in the sunne, and then take two spoonefuls of the oyle that shall come of it with a spoonefull of Aqua vitae, and warme it on the fire in a saucer, & so annoynt the place which is benumd or gréeued, and the patient shall find very great remedy: prooued. A medicine for the Palsie. ¶ Take a handful of Marigolds, beate them and wring out the iuyce therof with a draught of Ale, & put to the same a spoone∣full
of as good Musterd that may be gotten, warme this drinke thrée times, and so giue it to the party so gréeued. Another medicine for the palsie. ¶ Take Cowslips, wild Sage, Lauender, and stamp them small, and worke them with swéet Ale, and make them vp in balls, and make holes in them, and fill them full of swéet oyle, and let them stand infuse nine dayes, then take them & temper them againe with swéet oyle, and then fry them, and straine them, and so annoynt the party so gréeued with the palsie. An electuary for the palsie. ¶ Take Mints, Sinamon, Comin, Rose leaues dryed, Mastick, Fenigreeke, Valerian, Ameos dorinici, Zedoarye, Cloues, Saunders, and Lignum aloes, of euery one a dram, Muske halfe a dram, make an electuary with clarified hony, and let either man or child that hath the palsie, take halfe as much as a nut. Also a bath made with these hearbs, Sauery, Marierum, Time, Sage, Nep, Smallage, and Mints, are very wholesome for the same. A plaister for a man that is benumed in any member with cold or palsie. ¶ Take Sauine, Ru, Sage, Musterstéede, and temper it with white Wine, and make it as thick as it were a plaister, and so let it stand in a vessell a day and a night, and then lay it on a cloth thick, and lay it to the member benumed. For the pricking of a thorne or needle in a ioynt, and the hole stopped. ¶ Take fine bolted flower of Wheate, and temper it with white Wine, and boile it together till it be thicke with white Wine, and lay it to the sore as hot as you may suffer it, and it shall open the hole and draw out the venim and cease the a∣king, and heale it againe, this medicine is good to heale a bile or any Whitlow or Vncome.
For the pricking of a thorne. ¶ Take Mather rootes and grind them small, and boyle it with oyle Oliue, and lay it therunto, or els with the aforesaide oyle anoynt the sore place, and it will doo thée good. A preparatiue. ¶ Take of Endiue, Succory, Harts-tung, Borage, of each a handfull, of Persly roots, Fennell roots, Fumitory, and the tops of young Hops, of each a quarter of a handfull, of Time, Betony, Germaunder, of each foure crops, great Raizons a handfull, of Licoris a little brused, halfe an vnce of Fenell séed, seeth all these in a pot of faire water to the halfe, then put ther to sixe spoonefuls of vineger, and after one boyling straine them without pressing, then take the clearest thereof, and if you will make a sirrop thereof, put to a pint of the broth, a pound of Su∣ger, and in the boyling therof put therto a little Cinamon bru∣sed, the weight of eight pence, let him drinke of this foure good spoonfuls, with sixe spoonfuls of Borage water warmed fasting in his bed, and sweat after it. To make an excellent Millilot plaister. ¶ Take of gréene Millilot brused ten handfuls, boyle it in a pottell of white Wine to the wasting of the halfe, and straine it, then put therto of Rozen a pound, Waxe as much, Shéepes tallow foure vnces Turpentine three vnces, Mastick one vnce, boyle all saue the Mastick, vntill the wasting of the iuice more then halfe, then bruse other sixe handfuls of Millilot, and put to it while it is a boyling, and stir it well while it hath a play or two, then take it from the fire, and straine it while it is hete through a course canuas bag, and with wringing and iumping betweene two round staues, till by little and little, the stuffe, gums, and iuyce be come all out as much as you can get, and when you may handle it, put therto your vnces of Mastick fine∣lie powdered, and make it in rowles, mingle your Mastick in the handling thereof.
To make the powder of life. ¶ Take Spinage, Columbine, Camomell, the séed of Fe∣mitory and Marigold, of euery of these iuyces and séedes one handfull, and dry them out of the Sunne, and make thereof powder, and giue it to drink either hot or cold: for this hath béen proued a medicine full true. The Philosophers stone so called for medicine to cure all diseases both within and without, Fistules, Canker, Poxe, Falling sicknes, Woolfes, S. Antonies fire, and all incu∣rable diseases, proued. ¶ Take Celondine leaues fast by the roots in May or Iune, and seethe them in running water, vntill such time as they doe come to pap, and as pap take them forth, and grind them on a stone very fine as Gréene-sauce, and let it be no dryer, then put them in a glasse with a Limbeck head & a receauer, but it must be stilled in Balneo likewise, receaue the first water by it selfe, and when it beginneth to drop somewhat slowly or to change, then take that receauer away, & put another to it, and then take that as long as it will stil, then take that glasse away, and kéepe it closely and sure for that is the fiery element, and the first is the water, then let your glasse coole, and then set it in ashes in a dry Furnace, and draw the last water by it selfe, for that is the ayre, and that that remaineth in the bottom is the earth, which earth you must take out and grind it on a stone fine, and let it stand vpon the stone for to dissolue into water, for so it will in time so that the stone stand in a moist place, but you must re∣member to close your stone round about, that the water passe not by when it is in moistnes, set your stone hanging a little a∣side, and make a little gutter for the water to run into the glasse in the which glasse it must be congealed vntill it come to earth, therfore to stop your glasse that nothing doo goe out but that all may come to earth again, and thus with that earth grind it and dissolue it, and congele it two or thrée times for it is better, and
then this earth will doo great wonders, all diseases it will run through and all wounds, and cause the same for to heale surely, and being drunke with your Aurum potabile, and as much of that earth as a Hasell nut drunk, and this will expulse all wic∣ked humors out of thée that no ill can grow in the body, if you so vse it but once a wéeke with the portion. Also your first water must be stilled often, and that remay∣neth still in the glasse must be put into the earth for that is earth, if the Phisition doo well skill vpon the triplicities, and who hath the great gouernance in man of the triplicities, as for the earth Taurus, Capricorne, and Virgo, and for the ayre A∣quarius, Libra, and Gemeni, and for the fire Leo, Sagitarius, A∣ries, and for the water Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces: then who so can know the complexions in them, and minister accordingly, he shall doo great wonder with these medicines & Quintisans, and as for the earth being so vsed as aforesaid, it will dissolue siluer of it selfe, and also gold: and also heale many incurable diseases in man or woman that haue long raigned, and béene most vncurable for to be healed. Laus deo. To make Aurum potabile et Quintescena. ¶ Take Tartar the best you can get, and fine calcenate it very white, then take a part about a pound, and let it drinke foure pound of Aqua vitae, rectified by little and little, giue the Tartar to drink of the Aqua vitae, this must be done in a glasse or Limbeck set vpon ashes with a little fire, and euer kéepe it close, and so being congeled in maner somwhat liquid, then dis∣solue it with more Aqua vitae rectified, and by and by it will dis∣solue, and looke as it were Azure right in colour, then take of this water ordained of God, for to comfort his creatures, put it in a vessell of glasse againe, faire being dissolued cleane, then take fine Duckat gold, but beware of the same gold, take an vnce first fined in a teste, and then fine beaten in fine shéetes, then take pure fine life hony foure spoonfuls, and take a quarter of Gentiana fine searced to pouder, the gold Gentiana and hony must be ground finely and put to the Quintescens, halfe an vnce
of fine mother pearle, grind all strongly together vpon a Mar∣ble stone, and put all into your water or Quintescens, put all into your glasse, and set it in stilling with a gentle fire, and let it still vp and downe ten or twelue daies, and then kéepe it close and safe, for it is good, let it still in most balnes in any case, and then it is done. Some doe vse to make oyle of gold in this man∣ner, they doo take vineger and put filing of gold in it or leafe gold, so let it stand in the Sunne when it is hot twelue dayes, and there will arise vpon the vineger as a scum, the which you must gather with a feather, and as you gather it you may put it into your Aurum potabile, or els grind it with your hony pearle and Gentiana, for this gold is better, for this is one of the Phi∣losophers great secrets hidden, this is a vertuous Quintescens or water of life to heale all infirmities, as leaprosies, and as many as be in man that is hard for to heale, and if a man be a dying and haue but one dram nature within him, giue him but one spoonfull of it, and if his time be not ordained of God it shall help him certainly, and will procure him for to liue longer, by Gods prouidence prouided for man. Note this noble deuine plaister which hath a number of vertues in him as heereafter followeth. ¶ Take Galbanum an vnce, Aromatici thrée vnces, Appo∣ponaci an vnce, new Wax twenty vnces, oyle Oliue a pound, Litarge of gold thirtéene vnces, Olibane two vnces, myrrh an vnce, gréene Copperis as vnce, Aristologia longa an vnce, Ma∣stick an vnce, Bedely two vnces, Orimandi calamita foure vn∣ces, make all these into pouder euery one seuerally by himselfe, take a pot of earth and your Galbanum, Armoniaci, Appopona∣ci, and put it in white vineger very strong, and couer the pot till such time that all be molten in them, after straine it through a strainer, then put it in a cleane vessell, and set it on a gentle fire and temperate, and let them simper together vntill all your vi∣neger be consumed, then take your oyle Oliue, and put it in the same pot, and so stir them together on a gentle fire continually,
and when all is molten then put in your lytarge of gold made in powder, and as you put it in you must be euer stirring of it that it may consume in the substance: and thus you must vse it vntill it come to blacknes, then put in your Bedely, Olibanum, Ari∣stologia longa, Myrth, Mastick, your Verdigreace, Copperis, and your Calamita, let it be all in very fine pouder, and when it is sod and well boiled it will be black and red, and put a little on a stone or cloth, and if it be hard then it is sodden well, then let him séeth vntill such time as he be hard, and so prescrue it, then anoynt your hand with oyle Oliue, and so take it forth, then make it in roles as Past, and put it in a péece of Geates skinne well and cleane made, then put it in a vessell of Lead to kéepe, made like a boxe close, for this is the precious diuine plaister of all the world none like it, it is a Kings iewell of health, for it is good for all diseases both old and new, and shall giue new flesh; and good that he had no better before, if a man be broken let him make a plaister, and lay it to nine dayes, it shall knit sure for euer againe by Gods grace. The black plaister for all manner of griefes. ¶ Take a pot of oyle Oliue, a part of red Lead, boyle these together, and stir them with a slice of wood continually vntill it be black and somwhat thick, then take it off the fire, and put it in a peny worth of red Wax, and a pound of Rozen, and set it to the fire againe, but you may not blase it and stir it, then take it off and let it stand vntill it be cold, and make it in a lump, it is good for a new wound, or to staunch blood, poure a little of it in a dish, and if it stick fast vnto the dishes side, then it is inough, and preserue it to your vse as neede requireth. The making of the flower of all plaisters and salues called Flos vnguentorum per G. K. ¶ Take halfe a pound of Rozen, halfe a pound of Perossen, a quarter of a pound of Frankensence, a quarter of a pound of virgin Wax, an vnce of Mastick, a quarter of a pound of Dears
sewet, a quarter of a pound of Shéepes sewet, two drams of Camphire, a quarter of a pound of Venice Turpentine, and melt that may be molten, and make powder of that which may be beaten to powder, and searce your powder through a fine searcer, and to compound this treate or plaister with all: your Waxe, Shéepes sewet, and Deares sewet must be first molten on a soft fire, then your Olibanum, Mastick, with your Rozen and Perossen, and your Frankensence and Myrrh, and last of all your Turpentine of Venice, and as you put these gums in, you must euer be stirring it with a little sticke that it doe not grow to the kettle side with a soft fire: the gums being throughly molten, take the kettle from the fire still stirring of it, let your Myrrh and your Turpentine be put in the last, for that must not abide on the fire long after it is put in, then take a pottle of good white Wine, and let your strainer be of canuas, ready for to straine the sayd gums withall, and let there be no holes in the canuas strayner, then take a faire Bason or Péece and put it in a quart or thrée pints of your white Wine, and then let it runne through into the white Wine, and so let it coole for the space of two houres, and then worke it and make it vp in roles, and let the roles lye continually still in the white Wine, for it will be  as Allablaster, and yée may kéepe it this seauen yeares in full effect and goodnes, and especiallie for all new woundes and aches béeing spread vpon new can∣uasse, and apply it to the gréefe, and these be the vertues of this Flores vnguentorum. Also this noble Salue or plaister amongst all other is most clensing, and wel sounding the flesh, that it healeth more in one weeke then in any other, it wil suffer no corruption to be ingen∣dred in man or woman, nor no euill flesh to grow, for all these diseases aboue named, it is the most strange medicine that euer was sound: as in experience it hath béen full many times pro∣ued and tryed.
The golden plaister that healeth all bruses of vaines or sinewes, proued. ¶ Take Colofony, Pitch, Rozen, and Oyle, thrée vnces, of liquid Pitch an vnce, of Olibanum an vnce, of Auri vnguenti a like of each, of Wine as much as suffiseth, and make thereof a plaister, and lay it too, and kéepe it to your vse. To make Gratia dei. ¶ Take halfe a pound of Rozen, and boile it in a pan vntill the fome or scum be come of it, then take a quarter of a pound of vnwrought Wax, and put it into the Rozen, and boyle them to∣gether as is aforesaid: then take an vnce of Sheepes sewet, and as much of Turpentine, and oyle Oliue a spoonefull, and put them all together into the same pan amongst the Rozen and Wax aforesaid, and boyle them all together vntill the fome be∣gin aboue, and when the fome beginneth to waxe blacke, then take it off the fire and clense it through a faire linnen cloth into a pan of water, then work it with your hands, and put it out as you doo Birdlime for the space of a quarter of an houre, and now and then wet your hands in the wa when it cleaueth to the salue, and then make it into roles. To make Gratia dei minor. ¶ Take Betony, Veruaine, Pimpernell that beareth the white flower, of each thrée handfuls, and bray them, séeth them in white Wine till it be halfe sodden, then poure out the Wine through a cloth, and set it ouer the fire: put thereto Perrosin a pound, Mastick a pound, Virgin wax, and take womans milk that nourisheth a man child a quantity, mingle them together boyling with a slice till it be well melt: then take it off the fire, put in halfe a pound of Turpentine, stir it well together till it be cold, then kéepe it till ye néede: it is good for all new wounds and olde, for the Webbe in the eye, it suffereth no dead flesh
to remaine within the wounde. Also for stinging of venimous beasts, and also for all maner of impostumes, and for all sores. To make a plaister that will heale a wounde. ¶ Take a pound of the iuyce of Betony, as much of Plan∣tine, the iuyce of Smallage as much, Bursa pastoris as much, and foure pound of Waxe and Perrossen, a quarter of a pounde of Incense: boyle all these together with the iuyces of these 4. hearbes, till they be almost thick, and then put therein a quar∣ter of a pound of Turpentine, oyle Oliue thrée pound, and so vse it as a plaister at neede. A methridate against poysons and pestilence, which for a trueth was prooued vpon foure Irish Gentlemen poysoned with Rats∣bane, cast into a pan of Milke in Fraunce, who were so swolne that they were ready to burst. ¶ Take of the rootes of Turmentile two drammes, of all the kinde of Saunders, of euery of them a dram, white Ditta∣nie, newe gathered and dryed, a dramme of the top of a Harts horne, or a Spitrack of precious stones, the fragments of orient pearle, Bole armoniack, Aristologia rotunda, of each a dram, Peniriall, Mirrh, and sewet, of each two drams, Tarra limnia, of the purest, two drammes: the seedes of Cytrons and Saf∣fron of each a scruple, Vnicorns horne, and iacints, of each halfe a dramme. The licour to make this Electuary is Rosewater, and the water of Borage flowers distilled: boyle your Sugar and waters to a perfection, and in the cooling put in your pow∣ders searced, and so reserue it as a most precious treasure, that is, also a present remedy to driue out the Measels, shingles, small poxe, the plague pushes, and hath holpe them whose sores were gone in, and brought them out againe, and recouered the parties, and it defendeth all venim.
To make pilles against poyson, of a meruailous vertue, as hath been proued. ¶ Take Imperatrice, Bistorta, Turmentilla, Valeriana, Dit∣tamo, Bianco, Carlina, Gentiana, Aristologia rotunda, Agarico, Electo, Salgem, of each a like quantity, beate them in fine pow∣der, then take the iuyce of Garlike, and of Onions, as much as will make it into a paste. Also put into the iuyce one dram of Saffron, then let the sayd paste be mixt dry in the shadow, and then beate it into powder againe, and mixe it with the foresayd iuyce in good force, and kéepe it in a vessell of lead vntill thou hast neede, and when thou wilt vse it, take thereof 4. drammes, and make thereof pilles with Siropo aceteso, in good forme, the which thou shalt giue vnto him that is poysoned, and in short time thou shalt see miracles of this medicine: for all the afore∣said simple is in maner alone sufficient to deliuer one that were poisoned: but béeing mixed together, it worketh greater effect, these pilles are of as good experiment against poison as may be. For a man that hath drunke poyson. ¶ Take Betony and stampe it, and mingle it with water, and the poyson that the partie hath drunke, will presently come forth againe. Against the plague or pestilence. ¶ Take Matselon, Sentuarie, Worme-wood, Horchound, of each a good handfull, and stéepe them all night in a pot of Beare, and in the morning drinke a draught thereof fasting. Also to perfume your Chamber with Rosemary dryed, & Bay leaues, or Ieneper or Rosewater, and Cloues and Olibanum, it is very good to giue children in time of infection, treakle with water of Dragons or Scabions, or let them chew Zedwall in in their mouthes.
To driue out the plague if you thinke one be infected. ¶ Take the roote of Dragons, and the roots of Polipodi∣um of the Oake, of each like quantitie, and dry them in an O∣uen, and beate them to powder: and if you thinke that you bee infected, take asmuch of the powder as will lye on a groat, and put it in a cup of Ale, and drinke it next your hart, and it will driue out the plague, and preserue the patient. A powder to drinke to preserue one from the plague. ¶ Take Betony, Pimpernell, Sinckfoile, Scabions, of each of all these a like quantitie, and dry them all, and beat thē into fine powder, & where any infection of the plague is, drinke some of ye powder in Ale warme next your hart, two mornings in a wéeke, and if the infection bee great, drinke it euery mor∣ning, and by Gods grace it shall helpe you. For them that are infected with the plague ¶ Take a spoonefull of running water, aspoonfull of Vine∣gar, a good quantitie of Treakle to the bignes of a Walnutte, temper all these together and heate it luke-warme, and gine it him to drinke 24. howres. For the plague a remedie. ¶ Take Scabions and stampe it with swines greace, and lay it to the sore, and let it lye 24. howres vnremooued, and it will take it cleane away, or else breake it, and if the patient drinke the iuyce thereof, it is very good therefore. For the plague a medicine. ¶ Take an Onion and cut out the core, and fill it full of Treakle of Iane, and rost it in the fire: and then take three spoonefuls of red Vinegar, and sixe spoonefulles of iuyce of Sor∣rel, and straine the Onion with the said iuyce, and drinke it warme, and it will helpe you.
Another for the same. ¶ Take Treakle of Iane, and stirre it together with Gin∣ger and Cloues, and a little Saffron, and take thereof in the morning, next to your hart. For to kill Ring-wormes or Tetters. ¶ Take vnslacked lime and Sope, and mixe them tagether, and lay it vpon a parchment skinne, no broader then the King∣worme, and lay it thereto halfe an howre, vntill it take the barke or skinne, and thē take the iuyce of Orpine, and annoynt it till it be cold, and then heale it vp with salue. Also, if ye take glasse, and make the same into fine powder, and afterward meddle it with blacke Sope, & annoynt the sore there-with, it will heale the same. A very good oyntment for Ring-wormes or Tetters. ¶ Take oyle of Roses two ounces, newe Waxe 4. penny waight, mingle your oyle and Waxe together, then take Li∣tage of Golde, and Seruse, of each halfe an ounce, make your Litage and Seruse into fine powder, and meddle them in a bra∣zen Morter with your oyle & Waxe: then take halfe an ounce of Quicksiluer mortified, and the white of an Egge new layd, meddle them together, and put in your Quicksiluer last, and vse it euening and morning, and thus you shall mortifie your Quicksiluer, put it into a violl of glasse, and put fasting spettle to it, beate it vp and downe till it change colour like ashes, then put in your stuffe, and labour them well together, and after∣ward vse thereof at your neede. For a Ringworme or Tetter. ¶ Take foure ounces of Bores greace, and one ounce of Quicksiluer, and kill it with fasting spettle, one ounce of Ver∣digreace, a dramme of Camphire, a quantitie of blacke Sope,
and of Mustard, the iuyce of Walnut leaues, and grinde them altogether vpon a Painters stone, and put it into a boxe, and there-with annoynt all the places where the Ringworme or Tetter is, euening and morning, till it be whole. To kill a Ringworme or Tetter in what place soeuer it bee. ¶ Take blacke Sope and Pepper, and mingle themtogea∣ther, and make a plaister thereof, and lay it to the gréefe. Also take the iuyce of Honny-suckle leaues, and annoynt the place with a feather. Also take the oyle of Scorpian, & annoynt the place where the greefe is, and it helpeth the same. Also if you take the flower of Popell and Vinegar, and oyle of Nuts, and annoynt the place with the same, it will perfect∣lie cure the Tetter or Ringworme. A good restoritie to restore a mans nature, and to helpe them that are weake and decayed. ¶ Take and make Almond milke with the broth of Béefe mary-bones, and of a Cocke that is well boyled, then temper there-with yolkes of Egges, and good Bastard, then put them in the Almond milke, and make a Cawdell thereof with your Bastard, and cast blaunch powder vpon it, and you may put a little Rosewater vpon it, for it will be the better. A restoratiue of Rosa solis. ¶ Take Rosa solis, but touch not the leaues in gathering, nor washe it not, take thereof foure good handfuls, then take thrée pints of good Aqua vitae, and put them both into a glasse or pot of thrée or foure pints, and then stop it hard for three dayes and thrée nights, and the fourth day straine it through a cleane
cloth into a glasse or pewter pot, and put thereto halfe a pounde of fine Sugar beaten very fine, take foure ounces of fine Lico∣ris beaten in powder, halfe a pound of sound Dates, the stones taken out, make them cleane, and mince them small, and put all these together in a glasse or pewter pot, and stop it close that no ayre goe out, and drinke thereof at night halfe a spoonefull with Ale or Beere, but Ale is best, take as much in the mor∣ning fasting, for there is not the weakest body in the world that wanteth nature or strength, or that is in a consumption, but that wil restore him againe, and make them to haue a good ap∣petite to theyr meate. For to restore the strength of a man that is brought low. ¶ Take two or thrée Fennell rootes, and as many Parsely rootes, Isope, Time, Sauory, Violet leaues, of each halfe a handfull, and a Licoris sticke brused small, a spoonfull of Anny∣séedes, halfe a handfull of great Raisons, with a handfull of Barlie: make your broth of all these, sodden in a pottle of wa∣ter till it come to a quart, or lesse, and when your meat is verie well sodden, stampe it: your flesh must be either a Cock Chic∣ken, or a knockell of Veale, and being so stamped very well to∣gether: straine it and kéepe it, and giue the patient therof mor∣ning and euening often, and it will restore him although hée be neuer so low brought. A salue to heale all manner of sores, and especially for afresh wound. ¶ Take of oyle Oliue and Turpentine a like much, a pret∣tie quantitie, of Rosemary-leaues pricked, boyle all these toge∣ther, and in boyling put thereto a spoonefull of faire water, and let thē boyle together vntill the water be consumed as an oynt∣ment, and when it is boyled, straine it hote and warme, and let it stand in a vessell of earth, and when ye shall occupie it, heate
it ouer the fire, and against the fire dresse the sore, so that the fire may dry the oyntment, and if neede bee, that there be no dead flesh, lay lint in the salue, and lay it hote against the sore, and if it neede to be tented, then tent it with a tent of the same oyntment hote, and lay vpon the tent a plaister of hote cleauing salue, and it will cure any wound or sore. To make a salue to bring sores that rankle and ake into their owne kinde, and cease the burning and aking. ¶ Take the iuyce of Smallage & of Plantine of each like much, of Honny and the white of an Egge a like much, and put thereto flower of boulted Wheate, and stirre them well to∣gether vntill it be thicke, and let it come néere no fire but all cold and raw lay it to the sore, and it shall clense the wound and cease the aking, and bring it to his kinde and heale it faire: for this is a principall salue for sores. A salue for a newe cut that will not leaue bleeding. ¶ Take the blades of vnset Léekes, stampe them, and put thereto Honny and Wheate flower, and stirre them well toge∣ther vntill they be thicke, and let it come neere no fire, but all cold lay it to the wound, and it will staunch the bléeding, and it will driue out the brused blood, and make it cleane and heale it. A salue for all sores. ¶ Take oyle Oliue a pint & a halfe, Turpentine asmuch, Rozen a quarter of a pound, vnwrought ware halfe a pound, of sheepes tallow 4. pound, then take two handfuls of Smallage, 2. handfuls of Bugle, 2. handfuls of Ragewoort, 2. handfuls of Plantaine, 2. handfuls of Orpine, and cut all these herbs smal, and séeth them in the foresaid geare aboue written, & let it boyle softly ouer the fire, alwaies stirring it vntill it bee well medled trgether, and when you thinke it well, take it from the fire, and straine it through a strainer of Canuas, and so vse it.
A salue for a newe hurt. ¶ Take Waxe and sheepes sewet, but not so much of the sewet as waxe, and a little Rozen, and if you will heale it short∣lie, but in but a very little Rozen, and set it ouer the fire togea∣ther, and as it riseth stirre it, and then put therein a dish of wa∣ter, and when it is cold make it in roules. Another for the same. ¶ Take the whitest Virgin waxe that ye can get, and melt it in a panne, then put in a quantity of Butter and Honny, and seeth them together, and take a dish with faire water & straine it into the water, and worke it with your hands, and then make it in a round ball, and so you may keepe it: and when you lay it to any sore, you must first worke it in your hand, and then strike it on a cloth and lay it to: and this medicine wil both heale and draw the same. A salue for wounds, and all old sores. ¶ Take halfe a pound of Saruese and some-what more, of oyle Oliue, which is Sallet oyle, two ounces, of Vineger a pretty quantitie, and boyle it till it be blacke, and make it vp in roules, and so at your neede you may vse it. A very good salue called Incarnatiue, to bring flesh. ¶ Take of the best Turpentine, and wash it in very fayre water vntill it be very white, and then put out the water frō it, and compound it with the yolke of an Egge or two, and put in the dust of Frankensence and Saffron very fine beaten, and so worke them all together: and keepe it to your vse when you shall neede it. A notable healing salue. ¶ Take pure Ware, Rozen, Bolae amoniack, sheepes sew∣et, Déeres sewet, of rach one pounde, beate the Rozen and Ar∣moniack
into fine powder, and searce it through a fine searcer, then take Turpentine halfe a pound, boyle all these together vpon a soft fire, and stir them well all the while that they séeth, but put not in the Turpentine vntil it be ready to take from the fire, for it must haue but one walme, and so imploy this salue to any sore wound, and it will heale it in short time. To make a drawing salue. ¶ Take Deares sewet and melt it, and put in as much oyle Oliue, as much Rozen and Waxe, boyle them together, then let it stand and put in some Turpentine, and so straine all through a linnen cloth, and kéepe it to your vse. Another for the same. ¶ Take an vnce of Waxe, two vnces of Shéepes sewet, halfe an vnce of Olibanum, halfe an vnce of Rozen, two spoone∣fuls of Hony, two handfuls of young Docke leaues, and take and put them into three or foure old Dock leaues close wrapped together, and so rost the young Docks therein, and when the Docks be rosted put in your gums thereto. A salue for an olde sore. ¶ Take as many Bramble leaues as when they are shired come to a quarter of a pound, of Sage, and Valerian, of each of them a quarter of a pound, also as much of Waxe, as much fresh butter, halfe a pound of Rozen, then put them into a skil∣let, and boyle them altogether a good space, and then straine it through a faire cloth, and so kéepe the salue till that you haue néede thereof, and this helpeth. The making of a salue to cure wounds that be rank∣led and brused, and to cease the swelling, and aking. ¶ Take the iuyce of Smallage, and the iuice of pety Mor∣rell, and the iuyce of Plantaine leaues, of each a like much,
then take Honey and the white of an Egge a like of each of the same as of the iuyce, and meddle them all on the fire, and put therto flower of bolted Wheat, and stir them well together till it be some deale thicke, and then let it come nye no fire, but lay it to the wound all cold, and it will clense the wound and cease the aking and brenning, and bring them in his kind, and heale him faire for euer, and this is a principall salue for sores or wounds: Prooued. To make a salue that is a precious oyntment for wounds and for bruzings, but it must be drunken in white Wine or stale Ale. ¶ Take of the hearbe Walter, Robart, wilde Thistles, Pursewort, Veruaine, Daysie, the little Knapwoort, Egrimo∣uy, Harts tung, Horehound, Pimpernell, hearb Iuie, Sani∣gell, Plantaine, Medewoort, Sothernwood, little Burnet, Mugwoort, Tansie, the holly Thistle, Betony, Turmentile, Mouse-eare, Peluet, Milfoyle, Robwort, black Thistle, wild Sage, crops of Hemp, crops of the red Bramble, crop of the red Woorts, Mors diaboli, Groundswelly, Scabions, Sage, Violet of the garden, Osmond waches of the mede, Fumitory, Dawk, Spinage, Strawberies, and the more Dayste, Mede March, Wasts crops, Peygell, Woodrone, Crosset, Ierman∣der, Tutsan, Woodbind, Pedelion, flowers of Broome, Cink∣foyle, Wormwort, Scabwort, then take of Auence as much of him as of all the other hearbs, and then shred them, and doo them in a morter, and stamp them sinall, and doo therte thrée or foure pound of May butter cleane clarified and put together, and so let them stand seauen dayes, and then doo it in a cleane pan, and set it ouer the fire, and let it séeth soft, then strain it through a can∣uas cloth, and doo therto the iuice of Saffron, and stir them well together, & let it stand forth till it be cold, then must the sick take therof on this maner: take of this salue sixe peny waight, & doo it in warm Wine or stale Ale, and let it melt on the fire, and let the sick drink it first and last, and this healeth wounds well.
For the salt humour. ¶ Take halfe a pound of Lignum vitae, and barks therof, and Anniseed, Licoras, and boyle all these together, and halfe a pint of clarified Hony, and all kind of cold hearbs, with Liuerwort, and Harts-tung, halfe a quartern of French Barly, and halfe a pound of Rayzons of the sunne, pull out the stones of the Rai∣zons, and boyle all these together very well, and straine them, and it will help that disease in the body. For the salt humour another. ¶ Take white Lead, Ceruse, Litarge of gold, and Litarge of siluer, of each one vnce, Sulphur one vnce, mixe them toge∣ther, and make them in powder very small, then take oyle O∣liue one vnce and a halfe, Vineger, white Wine as much as néedeth mixe in due proportion. For to heale any sore or cut. ¶ Take a little fine Flaxe, and a little Hogs greace, and chop them together, and make a plaister of the same, and it will heale it very well and faire. An oyntment for all maner of sores, and cuts, and swellings, and heat. ¶ Take Melilot, Egrimony, of each a like much, Wood Betony, Wormwood, and Smallage, a quantity of each of them, and gather them in May, and shred them, and bray them with as much butter waight for waight as the hearbs all toge∣ther, and then lay it in a corner sixe or seauen daies vntill it be hoary, and then take it and fry it, then strain it into an earthen pot, and when it is cold make an hole in the side or bottome of the pot that the drosse may runne out. Another for the same. ¶ Take a good quantity of Smallage, and Mallowes, and put therto two pound of Bores greace, & a pound of butter, and
oyle of Neates-féete a quantity, and stampe them well altoge∣ther, then fry them, and straine it in an earthen pot, and kéepe it to your vse. A water for to heale an old sore. ¶ Take a gallon of running water and set it on the fire, and let it séethe: then take an vnce of gréene Copperas, two vn∣ces of Bolae armoniake, white Copperas the quantity of halfe a Nut, and grind or beate them all to powder together into the said water, and let them séeth together a little while, then take it from the fire, and when it is cold put it in an earthen bottle, and stop it fast, and then occupy it at your néede. A soueraigne water for all manner of sores. ¶ Take red Sage, Isop, Rosemary, red Fenell, Daisies, English Saffron, Nep, Allom, of each a quantity, but most of Daisies, séethe them in running water, and wring it through a cloth, and so make a water: and this is good for all sores. An oyntment to cleanse olde stinking sores. Take the iuyce of Selidon, the iuyce of Plantaine, Honey, the yolke of an Egge, of each a like much, Barly flower, med∣dle them together, and put as much Barly flower as shal make it thick like a plaister, and let it come néere no fire, and so lay it vpon the sore. A good oyntment to cleanse a sore both olde or newe. ¶ Take halfe a pound of Turpentine, and wash it well in Barly water, the yoks of sixe Egs new layed, honey of Roses foure vnces, and for lacke of honey of Rofes take other honey, Barly flower as much as shall be sufficient to make it thicke like a plaister, and meddle them together, and let them not come néere any fire.
To skin the flesh that is raw. ¶ Take a quart of good Ale, and Allom, Hony, and Wood∣bind leaues, and stampe the leaues, and put the iuyce to them, and séeth them till they come to a pint, and when it is cold wet a gray paper in it, and lay it to the sore. For all manner of scabs. ¶ Take Enula campana, red Docke rootes, Nightshade, Woodbind leaues, and then cast in a péece of Allom, and put in Vitrioll romana rubrified when it is cold, and wash the scabbe therewith. Another for the same. ¶ Take white oyntment, Brimstone, Quicksiluer, Ver∣digreace, and meddle them together, and therewith annoynt the sore scab. For to doe away scabs. ¶ Take red Dock roots, Pimpernell, Scabions, Sorrell de bayes. Celondine, stampe them with May butter, and fry them well together, and straine them through a cloth into a cleane vessell, and cast thereto a good quantity of Brimstone in powder, and stir it well together till it be colde, and therewith annoynt the sick till that he be all whole. Another for the same. ¶ Take the roote of Horsehelme and séethe it in water till it be nesh, and take old Shéepes tallow and meddle them well together in a morter, and doo it in a linnen cloth, and annoynt the sore by the fire. Another for to doe away scabs. ¶ Take Celondine, and powder of Brimstone, and medle them well together, and it will doo away the scabs.
Another for the same. ¶ Take Oniens and mince them, and séeth them in water or in vineger, and wash therewith the scabs or isching, and it shall doo it away, and heale it faire and smooth. Another for to doe away seabs or itching. ¶ Take the roots of Enula campana, and wash them cleane in faire water, and seeth them as you séeth Persneps, and then make them cleane, and cut them in péeces, and stampe them small with Colts greace, & anoynt the sore therwith. A good oyntment for the scabbes and for itching of the body. ¶ Take foure vnces of oyle de bay, and an vnce of Fran∣kensence, and two vnces of white Waxe, and thrée vnces of Swines greace, and an vnce of Quicksiluer that must be slack∣ed with fasting spittle, an vnce of great Salt, as much of the one as of the other, and of all these make an ointment, and if the scabs or itch be vpon all the whole body as wel aboue the girdle as beneath, then when thou goest to bed wash both thy hands and thy feet with warme water, and supple them well therein by the fire, and after dry them with a cloth of linnen, then take vp with thy fingers of that oyntment, and doo it in the palmes of thy hands, and on the soles of thy féete, and rub it well toge∣ther that it may drinke in well nd if it doo soke in well, thou must put gloues on thy hands, and socks on thy féete, and thus doo euery night when thou doost goe to bed, and if the scab or itch be aboue the girdle and not beneath, thē anoynt but thy hands, and if the scab be beneath the girdle, then looke that you anoynt the soles of your féete, and the scab or itch be in all thy body as well aboue the girdle as beneath, then thou must anoynt both thy hands and thy féete as thou sittest by the fire, and thou shalt be whole: this hath béen prooued.
Another oyntment for a man that is scabbed. ¶ Take fiue or sixe handfuls of Horehound, and séeth it in running water till it be halfe sodden away, and then wash the sicke therewith as hote as he may suffer it, and then looke that you haue ready this oyntment made of these hearbs: take the roote of the red Dockes, and the roote of Selidon, and then take Wormewood and Alleluia, of each a like much, and bray them well together, and doo therto a good portion of May butter, and stampe them well together, and so let them stand seauen daies, and then fry it, and straine it as thou doost another oyntment, and therewith annoynt the sicke when he is washed, and hée shall be whole. For the shingles a remedy. ¶ Take Doues dirt that is musty, and of Barly meale heaped halfe a pound, and stampe them well together, and doo therto halfe a pint of vineger and mingle them together, and so lay it to the sore cold, lay Cawle leaues ther-vpon, and so let it lye thrée dayes vnremoued, and on the third day if néede require lay therto a new plaister of the same, and at the most he shall be whole within thrée plaisters. Another for the shingles. ¶ Take the blood of a Cats eare or of the taile, and there∣with anoynt the shingles, and doo nothing else therto. Also take Doues dung, and Barly meale, and stamp them together with Aysell, and lay it to the shingles all cold. For all manner of sinewes that are shrunken. ¶ Take the head of a black Shéepe, Camomell, Lorrell leaues, Sage, of each a handfull, and bray these hearbs in a morter, then boyle them altogether in water till they be well sodden, and let them stand till they be cold, then draw it through a strayner and so vse it.
An oyntment for shrunken sinewes & aches soueraigne. ¶ Take eight Swallowes ready to flye out of the nest, driue away the bréeders when you take them out, and let them not touch the earth, stampe them vntill the feathers can not be perceaued, put to it Lauender cotten, of the strings of Straw∣beries, the tops of mother Time, the tops of Rosemary, of each a handfull, take all their waight of May butter, and a quart more, stamp all the feathers that nothing can be perceaued in a stone morter, then make it vp in balls, and put it into an ear∣then pot for eight dayes close stopped that no ayre take them, take it out, and on a soft fire as may be séethe it so that it doo but simper, then straine it, and so reserue it to your vse. For sinewes that be broken in two. ¶ Take Wormes while they be knit, and looke that they depart not, and stamp them and lay them to the sore, and it will knit the sinewes that be broken in two. For to knit sinewes that be broken. ¶ Take Archangell and cut it small in gobbets, and lay it to the sore, and take Milfoile and stamp it, and lay it aboue it hard bound, and let it lye so thrée dayes, and at the thrée dayes end take it away, and wash it with Wine, and then make a new plaister of the same, and at three dayes end put therto ano∣ther, and doo nothing else thereto. Another for the same. ¶ Take Peniriall and bray it, and put salt inough to them, and temper it with Hony, and make a plaister thereof, and lay it vpon the sinewes that be stiffe, and it will make them to stretch: Prooued. An oyle to stretch sinewes that be shrunk. ¶ Take a quart of Neates-foote oyle, a pint of Neates gall, halfe a pint of Rose-water, as much Aqua vitae, then put all
these together into a Brasse panne, then take a handfull of La∣uender cotten, as much of Bay-leaues, a good quantity of Rose∣mary, a good quantitie of Lauender Spike, of Strawberry∣leaues, the strings and all, then take thred and binde them all in seuerall brauches, and put them into the pan or pot, and sette them ouer the fire vpon cléere coles, with the oyles altogether, and so let thē boyle a good while, and when it is boiled enough, it will boyle but softly: then take it off the fire, and let it stande till it be almost colde, then straine it out into a wide mouthed glasse, bottle or pewter pot, and stoppe it close, it will not con∣tinue in a woodden thing: and where the sinewes be shrunke, take of this beeing warmed, and annoynt the place there-with and chafe it well against the fire, and vse this morning and e∣uening, and kéepe the place warme, and by the grace of God, you shall finde great ease. For to staunch bod. ¶ Take Bole armoniacke, and Turpentine, and make a plaister and lay it to, and it will helpe the same. Also if you take the mosse of the Hasell trée, and cast it into the wound, and it will stanche the blood foorth-with: and the longer that it is gathered, the better it is. Also take a good peece of Martilmas béefe, out of the roote, and heate it on the coales, and as hote as may be suffered, lay it to the place. Another for the same. ¶ Take a péece of leane salt béefe, and let it be of that big∣nes that it may fill the wound, and lay it in the fire in the hote ashes, till it be hote through, and beeing hote, thrust it into the wound, and binde it fast, and it shal quickly stanch the bléeding. Another to staunch blood. ¶ Take Bursa pastoris, stampe it, and lay it to the vaine, and it will quickly stanche bleeding.
Another for the same. ¶ Take the mosse that groweth about the roote of the Ashe trée, and hold it to thy nose and smell it, and it will stanche the bléeding thereof. To staunch blood when a Maister vaine is cut. ¶ Take rawe Béefe that neuer had any salt cast thereon, and lay it on a gredion ouer fresh coales well kindled, and lay the Béefe thereon, still turning the same till it be well broiled, and then lay it to the sore, and it will stanch the blood: and for the nose, if it be put into a cloth and smelt to, it helpeth. To staunch blood. ¶ Take an hearbe that is called Lunaha, and stamp it, and lay it to the wound, or take the gréene leaues thereof, and lay them on the wound, and it shall staunch: and if a man may not haue thys hearbe, let him burne the feathers of a Cocks necke, and take the ashes of them and lay on the wound, and the blood shall soone be staunehed. For swelling that commeth suddainly in a mans limmes. ¶ Take Harts-tongue, Cherfoyle, and cut them small, and then take dregs of Ale, and wheate branne, and shéepes tallow molte, and doe all in a pot, and séeth them till that they be thick, and then make a plaister and lay it to the swelling. Another for the same. ¶ Take faire Water and salte, and stirre them well toge∣ther, and therein wet a cloth, and lay it to the swelling. For to make one slender. ¶ Take Fennell and séeth it in water a very good quanti∣tie, and wring out the iuyce thereof when it is sod, and drinke it first and last, and it shall helpe the patient.
For to breake the stone, a medicine. ¶ Take halfe a handfull of Pellitory of the wall, halfe a dozen Parfly rootes, halfe a handfull of vnsette Time, a quan∣titie of Pennyriall, and seeth all these in a pottle of Rennishe Wine or white wine, and let it séeth to a quart or a pint, which you will: then take a Nutmegge rosted and dry it by the fire, and deuide it in foure parts, and drinke the same warme after it is strained, as much at a time as you thinke good. Another for the same. ¶ Take the rootes of Parsly, Pellitory, and red Nettles, of each a like quantitie, wash them cleane and mince thē smal, and lay them in White wine twenty foure howres, and still them together, and drinke it with two pound of rootes put to a quart of White wine. For the stone a remedy. ¶ Take Reysons, vnset Léekes, Sappifrage, Samphire, Auence, Beane-cods, still each one by it selfe, and fine them in the Sunne, and take of each a like much, and put thereto as much Malmesie as of the waters, and still them altogether a∣gaine, and fine it in the Sunne, and when the patient is grée∣ued and at no time else let un drinke thereof thrée spoonefuls at a time, and that will be sufficient enough at once, and heate it luke warme, and put in a little powder of Giues, and drinke it, and lay him downe to sweat. Also tak Sapifrage, and still the same with water, and make thereof a firrop, as though it were with Roses, and put thereto a quantitie of Sugar, and eate it, and it will breake the stone meruailously. Another medicine for the stone. ¶ Take a cake of Rye and bake it, then take Onions, and roste them very soft, then take your cake out of the ouen, & slit it a sunder in the middest, the vpper side frō the nether, then take
your Ouions, and pill them, and shread them vpon the cake, and lay the one péece to the bottome of your belly, and the other part to the raines of your back, and it will helpe you. A very good powder for the stone. ¶ Take Smallage seede, Louach séede, Fennell séede, Sa∣pifrage seede, Caraway séede, Gremell seede, Broome seed, pars∣lie féede, Philopendula, the roote thereof dryed, Veruaine, and the kernels of Cherristones, of euery of these a like much by weight, then beate them in a brassen Morter all to powder, and then let the sick vse of this in White wine at euening and mor∣ning, and also let him vse of this powder in his pottage, for it is very good for the stone. An excellent good Medicine for the stone, and to breake it. ¶ Take Allisander, Louach, Smallage, Water cresses, and Gromet, of each a like much, and boyle them in a Gallon of faire water, till the halfe thereof be wasted, and doo thereto a good deale of Sugar, or of Licoris, and then straine it through a cloth, and doo it in a cleane vessell well stopped, and let the sick drinke thereof morning and euening, and this will breake the stone in the raines or bladder, and make him for to come foorth without faile. A good medicine for the stone. ¶ Take March seede, Anniseede, and Commin séed, Pars∣ly seede, and Fennell séede, and Water Cresses seede, or els the powder made of the hearbe, then take all these seedes and doe them in good Vinegar, and so let them stande two dayes and a night, then dry these séedes in an Ouen, and then make them to powder in a brassen Morter, and let the sick vse of this pow∣der in his pottage, and in his drinke as is aforesaide, and thys will make a man to make water well.
A good plaister proued for the strangury. ¶ Take Holly-hocks, Violets, and Mercurie, the leaues of these hearbes or the séedes of them, also the rind of the Elder trée, and leydwort, of each of these a handfull, and beate them small, and seeth them in water till halfe be consumed, then doe thereto a little oyle Oliue, and all hote make thereof a plaister, and lay it to the sore and raines. And also in Sommer you must make him a drinke in this manner: take Sapifrage and the leaues of Elders, fiue leaued grasse, and seeth them in a pottle of stale Ale till the one halfe thereof be consumed, then straine it and keepe it cleane, and let the sicke drinke thereof first in the morning, and last at night, and if you lacke these hearbes because of Winter, then take the rootes of fiue leaued grasse, and dry them: and make thereof powder, and then take Dister shels and burne them, and make powder of them, and mingle them together, and so let the sicke vse thereof in his pottage and drinke, and it shall helpe him. A very good medicine, shewing how to make a powder for the stone and strangulion. ¶ Take blacke Bramble berries while they bee red, Iuie∣berries, the inner pith of the Ashe keyes, the stones of Eglan∣tine berries clouen, rubbed from the hayre, Nutte keyes, the rootes of Philopendula, of all these a like quantity, Acorne kir∣nels, the stones of Sloes, of each a like quantity, dry all these in platters in an Ouen, till they may bee well beaten to pow∣der, then take Gromell seede, Sapisrage seede, Alisander seed, Coliander seede, Persly seede, Commin seede, Fennell seede, Anniseede, of each of these a like quantitie, asmuch as is before written, and dryed in like sort, then beate all these to fine pow∣der, and take Licoris of the best that you can get fayre scraped, as much in quantitie as of all the other, and beate it fine, and mingle it with the same powder, and so keepe it close that no
winde come at it, vsing it first and last with posset drinke made with White wine or strong Ale, and when you cate your pot∣tage or other broth, put some in it if you bee sore pained, and if you haue any stone it will come away by shiuers, and if it doe so, when you think that your water beginneth to cleare again, take this drinke following and it will clense your bladder, and it will leaue no corruption therein. The drinke. ¶ Take Rose-mary and wilde Time, and séeth them in running water, with as much Sugar as will make it sweete, from a quart to a pint, vse the quantitie of your hearbes accor∣ding to your discretion, so that it may sauour well of them, and so vse it nine mornings, sixe or seauen spoonefuls at a time. For the Tissicke, well proued. ¶ Take a handfull of Fennell rootes, as much Parsley rootes, as many Alisander rootes, halfe a handfull of Borrage rootes, and pull out the pith of all the sayde rootes, then take halfe a handfull of Penny-riall, as much of Violet leaues, and as much of Cinckfoyle, as much Succory, Endiue, Hollihock∣leaues, Mallow leaues, and redde garden Mints, of all these a like quantitie as of those next before, halfe a handfull of Licoris stickes scraped, brused and beaten to fine powder, a gallon of fayre running water, boyle therein all these simples, and boile these séedes following with them, that is, thrée spoonesuls of Annyseedes, as much Fennell seede, as much Coliander seede and Comin seede, a good handfull of Dandelion rootes, and so boyle altogether from a gallon to a pottle, and let the patient drinke thereof first and last, and it will quickly help him. Another for the Tissicke. ¶ Take a quart of running water, with a handful of Isope, two ounces of Annyseedes, asmuch Licoris beaten both togea∣ther, halfe an ounce of Fennell seede, beate all these togeather very sine with a quarterne of white Sugar, and so boyle them
altogether vnto a pint, and then straine them, and so let the par∣tie drinke thereof first and last, and it will doo him good. For a Tissicke or colde, another. ¶ Take two ounces of Licoris scraped and brused, of Figs three ounces, of Egrimony, Hore-hounde, Enula campana, of each a handfull, and boyle them altogether in a gallon of Wa∣ter vntill the halfe be wasted, then straine the hearbes from the iuyce, and vse it early and late: for this hath béene proued. Also for the dry Tissick, take and stamp Fennell rootes, and drinke the iuyce thereof with white Wine. For the Tissicke another experiment. ¶ Take Radish rootes, make them cleane, and cutte them thin, and cast them into an Ouen and bake them, then beate them into powder so small as you can, then drinke thereof eue∣rie morning fasting, and at night when you goe to bedde, and wet your meate in the same powder as you weuld doo in salte, and it will doo you very great ease shortly. To make the mother of Treakle. ¶ Take a pint of Honny, put thereto the iuyce of red Fen∣nell, séeth it on the fire vntill it come to a pinte, then take it of, and put thereto a penny-woorth of Sinamon in powder, two raises of Ginger, a Nutmeg and a little Mace, and stirre them well together, and when it is cold put it into a boxe, and gather your Fennell in May. Also to make Treakle for all manner of poyson, take one ounce, of Betony in powder, 4. ounces of Centory in powder, and 2. ounces of the powder of Rew, medle these together, and temper them with clarified Honny, and kéepe it in a glasse. The golden treate that healeth all bruses. ¶ Take Colosony, pitch and Rozen, and two ounces of oyle, three ounces of liquid Pitch, 1. ounce of Olibanū, Auti vnguenti
Allam, of each two ounces, of Wine as much as suffiseth, and boyle all these together and so receiue them to your vse as you neede, and it helpeth. For to make a white treate, called Apostolicen. ¶ Take oyle Oliue, litarge of Leade, Golde and Siluer, stampe it, and put it in the oyle through a cloth, and stirre it till it be harde, and this is a good treate for to heale all manner of woundes, be they newe or old: thys kinde of treate hath often béene proued good. To make a treat called Emanuell. ¶ Take Veruaine, Bittany, Pimpernell, Centorie the more, Gratia dei, of each one handfull, hearbe Iohn, Auence, Celondine, Acus muscata alaluia, Plantaine, Spurge, Egri∣monie, of each one handfull, grinde all in a morter, and put thē in a gallon of Wine, and boyle them in a pan till the third part be wasted, then straine it through a Canuas cloth, and set it o∣ner the fire, and put thereto Waxe foure ounces, Pitch asmuch, Rozen as much, Olibanum two ounces, Mastick two ounces, Mirrhe two ounces, Aloes two ounces, Turpentine two oun∣ces, Sheepes sewet halfe a pound, boate them all in powder, and boyle them all together saue the Turpentine, the which must be put in last of all, then straine the same through a cloth, and keepe it till you haue neede thereof: and this is a speciall healer of all wounds and sores, bruses and broken bones, and Apostumes that be broken, also it hath a special vertue to draw, clense, and reengender good flesh, it healeth and doth away all kinde of aches whatsoeuer, all Cankers and Festers, it hea∣leth Morimals, it passeth all other oyntments: and if you will haue it soft, put thereto a quantitie of oyle of Roses, so much as you thinke good. Proued.
A good entreat called the greene treat of Iane. ¶ Take a pint of the iuice of Smallage, a pint of the iuice of Waybright, as much of Plantaine, put them together in a vessell, and put to it a quarter of a pound of Wax, and as much of Frankensence or Rozen made into powder, make your Wax into small péeces, and boile them altogether, and euer stir them, and to know when it is boyled inongh, drop a drop vpon a Bason, and if there be any moisture in it when it is cold, then put to it a pound of Turpentine, and stir them till they be well medled together, then strain it, and put into it a quart of white Wine, and let it stand while it be cold, and so vse it. Another intreat called Gratia dei. ¶ Take Wax, May butter, or other butter, without salt, of each one vnce, then take of Frankensence two vnces, melt them together, and straine them, and this is the making of this entreat which is called Gratia dei. A good entreat for wounds. ¶ Take Betony, Pimpernell, and Veruaine, of each a handfull, boile them in a pottell of very good white Wine vntill it be halfe consumed, then straine it through a course canuas, then put the liquor ouer the fire againe, and in the boyling put to it halfe a pound of Rozen, a pound of Frankensence in pow∣der, and alwayes stir it that the powder goe not to the bottome, and when it is taken from the fire, put to it halfe a pound of Turpentine, and a dram of oyle of Spike, and stirre it till be colde. Prooued. A greene treat for a greene wound which is especiall good, ¶ Take Rozen made in fine powder foure vnces, of Shéeps sewet one vnce, halfe a pound of Turpentine, Wax, and Fran∣kensence, of each one vnce, Ve rdigreace ten pence waight,
Oyle sixe vnces, beate your Frankensence and Vel digreace, and put to all your stuffe ouer the fire in a vessell, but your Tur∣pentine and Verdigreace let them botle euer stirring them till they be all relented, then take it from the fire and stir it well, and then put in your Turpentine euer stirring it till it be relen∣ted, then put in your Verdigreace, and mixe it well with the o∣ther and strain it, and kéep it to your vse and it wil help you. The making of this treat which will endure an hundred yeare, and it is good for all ache in the bones, and for the sinewes. ¶ Take a pottell of neate oyle, and fry it with Madocks as many as he may, for they be dry and hard, then wring out the oyle and doo them away, then doo theron two pound of shéeps tallow that is new and melt it, and halfe a pound of Waxe, as much Rozen and Frankensence and break them small, and doo them into the oyle for to be melted, then take sixe handfuls of Hocks, and of Celondine foure handfuls, and foure handfuls of Enula campana, and of Plantain eight handfuls, and of the root of Enula campana cleane picked two pound, and so bray them small as morter, then too to these hearbs & roots a pottell of good white Wine, and so let it stand a day and a night, then straine out the liquor, and doo it into the oyle before that they séeth them and set it ouer the fire, and let it seeth the space of foure houres, then take it off the fire, and doo it in a clean bowle, and so let it stand till it be all cold, and then take it vp and doo away the wa∣ter and the slime and if it be too hard doo in more oyle, and if it be to nesh, doo therto more Wax and Rezen, and of Frankensence and seethe it againe, then doo it in boxes and kéepe it well, for this is a precious treat or oyntment for all manner of ache in the bones. The making of a treat the which is called Oxicrochsie. ¶ Take a quarter of a pound of mede Waxe, as much of pure Rozen, as much of black Pitch, as much of Saffron, an
vnce and a halfe of Mastick, and halfe a quarter of a pound of Frankensence, as much Myrrh, and a quarter of a pound of Arpinake, halfe a quarter of a pound of Galbanum, as much of Turmentile, then take all the gums and make them to small pouder, and breake thy Waxe and Galbanum to small péeces, then set them in good vineger all a night, and on the morrow set it ouer the fire, and let it seethe till that the vineger be wasted somwhat: also straine it well through a cleane cloth into a ves∣sell with white Wine or with water, and when it is cold take it vp, and then hold it against the fire, but looke that thou haue thy Saffron ground, then hold it as thou wouldest hold Waxe, and a little and little temper the Saffron thereon, and meddle them wel against the fire til the Saffron be melted in the gums, but thou must annoynt thy hands with oyle of Laurell that it cleaue not to thy hands, and doo it where thou wilt: and this treat is good for all sores and bruses in any limb of a man, it de∣stroyeth hard apostumes, and it is good for broken bones and for the surgery of salerne, who vsed this medicine for smal wounds that were euill healed, and this will open a sore, and will heale him well and faire againe: prooued. For to make Vnguentum albanum. ¶ Take a pint of oyle Oliue, and put thereto halfe a quar∣terne of Waxe, and set it ouer the fire till the Waxe be molten, but make it into smal péeces: then take half a pound of Ceruse, and an vnce of Mastick, and one vnce of Olibanum, and a little Camphire: take and grind all these small, and cast it into the oyle, and stir it well together till it be nigh cold, then take the white of foure Egs made into gleare, and put therto a saucer ful of vineger, and stir all this well together and too it in boxes, and this oyntment is good for to anoint all sores without the wound, but doo it not in the wound, for this is a good cold oyntment. To make vnguentum album another way. ¶ Take a pinte of oyle Oliue, and halfe a pound of Dia∣clome, Anniséede a prety quantity, and put them together, and
put thereto a pound of Seruse small grounded, and then boyle them altogether a little, and stirre them alway till it be cold: et fac vnguentum. For to make vnguentum popilcon. ¶ Take thrée or foure pound of Poppy séede, and two or three pound of hearb Walter, one pound of Henbane, and one pound of pety Morrell, and one pound of Orpine, and one pound of Singrene, and one pound of Endiue, one pound of Plantain, and one pound of Violets, and one pound of water Cresses, one pound of Mandrake, and one pound of Peniwort: take all these and stamp them in a morter, and doo therto thrée or foure pound of Barrowes greace molten, and bind them well together, and then set them in an earthen pot well closed in a moist place, and so let it stand nine daies, and on the tenth day set them on the fire, and doo therto a quart of white Wine, and let them seethe well together, and then wring them through a strainer a little and a little till it be cold, and when it is cold doo it in boxes, and this oyntment is good for many sores. For to make vnguentum geptiacum. ¶ Take a farthing worth of Honey, a spoonfull and a halfe of Vineger, of gréene Copperas a small quantity, a péece of Al∣lom, and if you will make it easily, put therunto Ale, or els wo∣mans milk, and this oyntment is good for all sores and wounds both new and old. For to make vnguentum ruptorum a corsie. ¶ Take Cantarides and make it into powder, and as much of vnslaked lime, and of blacke Sope as of all the other, and make all these in maner of a plaister, and lay it to the sore as brode as thou wilt haue it broken, and no broder. For to make vnguentum versilinum. ¶ Take an vnce of Litarge, halfe a pound of Masticke, halfe a pound of Ceruse, an vnce of Camphire, halfe an vnce of
the stone called Calamint, and make these to small powder, and doo therto halfe a pound of mede Waxe small broken, and then doo therto a pint of the iuice of Emerose, and put all this in a pan, and set it ouer the fire, and let them seeth till they be mol∣ten, and alway stir it, and then take it from the fire, and let it stand till it be cold, this oyntment is good for a man that is scal∣led on his yard with fire, or on his body or visage, or on any limb of a man, and for all scalding, and this is good for wounds and for many other priuie maladies: and this is a precious oyntment. For to make vnguentum dolerosica. ¶ Take a pound and a halfe of purified Hony, and a quar∣ter of a pound of Verdigreace small made to powder, and a good saucerfull of Vineger, cast all this together into a panne, and boyle them well together till it become red, and alway stir it well, and then beware for it will haue many colours, for it will be red, then doo it in boxes and it will be hard, and after it will relent againe, and then doo therfore into the rotted wound, and anoynt the sore therwith, and it will doo away dead flesh and other corruption, and this is a good oyntment for to clense, and for to make the flesh for to grow. For to make vnguentum Geneste. ¶ Take two pound of the flowers of Broome, a pound of the flowers of Woodwexe, and a pound of Oreflips, and bray them in a morter, and doo therto three pound of May butter, and mingle them well together, and so let them stand for three dayes and for thrée nights, and then doo it in a pan, and fry it well on the fire, and then wring it through a cloth, and doo it in a boxe, this oyntment is good for all cold gowtes, and for other cold euils. For to make vnguentum Penetium. ¶ Take a gallon pot full of black Snailes gathered in the dew, in the moneth of May, and doo them in a linnen bag, and
when ye haue the Snailes looke that ye haue redy then a pound of the pounder of Comin, and an other pound of Dill, and med∣dle these pouders amongst the Snailes and hang them vp and set vnder a clean vessell, and keepe well the oyle that cometh of them, and then take the oyle and seethe it on a soft fire, and doo theron a quarter of a pound of the marrow of a Horse legg, and seeth it with the oyle, and then doo it in a glasse with that oynt∣ment, and anoynt any man or woman that is so troubled with the Gowt, and he shall be whole by Gods grace. A good oyntment for to heale wounds. ¶ Take Auence, Bugle, Pigle, and Sauigle, Smallage, and hearb Robert, Veruein, and hearb Water, Weybred, and Ribwort, Daisies, and Holyhock, Ligni serpemini. red Cawle and the crops of Brier, of euery one of these a pound, or at the least halfe a pound, then take these hearbs and stamp them smal in a morter, then take May butter two pound, and two pound of Barrowes greace, and stamp them well together, and then doo these in an earthen pot, and let them so stand for nine daies, and on the tenth day doo them in a pan and séeth them on the fire and let it seeth easely a good while, and then wring them a little and a little through a strainer, and then take them, and put it into the pan againe with a quart of white Wine, & half a pound of mede Wax, and a pound of shéeps tallow, and a quarter of a pound of Frankensence, and a quarter of a pound of purified ho∣ney, cast all these together into the pan, and then set them ouer the fire, and seeth them well together a good while, and then set it downe and let it kéele, and then doo it in boxes, and this is a spéedy ointment to heale all maner of sores and wounds be they neuer so great: this hath béen prooued. If thou wilt heale wounds well and cleane with the drink of balles, then take of these hearbs to make thy balles. ¶ Take a pound of Pigell, and a quarter of a pound of Sa∣uigell, and halfe a pound of Bugle, a quarter of a pound of
Turmentile, halfe a pound of Auence, a quarter of a pound of Mouse are, a quarter of a pound of Centory, a quarter of a pound of Rue, a quarter of a pound of Iuy, a quarter of a pound of wild Sage, and halfe a pound of Daisie, a pound of hearb Robert, a pound of hearb Water, and a quarter of a pound of hearb Iohn, a quarter of a pound of Egrimony, as much of Violets, as much of Strawberries, and halfe a pound of Ribwort, and halfe a pound of Weybrev, and a quarter of a pound of great Daysie, and halfe a pound of Spignell, and halfe a pound of Betony, a quarter of a pound of Hemp, and as much of red brier trop, and as much of the black brier crop, halfe a quarter of the red Net∣tle, and halfe a quarter of the red Cawle, and a quarterue of Verueine, as much of Burnet, and as much of Scabions, take all these hearbs and shred them small, and then doo them in a morter, and grind them all to flower as thou wouldest doo Ver∣uine, then mingle of Madder the waight of al these other herbs and grind it with these hearbs, and then let them rot together for fiue daies and flue nights, and then make therof small balls as big as a Walnut, and dry them in thin platters couered one ouer the other, and set them in the Sunne so that there come no ayre therto by no way, and who so hath a great wound, then take one of these balls, and crum it into a quart of white Wine or of stale Ale, and let him drinke thereof each day first a little quantity, and to wash his wound thrée times on the day with white Wine, and if that you haue no white Wine: then take the iuice of Auence and let come none other oyntment at the wound but the iuice of Auence, and therewith wet well the wound all about, and thus thou maist heale and saue euery old wound be it neuer so horrible and festered: and if there be in the wound any dead flesh, thou must doo thereon the powder of Sandefer or else of burnt Allam, for that will fret away dead flesh, and these balls will heale the wounds. For to open a wound that is closed too soone. ¶ Take the leaues of the white Plum-trée, and the milke of a Goate, and stampe them together, and make a playster
therof, and lay it to the sore, and it will open it well, and it will doo away the rankling. Also take Centory, stampe it, and lay it thereto, and it will open any wound faire and well. Also Galbanum is good for to clense a wound, and for to kéepe it open. To heale a wound. ¶ Take Turpentine, as much as you thinke to serue your turne, and put it into a dish with cleare water, then take a stick and make it fit at one end, and with that beat, and turne your Turpentine in the water till it be very white, then put the wa∣ter cleane from it, and put to it halfe as much yolks of Eggs as is of the Turpentine, and mingle them well together, and mi∣nister it when ye néede, put not this in your treane bore, for it will soke through: you may keepe it in a bladder. For a wound in the head a good Mundicatiffe. ¶ Take hony of Roses two vnces, oyle of Roses an vnce, meddle them together, and put it warme into the wound with Lint, and a plaister vpon it: it is a good Mundicatiffe. For the ache in a wound. ¶ Take the rootes of Briauy, and pare the vtter side, and beate them in a morter and in faire running water, and straine it, and warme it, and lay it hot to the wound or ache as the par∣tie may suffer it: first wash the wound faire, and then lay it to the wound. To make a water for a cut or wound. ¶ Take a pottle of faire running water, and séeth it on the fire, and let it séeth a while, then take two peny worth of white Copperis, as much of Bole armoniack, and foure peny worth of Camphire, and beat them altogether in powder, and put them all together into the water, and let them séethe a little while, and then take it off the fire, and when it is colde put it into a
Glasse, drosse and all: and when it is occupied poure out a lit∣tle into a sawcer of the cléerest water, and none of the bottome or drosse: and set it vpon the coles, and wash the wound as hote as he may suffer it, and then take a little linnen cloth, and dou∣ble it thrée or foure times double: and wet it in the water, and lay it to the wound as hote as the patient may suffer the same, and binde it fast. For a cut or wound. ¶ Take a gallon of running water, and put thereto a pinte of Honny, and a quarter of a pound of Roch-allom beaten in ve∣ry fine powder, and let them séeth together and scum thē cleane, and put thereto a handfull of Wood-bine leaues, and a handfull of Sage leaues, a handfull of Selondine, and séeth them alto∣gether till the halfe be consumed, then take it from the fire, and straine it through a Canuas cloth into another cleane vessell, and then put thereto a penny-worth of graines, and let them séeth a while together: and then put it in a faire glasse when it is cold: thys is a principall medicine. For to heale wounds, and to knit and heale broken bones. ¶ Take Betony, Bugle, Sauigle, Pimpernell, Milfoile, Strawberry leaues, Orpin, Sage, Mouseare, Emerose, Tan∣sie, Sothernwood, hearbe Robert, hearbe Water, Egrimony, Plantaine, Solcirkle, Auence, Madder, Daisies, Camphire, Osmond, the crop of the red Colewort, the crop of the red bryer, the red Nettle crop, of the crops of Hempe, take of each a like much saue of the Madder by waight, then take these hearbes and stampe them small, and take May butter made of rawe Creame, Ewe milke, with dew water of May, and if that you can get no Ewe milke, take the Butter of Cowe milke of the yellowest colour that can be found, for it is far better then the white, and take a quart of Butter, halfe a quarterne of Mede
waxe, and melt the Butter and the Waxe together: and when they be molten, let the Butter and waxe run through a cloth, for then is the Butter clarified from the Waxe, and shread the Butter and the Curds a sunder, or else it will neuer do so wel, and then let thy Butter kéele, and when it is colde then take and put thereto thrée pound of thy hearbes, and halfe a pounde of Butter, and cast them in a Morter, and stampe them small, till you can sée nothing of the Eutter, and then doo it in a newe earthen pot, and close it fast that no ayre come forth, and when all is in the pot, make it sure that no wormes may gette in, nor that no ayre (as I said before) gette out: then set it in a moist place, and so let it stand for nine dayes at the least, and then it wil be hoare aboue: then take it out of the pot, & do it in a faire panne, and set it on the fire and fry them well together, and stirre it well, and when it is hote enough, take it from the fire and wring it through a cloth, and let it stand till it be cold, and then kerne it and let out the water, and then doo it into the pan and melt it againe: then doo it vp in boxes, and kéepe the same to your vse. Also to make an oyntment sanatiffe for wounds. ¶ Take of the same hearbes before expressed, and worke them as thou didst the salue: but whereas thou tookest Butter to thy salue, take faire Barrowes greace & melt it: and when it is cold, put it to thy oyntment, and whereas thou tookest to thy salue Madder, put thereto Cammemile, and put thy hearbs thereto: take to that oyntment of Auence as much waight as of all the other hearbes before named, and then shall this oynt∣ment bee according to the salue, the one to worke within, and the other to worke without, for this salue and oyntment is chee∣fest accounted of among Phisitions for all woundes, both to cleanse and to heale very faire and perfectly, and to knit broken bones surely.
To heale all olde wounds. ¶ Take Plantaine water distilled, and put halfe a pinte thereof to an ounce of Mercurie sublimatum, and so stir them very well togeather, vntill it be dissolued in the Plantaine wa∣ter, and then wash the sore or wound well therewith, and af∣ter wet a cloth in the same water, and couer it cleane ouer the sore or wound, and vse this once euery day vntill it bee whole, and doe so from day to day. A red water for sores and wounds, either olde or newe. ¶ Take a pottle of running water, a pecke of ashes of Ash wood that is old, and a pottle of Tan-iuyce that leather neuer came into, and a pound of Mother, a pound of Allam, and beate them all in fine powder, and put it into your Tan-iuyce nine dayes, and then whē you haue so doone, take a pottle of the one and a pottle of the other, and put thereto ten ounces of greene Copperis, and one ounce of Ginger beaten all into fine pow∣der, and put them all together, and so séeth them to a quarte, then take them off and straine them, and put them in a faire vessell, and poure out the thinne from the thicke, and lay a wet cloth thereon, and lay it to the wounde or sore eyther olde or new, and wash them well therewith. A water imperiall for all wounds and Cankers. ¶ Take a handfull of red Sage leaues, and a handfull of Selondine, as much of Woodbine leaues, take a gallon of con∣duit water, and put the hearbes in it: and let them boyle to a pottle, and then straine the hearbs through a strainer, and take the licour & sette it ouer the fire againe, and take a pint of Eng∣lish honny, a good handfull of Roch-allam, as much of white Copper is fine beaten, a penny-worth of graines brused, & then
let them boyle altogether three or foure walmes ouer the fire, and let the skimme as it riseth be wel taken off with a feather, and when it is colde, put the same into an earthen pot or bottle so that it may be kept close from ayre: and for a greene wound, take of the thinnest, and for an olde wounde of the thickest, couer the sore rather with Veale or Mutton: skimme them with Docke leaues: when that you haue dressed them with thys aforesaid water. To make water imperiall another way. ¶ Take a handfull of Dragon, of Scabions, of Endiue, a handfull of Pimpernell, a handfull of Worme-wood, of Rew a handfull: a handfull of Tansie: as much Fetherfoy: asmuch of Daisie leaues, as much of Cowslyps: as much of Mayden∣hayre: as much Sinckfoyle: as much Dandelyon: as much Time: as much Bawme: of each of these hearbes a handfull, as I sayd before: then take of Treakle a pound: of Bole Armo∣niack foure ounces: and when you haue all these hearbes toge∣ther, you must take and shread them a little, but not too small, then take the Treakle & the Bole armoniack, and mingle them and the hearbes together: then put them in a stillitory and still them, and it is made. A very good remedy to take away Warts. ¶ For to take away Warts, take the séede of Briony with the leaues, burne them and make Ashes of them: and meddle the ashes with the iuyce of the same hearbe like an oyntment, and annoynt your Warts often, and they will fall away. The dunge of an Eagle if it be often rubbed vpon the Warts, dooth likewise doo away the same very quickly. Another remedie for Warts. ¶ Take the iuyce of hearbe Wart-wort, and annoynt a∣ny Wart or Ring-worme there-with, and it helpeth.
For to doe away Warts. ¶ Take Elder berries and stampe them, then wringe out the iuyce, and with the same vse once or twise a day to annoint thy Warts, and it will quickly doo them cleane away. Thys experiment hath béene proued. For to doe away a Wenne. ¶ Take and binde fast the Wenne, then take Verdigreace, Sulphur, Sope, oyle of Egges, Allam and Honny, and tem∣per them together, and lay thereto, and it shall doo away the Wem, and also for to heale it well and cleane within three or foure times dressing. For to doe away a Wenne. ¶ Take a quantitie of vnslackt Lime, and mixe the same very well with as much blacke Sope, and annoynt any Wen therewith, and the Wenne will fall away: and when the roote is come out, annoynt the place with oyle of Balme, and it wil perfectly heale the same. How to helpe one that is blasted. ¶ Take the white of a Hennes Egge, and put it in a bra∣zen Morter, then put thereto a quarter of an ounce of Coppe∣ris, and grinde them well togeather till it bee as small as an oyntment: with which annoynt the sore face, and it will case the paine and take away the swelling: and when it is welnye whole, annoynt the place with a little Popilium, and that will make the skinne faire and well againe. An excellent remedy to helpe the rewme. ¶ Rub the leafe of a Marygold betweene your fingers, and put the same into your nose, and let it stay there a little while, and it will bring forth aboundance of humors out of the heade, it will helpe the Rewme within a little while, if you vse it. This hath béene prooued.
Another speciall remedie for the Rewme. ¶ Take a little sticke, and tye about the ende thereof olde Oaken leaues, then cut them something rounde, and holde the same leaues in your mouth as deepe and as farre as you can suffer the same, holding the sticke betweene your teeth, in thys manner hold your mouth ouer a dish or poringer, and there wil great aboundance of humors auoyde out of your mouth. But within a while washe in faire water the leaues on the sticke, and then holde them in your mouth againe. Doe thus for the space of an howre, and vse it thrée or foure times a day, for thrée or foure dayes together, or vntill you haue auoyded so much watry humors as you thinke good. This is the best and pre∣sentest remedy for the rewme that euer was heard of. And hee that proues it shall finde it and excellent helpe. A soueraigne water against melancholly, and drinke to comfort the stomacke. ¶ Take a pounde of Aqua vitae. and put thereto a quart of Redrose water, put into it as much Licoris sliced and scraped as you may hold in both your hands, but if it be English Lico∣ris you may take lesse, put thereto as much Anniseede as you thinke will be sufficient to make it taste well thereof: stew all these with a soft fire well couered with an earthen pot that the ayre doo not goe out to your iudgement, till that a pinte thereof be consumed: let it not boyle in any case but stewe softly, this done, take it from the sire, and let it scand and coole: and when it is cold draw it from the seede and Licoris, and put it into the wicker glasse or bottle, but bruse it that your water may be as cleere as you can, and when neede requireth occupy it. To make artificiall oyle of balme for woundes. ¶ Take Balme, Rewe, Fetherfoy, Sowthistle, Nettles, Briany leaues, Bramble leaues, Sage leaues, Cinckfoyle, of
each of all these a handfull: take all these simples and lay them in oyle Oliue one whole night, and take the water that com∣meth of a Vine stalke, and blacke Suailes, gum Arabeck, gum Edere, of each of these one ounce: you must take the seed of the Ashe trée, and beate the seedes and the gummes very fine toge∣ther. Afterward, you must put the oyle and the hearbs into the Still, and throwe thereupon a quarter of a pound of the oyle of Roses, and two ounces of Aqua vitae, and so distill it with a soft fire: but you must still it at the least twice or thrise: Thys oyle will heale all wounds very soone. A greene balme to incarnate wounds, and to dry vp filthy vlcers. ¶ Take of fine Aqua vitae, Venice turpentine, oyle of Ro∣ses, of euery of them a pint, boyle them with a soft fire of coles, and after a waume or two, put in of Verdigreace made in fine powder an ounce and a halfe, and boyle it to a good perfect sub∣stance, and so vse it to your sore wounds and filthy vlcers, and it shall helpe them very shortly. To make artificiall Balme. ¶ Take of gum Elempine sixe ounces, Aloes, Mirrhe, Ca∣store, Apponace of each two ounces, Storax calamite. Olibanum Mastick Cacabre, of each foure ounces, Munge Bedelii, gum of the Fig trée, of each two ounces and a halfe, make euery one of them in powder by themselues that will be powdered. The spices take of Lignum aloes, three ounces, Zilobalsami, Carpo∣balsami, Spignard, Cloues, Sinamon, Calamus aromatici, nut aromatici, Nutmegs, Galingall, Setwell, graines, Cardomo∣mus, both of the great and small, Cucubes, rootes of Cipres, Mustacastaline, which is the coddes of the Muske, of each two ounces, Rewpenticon 2. drams, flowers of rosemary 2. ounces, Iuniper berries, Enula campana, of each dried an ounce, Bay∣berries halfe an ounce, beat all together in grosse powders, then take of the séed of fennell, perfly, tansie, Carret, Coriander, and Caroway séed, of each one ounce: wormwood, sage dried, basill,
Rosemary: Margerum: Penniriall: Mints: Secades: E∣grimonie: a like quantitie of each: then take Figges of Alga∣rie, Dates the stones taken away: Reysons of the sunne: Al∣monds, of each foure ounces: then take oyle of Turpentine 2. pynts: oyle of Mastick, oyle Bennet, oyle of Castore, oyle of Tartor, oyle of Dyll, oyle of Exceter, of each halfe a pint, oyle of Spike, oyle of Nard, of each foure ounces: pure Aqua com∣posita the waight of all the former stuffe: and first boyle them in the bodies of two Limbecks of glasse fast luted, with the crownes of theyr couers downeward in Balnaeo mariae, that is, a Cawdron of water a day & a night: then take off theyr caps and set them aright, and distill it with an easie fire in these two Limbecks, all your stuffe being deuided into euen portions, as before: lute them strongly, and distill them with a sofe fire, sixe howres: then in the rest increase your fire by little and little til the water be passed, then shall you sée white oyle, and last of all yellow oyle: kéepe euery of them by themselues: the fourth is in the bottome, keepe ye as an excellent remedy for all wounds, it helpeth suddainly, without suffering the wound to putrifie or cast matter, but confoundeth it and helpeth it straight. The vertue of this Balme. It is most excellent for Gowtes, Palsies, Cramps, wounds, akings, sinewes cut, hurt or shrunke, the falling sicknesse, Apo∣plexia, the turning of the braine, the biting of dogs, or any other venimous things, for the Timpany to annoynt the belly, and the first water is good for all wounds, and all retten and filthy vlcers, as hath beene prooued. The receit of the water of health, by G. K. ¶ Take red Rose flowers, Cammomile flowers, Lauender flowers, Buglosse flowers, Isope flowers, Rosemary flowers, sage flowers, secados flowers, balme flowers, time & wild time, peniriall, Margerū, winter sauery, pimpernell, S. Iohn woort, Philopendula, eyebright, horehound, dittany, bittany, scabies, turmentill, planten, auence, maidenhaire, mints, rue, sapifrage,
Harts-tung, Ensras, Brasill, Canepithy, Piony, Iuniper ber∣ries, Bay leaues or berries: take of all these flowers a maine handfull if they be gotten, if not, then take thrée gallons of migh∣ty strong Ale, or thrée gallens of Gascoigne wine: then take these spices, Anniséede two pound, Licoris two pound, Fenell séede two vnces, Cinamon two vnces, Caraway seede two vn∣ces, Galingall two vnces, Setwell two vnces, Angelica two vnces, Ciperus two vnces, Ginger, Nutmegs, of each one vnce, Enula campana one vnce, Calamus aromaticus one vnce, Ireus one vnce, Lignum aloes two vnces, Cloues one vnce, Cucubes one vnce, Graines one vnce, long Pepper one vnce, Spignard one vnce, Mace one vnce, Amis amonium one vnce, Suger half a pound, Alkenet two vnces, Olibanum, Mastick, Basill séede, Marierum seed: of all these halfe an vnce, and doo by the draw∣ing of this water of health in all respects as by your Aqua com∣posita, your flowers and hearbs must be dried, and shred on a chopping boord a good handfull of each at the least, and your Ani∣séede must be well beated and dusted, and your Licoris must be scraped and sliced cleane, and then all the rest of your other spi∣ces and seeds must be beaten fine in a brasen morter each to his quantity. Also you may put therto thrée grains of ciuell Musk, for it will make it to drink the more plesanter, and for diuers in∣firmities this water is good, as to breake wind in the belly, for them that cannot relish or disgest their meats, and for diuers o∣ther cold causes, this water will make a man to liue long, and to kéepe and preserue a man long in health, and to make a man to looke young againe. For to make pety Balme. ¶ Take fine meat oyle a pint, and put it in a clean pan, and séeth it well ouer the fire, then doo thy hands in cold water and let it drop thereon and it will creame, and when it leaueth crea∣ming doo it to the fire againe, and let it séethe well, and doo so thrée or foure times with your hands, then take halfe an vnce of Masticke, as much of Frankensence, as much of Rozen, a quarter of an vnce of Verdigreace: make all these into powder
by themselues, then doo them into the oyle, and let them séethe well together, and stir it well and skim it cleane, then let it coole, then doo it in a pewter vessell, and this is a good balme. For to make aqua vitae perfectissima, per G. K. ¶ Take the roote of Sapifrage, Persly, Alisander, Fenell, Time, Isope, Peniriall, Rosemary, Lauender, Primrose, Mints, Rue, Betony, Sauein, Sage, Auence, Calamint, of each of these hearbs halfe a quarterne: then take Galingall, Pepper, long Pepper, Cloues, Nutmegs, of each of these one vnce, of Canell, Mace, Cucubes, of each of these two vnces, Setwell, Pellitory of Spaine, Lignum aloes, of each halfe an vnce, stamp thy hearbs, and pouder thy spices, and doo them in a gallon of good red Wine, and mingle thy hearbs and spices to∣gether in the Wine, and let them stand all a night in stéepe, and on the morrow distill them into a Limbeck: this water hath many faire vertues, and it comforteth man or woman, and kée∣peth them from all maladies that be cold. Also it is hot at the first distilling, and at the third distilling it helpeth man or woman in their kindly heates. Also it comforteth a cold stomack, and destroyeth both scabbe and scall. Also it healeth all olde sores if it be kindly vsed, it is good for the deafnes of the eares by putting a little therof into thy eare: it driueth away the stinking of the breath. Also it is good for the falling euill, & for the palsie in the tung, for that palsie maketh a man sodainly dombe. Also it healeth the palsie of other members that trembleth. Also for biting or stinging of Scorpions or Adders, or other venemous beasts, for no venim can come néere vnto it. Also it is good for the toothache of cold rewme, and for a cold feauer being drunk before the axis: it is good for to wash the emerods and old sores called Noli me tangere, and for the Colli∣ca passio, and who so drinketh it for the vanity of the head: it al∣so healeth the saucefleume in the face.
Also it purgeth the stomack of all corruptions and for stone, and for all gowtes, it destroyeth the gnawing within the belly, and suffereth no wind to bréed in mans body. To make Aqua vitae for cold causes. ¶ Take good Gascoigne wine, and distill it in a glasse, or Serpentine, and that water that burneth doo it by it selfe, and if it be moist it will be of more vertue. Also take of Ginger, Canell, Mace, Cucubes, Nutmegs, Graines, long Pepper, of each of these thrée vnces, and bray them in a morter, and searce them: and put these powders into the water that burneth and still it oft, and so reserue it to your vse morning and euening first and last, and this is called the most soueraine water, and mighty against all manner of cold causes that ingendereth within man or woman, and this will helpe you for diuers infirmities that is within man: this hath béen prooued often. A soueraine water vsed by Doctor Steaphens Phisition, with the which he did many great cures, and a little before his death he declared the same to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and now to the benefit and commodity of all people that be well disposed. ¶ Take two gallons of good Gascoigne wine or Clarret wine that is good, or else two gallons of mighty strong Ale, and of euery of these spices a dram: take of Ginger, Galingall, Cinamon, or Canell, Nutmegs, Graines, Cloues, Anniséeds, Fennell séed, Caraway séeds, Calamus aromaticus, Cucubes, Ireos, Maces, Spignard, Enula campana, Canepithis, of each of these a good handfull, Iuniper berries one vnce, and of euery one of these hearbs following a handfull, Sage, red Roses, red Mints, garden Time, wild Time, Pellitory, Camomell, La∣uender, Wormwood, Betony, Plantaine, Ribwoort, Bayes, red Iilliflowers, wild Marierum, Rosemary, Organum, Rue,
the flowers of Secados, Peniriall, Hilwoort, Auence, Cowslip leaues, Primrose leaues, and flowers of screbby grasse, Straw∣bery leaues, Tutson, beate all these spices, and stamp all these hearbs, and put them in the liquor aforesaide, and put a little Muske therin, and let it stand twelue houres infused, and stir it oftentimes, then still this water in a Limbeck close stopt that no ayre come out of the pot, and with a small sire kéepe about it that it come not too fast forth, and kéepe the first water by it selfe for that is best. Also the second pint by it selfe for that is also good but not as the first is. Also you shall receaue a third pint of that water of these thrée gallens, but your vnce of Alkenet must be for the two last waters to cullour it red withall, which must be in the receauer with some Suger, and some Cinamon, and you may kéepe this water these seauen yeares, and it will be in his full strength and operation. The receite of the water called Aqua mirabilis et pre∣tiosa, made by Doctor VVillowby Phisition. ¶ Take of Galingall, Cloues, Maces, Cucubes, Ginger, Cardomomum, Nutmegs, Millilot, Saffron, Egrimony wa∣ter foure vnces, and beat all these into powder the quantity of a dram and somwhat more: then take of the iuice of Selondine, and a pint of M. George Kebels water of the best and the first: put of the same water beeing well mingled in a stillatory of glasse, and let it be stopped well and close, and so let it stand for the space of foure and twenty houres, and then distill them with a soft fire for the space of a naturall day. The vertue of this water aforesaid. ¶ This water is of secret nature, it is excéeding good for the stomacke, it dissolueth the lungs without any gréeuance, and the same lungs beeing wounded and putrified it mightilie hel∣peth them, and comforteth them, and it suffereth not the body to putrifie.
Also he shall neuer néede to be let blood, and this water suffe∣reth not the body to be brent with choller, nor yet with melan∣cholly nor slemot to be lift vp and haue dominion aboue water, and this water mightily expelleth the rume, and profiteth much the stomack, it ingendreth good colour, and keepeth and conser∣ueth the visage and memory. Also it is good for the palsie, if the said water be giuen to man or woman labouring towards death one spoonfull, it relenteth them: of all waters artificiall there is no better. Also vse in Sommer once a wéeke a spoonfull of this water fa∣sting, and in Winter time two spoonefuls: it is good for women that haue the gréene sicknesse, and for diuers other causes: per Doctorem Willowbie. The receite of Cinamon. ¶ Take rennish wine a quart, or spanish wine a pint, Rose∣water a pint and a halfe, Cinamon brused a pound and a halfe, let these stand infused the space of foure and twenty houres, then distill it, and being close stopped and luted, then with a soft fire distill the same softly in a Limbecke of glasse, and receaue the first water by it selfe. Also if ye be so disposed to make the same water weaker, take thrée pints of Rosewater, and a pint and a halfe of rennish wine, and so distill the same, and you shall haue to the quallity of the stuffe the quantity of the water, which is thrée pintes: but the first is the best, and so reserue it to your vse both morning and euening. To make Cinamon water another way. ¶ Take thrée quarts of Muskadine, and a pound of Cina∣mon, and halfe a pint of good Rose-water, and so let them lye in∣fused the space of foure and twenty houres, and distill it as a∣foresaid, and you shall receaue to the quantity as to the quality, but the first pint is the best and the cheefest of all the other as is manifest practise.
Aqua composito for a surfet. ¶ Take Rosemary, Fenell, Isope, Time, Sage, Hore∣hound, of each of these a handfull, Peniriall, Mints, Marie∣rum, of each sixe crops, a roote of Enula campana, of Licoris, Aniseed brused, of each two vnces, put all these to three gallons of mighty strong Ale, and put it into a brasse pot ouer an easse fire: and set the Limbeck vpon it, and stop it close with dow or Past that no ayre doo goe out, and so kéepe it stilling with a soft fire, and so preserue it to your vse as néede requireth. To make water of life. ¶ Take Balme leaues and stalkes, Burnet leaues, and flowers a handfull, of Rosemary, Turmentile leaues and roots, Rosa solis a handfull, red Roses a handfull, Carnations a hand∣full, Isope a handfull, a handfull of Time, red strings that grow vpon Sauery a handfull, red Fenell leaues and rootes a handfull, red Mints a handfull: put all these hearbs into a pot of earth glased, and put therto as much white Wine as will co∣uer the hearbs, and let them soke therein eight or nine dayes: then take an vnce of Cinamon, as much of Ginger, as much of Nutmegs, Cloues, and Saffron a like quantity, of Aniséeds a pound, great Raisons a pound, Suger a pound, halfe a pound of Dates, the hinder part of an olde Coney, a good fleshy run∣ning Capon, the flesh and sinewes of a legge of Mutton, foure young Pigeons, a dozen of Larks, the yels of twelue Eggs, a loafe of white bread cut in sippets, Muskadell or Bastard thrée gallons or as much in quantity as suffiseth to distill all these things at once in a Limbeck, and thereto put of Methri∣datum two or three vnces, or els with as much perfect Treakle, and distill it with a moderate fire, and keepe the first water by it selfe, and the second water alone also, and when there com∣meth no more water with strings, take away the Limbecke, and put into the pot more Wine vpon the same stuffe, and still it againe and you shall haue an other good water, and shall so remaine good. In the first ingredience of this water you must
kéepe a double glasse warily, for it is a restoratiue of all princi∣pall members, and defendeth against all pestilentiall diseases, as against the Palsie, Dropsie, Splene, yellow or black Iaun∣dise, for wormes in the belly, and for all agues be they hote or cold, and all manner of swellings and pestilentiall sorrowes in man or melancholly and flegmaticke, and it strengthneth and comforteth all the sprites and strings of the braine, as the hart, the milt, the liuer, and the stomacke, by taking thereof two or three spoonefuls at one time by it selfe, or with Ale, Wine, or Béere, and by putting a pretty quantity of Suger therein: al∣so it helpeth disgestion, and dooth breake winde, and stoppeth laske, and bindeth not, and it mightily helpeth and easeth man or woman of the paine of the hart burning, and for to quicken the memory of man: take of this water thrée spoonfuls a day in the morning, and an other after hee goeth to dinner, and the third last at night. The electuary of life. ¶ And if a man be sicke at the stomack or in the belly, or at the hart, or in the head, or were bitten with any venomous euill beast, or poysoned, and a man were by the way trauailing, or in the house, and he had all these sicknesses, so that he had with him this Lectuary that is made of fiue things to eate there of or drinke thereof in water thrée or foure spoonefuls, he should by Gods help  quickly whole, so that hee vse it for fifteene dayes fasting: and when he goeth to bed least he should not be whole of all his sicknesses in the body, and if he  drinke the of  a day the better: and there be the fiue thinge to make th electuary with: Scologlo, More, Gntia Grandorer, and Ilaout, as much of the one as of the other and stamp them, and straine them, and mingle them with honey that hath beene well boyled on the fire and scummed cleane: and th  making of this Lectuary, and when as need requireth you may vse it .
A good powder called the powder of life. ¶ Take the séede of Smallage, and the bones of a Mouse, and the roote of Turmentile, the roote of Quintfoile, and the roote of Philopendula, the séede of Gromwell, and the séede of Sapifrage, the séede of Alisanders, and the séede of Sowthistle, of each of these seedes a like much, and then take Licoris and Galingall, Cannell, and Ginger, of each a like much: then bray them in a morter, and mingle them together and vse ther∣of, then doo thereto a quantity of Auence, of Saffron, and a quantity of Maces, and this is the making of this powder for all manner of sicknesse in mans body or in the womb, or if a man be ouercome by the way, it will destroy all manner of poi∣son and venome, and the dropsie, and palsie, and also the wal∣lowing about a mans hart. FINIS.
A Table of all such matters as are con∣tained in thys Booke. FOr all parts of the head, and the diseases thereof. Fol. 1 Very good remedies for them that cannot sléepe. 9 For all manner of paine in the eares. 10 For all manner of disseases in the eyes. 11. For the diseases in the nostrils and the nose. 15 For the diseases comming by tooth-ache 16 Howe to keepe the téeth cleane. 18. How to helpe the paine in the gums & the bléeding thereof. 18 For blysters in the mouth, and swelling of the lips. eodem Howe to helpe a stinking breath. 20. For the tongue, and the palsie thereof. 20 For to doe away sunne-burning. 21 How to helpe all manner of red pimpled faces. 22 How to helpe any one that is iawfalne 23 For choller and shortnes of breath. eodem For a hoarce voyce and to open the pipes eodem For a sore throat, and for the Quinsie in the throat 24. How to helpe all manner of colde Coughes 25. How to stay a vomit, and how to make one cast. 27 How to prouoke a good appetite 28 A remedy against the shortnesse of breath. eodem For griefes in the armes and hands 29 For all kinde of diseases in the stomake eodem For the paine of the Bulke 32 For spetting of blood eodem For all manner of paine or incombrances in the breast. 33 A remedy against hart-burning 35 Remedies against swounding. 37 Remedies against the paines of the liuer, the lunges, and the diseases of the milt. 38 Against all paines in the gutts and belly. eodem Against the diseases comming of the Splene 39 For paine in the sides, and for the plurasie 45
Against all aches in the backe, and paine in the raines. 46 For all manner of impostumes in the body 48 Against the disease called the Mother. eodem For all manner of paine in the priuie members 49 Howe to helpe the fundament and the piles. 54 For to helpe the pilles and Emerods. eodem For euils in the flankes 57 Against all manner of paine in the knees eodem Against all aches in the legges. 58 Against the paine in the feete, and for cornes on the toes. 59 Certaine necessary rules for purging and letting blood. 62 Against all diseases through the body, beginning of agues 63 Against all manner of hote or cold Agues. 64 Against all manner of aches in the bodie 65 For a man that is broken. eodem For all manner of broken bones. 66 Against burning with Gun-powder, or scalding 67 Against all manner of bruses 68 A present remedy for to breake a botch. eodem For the byting of a mad dogge, or the biting of any venimous beast, or Serpent. 69 To helpe one that is in a consumption eodem How to helpe the Sciatica passio. 71 To helpe the Crampe, and to haue a good colloure 72 Against the Canker, a speciall remedy. eodem Against the Collick and the stone diuers remedies 73 Against the Collica passio, and for costiffenes. eodem Howe to helpe the Dropsie in a man or woman 74 For a Dormitorie eodem Howe to drawe a bile from one place to another eodem To drawe a Dart out of a mans body 75 Howe to helpe the falling sicknesse eodem To cure a Fistula eodem Howe to stop a flixe or laxe. 76 To drawe fire out of any sore, and to fret away dead flesh. 77 Against all manner of Goutes. eodem
Against the greene Sicknes, and gnawing or aking of ioynts, diuers remedies. 78 Against heate in the body. 79 Remedies against the black or yellow Iaundies eodem. Against all impostumes in the body 80. To destroy all itches or breakings out eodem To destroy a Tetter or Kingworme 81. For the kernels, or Kings euill. eodem For the laske. eodem Diuers remedies for the Leprosie 82 Howe to make a man leane eodem Remedies against the paine in the lunges eodem Remedies for the Morphew, either white or blacke. eodem. To cure a Marmole 83 A maturatiue to ripen a botch or bile. eodem To make Neruaile for all akings eodem To make of diuers sorts of oyles, and to knowe which be hote and which be cold. 84 To make an oyle for diuers purposes. eodem To make oyntments that be greene 86 To make diuers precious oyntments eodem To make a medicine against the palsie. eodem To helpe the pricking of a thorne or needle in any ioynt, and the hole be stopped. 87 To make a preparatiue eodem To make a Mellilot plaister eodem To make the powder of life two wayes 88 To make the Philosophers stone, so called, by reason of the sundry vertues thereof. eodem Howe to make Aurum potabile. eodem To make the blacke plaister two manner of wayes 89 To make the plaister called Flos vnguentorum. eodem Howe to make the golden plaister, which healeth all bruses of∣vaines or sinewes 90 To make a plaister called Gratia dei maior et minor. eodem To make Methridate against poyson or pestilence. 91
To make pilles for poyson. eodem Against the plague or pestilence a remedy eodem A remedy for a man that hath drunke poyson eodem To cure a King-worme or Tetter 92 A good restoratiue to restore a mans nature, and to helpe them that are weake and decayed. 93 A restoratiue of Rosa solis. eodem To restore a man that is brought low 93 A soueraine salue to heale all sores and wounds. eodem A salue for to bring sores that ranke and ake into theyr owne kinde, and to cease the burning or aking 94 A salue for a newe cut that will not leaue bléeding eodem A salue for all sores. eodem A very good salue to heale a newe hurt eodem A very good salue called Incarnatiue, to bring flesh. 94 To make a salue to draw and heale 95 To make a salue for any olde sore eodem To make a salue that is a precious oyntment for all kindes of woundes and bruses. eodem For the salt humor. 96 Howe to heale any sore or cut. eodem An oyntment for all manner of sores, cuts, and swellings, and for any great heat. 96 Howe to skinne the flesh that is raw. 97 Sundry medicines to heale scabbes eodem A very good oyntment to doe away scabs and itching. 97 Remedies to cure the shingles 98 To helpe the shrinking of the sinnewes eodem An oyle for sinnewes that be shrunke 98 Howe to knit sinnewes that be broken eodem Diuers remedies to staunch blood 99 Against any kinde of swelling that commeth suddainlie into a mans limmes. eodem To staunch blood when a Maister vaine is cut. eodem For to make one slender 99 A very good remedy to breake the stone 100
Against the Strangurie and Dissury 101 Remedies against the Stone and Strangulion eodem Remedies against the Tissicke, well proued eodem To make Treakle 102 How to make the golden treat that healeth all bruses eodem An excellent way teaching how to make the white treat, cal∣led Apostolicon. eodem Howe to make the treat called Emanuell eodem To make a good treat, called the greene treat of Iane 103 Another treat called Gratia Dei. eodem To make a very good treat for wounds 103 To make a greene treat for a gréene wounde, which is a speci∣all good remedy eodem Howe to make a treat which will endure a hundred yeres, be∣ing very good for all aches in the bones, and excellent for to help the sinewes. 103 To make a treat called Oxicroxie. eodem Howe to make Vnguentum album, two waies 104 To make Vnguentum popilium eodem To make Vnguentum geptiacum eodem To make Vnguentum ruptorum 104 To make Vnguentum versilium. eodem To make Vnguentum delerosica. 105 To make Vnguentum genuest. 105 To make Vnguentum penatum eodem A very good oyntment to heale wounds eodem A drinke made of balls to heale wounds 105 Very good remedies for all manner of wounds. 106 Remedies how to heale wounds and broken bones. 108 To make an oyntment sanatiffe for wounds 108 Howe to heale all old wounds 109 A red water for sore wounds, either old or new eodem A Water imperiall for all wounds and Cankers 109 Another way how to make water imperiall. eodem Very good remedies to doe away Warts. 110 Remedies to doe away a Wenne eodem
Howe to helpe one that is blasted 110 Very good remedies to helpe the Rewme eodem A soueraine water against mellancholie. eodem To make artificiall oyle of Balme for wounds eodem A greene Balme to incarnate woundes, and to dry vp filthie vicers. 112 To make an artificiall Balme. eodem The receit of the water of health eodem To make petty Balme 113 To make Aqua vitae perfectissima. eodem To make Aqua vitae for cold causes 114 To make Doctor Stephens water eodem To make Doctor Willowbies water, called Aqua mirabilis, very necessary for diuers purposes. 115 To make Cinamon water two waies eodem To make Aqua composita for a surfet. 115 To make the Water of life eodem To make the electuary of life. 116 To make the powder of life. eodem The end of the Table. AT LONDON Printed by I. R. for Edwarde White, dwelling at the little North doore of Paules Church, at the signe of the Gunne. 1597.
