22780 S124870 99898677 152114
TWELVE SERMONS PREACHED BY MAISTER HENRY SMITH. And published by a more perfect copie then heretofore. Woodcut printer's device of Robert Dexter, showing a framed right hand pointing to a star, with the motto Deus Imperat Astris and the initials R. D. ( McKerrow 257). LONDON. Printed by Richard Field for Robert Dexter, dwelling in Paules Church-yard, at the signe of the Brasen serpent. 1598.
THE CONTENTS. Two Sermons of the song of SIMEON. The third of the calling of IONAH. The fourth, of the rebellion of IONAH. The fift, and sixt, of the punishment of IONAH. The 7. The sinfull mans search. The 8. Maries choise. The 9. The Trumpet of the soule. The 10. Noahs drunkennesse. The 11. The Sinners conuersion. The 12. The Sinners confession.
THE SVVEETE SONG OF OLD FATHER SIMEON, IN TVVO SERMONS. Luke 2. verse 29 Lord now lettest thou thy seruant depart in peace according to thy word: 30 For mine eyes haue seene thy saluation, 31 Which thou hast prepared before the face of all people, 32 A light to be reuealed to the Gentiles, and the glorie of thy people Israell. THis is the sweet song of old father Simeon, wherein is set foorth the ioyfull and peaceable death of the righteous, after that they haue embraced Christ Ie∣sus with heart and mind vnfainedly as he did, seeing their death is to be the beginning of a better and more ioyfull and pleasant life then the former. But before we proceede further in it, let vs heare a litle of that which went before. The Euangelist saith verse 25. And behold, there was a man in Ierusalem, whose name was Si∣meō: this man was iust, & feared God, & waited for the consolation of Israel, and the holy Ghost was vpon him. And a reuelation, &c. Simeon feared God. Religion may wel be called feare, for there is no Religion, where feare is wanting: for the feare of the Lord is Prou. 1. 7. the beginning of wisdome, and this priuiledge hath God giuen to those that feare him, that they neede to feare nothing else. And wayted for the consolation of Israel. Simeon also wayted for the consolation of Israell, vntil he had embraced in his armes, him whom he so long longed to see and feele. How many wayters be there in the world? yet few waite as Simeon did: but some wait for honors, some for riches, some for pleasures, some for ease, some for rewards, some for money, some for a deare yeare, & some for a golden day as they call it: but Si∣meon
waited and expected with many a long looke, vntill he had seene and embraced Christ Iesus, the light of the Gentils, the glo∣rie of Israel, the saluation of all that with a faithfull and zealous affection and loue do waite for his coming, to the comfort of the afflicted, and to the terrifying of the wicked and vngodly, which haue not alreadie wayted, neither embraced him as Simeon did. And wayted for the consolation of Israel. Faith in all afflictions doth lift vp her head, wayting, in assured hope, beyond all hope, and seeing the clouds scattered ouer her head, yet she is euer comfortable to her selfe, saying, anon it wilbe calme: and although all the friends in the world do faile, yet it ne∣uer faileth nor fainteth, but euer keepeth promise in that which by the verity of the spirit of God it assureth, vntill her ioy be fulfilled. All are not Israelites that are born of Israel. Simeon was an Israe∣lite Rom. 9. 6. indeed, for he wayted for the Messias from God with patiēce and expectation: so the spirit of God dwelleth alwayes with thē which alwayes say, Thy will be done. 26 And a reuelation was giuen him. If we wait as he did, the spirit will assure vs as it did him, that we shall see God before we die: and they that long in faith to see the ioyes of heauen, the spirit assureth and promiseth faithfully vnto them, that they shall see it. 27 And he came by the motion of the spirit into the Temple. Simeon came into the Temple at this time by the prouidence of God. The worldlings wil call it chance, but the Euāgelist wold Pro. 16. 33. Mat. 10. 29 not chop that in, because it is manifest, that all things come to passe by the prouidence of God, without which there is nothing done. By this prouidence Rebecca came forth to waite on her fathers Gen. 24. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. cattell, when Abrahams seruant prayed, and looked for her com∣ming, that he might take her for Isaac to marrie withall. By this prouidence Saul was annointed king by Samuel, when he had no 1. Sam. 9. 20. &. 10. 1. such thought in his heart, but went about seeking for his fathers Asses that were lost. And he came by the motion of the spirit. The Diuelled Christ vnto the top of an high mountaine, that he might shew him the glory of the world, which deceiueth vnstable minds: so would he do you, if you would be led by such a guide; but I would not haue you to marke the vaine motions of such a
spirit, which leades to nothing but to vanity and pride: for after he hath led you to the top, and allured you by carnall pleasures as much as he can, if you then fall downe to worship Mammon, and imbrace the world, the same spirit will afterward lead you, nay ra∣ther cast you downe from the top of all vnto hell. Therefore I be∣seech you, and hartily intreate you, that you wold be the seruants of God, and seruants of the spirit of God, to be led by it, to obey it, and to do nothing contrary to his wil that you can refraine, but all those good things which you would were done by you, & go thither whither you would come, for all would come to heauen, but all will not go to heauen. If you will all heare, I will teach you all, yea I will vndertake this: heare and marke my words, and you shall be led by the power of the spirit to our Lord Iesus Christ. And I pray vnto the Lord, that I may neuer preach to the con∣demnation of any among you all; yea I wish that euery one of you were more zealous and more godly then my selfe. But to whom shal I compare you? euen to the vagabond Iewes, of whom Luke mentioneth in the Acts, that they tooke vpon them to abiure euil Act. 19. 1. 14. spirits, by the name of Iesus whom Paul preached, to whom the euil spirits answered saying, Iesus we know, and Paul we know, 15. 16. but who are ye? and those which had the euill spirits, ran vpon them & ouercame them, so that they fled out of that house naked and wounded: and thus the deuill preuailed against them at that time, because they sought to worke with anothers instrument, & preuaile with anothers weapon. If they would haue said, in the name of Iesus whom we preach, they might haue preuailed, but they thought it sufficiēt that Paul preached him, though they ne∣uer professed him. And so we leane vpon anothers staf, & think to be saued because God saueth others. We shall be dealt withall as were those vagabond Iewes: for he will answer, such I know, and such I know, but who are ye? Therfore it behoueth vs al to pray vnto the Lord, that he wold furnish vs with weapōs to encounter against all the euill motions of the spirit of Sathan, that we may ouercome, and not be ouercome and put to flight, like those va∣gabond Iewes, but that we may haue oyle alwayes in our lampes burning, and alwayes armed with watchfulnesse against our ene∣mies, lest Sathan steale vpon vs vnawares, in the darke, & lead vs to fulfill his lusts, & spoile vs, and strip vs, & leaue vs starke naked.
27 And he came by the motion of the spirit into the Temple, &c. If we would thinke that his spirit doth leade vs into the Tem∣ple, we would marke very diligently the motions thereof when we are there, whether it speaketh to vs in our owne soules by the mouth of the minister of God, who is the minister not of the letter, but of the spirit and grace of God. 27 And when the parents brought in the child Iesus to do for him according to the custome of the Law. 28 Then he tooke him in his armes. Happy Simeō embracing Christ, but not happy that he embraced him with his hāds, but therfore happy because he embarced him in heart. Happy are they and blessed which see the things which ye Mat. 13. 16. see, and the eares that heare the things that ye heare, saith Christ: but cursed are we, that hearing and seeing do not repent: for we cannot be blessed by hearing and seeing only, vnlesse we heare & see with profit, so that we in heart embrace Christ. But we will ob∣iect that we are Israelites, and are circumcised, and haue receiued the Sacrament of Christs bloud, that we might be his people and he our God: but this will not excuse vs, nor make vs seeme anie thing better in the sight of God, but rather worse, if we haue not Ephes. 4. 20. 22. 23. 24. ceased to embrace the world, to embrace vanities, & haue vnfai∣nedly embraced the word of God, and also the Lord Iesus Christ. For it is said, that Christ came amongst his owne, & his owne re∣ceiued Iohn. 1. 11. him not: but therefore accursed are so many of them as re∣iect their owne saluation, which being freely offred vnto them, will not stretch forth their hands to receiue it, that is, will not at∣tend with their eares to heare it, or at least will not enlarge their heartes to embrace it. And praysed. If Samuel had heard the first time that God called him, then God needed not to call him the second or the third. If Peter had marked the crowing of the cocke at the first time as he did at the third, the cocke needed not to crow thrise. Luke. 22. Now therfore, when you heare the same sound againe which you haue heard before, remēber now that the cocke croweth the second time: for you know what discommodity doth come by negligence, & what commodity by attention: for if you attend & follow, iustice shalbe swallowed vp of mercy.
Simeon praysed God. Simeon was thankfull. Here is the example, but where be they Luke 17. that follow it? If nine leapers be clensed, yet but one returneth to giue thanks, then one is all. Vnthankfulnesse is the first guest that sitteth at the table; for some will not sticke to say, that they neuer said grace since they were children, but if they had said they neuer had grace since they were children, I would rather beleeue them. Do you not say, Giue vs this day our dayly bread? If you do, for. shame say so no more, begge no more at Gods hands, vntill you Leu. 26. 16. bee more thankfull for that you haue receiued. For behold, the heauens frowne vpon you for your sins, and the earth denieth her fruite, and is become barren, because of your vnthankfulnesse. And praised God, and said, &c. Here Simeon prayed & praised God, yet but in few words, for God delighteth not in much babling, he prayed not like the Eth∣nicks, the Pharisies, or the Priests of Baal, but Simeon praied with the heart like Moses, and was heard. And said: He ioyfully praysing God spake, yea sweetly as it were sung it. Though you sing all Dauids Psalmes ouer, and haue not Dauids spirit, it profiteth nothing: and though Dauid was heard when he sung them, yet you cannot be heard. Therefore let vs pray so, that our prayers may be heard. But we cannot with the heart, and so that we may be heard pray, if we turne away Prou. 28. 9. our eares from the word: for so doing, whatsoeuer prayers we make, they are abhominable. Therefore let vs heare so, that hea∣ring we may profit by it. Let vs not heare still so vnprofitably as we were wōt to do: if we do, it shall be required at our hands. Do you thinke you shall neuer be called to account of that which I haue preached vnto you, & therefore as soone as ye are gone out of this place, all is shut vp, and all is forgotten, God is exempted Loh. 12. 48. Luke. 10. 42 frō your minds? Our Sauiour Christ saith, the word that I speake vnto you shall iudge you at the last day. Marie is cōmended, for that she heard our Sauiour verie diligently, laying vp his words in her heart, and Iacob was wiser then all his children, in that hee remembred the dreame of Ioseph vntill he saw it fulfilled. Those that loue the Lord with an vnfained loue; do gladly heare his Ioh. 10. 27. voice & become obedient. My sheepe heare my voyce, saith Christ: and they that loue the Arke as Dauid did, will daunce about the
Arke as Dauid did, and that with ioy and gladnesse. Isaac was a 2. Sā. 6. 14. Gene. 21. good man, his name signified laughter, wherby was shewed what ioy and laughter there should be about Christ Iesus, for he was the figure, the truth was Christ himself. The Virgin song whē she Luke. 2. 46. Luke. 2. 13. 14. knew that she should beare him, the Angels song ioyfully whē he was borne, & Simeon song when he was brought into the Tēple. If Simeon had not longed, and so waited for the consolation, should he now haue had this ioy and exultation? he could not haue felt it, for as our desire is, so is our ioy. And surely therefore we receiue not sound comfort, or feele small ioy by the preaching of the Gospell, because we with longing wait not for it, we haue no liuely desire of it, we hunger and thirst not after it. Lord now lettest thou thy seruant depart. Simeon waiting for the consolation of Israell, longing to see the Sauior, was like the hart panting for the water brooks, till he had beheld his best beloued: but as soone as he had taken him in his armes whom his soule desired to see, he so thirsted for death, that he thencefoorth thought of, sought after, besought God for no∣thing, but to leaue this life, and hence to depart: for he forthwith singing, prayed: Now lettest thou thy seruant depart. But do you (say some) commend him herein? did he well? May not any man desire death? may not the fastned ship in a strange land desire to be loosed to hasten to his longed for port at home? may not a mā imprisoned amongst bitter enemies, desire to be set at liberty, to returne to his owne countrey, in freedome to liue amongst his sweete friendes? Are we not strangers here, and by vnpeaceable most deadly enemies, our owne flesh, the world, and the diuell, held prisoners in the chaines of sin, & manifold infirmities? and is not our home heauen, and the Saincts and Angels our most deare friends? No maruell then that Simeon here desireth to be loosed, or let depart: and Paul professeth he desired to be dissolued or Phil. 2. 23. vnlosed, as ships in a strange land fastned, as straungers amongst cruell enemies imprisoned. They were vnnaturall if they did not, it were vnreasonable to require they should not: for we not onely may thinke it lawfull, but must also acknowledge it, euen a necessarie dutie to desire death. For is there till then in vs any perfect, yea any pure obedience of God? doth not sinne as long as this life lasteth, dwell in our members? Is there any
passage to the perfect life but by the first death? The fish which is taken in the net out of the sea, struggleth to get in againe, and Adam thrust out of Paradise, would faine haue beene within againe: how much more should we be desirous to be setled in the true Paradise in assurance neuer to bee put from thence? Therefore also it is not onely our dutie to desire death, but also as soone as any clearly seeth Christ, presently he desireth to dye. For though his state be neuer so pleasant, though his life be most delightfull, though he excell in riches, and pleasures, and honors, and knowledge, and glorie, and farre exceede all that euer were: yet at the sight of Christ he euen reioyceth to forgo all, the loue of the world falling away like the mantell of Elias when he was rapt into heauen, and so crieth with the Apostle, I desire to be dissolued, that he may be with Christ. For Christ is light, and as soone as they see him, they see also themselues and the worlds false happinesse: his glorie, and their shame and filthinesse, which maketh them wish for death, that they may ceasse to sinne against God, and perfectly please him, and enioy true hap∣pinesse with him: for all sin is bloud in their eyes, and all worldly pleasures vanities. But why then (say you) haue Heman the Ezrachite. Psal. 88. 15. 16. 17. and Ezekiah that godly King Isa. 38. 10. 12. 13. 14. & that man after Gods owne heart, the sweete singer of Israell, Da∣uid, Psalm. 6. 4. & 30. 8. 9. so prayed, and taught others to pray a∣gainst death? Why? Because they all were, and would haue others to be in the feruent loue of God, both to die, and to liue desirous: to liue, that they might amongst men vphold and further the true Psal. 6. 10. & 36. 10. & 88. 11. 12. 13. worship of God, so to saue their brethrens soules, and aduaunce the glory of God the more: to die, that they might perfectly o∣beying God, fully please him, and freede from all euill, enioying all good, with him most blessedly liue. For not onely the A∣postle Isay. 38. 11. 12. Phil. 1. 23. 24. Paule, but all these, and who so euer are grounded in the faith of Christ, but especially all that haue strong hope to aduance the honour of God are in a strait, as the Apostle speaketh Phil. 1. 23. and crusht on both sides, euen with two contrary desires: to be with Christ, which is best of all for themselues, and to conti∣nue amongst men, which is most needefull for them. So that this remaineth a manifest most necessary dutie, and of all that haue
truely as Simeon beleeued in Christ, performed, namely thenceforth still to desire death, though they also withall life: life for others, death for themselues. Yet all that desire death performe not a duty: for the wicked of∣ten desire to die, but not duly: for though they wish sometimes for it, and be willing also to abide it: yet do they not in heart de∣sire it; because they thinke it not a thing in the ordinance of God good, & that for them, but vtterly hate it, holding it an extreame euill. For they acknowledge as the truth is, it will depriue them of all their delights which here they desire, and they cannot but at least feare, it will take from them all pleasure, and bring them to easelesse, & yet endlesse paine, and torments intollerable, and yet vnspeakeable. For the sentence of the vnchangeable God is al∣ready giuen. The fear full, and vnbeleeuing, and the abhominable, Reue. 21. 8. & murtherers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, & Idolaters, and all lyers, shall haue their part in the lake which burneth with fire Mar. 24. 41 and brimstone, which is the second death. And the iust iudge shall say to all workers of iniquity, Go accursed into hell fire prepared Mar. 9. 43. 10 49. for the diuell and his angels. Hell fire, where the worme neuer di∣eth, and the fire neuer goeth out. Whereupon this the Prophet a∣uoucheth, There is no peace to the wicked saith my God. For in their strongest hope, they feele a stinging feare, their greatest confi∣dence Esay. 57. is not without trembling of conscience. Therefore fearing the euent of death to be for them (as indeed it is) most horrible, they vtterly abhor it, they detest it extreamely. How then (say some) should they seeke death so eagerly? how should they mur∣der themselues so willingly? They do it not altogether willingly, but wittingly, not freely, but forced with feare of some supposed greater euill: the troubles of this world, the anguish of bodie, the horrour of minde, they are most impatient of, they cannot, they will not endure them, and thereupon they sometimes prefer death before life, lesse willing to liue in vexation, then dying to trie, whether they shall feele what they feare, euen deserued dam∣nation: for they are neuer willing to die, but vnwilling to liue often, and so worke themselues endlesse woe in hope of sup∣posed happinesse, abhorring life, not truely desiring death. For how die they, when they must voluntarily bereaue themselues of life? not in loue of God lōging to please him, performing al seruice
to him: but either in paine of body, or else anguish of minde, either raging that they cannot satisfie their lusts, or haue lost out∣ward things immoderatly loued, or fearing, if they die, deserued torments, if they liue, they shall either continue in felt horror, or leese hoped for honour: either impatient of Gods rod, fretting a∣gainst him that they so heauily feele his furie, and cannot fiercely fulfill their malicious minds, or freely feede on the rest of their fleshly lusts, or impotent in their desire of some false fondly con∣ceiued good hoping, with dreadfull doubting, by death to better their state, they choose rather to prooue the truth of Gods threats, and of the terrors of their trembling minds, then in life to remaine any longer, rather abhorring life, then any way truely desiring death. Therefore in that Simeon duly desired death, that which we heard of Simeon in the beginning is proued true, to wit that hee was iust and feared God. For none but the truly religious, none but they that by faith are assured they are before God righteous, can rightly desire death. For who would desire a change but for the better? But all that are ignorant of God, all the vnfaithfull what knowledge soeuer they haue, cannot be in better case dead, then they are now in liuing though most miserably pained: nay they cannot be without iust feare when they forgo this life, to feele for euer the second death. But the faith full hauing their con∣sciences quiet, & also ioyfull in Christ, free from the feare of that death they haue deserued, and assured by death to passe to that life which God to all faithfull hath promised, ear∣nestly wish to die in feruent loue of God, and zeale of his glo∣ry, that so they may cease from offending their good God, and neuer cease magnifying his mercy; shewing thereby that they are wearie of the seruice and bondage of Sathan and sin, and assured after death to enioy the true lif, most fully glorifying God, & most perfectly pleasing him for euer. And therefore also they desire death, not shortning their life, but waiting his leasure and calling, therby glorifying God as in their liues they haue done, & sought to do. For man was not borne at his owne will, and therfore may not die at his owne pleasure. Therefore they beg it of God, refer∣ring themselues euer to his good will, when, where, and how by death they shal glorify him: stil desiring it, but neuer wilfully procu¦ring it. If any obiect that Sāpson pluckt the house on his own head
aswel as on the Philistins, we must vnderstand that Sampson was a figure of Christ, and therefore as it were offring himselfe to God a sacrifice, first prayed, and then glorified God at his death, more then all his life, in killing so many of Gods enemies. And because they wait the Lords leasure, they not onely wil∣fully murder not themselues, but are careful also lest foolishly vn∣wittingly they hasten it. For all they are guilty of their own bloud, that either by foole-hardy, rash, or vnwise behauing, or with sur∣fets, drunkennesse, or any intemperate vsing of themselues shor∣ten their life. Yea though they tender their liues neuer so deare, yet are they in the guilt, because they willingly vse the meanes that brings death. Simeon had seene much in his many daies, but when hee saw Christ, he was vnwilling to liue any longer to see more. His desire accomplished, his long longing at length satisfied, his feruent ex∣pectation with free ioy now fulfilled, It is inough saith Simeon, that I haue seene my Sauiour, as Iacob said, It is enough that my sonne Ioseph liueth. How much more then should we be satisfied Gen. 45. 28. with this, & in al thankfulnesse rest in it, that we haue seene Christ, not as Simeon in weaknesse & basenesse, but victorious, most glori∣ous, ouer sin, death and hell triumphing, and are more assured then Iacob was, that he not as Ioseph vnder Pharaoh in Egypt liueth, but in heauen with his father in highest maiestie raigneth Lord o∣uer all, hauing all power both in heauen and earth: and moreouer Ioh. 17. 14. where he is, thither shall we come, and be like him, & with him as 1. Ioh. 3 3. fellow-heires raigne in the kingdome of our fathere for euer? Simeon knew Christ as soone as he saw him, and embraced him Rom. 8. 17. as soone as he knew him, and enioyed him as soone as he embra∣ced him: so some know the word of God as soone as they heare it, and beleeue it as soone as they know it, and feele the comfort of it as soone as they beleeue it. But others heare it as though they hard it not, like deaffe adders which stop their eares at the voice of the charmer. So Pharao would not heare the voice of Moses, nor Exod. 5. &c. 1. Kings. 18. Baals priests the voice of Elias: & others though they know it, yet wil not beleeue it, as if God were vntrue. So al malicious wretches that prefer the pleasurs of sin before the glory of God. And others though they beleeue it, yet can they not either presently, or when they will, feele the comfort of it much lesse the ioy which is
offred by it, namely the hart oppressed, the desolate afflicted soule. The seed is not cast all on a heape, but it is cast abroade: there∣fore where be the fruites of the spirit that you haue brought forth? for the spirit of God is not like a dead potion in the stomach, which worketh not, neither can we haue this spirit in vs and feele it not. For if thou hast it, it will leade thee as it did longing Si∣meon, as we haue hitherto seene, to the Temple, and when thou art there, it will lead thee to Christ, and when thou hast receiued and embraced him, it will possesse thee with ioy & so with thank∣fulnesse, and godly care to keepe him and to entertaine him, and to be obedient vnto him: nay also with a longing to be loosed hence, and euermore perfectly to please him. Therefore beloued, iudge your selues, that ye be not iudged of the Lord. Thy seruant. The godly would not leaue this priuiledge for all the riches in the world, for that they are the seruants of God, fellows to Prin∣ces and Angels: for we serue him whom Dauid, Salomon, Ezechias, Iosias serued: yea to whom a thousand thousands, Dan. 7. 10. e∣uen Dan. 7. 10. innumerable Angels minister, Heb. 12. 22. euen him who is most blessed for euer. Euery seruing-man beares the cognisance of his master vpon his sleeue. What then will the Lord say when he commeth and findeth vs marked with the badge of Sathan? Surely he will say, giue vnto Sathan that which is Sathans. But Exod. 12. 22. 23. Eze. 9. 4. 11. Reuel. 10. 7. 3. 5. 6. all the houses of Israell are sprinkled with the bloud of the Lambe, and all the mourners in Ierulalem are marked, and all the chosen are sealed with the seale of the liuing God. Well, was it said the poore receiue the Gospell? The yong men are more forward in the truth, and more zealous then the aged, the sonne then his father, the seruant then his maister. Once the yonger brother stole away the blessing from the elder, therefore the elder hated him euen for his zeale. And when was Iacob hated more then he is now? when was he so hated and persecuted as he is now by Esau? Yet in the old time men were more zealous in their age then euer we heare of them to be in their youth, yea they were zealous in the Lords businesse. Age hindred not Noah Gen. 5. 32. & 6. 22. from building of the Arke when God commanded him: age hindred not Simeon from reioycing and mirth when he beheld and embraced the Lord Iesus Christ. Then old Simeon embraced
Christ, & he enioyed him with heartie ioy in zele, but now where is old Simeon? there be but few of them to be seene coming to the temple to receiue Christ, but now yong men receiue him, yong Simeons, yong Daniels, yong Samuels, yong Timothies, and yong Onesimus, and the yong infants begin to speake againe. The yong Dan. 1. 8. 1. Sam. 2. 3. 1. Tim. 4. 12 Phile. 10. Mat. 21. 15. haue him, they are zealous, and I hope they wil keepe him though old men neglect him. Sathan thou hast too much for nothing al∣readie. In peace, &c. Christ brings peace with him, not the peace of the world, but that peace which passeth all vnderstanding, My peace I leaue with you. Ioh. 14. 27. My peace remaine with you, saith he. Our peace is laid vp in Christ, and all the peace we haue, we haue by him, else Psal. 37. 37 it is not true peace. Simeon was iust, and feared God in his life, and therefore he departed in peace: so marke the end of the iust, and follow their steps, and you shall then depart in peace, like the lābe vpon the crosse. Faine would Balaam die the death of the righte∣ous, but Balaam must then liue the life of the righteous, therefore Num. 23. 14 all men looke to this. Happie are they that depart in peace, who when death saith feare, and the Serpent saith despaire, then say by the spirit to the flesh, crouch, and bid the Serpent flie while death openeth the prison doores. If the Papists wold haue men to depart in peace, they wold ne∣uer say, that those which depart go to Purgatorie: for so by their owne saying, the worst part is behind. For they affirme, that the paine thereof is far grieuouser then any that in this life may be sustained. But againe some say, this Purgatory is in the earth neare to hel, & so it is too far from heauē to be saued. Some say, they are punished there by fire, and some say by water, & some say by fire & water. Some lastly say, that the good Angels torment, & others say, that the euill spirits do it. In this variety of most vncomfortable opinions, how is it possible hence to depart in peace? But we must vnderstand, it is a painted sepulcher, made for the pāpering of the liuing, not for the punishing, nor purifying of the dead. For the lo∣cust of Rome doth liue altogether by such Trētals & by such tra∣ditions, and this is the profitablest dreame that euer any of them Pro. 30. 15. dreamed, but it is manifest by the word of God, that where the Eccl. 11. 3. Luke. 16. 22. 23. tree falleth, there it lyeth, and shall lye for euer. Diues and Laza∣rus are dead, and where they are, thither shall we all go.
Sathan hath many sleights to deceiue vs, of which this is one of the greatest, to bring vs from the word of God to dreames & traditions, and thinges inuented by the braines of mortall men which haue not the spirit of God in them. According to thy word. All the seed falleth not into good ground, & therefore though I haue shewed you it is vngodly, as being not according to the word, some thinke it but a small matter to say for the dead, Lord haue mercie vpon them, at least they thinke it as it were a veniall sinne, if it be a sinne. But let vs take heede how we make trifles of sinnes, for there is no dallying with God, who is iealous as a con∣suming Heb. 12. 29. fire, when his people make such smal accoūt of his words. Other demaund whether it be not better to say, God be with thē, then the diuell be with them, both which are naught and to be e∣schued. And herein they aske this question, like a thiefe who ha∣uing robbed a man by the high way, and being taken with it, and demaunded why he did such a villanie, saith; is it not better to rob him then to kill him? as though he must needes do the one of them: then what shamelesse answer is this? for it is manifest, that of two euils none is to be chosen. Some will say, it is a testimonie of our good will. To such we must reply saying, so it is a testimonie of your ignorance: and then after a litle conference they will graunt, that indeed it doth not profite them. Then we must reply and say, God hath made all things to profit vs, and hath commanded that nothing be vsed vn∣profitably, no not so much as a vaine word speaking, saying, that for euery idle word we must giue account at the day of iudgemēt. Mat. 12. 36 Then they reply againe saying, if it do them no good, it doth thē no harme. But we must reply & say, it were good to beware least it do thy selfe harme. Another sort will reply and say, I pray God I neuer do worse. But to such we must answer, I pray God you may do better: and you should first know whether you do not harme before you do it. For indeed it must proceed of harme be∣ing spokē in doubting without faith, for if you beleeued that they were layd vp in peace whom you pray for, what need you pray for them at all? But it shewes an vnbeleeuing heart, and we know that whatsoeuer is not of faith is sinne, & the Lord will say of thē, who hath required those things at your hands? you haue wrought Rom. 14. 23.
vanities. Now therefore you will not leaue it, because you vsed it: then will you say also, we will not leaue our lying, nor our swea∣ring, nor our cursing, because we haue vsed it. It will greiue me if I heare you vse these speeches hereafter, hauing no reason nor proofe of Scripture to maintaine it by, or to be your warrant in it. Therefore I charge you in the name of God, that you vse them not, but rather when you heare this, or any other sinne condem∣ned, lay hands vpon it, and see that you put it to death without delay, according to the law of God. According to thy word. When Sathan hath once possessed vs with this opinion, that in the seruice of God we may neglect the word of God, then pro∣fits and pleasures guide vs in our profession, but they that do so professe Religion and godlinesse, can neuer haue any comfort by it all their life. For their owne hearts accuse them for hypocrites, because they waite not for the consolation of God according to his word, and whatsoeuer is not done according to that word cannot be acceptable: and this word they care not for, neither haue it in estimation. When Adam seeth his nakednesse, the suttle Serpent can deceiue no longer, but before he seeth his nakednesse, he is euer deceiued, and led away with the multitude into innu∣merable errours. Some say, they shall be saued by good workes, and some by the Popes pardon, others say by Purgatorie, and these will haue a Masse song for them as long as the world stan∣deth, and all for one sillie soule thinking to be to be saued by it. And yet see their blindnesse, for they seeme to thinke that their torment shall not ceasse as long as the world standeth, else why shold they find & hire men to say Masse for thē so long? But these are the fat morsels of Baals Priests, and for this cause is the Po∣pish Creede made very fauourable to the Cleargie. Well, say that ignorance is the mother of their deuotion, for when the couetous∣nesse of the Priests, and the ignorance of the people ioyned to∣gether, then they inuented Purgatorie, Masses, Prayers for the dead, and then all their trinkets. For if they had not held our fa∣thers in ignorance, keeping them from the word, they would ne∣uer haue bene Papists. But when they cast a mist before the eyes of men, then the blindfell into ditch, which doth containe so ma∣ny grosse corruptions.
For mine eyes haue seene thy saluation. For, &c. Because the holy Ghost by inspiratiō had declared vn∣to him, that he should not die till he had seene Iesus Christ, there∣fore the same spirit led him to the Temple, and shewed him that which it promised, & hauing seene the same, he desireth & wish∣eth to die, & be released frō this earthly prison, that he might liue with God. As idle and euil wishes are vaine, because they are not according to faith, nor groūded vpon the word of God: so though we aske as cunningly as Iacob, & as earnestly as the sons of Zebe∣de, Gen. 27. 17. 18. 9 20. &c. Mar. 10. 35. 37. I am. 17 yet if we aske not in faith according to knowledge, we cannot obtaine. But we should aske so that we may receiue, that we may not returne emptie. Therefore the ground whereon Simeon setled himselfe to wish for death, was, that he had receiued a promise of God, that he should be deliuered from this miserable life, when he had once seene the light of the Gentiles, the Christ; & now he had seene his Sauiour, and embraced the true Messias, which was pro∣mised by the father, figured by the law, spoken of by the Prophets, foretold by the fathers, and pointed at by Iohn Baptist. For thus he reasoneth: Now that I see thy saluation according to thy word, & therefore the condition is now performed: let thy promise also be fulfilled: Now let thy seruant depart, &c. For mine eyes, &c. Mine eyes haue seene, &c. Then we see that Christ was no spirit, neither was his body a fantasticall body, for if he were a spirit, Simeon could not see him, and if his body were a fantasticall body, then could not he haue embraced him. Therefore we see that the words of the Scripture are true, which saith that Christ was perfect man in all things, sin onely excepted. For he sometime wept, as at the death of Laza∣rus, Iohn. 11. Lake. 19. Iohn. 4. Luke. 10. Luke. 5. and likewise ouer Ierusalem. Sometime he thirsted, as at the wel where the woman of Samaria disputed with him: & also som∣time eate as at Marthaes house, as also among Publicans & sin∣ners, & in euery thing shewed himselfe to be perfect man. Haue seene, &c. O Lord saith he, I desire now to be dissolued & free from the bondage of sin, which so long hath inhabited in my mortall body, for now he is come, by whom thou hast promised to free vs and set vs at liberty, he is come by whom thou hast promised to breake the Serpents head, and he is come that will heale our infirmities,
and giue strength against sinne and Sathan by faith, and peace to∣wardes God through loue. And now saith he, I haue embraced him, & thankfully do receiue him. I beleeue, & am perswaded that this is the same Messias, whom the Father promised, and the Pro∣phets foretold, all Israell longed & expected for, who is the light of the Gentils, the glory of Israell, & the God of the whole world. So they which loue the truth of God, and wait with desire to be filled with the knowledge thereof, such shall not dye vntill they haue their hearts desire with contēplation therof. For as Peter was sent to Cornelius and Philip to the Eunuch: so the Lord wil stir vp Act. 10. Act. 8. such of his seruants, as may be fit instruments to minister the same vnto vs. Iudas indeede dyed before the time, and liued not to see Christ crucified, but the Disciples which loued Iesus, did see him die like an vndefiled innocent Lambe, and that to their exceeding cōfort and ioy, when they vnderstood how that he suffered death for loue of them, and for their redemption. Now if Christ cannot hide him from such as hunger after him through loue, then what shall we say of our fathers which liued in the time of ignorance, that longed to see this light, although they had a mist cast before their eyes? surely such died not til they saw Christ, and embraced him in their harts. And this is our iudgement cōcerning them that dyed in the time of Popery. And likwise as concerning the rest, which thought to be saued by Purgatory & Masses after that they are dead, we say that they which sleep without oyle in their lāpes, they die ere they are aware of, & ere they wish for it, like the Phi∣listines which sent for Sampson to laugh & mocke at him, and to Iudg. 16. sport them selues, vpon whom the house fell and destroyed them all: or like the Egiptians, which thought that the waters had made Exod. 14. passage for them as well as for the Isralites, both which died in, & for their security, because they were not watchfull, nor prepared, against the Lord called them. Haue seene thy saluation. Seeing now he is come for whom Simeon longed, what are the troubles thar are past, & the sorrowes that are come to an end? so when we haue our desires accomplished, feeling the sound cōfort of the Gospel, what should we? how may we thinke, either on the length of time wherein we waited for thē, or the tediousnesse, or also grieuousnesse of the troubles wherby we haue obtained thē?
Haue seene thy saluation. As Moses died on the mount where he saw the land of Cana∣nan: Deut. 34. so the godly die in the sight of God, & in the contemplation of his glory, like Steuen, who at the very instant of his death, saw Act. 7. the heauens open, and Christ Iesus sitting at the right hand of his father, and like Simeon here, which desireth to be loosed, and no doubt shortly died, viewing ioyfully, and so thankfully beholding the Lord of life. Beloued, you are not ignorant that the great day of the Lord is neare at hand, and therefore they that haue not yet seene Christ, they that haue not yet embraced him, but still sleepe without oyle in their lampes shall suddenly be ourtaken without the wed∣ding garment and shall be cast into eternall torment for euer. Haue seene, &c. There be many sights of Christ, all go not vp to the mount as Peter, Iames, & Iohn, all see not his face with Moses, all sleepe not Mat. 17. Exod. 33. Iohn. 13. 2. Cor. 12. 2. in his lap with Iohn, all are not taken vp into heauen like Paule, all embrace him not in their armes with Simeon. But as pleaseth God, so he sheweth him selfe vnto vs, & all that loue him, both see him and embrace him. To some he shewes himselfe as in a glasse, to some generally, to some particularly, some he calleth earely, and some he calleth late, Mat. 20. and there is no hower in the day, wherein he calleth not some to go labour in his vineyeard. To some he sheweth himselfe by An∣gels, Gen. 18. Gen. 19. Iudg. 13. Iohn 8. & to other some by visions. Abrahā saw three Angels, Lot saw but two, Manoahs wife saw but one, & yet one was enough. It is said that Abraham saw Christ his daies, but we see him clea∣rer then Abraham, and clearer then Iohn, if we beleeue in him as we should. Some see Christ and not his saluation, and some see his saluation, and do not embrace it. We see Christ when we heare his word, and we embrace his saluation when we beleeue it: they see him that heare him, they imbrace him that follow him. Here if they had heard me, I wold haue searched Ierusalem with lamps, to see who sitteth in darknesse. But how can they beleeue the word of God which heare it not? How can they imbrace Christ which know him not? & al through ignorance, hauing not the meanes to see him, because their leaders are either blind guids, sleepy watch∣men, or hireling shepheards. And surely it is a woful case, when
shepheardes go to taske, and let their owne sheepe alone summer and winter. They sheare them, but neither sommer nor winter do they feede them. How should those people vnder their charge see Christ & his saluation, when they are so debarred of the wholsom foode, and euen starued to death many thousands of their soules, because they haue not the foode which nourisheth the soule vnto saluation? & how many be there which are as old as Simeon, & yet haue not embraced Christ Iesus? yea they know him not though they see him, neither do they wait for his comming, because they haue no desire to imbrace him, and therefore they defer that, and put it off from their youth to their middle age, frō their middle age to their old age, frō their old age to death, and so they can haue no leysure in al their life to imbrace him. But to such as do seek him, & wait for him with vnfained diligence, we say as the Angel said vnto Iohn. 20. the woman at the sepulchre, feare not, you seeke the Lord Iesus. How is this world set to deceiue vs? we can find leisure to do euil at any time, but we can find no leysure in all our life long to do good, that we may at length enioy the true saluation. I haue somwhat to say to you of this parish: A dainty was pre∣pared for you, & you let the strangers take it from you, you were required to a fast, & you did feast your selues, you were required to come and pray vnto the Lord, and to humble your selues in his sight, that he may turne away his wrath from you, and you let the Temple stand open and emptie, for your parts, and your shops were as open, and you were about your marchandise, forsaking God, and seeking to win the vniust Mammon, and the vanities of the world. Thy saluation. He came not by Angels, or by men, or by any other meanes, but onely from the alone & eternall God. He calleth him thy sal∣uation, for his name was not giuen him by Ioseph, nor by Mary, Mat. 1. but by the Angell of God, signifying that he was come from hea∣uen. The father saw him when he was borne, the spirit came vp∣on Luke. 1. Luke. 3. Luke. 4. Mat. 27. Mat. 2 him when hee was baptized, the Angels ministred vnto him in the wildernesse, his enemies subscribed vnto him vpon the Crosse, the Virgine trauelled, the star walked, the wisemen came out of farre countries to worship him. Thē is not this Iehouah the mighty God, whose birth is glorious, whose life is famous, whose
death is meritorious? None can take vpon him the authoritie of God, but he, on whose shoulders the Lord layeth it, being sent of God and from God. Then we see that our Sauiour is the true Sauiour sent from God, for all creatures beare witnesse vnto him, yea the very deuils, with all the euill spirites doe obey his voyce, at whose came all knees shall bow. He came not to bring Mar. 1. Phil. 2. health, wealth, pleasures, or profites, for the which if he had, then multitudes of worldlings would haue followed him, but he came to bring saluation, righteousnesse, peace, truth and life, therefore few care for him. He came to saue sinners, not all sin∣ners, nor euery one that saith, Lord Lord, but hee came to saue Mat. 7. Luke. 5. penitent sinners, which turne vnto God by their repentance. Therfore he prayeth in Iohn for those onely that were giuen vn∣to Iohn. 17. him. So soone as the seede is sowne, the stones refuse it, or the sunne parcheth it, or the thornes choke it, and what comfort hath the Lillie among thornes? Therefore wisedome taketh her vnto her wings, and whispereth, saying, you shall seeke me be∣fore I come, you shall seeke me but shall not finde me, because ye Prou. 1. haue refused me when I offred my selfe to you. Christ is their saluation that beleeue in him, and make much of him, and thankfully receiue him. The godly he deliuereth from sinne, but the wicked hee leaueth bound in the chaines of their iniquitie, to be tormented of him which had tempted them there∣unto, whose will they alwayes endeuoured to fulfill and not the Lordes, and hee sheweth them a hand vpon the wall writing Dan. 5. their condemnation, and another catching them by the hairie scalpe, which maketh all their iointes to tremble, and their harts to dispaire, and he saith vnto them, what doest thou here with∣out thy wedding garment? how darest thou come to steale the Mat. 20. childrens bread? The spirit of Saule worketh in him in his bed and 1. Sam. 16. euery where, and he calleth for the harpe of Dauid to comfort his heart which cannot be comforted. And this spirite saith to Iudas, Mat. 27. thou hast betrayed thy Lord and crucified him, therefore go and hang thy selfe: for euen at the preaching of saluation, the horror of damnation, the marke of Cain sticketh within thee whosoeuer Gene. 4. beleeuest not in Gods saluation. But the godly heart goeth home, hauing embraced this saluatiō, chewing the cud, & reioycing like the Apostles, which reioyced, in that they were counted worthy Act. 5. 41.
to suffer for his names sake, and they say, ô what a good banket we haue had this day, what delicious dainties hath God feasted vs with! and so the Bee goeth loden to the hiue, and goeth longer in the strength thereof then Elias did. Thy saluation. The onely Sauiour is here called saluation it self: 1. King. 17. for if he were called a bare Sauior only, then you might likely vn∣derstand it by some other Sauiour, but here he is called saluation it selfe, to shew that there is no other. For there be more Sauiours, but no more saluations, as there be many wayes to death, and yet but one death. The brasen Serpent was a figure of Christ, that Num. 22. Ioh. 3. they which are stung by sin, by fire, and by the Serpent which be∣guiled Euah, may make speed, because there is no remedy but to come to Christ. The Papists haue found out many saluations, they haue found out a saluation by Saints, a saluation by Angels, a saluation by Masses, a saluation by merites, a saluation by Idols, as though Christ had least to do, in his owne office, for they haue other sal∣uations to flie vnto. They will haue it, but they will buie it, and what will they giue for it? why, they will fast so many dayes, go so far on pilgrimages, hire Priests to say so many Masses, build so many Abbeis, and giue so many summes of mony to the Monkes and Friars. Therefore the Scripture goeth against them, and doth dishonour their shamelesnesse, who (like Nimrod, that heaping Gene. 11. stone vpon stone, would haue built vp to heauen) heape sin vpon sinne, and euerie houre some one heresie or superstition groweth vp from this filthie roote. For what Papist dare say that Simeon thought on any of these, or put confidence in any other Sauiour, but onely in him whom he embraced in his armes? for saluation is by the promise of God, and all promises are in Christ. And Gal. 3. 1. 18. 2. Cor. 1. Gene. 42. though Iacob wanted bread, Ioseph wanted not mony, therefore he gaue them backe againe their money, and likewise hee gaue them that corne, that they would haue bought with it. I would therefore wish them to say as Iosephs brethren did, that they haue their corne for nothing, and their money too, let them I say bee content and reioyce, to say, that they haue mercy for nothing and their works too. For God cannot be won by mens works, be∣cause they profit not him but themselues. There is no water can wash Naaman but Iordan, no water can wash the leprosie of sin, 2. King. 5.
but the bloud of the Lamb. By this the Israelites were saued when the destroyer passed by. By this the Lord knoweth vs to be Act. 4. 12. Exod. 12, his people, and by this the diuell knoweth vs to be none of his. As it is proper vnto God to be called goodnesse, so is it proper vn∣to Iesus Christ to be called saluation. He is also called the way, Iohn. 14. the truth and the life, for that life which we haue, is but a sparke & shadow of life, but he is the true and eternall life. Then seeing Christ is both our righteousnesse, saluation, and also the way, the truth and the life, to leade vs thereunto: it is as possible for vs with∣out Christ to be iustified or glorified, as it is to be wise without wisdome, righteous without righteousnesse, or saued without sal∣uation. Therefore let vs not be ashamed to take our water from the fountaine, seeing Christ is the fountaine of all wisdome, of all righteousnesse, of all truth, of all knowledge, of all saluation, and briefly of all goodnesse: for there is no other Arke to saue vs from the floud, no other ladder to ascend with into heauen, no other Ioseph to feede vs in the famine, no other Moses to leade vs through the wildernesse. But as the riuer Siloa runneth through all the land of Iudaea and watereth the whole Citie of God: so Christ doth shew himselfe all in all, and all-sufficient in mercy to saue and blesse all his Church with spirituall giftes. If Christ be saluation, what shall make vs dispaire? shall Sathan? No, for he hath ouer∣come Ephes. 4. 1. Cor. 15. Rom. 5. Sathan. Shall death? No, for he hath ouercome death. Shall hell? No, for he hath ouercome hell. Shall the Law? No, for hee hath fulfilled the Law. Shall wrath? No, for he hath troden the Esay. 63. winepresse of his fathers wrath. Therefore it was a sweete saying of one at his death, when mine iniquitie is greater then thy mercie ô God, then will I feare and dispaire. Saluation is borne, therefore we were all in the state of condē∣nation before: light is come, therefore we sate all in darknesse before: glory is come, therefore we were all loden with shame before: life is come, to shew that we were all dead in sinne be∣fore. Life is come, and light and saluation: life to the dead, light to the blind, and saluation to the damned. For Christ is called saluation, to shew that without him we are al damned firebrands of hell, heires of condemnation, and forsaken of God. To him that is sicke, it is easie to be thankefull when hee is whole, but when he is whole, it is harder to be thankfull then to be sicke. I
would faine be disprooued, that Niniueh might be saued though Ionah would not. Thy saluation. This word saluation is a sweete word, yea the sweetest word in all the scripture, and yet many despise this worthie iewell, be∣cause they know not what it is worth, like the dawes which would rather haue a barly corne, then a pearle or a iewell, be∣cause they know not the value thereof. O Lord what is man that thou art so mindfull of him? O man what is God that thou art Psal. 8. so vnmindfull of him? If a friend had giuen vs any thing, we would haue thanked him hartely for it, but to him that hath gi∣uen vs all things, we will not giue so much as thankes. Now therefore let the rocke gush foorth water againe, and let our sto∣ny harts powre foorth streames of teares in vnfained repentance. We haue all called vpon you, but none regardeth vs, as though God were as Baal, and as though Diues felt no paine, nor Laza∣rus ioy, but all were forgotten. Many times Christ commeth into the Temple, and there is scarse a Simeon to embrace him, the babe is here, but where is Simeon? If God had not loued vs better then we loued ourselues, we should haue perished long ere this, and yet we embrace not Christ as Simeon, who hath saued vs from temporall and spirituall punishment. We are inuited to a banket, he who calleth vs to it is God. What is the banket? Saluation. Who are the guests? The Angels and the Saints. What is the fare? Ioy, peace, righteous∣nesse, this is the fare, and we inuite you euery one: yet who will come at our bidding? some for want of faith, some for want of loue, some for want of knowledge, haue despised this holy banket, yet vnto this art thou called still, ô soule vnworthie to be beloued.
THE SECOND SERMON OF THE SONG OF OLD FA∣THER SIMEON. Thy saluation which thou hast prepared before the face of all the people; a light to be reuealed to the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israell. THY saluation. This word saluation is a sweete word, and holds me to it like an Adamant, for when I thought to proceed, this word said vnto me, stay here, teach this & teach all, learne this and learne al, for it is the pith of all the mercies of God towardes his children. Christ is called saluation, because no man shold dispaire, and be∣cause it is impossible to be saued without him, for saluation is on∣ly in him. Christ can do any thing but this, hee cannot saue him that will not repent. He is called the saluation of God because he came not from men, nor from Angels, nor by chance, but from Luke. 1. Luke. 1. Mat. 2. Luke. 2. Mat. 2. Luke. 3. Mark. 1. Luke. 4. 15. Iohn. 11. Mat. 27. God himselfe, and therfore his name was not giuen him after the maner of men, which was, that euery father should name his owne child, but so did not Ioseph, for the Angell had giuen him direction for his name. The Virgine, the oracles, the babes, the shepheards, the starre, the wisemen, the voice of the crier, the di∣uels, the leapers, the sicke, the dead, the earthquake, the sunne, the moone, and all the creatures do beare witnesse vnto the Sonne of God which is our saluation. He is called the saluation of God, because he is saluation according to Gods owne mind. He came not to bring ease and libertie, but he came to bring the spirituall sword, and condemnation to all obstinate sinners, yet saluation to the penitent. I shewed you how many despised this iewell, because they know not what it is worth, how few Simeons there be in the Tem∣ple, how few Nathaniels, how few mē that feare God: these plāts
grow not on euery ground. Who would be vnthankful if he knew what the Lord giues, and what he forgiues? he giues the sonne for the bastard, the Lord for the seruant, the righteous for sinners, the innocent for the wicked, and the almightie Lord, for the sinfull sonnes of men. Do you not maruell how you can offend this Lord willingly, which hath done so much for you? Here I reproue vnthankfulnesse, securitie, and negligence, striuing as it were to crucifie Christ againe, as the wicked Iewes did, who neuer pro∣spered since the time that they said, his bloud be vpon vs, and vp∣on our seede. They were not like Simeon, who as soone as he saw Mat. 27. 25 him, embraced him, and reioyced ouer him. There is no shew of grace in them which shew no liking of godlinesse, neither in themselues, nor in others: for this is the first part of our conuersi∣on, to loue them that loue God, and so they are drawne to the Sonne. No man will build an Arke vntill the floud come, no man Gen. 7. will seeke for corne vntill the famine come, and scarse Lot will be gone out of Sodome before the time of execution of Gods Gen. 42. Gen. 19. wrath do come vpon them. We preach vnto you, and call vpon you, we haue euen wearied our selues among you, we haue re∣proued you for sinne, and we must still reproue you vntill you amende: now therefore if there bee any grace in you, if yee haue any knowledge, any feare of God in you, if ye haue any goodnesse in you, if you haue any leasure to be saued, turne backe now from doing euill, come out of hell, and plucke your limmes out of the clouches of the Serpent, for verily we haue not done so well in this citie as the Niniuites did, for all the preaching and teaching we haue had. For who hath determined in his heart to amend his life? who hath left his pride? who hath restored that which he hath taken by extortion, vsurie, and wrong? Surely they that haue done thus are monsters, I cannot see him, he wal∣keth inuisible and cannot be found. The heauens trembled at the death of Christ, the sunne did hide his face, the earth quaked, the Mat. 27. 45 51. 52. 53. vaile of the Temple rent in sunder, the dead bodies rose out of their graues, and all this was to shew, that the Prince of the world suffered violence, and that the Lord of life suffered death for the ransome of vs, and of all whosoeuer throughout the world do be∣leeue the Gospell, and liue in obedience thereof, and withall that he suffering for sinnefull and wretched man, was a conquerer o∣uer
hell and all euill, and had ouercome death. The Scribes are against him, the Pharisies were against him the rulers band thē∣selues against him, the Atheists against him, and all the spitefull & enuious Iewes against him, whose birth was base, whose life was contemptible, and whose death was ignominious, but God was with him, and in him, by whose power he ouercame them all, and so became the saluation of God. Dauid being to encounter with Golioh, Saul tooke and put 1. Sam. 17. on him his owne harnesse, but he could not weare it, it was too heauie for his little body, therefore the tooke nothing but a staffe and a few stones in a scrip, and so Dauid slue the pride of the Phi∣listines, and the feare of Israell. And euen thus the Lord set his Sonne to fight with the Prince of this world, not with swords and targets, bowes and billes, but with the word and spirite of God, with the which he hath ouercome, and through him we also haue the victory. Which thou hast prepared before the face of all people, &c. He speakes this to the end that the eyes of all mankind may be fixed vpon him, as the eyes of all Israell were fixed vpon the bra∣sen Num. 21. Serpent in the wildernesse, that when they be stinged with the sting of that fiery Serpent which deceiued our forefathers, they may flie vnto him for helpe, lest they perish in their sinne, and their bloud be on their owne heads. Which thou hast prepared. He was prepared long ago, as it doth most plainly appeare, for the Virgin which bare him, the place of his birth, the poore estate wherein he was, his miracles, his Apostles, his torments, his crosse, his death, his resurrection & ascension into heauen; all these were foreshewed and foretold long before they came to passe. Therfore Luke. 4. 7. Iohn. 11. Luke. 8. Mat. 27. Iohn. 10. Mar. 6. some said, who is this that is so often spoken of by the Prophets? who is this that can do many miracles, that the Scribes and Pha∣risies cannot do? that can raise the dead, that can ceasse the winds, that can calme the waters, at whose suffering the earth quaked, the sunne hid his face, darknesse came ouer all: and being dead, rose againe by his owne power, and ascended into heauen in the sight of a great multitude? How can it bee then but it must bee knowne before the face of all people, which was so manifest by dreames, by visions, by oracles, by power, by authoritie, and
euery thing? for there was nothing which had not a tong to speake for God. Euery thing was prepared for him before he came to be reuealed, he came not in the beginning, nor in the ending; hee came not in the ending, that we which come after him might long for his second comming. He came not in the beginning, be∣cause that such a Prince as he, should haue many banners & trium∣phes before him. He came not in the beginning because the eyes of faith should not be dazeled in him, and lest they which should liue in the latter times should forget him and his comming, which was so long before, euen as you forget that which I haue said as soone as you are gone hence. He came not in the beginning, be∣cause if he had come before man had sinned, man would haue ac∣knowledged no neede of a Phisition, but when man had sinned, and had felt the smart of sinne: for when they were cast out of Paradise, they ran vnto Christ as the Israelites did to the Serpent. He came not in the beginning, but in the perfect age of the world, to shew that he brought with him perfection, perfect ioy, perfect peace, perfect wisedome, perfect righteousnesse, perfect iustice, perfect truth, signifying thereby, that notwithstanding he came in the perfect age thereof, yet he found all things vnperfect. The Iewes thought that he should come like some great Prince, with pompe and glory, which was a carnall conceipt, for herein they were maruellously deceiued, his father was but a poore carpenter, and his mother but a simple woman, and he a sillie babe wrapt in cloutes. Then ought not we to reuerence our Lord, and to praise his name, for that he became so humble for vs most vile wretches, that are worthie of nothing? yet we see how cruelly they dealt with this blessed one which came to saue them. Ignorance sate in the chaire, deceipt gaue the sentence, and cruelty executed him when the most painfull and shamefull death of the crosse. O that your eyes do not dazell, and your eares tingle, and your hearts maruell at this dealing of theirs to our louing Sauiour, which came to saue them if they would, and especially in that now you see that he abased himselfe for our sakes, euen to the vttermost! ô wonderfull thing to thinke of! If you would marke, I would make you in loue with him before I haue done with you, I say vnto all those that come hither to be edified, take your fill of pleasure, enter into Paradise, lift vp your eyes, stretch forth your
hands, and eate your fill of the tree of life, and the Lord will go home with you, imbrace him and kisse him, entertaine him well, and hee will dwell with you for euer. But you that come hither for fashions sake, either to see or to be seene, to finde fault with somewhat, or to make an hypocriticall shew of godlinesse where there is none. I tell you that comfort shall shake hande with you at the dore, marke it, and you shall see that my words are true. Shew me what it is that is better then saluation. I wold haue none of you to be damned if I might preuent it, nor so much as a peece of you to be giuen vnto Sathan, therefore I would I knew that stone that would kil Goliah for I would strike it with my might into his temples. If you will, you may be saued, and the Lord will one day put those words in my mouth that will touch your harts. Therefore now arise, kisse and imbrace the sweete babe Iesus, and then afterward frame your selues to obey him, for then the Lord will knocke at your hearts, and if you will let him in, he will teach you all things. The Lord came not in the beginning, nor in the ending, but he came in the middle age of the world, to shew that if it wil not learne now, it wil neuer learne to come vnto God Psalm. 2. by repentance and amendment, that they may learne to kisse the sonne least he be angrie, and so they perish in his wrath like So∣dome. He came in the middle age of the world, to shew that he was indifferent for the world, to giue light and life vnto all that returne vnto him. For God respecteth no persons, but euery man Acts. 10. of what nation or countrey soeuer he be, that feareth God and worketh righteousnesse is accepted of him, and he will fulfill their ioyes through Christ, yet not when we will, but according to his owne good pleasure, and when he thinketh good. Therefore; Stay Helias, anon the rauens will bring thee meate, and thou shalt 1. Kings. 17 haue enough. Anon Moses will deliuer Israell. So saluation is al∣ready Exod. 14. prepared of God, & hath bin lōg since with fulnes of know∣ledge, and all excellent gifts, and he will giue them to vs when he seeth good. But we are like whining children that will not stay till their milke be cold, but would haue it, though they be scal∣ded with it: so we would haue the knowledge of God and liber∣tie before we know how to vse it. We would know the high mysteries and deepe counsels of God, before we know our selues, we would haue the liberty of the Gospell, when we know
no way how to vse it but in securitie. But the Lord, he will wisely giue vnto vs as it were our bellies full when he seeth it good, and when he seeth vs ready for it, who knoweth our hearts better then we our selues. A light to be reuealed to the Gentiles, and the glory of thy peo∣ple Israell. You haue heard Simeon shewing the cause why the Sonne was sent from the Father, why he became man, which raigned before in Paradise. What moued God to leaue his ioy and his blisse, & suffer more then all the world could suffer together? A great cause it is that would make a king leaue his kingdome, and fall to beg∣gerie. A great and wonderfull cause it was that made Iehouah to come downe from heauen to suffer misery vpon the earth. Two vnder causes Simeon sheweth why this Messias came from heauen. The first that he might enlighten the Gentils, which sat in darknesse, and the second, that he might be the glory of Israell, which gloried in their sacrifices and in their ceremonies, and so had no glory before he came, but were like the Moone when the Gen. 29. Sunne doth shine vpon it, or like Rachel which dispised Leah and became barren. And they despised the Gentiles light, like that sonne which was angry because his lost brother came home a∣gain, Luke. 15. or like those labourers which checked the Lord of the vine∣yard, Mat. 20. because hee gaue vnto the other labourers as much as hee gaue vnto them. But the Gentiles are like Leah, who being despi∣sed became fruitful. Simeon reioyced in Christ, not only for that he Gen. 29. was the glory of Israell, but also for that he was the light of the Gentils. Shall the head be sorrowfull because the hand is well? nay rather the hand should be glad because the head is well, and the head because the hand is well. The father should be glad because his son is stronger then himselfe, the mother shold be glad because her daughter is wiser then her selfe, the brother shold be glad, be∣cause his brother is richer then himself, the mistresse shold reioyce, because her maide is a better housewife then her selfe. But wee enuie our brethren and our neighbours, because they are better then we, and because God hath blessed them with temporall or spirituall thinges aboue vs: if we see that they haue learning, then we enuie them for their learning, if hee haue more giftes, we enuie him for his giftes, if hee haue more knowledge, wee
enuie him for his knowledge, if he haue more zeale, we enuie him for his zeale, if he haue more riches, wee enuie him for his riches, and how can we reioyce when euery bodies good is our euill, and euery bodies ioye is our sorrow? But fixe your eyes vpon Christ alone, and hee will fulfill your ioy, if you looke not backe to Sodome like Lots wife. If you loue ioy and gladnesse, Gen. 19. Christ is ioy and gladnesse; if you loue comfort, why, Christ is the comforter of all that beare his crosse; if you loue life, Christ is eternall life; if you loue peace, Christ is peace; if you loue ri∣ches, Christ is full of heauenly riches, and full of liberalitie to be∣stow them vpon all such as loue God: so Christ is all in all vnto the godly, and they haue more ioye in Christ alwayes and in all things, then the richest, and most glorious and sumptuous Prince in the world, then Salomon himselfe had in worldly riches, honours, pleasures, ease or felicitie. For the wicked which put their trust in riches, and make them gods of golde and money, of ease and pleasures, though they doe all that they can to fulfill their lusts, and take neuer so much pleasure, and be neuer so merry, yet they can haue no true ioy, nor peace of conscience, for all the peace, the mirth and sport they haue, is but deceipt, all false and indurable, like the grasse, greene in the morning, and withered ere night. But when the Lord doth Esay. 58. & 57. knocke at their heartes, and strike them with a feeling of their horrible transgressions, as no doubt he will, then they are all in a maze, and they can haue no ioy, no peace, no rest, but they may say, in laughter my soule is sorrowfull, in ease my soule hath trouble, in mirth mone, in riches pouerty, in glory shame, in life my soule is euen deade, in plentie my soule wanteth all thinges wherein it should reioyce, it is destitute of all comfort, and pos∣sessed with all slauish feares like Cain, who being Lord of all the Gen. 4. earth, yet had no ioy in it when God had once forsaken him. Like∣wise Saul when God had forsaken him, he had no ioy of his king∣dome, nor of all his riches, and then who had more ioy, Saul the King, or Dauid the subiect? So then wee see that per∣fect 1. Sam. 16. ioy can bee had in nothing but in God and in Iesus Christ. Wherefore as by the streame you may bee led to the fountaine, euen so let the ioye and peace of this life serue to leade vs to God which is perfect ioy and peace, and there rest, like the wise
men which were guided by the star, to come to the true Sonne of grace, Iesus Christ when he was borne: and if we rest not in him when we haue found him, there is no rest for vs, we shall bee like the restlesse done, which fluttered about and found no rest any way, till she returned to the arke: but we seeme as though we sought him and found him, when as we do but play the hypo∣crites. Salomon saith; that the waies of the whore are prosperity & welfare, for she euer putteth on a vizard, that she might not be knowne to be so vile as she is: so vnder the colour of goodnesse e∣uill is alwayes lurking. Therefore also is Christ called the light, because we shold leaue our foolishnesse seeing light is come, & that we should forsake all our lights which are but darknesse, and cleaue vnto his light which is the true light indeed. A light to be reuealed to the Gentiles, &c. He came to lighten the Gentiles, and they receaued him with thankfulnesse, of whom there was no hope of goodnesse left. Who would suppose that the barren woman should become fruitful, or the prodigall sonne returne home againe? It is like as if an owle should bee conuerted to see light, or as if the streame would re∣turne into the fountaine, or as if an old man should become yong againe. A light to be reuealed to the Gentiles. To be reuealed, not yet reuealed, the Iewes must first reiect him before the Gentiles receiue him: and when the Iewes did oppresse him, condemne him, & crucifie him, then were his armes spread vnto the whole world. When the guests would not come, Luk. 14. 23. then he sendeth into the high wayes, to compell others that wold not come willingly vnto it. Comfort is on foot, & that which wil come shall come, &c. The Queene of Saba came from the vtter∣most Mat. 12. part of the earth to heare Solomons wisedome, and the wise∣men came from the East to see Iesus Christ, but we may say, the Lord was heere in the Temple, and I was in my shop, selling and buying, lying, deceiuing and swearing. Well, when hee comes backe againe I will be better accquainted with him, and so we es∣teeme not of his presence in any reuerent sort. The Shunamite said; Let vs build a chamber for the man of God: then we shold 2. King. 4. 20. Luk. 19. build an house. Zacheus did climbe vp into a tree to see our Sa∣uiour,
and the Lord seeing his diligence called him, Zacheus come downe, for I will dine at thy house this day, and that was a ioyfull day with Zacheus, for then saluation came into his house, and vp∣on all his family: he gaue the Lord a feast, and the Lord made him a far better feast of peace, a feast of ioy, a feast of heauenly things, and so for his zeale and indeuour to see Christ bodily, he shewed himselfe vnto him spiritually, euen to his hearts desire. To be reuealed. Haue an eye to the future tence, that which is not shalbe. As for 1▪ King. 3. 12. 11. Iud. 13. & 15. and. 16. Luke. 6. Acts. 1. Acts. 9. Mat. 16. Acts. 4. Acts. 7. example, Salomon was wise, but he is foolish, Sampson was strong, but he is weake; Iudas was a preacher, but he is a traytor, Paul was a persecutor, but he is a preacher; Peter was a denier of Christ, but now he is a bold professor of Christ, Moses was learned in the wis∣dome of the Egyptians, but now he is learned in the wisdom of God, by which the wisdome of the Egyptians is made but meere foolishnesse in the sight of God. Others as heathen Philosophers, Plato, Aristotle, Cato, Crates, and such like, were counted ve∣rie wise men in the sight of the world, yea they wrote so many bookes full of wisedome, and also adorned with notable senten∣ces and wittie sayings, that one would thinke all wisedome were buried with them, so famous were they, and so full of earthly vnderstanding, teaching manners counsels and pollicies: yet for my part I haue neither seene nor heard of any such, being wise in worldly things and without the wisedome of God, but that they haue committed some notorious foolishnesse in the sight of all men, like Achitophell, of whom we read that he was so wise a 2. Sa. 16. 23 2. Sam. 17. 23. counseller, that his counsell was like as one had asked coun∣sell at the oracle of God, and yet see the ende of him, hee han∣ged himselfe, and all for want of the knowledge of God. It had bin better therfore for him to haue had more wisdom & lesse wit. Crates, Aristotle, Plato, and others of the wise Philosophers, haue either poisoned, burned, or drowned themselues, & so we see 1. Cor. 1. 20. that the end of worldly wisedome is meere foolishnesse, and the foolish haue more peace then the wise: for their wisedome with∣out the feare of God, doth them no more good then the Arke did to the Philistines, which did nothing but torment them, be∣cause they knew not how to vse it, and therefore vnreuerently 2. Sam. 5. abused it. For if your wisedome consist in eloquence of words,
in profundity of wit, to gaine craftely, & spend warily, to inuent lawes, to expound riddles, and interpret dreames, to tell fortunes, and prophecy of matters by learning: all your wisdome is but vex∣ation of the spirit; for all these without the feare of God do vs no more good then their wit did these Philosophers, which notwith∣standing sate in darkedesse. And I am afraid though Christ brought light vnto the Gentiles, yet it may bee said, that the Gentiles sit in darkenesse stil, sauing a few Leuits scattered vpon the mountains, for whose sake Sodome is spared. And because those had not the knowledge of God, therefore they worshipped Mars and Cupid, 2. King. 17. 30.  Iud. 16. 23. Act. 19. 33. 2. King. 19. 37. Exod. 32 4. 6. 1. King. 1. 2. 1. King. 22. 13. 1. King. 16. 32, sunne and moone, beasts and serpents: so the Philistines worship∣ped Dagon, the Ephesians worshipped Diana, the Assyrians Nes∣roch, the Israelites worshipped a calfe Ahaziah worshipped Beel∣zebub, the Moabites worshipped Chamos, the Samaritans did worship vnto Baal: so the trueth to such seemeth falshood, & er∣ror seemeth truth. As for example, that the world shold be made of nothing, that the world became flesh, that God and man was ioy∣ned together in one person, that one man may be righteous in the righteousnesse of another, which is Christ, and that the dead shall rise againe, these seemed foolishnesse vnto the Gentiles, neither could they beleeue them. No more can some Gentils amongst vs at this day, which are but naturall men, therefore they do not be∣leeue them, for when they professed themselues to be wise, they became fooles, saith the holy Ghost. Rom. 1. 22. So then we see now what Christ hath done for vs, he hath boūd that Serpent, which hath sowne all the tares, so that the diuell is fayne for want of better lodging, to enter into swine. Heretofore, whereas one followed God, a thousand followed Baall, but now kings & princes lift vp their heads, desiring Christ to raigne with them and in them. Heretofore we made our selues like the wounded man, we were spoyled, we were stript naked, & we were bathed in our bloud being full of woundes, but now Christ hath furnished vs, hee hath washed vs, he hath clothed vs, and we are now become true Israelites: vs which were the vile and wild Oliues, he hath grafted vpon the true oliue, and planted vs in a fruitfull soyle. And what cause can we shew for this but only mercy? For heretofore we were called foolish, but the Lord Deut 32. hath made vs wise according to the wisdom of God in these daies
by his spirit: but if you deserue to be called the foolish nation a∣gaine, then yee are most vnhappy and most cursed. So now wee haue heard that the Lord doth reueale all his counsels vnto his Prophets, and how the glory of Israell is now reuealed to bee the light of the Gentiles. And you haue heard the cause why: because the Iewes reiected their owne saluation. You haue heard that the cause was only his mercy and his loue, because mercy cannot con∣taine it selfe within Ierusalem. A light to be reuealed to the Gentiles, and the glory of thy peo∣ple Israell. You haue heard why Christ is called light, why he is called the light of the Gentils, why the Lord did change a curse into a bles∣sing, and why the Gentiles did change darkenesse for light, and a thousand Gods for one true God. Then the Gentiles receiued more grace then they desired, for the Lord came vncalled vnto their owne houses, and made a feast vnto them in their owne houses. The light of the Gentiles is our light, your light, and my light: Christ is our grace, your grace, and my grace: and Christ is our saluation, your saluation, and my saluation. He came vn∣to the Iewes, and for the Iewes, and yet his comming vnto the Gentiles was better then to the Iewes. He came into the world when the world did abound in al wickednesse, and saued vs when we most deserued wrath. Wonder at this you that wonder at no∣thing, that the Lord wold come to bring saluation, to redeem our lost soules, euen as it were against our wils: so that now we wold not be as we were for a thousand worlds. The blindnesse of the Iewes was, & is wonderfull, who heard of their reiection, & of our conuersion, and yet vnderstood it not, neither sought to preuent Gods wrath in reiecting of them. Therefore the rocke which shold haue saued them did shiuer thē in peeces, wherin was shew∣ed their wonderfull blockishnesse, hauing it so often foretold by their Prophets, figured in their law, shadowed in their sacrifices, and read in their churches from Saboth to Saboth. Euery thing that commeth to passe in churches, in common weales, in Cities, in countries, in kingdoms, and in prouinces, these are all foretold in the Scriptures, and yet none do vnderstand it, sauing a fewe chosen ones whom God loueth. For, the comming of Antichrist, the ouerthrow of kingdomes, the darkenesse of Poperie, the light
of the Gospell, the conuersion of the Gentils, and the reiecting of the Iewes, all these are set downe in the Scriptures, and yet wee cannot vnderstand it, though we heare it day by day, because we do not giue our minds to vnderstanding. Such hearers shall stād in a maze before the righteous and terrible throne of God: the dead shall rise, the trumpe shall blow, and all the world shall be in an vprore, and they shall stand quaking, when their hearing with∣out profiting shall be laid to their charge, and they shall say, ô we haue knowen no such thing: but surely if the Iewes could come out of hell, they would admonish vs to take better heede how wee heare: for we heare as though we did not heare at all, our mindes, are otherwise occupied. Now when wee see any thing come to passe, as it is foretold in the Scriptures, then we must say as Christ said, this prophesy is fulfilled, for all thinges that are written are come to Scriptum est & factum est, that is, as sure as it is written, so surely doth it come to passe. It prophe∣cieth nothing but that which truly is fulfilled in due time, and the more often it speakes of a thing, the more certaine, the more excel∣lent, and the more to be beleeued it is. Like a Iewell that is beset with pearle, so is our calling ordained with Scriptures, for so doth God tender our calling, which is so often in his mouth, and we so often in his remembrance, that hee speaketh of vs in euery booke throughout the whole Scriptures, like a kind spouse whose loue is in a strange cuntrey, and he delighteth himselfe with thoughts & meditations of her: so he did long vntil the Gentils were come to him again, like the prodigall child, whose father did long vntill he had imbraced him. When shall my prodigall sonne come home a∣gaine saith he? I will put my best garment on his backe, and my gold ring vpon his finger, and his fare shall be the daintiest morsell. Luke. 15. And thus God longeth for our saluation, and he knocketh at our doores. Is faith here? is loue here? is one called the feare of God in this place? And as loue maketh louers somtime to speake plainly & fami∣liarly one to another, somtime by darke speeches and riddles, som∣time by letters, sometime by dumbe shewes and signes, and som∣time to hide themselues one from another: so our God speaketh sometime plainly to his Church, sometime darkely and mistically, sometime he turneth his face from his Church and deare spouse,
as though hee wold not speake vnto her for loue, as appeareth in the booke of the Canticles. Of the casting off of the Iewes and calling in of the Gentiles, the first tipe or figure was Cain and A∣bell; Cain was the eldest sonne of Adam, and Abell the yonger, yet Gen. 4. God loued Abell, & accepted his sacrifice, but God reiected Cain for his wickednesse, and hee became a reprobate. Euen so doth God, he reiecteth the Iewes which were the eldest sonne, the true oliue, and the naturall seede, and Gods dear children if they had continued in obedience, and he taketh vs being but the youngest son, the wild oliue, the seed of the wicked, and maketh vs children by adoption vnto him, onely of his meere mercy without any o∣ther cause. The second example was Sem and Iaphet, both which were Gen. 9. Gen. 5. 32. 9. 24. 10. 21. and. 11. 10. Gen. 9. 27. Iohn. 10. 16. Noahs sons, Sem was the second sonne, and Iaphet the first, and of this Iaphet came the Gentiles: of him said Noah, God perswade Iaphet that he may dwell in the tents of Sem, that is, that they may be vnited together, as we see it is come to passe. Other sheepe I haue saith Christ, which are not of this fold, them also wil I bring, and they shall heare my voice, and there shall be one sheepefold and one shepheard. The third type or figure was Ismaell and Isaak, both the sons Gen. 21. of Abraham: Ismaell was the eldest, Isaak the yonger, yet Isaak was chosen of God, and enioyed the promise, and Ismaell his el∣dest Gen. 22. brother a mocker of Isaak was put away, the Lord was not with him. The fourth type or figure was Iacob and Esau, both sonnes to Gen. 25. Isaak; Esau was the elder brother and Iacob the yonger, yet God loued Iacob and hated Esau, because Esau contemned his birth∣right, and sold it to Iacob for a messe of potage, and therefore Ia∣cob stole the blessing from him: so God blessed Iacob, but cursed Esau; whereby is shewed that the Lord did for the contempt of the Iewes, take away their birth-right and their blessing, and hath giuen it vnto vs. The fift type or figure was Leah and Ràchell the two daugh∣ters Gen. 29. 26. of Laban; Leah was the elder, but blear or squint eyed, Rachel the yonger beautifull and faire. 17. Therfore Rachell was beloued of Iacob, and Leah despised. 18. Yet Leah was first maried. 23. & also made fruitfull. 31. but Rachell also was after maried. 28. and
more beloued. 30. and hauing enuied her sisters fruitfulnesse. 30. 1. and repented, God remembred her, and made her fruitfull. So Christ first maried the Iewes, and made them glorious, but when they despised their glory, he maried with the Gentiles, and they enuying their happinesse, of barren in all goodnesse, became fruit∣full in true holinesse. The sixt figure was Manasses and Ephraim the two sonnes of Ioseph, Manasses was the eldest, and Ephraim was the yongest. Both of them Ioseph hauing brought to Iacob his father that hee might blesse them, he tooke Manasses and put him towards Ia∣cobs right hand, that he might blesse him first and more plentifully, and he took Ephraim and put him towards Iacobs left hand. But Iacob stretched out his right hand, and layd it on Ephraims head which was the yonger, and his left hand vpon Manasses, di∣recting his hands so of purpose, for Manasses was the elder of them. Thus the Lord blessed vs when there was no hope left for vs. The seuenth figure was Rahab a harlot in Iericho: who was a Gentile, yet her heart was touched so, that she receiued and en∣tertained Iosua. 2. the spies that Israell sent, and in the time of danger hid them, that they should take no harme: signifying thereby, that the Gentiles should receiue and imbrace the true Israelites and messengers of the Gospell, and keepe them as safely, and defend them as diligently as Rahab did the spyes of Israell. The eight figure was Ruth a Moabite: of her Christ Iesus Ruth 4. vouchsafed to come as concerning the flesh, to shew that he came not only of the Iewes and for the Iewes, but also of and for the Gentiles, which were the lost sheepe, vnhoped for, being strangers from the couenant. The ninth figure was Sampson, who being a Iew, would needs Iudg. 14. marry with a Gentile, signifying that Christ Iesus would also marry with the Gentiles, as he did with the Iewes. The tenth figure was Salomon, who maried Pharaos daugh∣ter 1. King. 11. which was an Egyptian and Gentile, signifying thereby that Christ wold take him a spouse among the Gentiles to marry with himselfe, as Dauid in the Psalmes declareth. Psalm. 45. Thee leuenth figure was Naaman the Syrian, whose leprosie is 2. King. 5. turned vpon Gehezie, the leprosie of an heathen and ignorant
man turned vpon an Israelite, and one that had the knowledge of God, being the seruant of a Prophet: signifying that our lepro∣sie of sin and ignorance shold be turned from vs vpon the Iewes, who had the knowledge of the law of God, but esteemed it not, but were vnthankfull for it. Many like examples there are in the new Testamēt. For like as the Cherubins, though seuered in sūder, yet loked one towards another, and both vpon the mercy seate: so the old Testament and the new looke one towards another & yet point at one and the same thing. The first type or figure in the new Testament was the wise∣men, Mat 2. which were the first fruites of the Gentiles, and came from the East, being guided by a starre: signifying that by the guiding of the word and spirit of God, the Gentiles should come from all the places of the world to imbrace Christ Iesus with ioy. The second type or figure was Christ his going into Egypt, Mat. 2. signifying therby that he shold go from the Iewes to the Gentils, because the Iewes refused him through vnbeleefe, abundance of wickednesse, and want of reformation: so we see that nothing can driue away Christ but sin. The third type was Christ whipping the Iewes out of the Tem∣ple, Mat. 21. 12. shewing therby that the Iewes shold be whipped or cast out of the spirituall Temple, and the Gentiles should occupy it. This (be∣loued) belongeth vnto vs to whom the Lord so wonderfully hath made his light to shine. The fourth figure is the parable of the vineyard, which was ta∣ken Mat. 21. verse. 33. from them that possessed it, and giuen to them that should bring forth the fruits thereof, and yeeld better increase vnto the Lord of the vineyard, The fift figure was the parable of the two sons that were bid∣den Mat. 22. verse. 28. to go & worke in their fathers vineyard, of whom the first said, he would, and did not: the second said, he would not, & did repent, and went to labour in the vineyard: the first signified the Iewes, which made many vowes with such a shew of godlinesse which was but hypocrisie, whom the Lord reiected and cast off, and said that the publicans and sinners should stand in iudgement to condemne the greatest of them. The sixt figure, was the feast that the Lord made vnto the Mat. 22. 2.
disobedient guests whom the Lord inuited to his banket, which was only ordained for them and who promised to come vnto it, and yet refused and would not come, but alledged slight excuses taken from their loue of earthly and transitory things aboue God. Therefore the Lord sent into the high wayes to call and compell the Gentiles to come, which came, though some left their wed∣ding garments behind them. The seuenth Type or figure, was the vision of Peter in Ioppa, Acts. 10. when he was on the top of the house, where hee saw the vessell come downe that had in it all manner of foure footed beasts of the earth, and wilde beasts, and foules of the ayre, and creeping things, where also the voyce said vnto him, Arise Peter, kill and eate: wherein the Lord shewed vnto him, that he should count no man vncleane, although the Gentiles then were counted vn∣cleane, as were the vncleane beasts set downe in the law of God, and therefore when Peter was sent for to Cornelius house, he said: Verse. 34. Of a trueth I perceiue that God hath no respect of persons, but in e∣uery nation he that feareth God, and worketh righteousnesse, is ac∣cepted of him. Many other examples of our calling, as the strayed sheepe, the lost groate, the prodigall sonne, and Christ eating with publicans Luke. 15. Luke. 5. and sinners, which when we read we should cast our figure and say, of whom is this spoken? of the Gentiles? then it is of me, for I am a Gentile. But am I conuerted? If I be not, then haue I not fulfilled this prophesie: therefore let vs striue to do well, and to mortifie and subdue sin which dwelleth in our mortall bodies, for none but the valiant can enter into the kingdome of heauen. Now all these prophesies are fulfilled, the blind see, the lame go, the dumbe speake, the deafe heare, the maimed worke, the dead are quickned, the leapers are cleansed, and the poore receiue the Gospell. Therefore who will despaire, and say, light is not re∣uealed vnto me, whē as he seeth it to be reuealed vnto whole nati∣ons? And so solemne is our calling, as that in so many places of the scripture it is foretold, wherby we see how dearly the Lord tēdreth our saluatiō as a kind spouse which was lōged for, while she was in a strange cuntrey: for Christ lōged for the Gentils, till they came home again vnto him. Therfore let vs now cōsider what he giueth vs, namely righteousnes & saluatiō: first righteousnes, then saluatiō:
first repentance, and then forgiuenesse of sins, the sun of the Go∣spell, least we should see heauen in hell, and light in darknesse, and ioy in anguishes. Let vs not contemne our light, or grow carelesse of it: let vs not build with one hand and ouerthrow with the other by pro∣phanenesse, like those men which while they surfetted at their gluttonous tables, did call vpon God for health. Christ is not re∣ceiued with the left hand: if the father offering a gift, do see the sonne stretch foorth his left hand, hee will withdraw his gift from him. I say let vs not contemne our light as the Iewes contemned their glory. For what is light to him that will shut his eyes against it? What is this light? It is such a glorious light, and such an excel∣lent reuelation, that great and mightie kings haue earnestly desi∣red Mat. 13. to see, and Princes haue laid downe their crownes to reueale it. Let vs embrace this light, let vs take and put on the wedding garment, and go to the banket, vnto which a thousand messengers haue inuited vs, and alledge none excuses: say not, I haue mar∣ried Mat. 22. a wife, I haue bought Oxen, I go to see a farme, &c. and there∣fore I cannot come, neither will I come. Well do so, if that ye will needs: but remember that thou wast inuited, and therefore the blessing shall be giuen to another. And Esau shall weepe for the Heb. 1 2. blessing but shall not haue it. But giue me a reason I pray thee, why thou wilt be called the seruant of God, which doest not serue him, or the child of God, which doest not loue him, or the disciple of Christ, which doest not learne of him: yet his raine falleth vpon all, the iust and vniust, and he giueth thee all things for nothing: the sunne doth giue his light for nothing, the dew doth giue his moisture for nothing, the riuers do giue their waters for nothing, and the earth doth giue her fruit for nothing. What shall we do then when the sunne shineth? We must not Rom. 13 Ephes. 5. do as we do in the darke, for then men ought to betake them to their labour. Learne of the sauage beasts, who as soone as the day springs, betake them to their trauell, and euery bird welcommeth it with many a sweete song, Christ is light, and this light is come: therefore hee that seeth not now is blind. Are not they then blind which yet see not, that prayer for the dead is vaine, need∣lesse and bootlesse? But thicke darknesse must haue a mighty light
to chase it away. So that he which beginneth to roote out some error or superstition, at the first shall haue much ado for custome and naturall corruption are the first causers of heresie, and shall crie against her in the maintenance thereof, and withstanders of reformation shall say, great is Diana of Ephesus, and so for a long time they seeme to wash the Ethiopian or the blacke More, the more they wash him, the more they gall him, & yet he is an Ethi∣opian still, but in the end the Arke standeth, and Dagon falleth 1. Sam. 5. downe, and truth triumpheth ouer falshood, hauing got the vi∣ctory, and light chaseth away darknesse with the brightnesse ther∣of. Why then doth this darknesse continue amongst vs still? To him that asketh what Scripture haue you against it? it is sufficient to answere, what Scripture haue you for it? For if the word com∣mand it not, God reiecteth it, and will say, who hath required these things at your hands? But what is this, for euery idle word you must giue account, as our Sauiour Iesus Christ saith. Mat 12. And whatsoeuer is not of faith is sinne. Rom. 14. 23. They aske, what, shal we not say God be with them? Why shold you? Why (say they) must we say nothing? What if thou do not? What saiest thou, when thou mentionest the death of thy first fathers, Adam, Seth, Enos, Enoch, Noah? Doest thou lesse loue these, not praying for them, then thou doest them for whom thou saiest, God bee with them, &c, But thou hast speeches inough to vse, if thou wilt needs say somwhat, and leaue such supersticious and offensiue sentences, if he be a good man, thou maist say, the Lord be thanked for his de∣liuerance, or the like: but if he be not, then thou maist say, God graunt we may do better then he hath done, and that by his fall we may learne to rise from sinne, or some such thing: whatsoeuer he be, thou maiest say as Dauid said of his child, giuing a reason why he would not pray for him any longer being dead. Can I call him backe againe? I shall go to him, but he shall not returne to me: or any other words, so they be wise, and therefore not against the word. What then is to be done? As Iacob said to his wiues and children; Giue me your idols that I may burie them: so say I vnto you, giue me your superstitions that I may bury them, that they may remaine with you, or in you, no lōger to the dishonor of God, offending of your weake brethrē, or to my greefe. For I am
iealous ouer you, and because you are mine and I am yours, O that my voyce were as the whirlewind, to beate downe, roote out, and blow away all your superstitions, that they may no lon∣ger raigne among you: or rather ô that Christ which is our light were come into vs all, and shined so bright, that we were asha∣med of all our darknesse: of all, not of mind onely, but of will al∣so, and of workes, that we no longer would walke in darke∣nesse, for few haue the will to walke according to the word, either in darknesse or light: we can see to sinne in the darke as well as in the light, and do rather, because the light disco∣uereth both the harlot and the theef, so they are afraid of the light, but assured be we, where light is not, Christ is not: for Christ is Iohn. 1. light, and let none be afraid to seeke this light which is so good, so excellent, and so profitable for vs. For it doth not onely descrie it selfe, but all other things round about it. Therefore if thou hast this light, thy faith, thy feare, thy loue will shew it selfe, and good things cannot now hide themselues, for he that is light, doth de∣light to please God in the light. It is no maruell though a man stumble in the darke, but hee which stumbleth in the light is not very strong, because he seeth his way before him. Once we stum∣bled at euery straw when we walked in darknesse, for then wrath had a fall, pride had a fall, lust had a fall, drunkennesse had a fall, pe∣nury had a fall, ignorance had a fall: or if you will, pride rose & we fell, lust rose, and we fell, &c. Were Egypt as light as Goshen, we should haue idolaters as ioyfull as true worshippers, but there is palpable darknesse, tedi∣ous, fearfull, and of long continuance in Egypt, cleare light onely in Goshen: therefore flie Egypt, but if thou liue in Egypt, that is, walke in darknesse, or commit wickednesse, though thou sin in the darke, the light will bewray thee, and thy conscience will ac∣cuse thee, and condemne thee for it. Therefore now giue ouer darknesse, and arme thee with light, for our life shineth like the light, therfore now we should be Israel, for Israel is reuolted. But many scrolles may be written of our sinnes, and thus the Gentiles are as Gentiles still. He that beleeueth not the word, is an infidell, hee that beleeueth not God, is an Atheist, hee that worshippeth any thing more then God, is an idolater: euery mans conscience shall condemne himselfe. Yet men will leaue
godlinesse for riches, but they will not leaue their riches for god∣linesse. What madnesse? Yea the Iewes neuer serued God at any time with such deuotion as many do now their golde and their riches, ô intollerable wickednesse! For many there are which could be content neuer to die, but liue euer here with their riches and pleasures. And is not the godly more dispited for his godlinesse then the wicked for his wickednesse? Are not the members of Christ more hated, and worse enter∣tained by vs then the limmes of Sathan? So dearely doth eue∣ry one loue sinne, and drawes sinne vpon sinne, till there bee a chaine of many linkes and monsters therein drawne most loth∣some. And though we of our selues run swiftly to hel, yet the most driue vs to make vs hie faster, they come vnto vs and say, your fa∣thers loued vs well, and said vnto vs, if you will be faire, you shall be wise, if you will be drunke you shalbe rich, &c. Yea euery one pointeth at, and sheweth vs the way which leadeth to destruction: and how few are the number of them which shew vs the way of vertue and godlinesse? And thus we are euen as forward as those Iewes which striue who shall come into hell first. Who did euer thanke God that he was not borne an hundred yeares ago, when ignorance spread o∣uer all, and all Egypt was smitten with darkenesse? or that the Lord hath not left him to himselfe to become an Atheist, or an Epicure which liues without God in the world? We haue al Gods gifts offered vs, but we haue refused them. Christ brought light, but we had rather he had brought darkenesse, for we loue darke∣nesse more then light. The Angels, the heauens, the word, the spi∣rit, are light, and we which see it are darkenesse, for we cannot a∣bide light, but are like an owle which flieth out of a bare field from the light of the day, such a death is day vnto vs. Faith is flowne away, truth is become a pilgrime, & euery string is out of tune. He which shold weepe & be sorrowfull, laughes: & truth is brought to the ground, yea poore truth is euen persecuted to the death: but sinners are stubble, & their sentence is burne them. How fine wold be the way of vertue, if you would pare away the rubs that are in it, if you would take away all occasions of sin, and giue it gall to eat, & when you haue done so, set a crowne of
thornes vpon the head thereof, and when you haue thus crow∣ned it, make it carry the crosse, and when it hath carried the crosse condemne it, and when you haue condemned it, put it to death, and when ye haue put it to death, bury it: and when you haue buried it, roll a great stone vpon the head of it, and set watchmen to keepe it, euen fasting and prayer, that it may neuer arise againe to raigne any more, the which the Lord for his mercie sake grant. Amen. THE CALLING OF IONAH. Ionah. 1. 1. 2. 1 The word of the Lord came to Ionah the sonne of Amittai saying, 2 Arise, and go to Niniuie that great Citie, and crie against it, for their wickednesse is come vp before me. YOu haue heard the sweete song of old father Si∣meon, like the pleasant song of a sweete bird be∣fore her death, setting foorth the ioy of the righ∣teous which embrace Christ Iesus. Before Christ Iesus vouchsafed to come vnto vs, we wold not come vnto him, but in al our doings we wrought our condemnation, and through the innumerable heapes of our iniquities, laboured to driue him without all hope of mercy from vs. So we continued like flies which flutter about the candle till they haue consumed thēselues. When we had done asmuch as in vs lay to driue him away frō vs, then he saued vs, & recompenced good for euill vnto vs. So that if God had loued vs no better then we loued our selues, we might haue perished in our sinne, and our bloud should haue bin vpon our owne heads. If Christ be the light of the Gentiles, let vs embrace him, and euery one walke as be∣commeth the children of light: but many do shut their eyes a∣gainst it, lest they shold see, & not only many smother their owne light: but the Sun saith vnto the Moone, shine not, & the Moone
saith vnto the stars, be not bright. And many haue smothered their light so long, that the dampe hath put out the candle, and thus they labour to bring the darkenesse of Egypt vpon Goshen: so that their eyes haue forgotten to see, & so many go out of the way be∣cause they would not looke vpon the candle, and the diuel giueth to euery one that which he wisheth, so it may be for his hurt. But who can but pitty, that with the same Manna which commeth from heauen and feedeth many to life euerlasting, so many are poi∣soned and find in it nothing but the sauour of eternall death. The Iewes had no cause to enuie our light, for he gaue them glory: he was poore, and yet he gaue them riches: he was counted base, and yet he made them honourable, he was contemned, and yet he made them beloued: they were full of darkenesse, and he brought them light, but they contemned this light, & so procured their owne condemnation. And therefore now it is come to passe, that they are become vagabonds vpon the earth, & most contem∣ned of all other nations, and euery people haue a dwelling, wher∣as since they prophecied euil vnto themselues, saying, his bloud be vpon vs and our children, goodnesse hath put on the face of bash∣fulnesse amongst them. If thou embrace Christ as Simeon did, then Christ is thy glory, but if thy glory consist in beauty which fadeth, in gay cloth which weareth, in wealth which wasteth, or in gold which rusteth, then Christ is not thy glory. We haue gone long with an old man, & now we haue lost him, but we are loth to part with him, he is such a good companion, ne∣uerthelesse we hope to find him againe in Ionah. We haue gone but slowly with him as with an old man that is not very swift of foote, but now we must run with Ionah as with a post, lest Niniuie be destroyed. The prophecie of Ionah. I neede not to shew the authority of Prophets, but concerning their sorts and difference: there are three sorts of Prophets. The first were such as called vpon the name of the Lord in prayer for the people, and receiued an aunswere from the Lord in the peoples behalfe, of which sort was Samuell, and these were called Seers. A second sort of Prophets were such as God raised to ex∣pound 1. Sam. 10. 9. the law & declare the will of God vnto the people, when
the Priest and such as shold do so, were slacke in their callings, of which sort was Esay, Ieremie, Ezechiel, Daniel, Hosee, Ioel, Amos, Obadiah, & the rest of the holy Prophets. A third sort were such as haue bin since Christ, working such like effects, of which sort was the Prophet Agabus, of whom mention is made in thee leuenth of Acts. 11. 28 the Acts and the 28. verse. Now in the second sort of these, Ionah, whom God sent to de∣clare his will vnto his people, vnto whom also the Lord did re∣ueale the subuersion of kingdomes, the ouerthrow of Tribes, the captiuity of Nations, the calamities that were to come vnto the sons of men for iniquitie and rebellion against God. As all wise men were not borne at once, nor liued together: so these holy Prophets haue not bin at once, but were raised vp by the Lord God, some here, some there, according to his pleasure, and as he saw the people stand in need of them by reason of the corruption of the times. And furthermore, the Lord hath not at any time reuealed vnto one of these, all thinges that might bee reuealed, but as much as was sufficient for them euery one in their times and places. Nei∣ther hath any of them told as much of the will of God as might be declared, nor fully expounded his lawes: but the Patriarkes left some to the Prophets, and the Prophets left some to the Apostles, but they haue left none for vs, but they haue al seft open the whole will of God vnto vs, and euery Prophet now bringeth only gold, myrrhe, and frankensense, like the wisemen which came to see our Lord. There are three thinges which moued me to take this story in hand aboue all others. First because you know the story, and ther∣fore can the better conceiue of the matter as I go forward with it. Secondly, because it is briefe and doth containe a great deale in a litle. Thirdly, because it is most agreeable for the time and state of this sinnefull age wherein we liue, and therefore most conueni∣ent for vs. It is manifest that Ionah liued in a very troublesome time, namely in the time of Ieroboam the sonne of Ioash king of Israell, a wicked king, though not hee which is called the Ie∣roboam that made Israell to sinne. For of this second Ierobo∣am in whose time he prophecied, it is written. 2. King. 14. 24. he departed not from any of the sinnes of Ieroboam that made Israell
to sin, which commendeth the holinesse of Ionah, in that he in the midst of the corruptions wherewithall the people were ouer∣flowne, was vncorrupted and vnspotted, and called to be a Pro∣phet among the people of God. For he had prophecied in Israell before he was sent to Niniuie, as the word also doth argue, which layeth open and magnifieth the great loue of God, in that he sent a Prophet to admonish his vngodly people, when as he shold haue sent a thunderbolt to terrifie them, or rather vtterly to destoy thē: 2. King. 14. 25. so that there mercy stept before iudgement. His name was Ionah, which signifieth a doue, which admoni∣sheth vs, that as we labour to be as wise as serpents, so we should also desire that we might be as simple as doues. His fathers name was Amittai, which signifieth trueth. I would that trueth were e∣uery preachers father. There are two speciall thinges contained in this historie. The first, the great mercy of God shewed to three sorts of men: the Niniuites, Ionah, and the mariners. In respect of the Niniuites, that  he sent a Prophet to Niniuie a Citie of the Gentiles, which were strangers from the couenant, from the promise, and stran∣gers from the common wealth of Israell, and conuerted them by his preaching, and so spared them now. In regard of Io∣nah,  that being, for his disobedience in flying to Tarshish, when he was sent to Niniuie, throwne into the sea, hee prepared a great VVhale to swallow him, and in his belly euen in the bottome of the sea, where there was no hope of life for him, preserued him, and after three dayes deliuered him thence safe, and then cast him not off, but continued him in his calling, and wrought powerfully by him, both in the ship conuerting the idolatrous mariners, and in Niniuy, humbling the king and the whole city: and lastly when he  had most vnworthily doubly murmured and iustified himselfe a∣gainst God, he contented himselfe with gentle and mild reproofe of him. In consideration of the mariners, that hauing bin idolaters all their liues, and now in danger, giuing the honour of God to their owne fancies, God yet conuerteth them, so that they called vpon him, and sacrificed, and made vowes vnto the true God, and by his mighty power hauing the wind and seas calmed, were then and for euer saued. The second thing is Ionahs fall, and rising again. His fall, first
sinning, both flying from God, and murmuring, and therein iusti∣fying himselfe: secondly sustaining his punishment manifold, and long feares, casting into the sea, & continuing in the Whales bel∣ly three dayes, and afterward his reproofe and conuiction. His rising, first repenting in the ship in the belly of the Whale, and be∣ing cast out of it. Then also faithfully discharging his dutie, cry∣ing against Niniuie couragiously. We haue seene Ionah a farre off, if we would we might see him nearer. Hee that receiueth a Prophet in the name of a Pro∣phet, shall receiue a Prophetes reward. Therefore let vs pre∣pare our eares to heare, and receiue the word of God preached by his Ministers, and let vs thinke that Ionah is come againe to our houses to preach, and whether it be fortie dayes, or fortie weekes, or fortie yeares, they that liue like Sodome, shall be punished like Sodome. But as our Sauiour said to his Disciples: Pray that your flight be not in the winter; nor on the Sabboth: so Mat. 24. 21. say I vnto you, pray that the Lordes comming be not on the weeke dayes, for if he come then, how should hee finde you? Therfore I pray you learne at least now, and giue good eare, that ye may heare sufficient for all the weeke. The word of the Lord came to Ionah the sonne of Amittai, say∣ing, Arise and go to Niniuie, &c. Herein I obserue that Ionah went not before hee was sent: for going to preach vnto the Gentiles, it was needfull that he should haue a speciall calling and commission from the Lord himself: for it was vnmeete to cast the childrens bread vnto dogges, vnlesse he had a speciall commandement from God so to do. None ought to take vpon him the function of preaching in the Church, vnlesse they haue their warrant or authoritie from God, as Aaron had. And although they haue not their authoritie in that Heb. 5. 4. forme & manner as Ionah had his (namely) as it were by word of mouth, euen from God himself, Arise and go to Niniuie: yet they must haue their warrant from him, else their calling is vnlawfull. But now here is another authoritie crept into the Church, that makes so many Idols, which haue eyes & see not, tongs & speake not, eares & heare not, & that is this, Whē one stalleth vp another into Moses chaire, not hauing Moses rod, nor Moses spirite. But this gal wil not hold spurring. Further I obserue, that as the word
of the Lord came to Ionah; so the word of the Pope came to his Priestes, Iesuites and Seminaries, but so and in such sort many times, that they are drawne to Tiburne while Masses are said for them at Rome. The word of the Lord came vnto Ionah, &c. That which came vnto him was not alwayes with him, but so it was, that when the word of the Lord came vnto any of the Prophetes, then they were well furnished with abilitie, to teach, to preach, to reproue, or to commaund whomsoeuer the Lord would haue so handled. As by example: Nathan the Prophet bad Dauid the king that he should build a Temple. 2. Sam. 7. and 1. Chron. 17, And a litle after he came and bad him that he should 2. Sam. 7. 1. Chro. 17. not build it. Where we see, that when hee bad him build it, then the spirite of the Lord came not vnto him to bid him so to doe. And therefore the spirite of God came vnto him the verie same night, and bad him that he should go to Dauid, and bid him that he should not build it. For this is euident▪ that as God himselfe is constant, so his spirite and his word are constant, and therfore ne∣uer saith and vnsaith one thing. Againe the Prophet Elisha said. 2. Kings. 4. that the Shunamits 2. Kings. 4. heart was grieued, but the Lord had hid it from him, and had not as then declared the same vnto him: which doth note vnto vs, that the same word whereby the Lord hath, and doth reueale maruellous things vnto his Prophetes, was not now vpon him, neither is alwayes vpon any Prophet, but according to the will of God it comes vnto them, to reueale vnto them what he would haue them to doe, and when it pleaseth him. Also Daniell said that the Lord did not reueale the kings Dan. 2. 30. dreame vnto him, for any wisedome that hee had more then any liuing, but onely for the kings sake, and for the poore people of Gods sake: and so you must thinke of vs that are the Ministers of the Gospell, that the Lord doth not reueale his will vnto vs, for any wisedome or worthinesse that is in vs, more then other men, but for your sakes, and that we might reueale it to you. There∣fore heare vs euen for this cause, because the Lord hath reuealed vnto vs these things for your sakes and good. From the calling we come to the charge. Arise and go to Niniuie that great, &c.
God commeth and findeth vs all asleepe, then hee bids vs a∣rise, for they are not fit to conuert others, which are not yet con∣uerted themselues, according to that saying of Christ to Peter: When thou art conuerted strengthen thy brethrē, teaching them Luk. 22. 32. by your experience. Now a dayes men take vpon them to re∣proue others for committing such things as themselues haue pra∣ctised, & do practise without amendemēt, notwithstanding their diligence in teaching others their dutie: they can teach all the do∣ctrine of Christ sauing three sillables, that is: Follow me. Therefore these are like some Taylers, which are very busie in decking and tricking vp of others, but go both bare & beggerly thēselues. Yet they will not let vs plucke out the moate that is in their eyes, vn∣till we haue plucked out the beame which is in our owne eyes. Go to Niniuie. Niniuie was the greatest and the auncientest Citie in the land of Assyria, and the name of it signified Beautifull, which name was giuen it rather for the greatnesse & beautie thereof, then for the name of Ashur, which was the builder and fitst founder ther∣of, as we reade in the booke of Genesis. It had a faire name, but Gen. 10. 12 foule deedes, like this Citie. Go to Niniuie, &c. God would not suffer any people to be vntaught, therefore hee hath written his name in great letters easie to bee read of all. The heauens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shew∣eth Psal. 19. 1. the worke of his handes. They haue no speech nor language, 2 without them is their voyce heard. Their line is gone foorth 3 through all the earth, and their wordes into the endes of the world. In them is manifest for all what may be knowen of God. Rom. 1. 19. 20. For his eternall power and God-head are seene by the creation of the world: but especially he teacheth some by his word also. Therefore he sent vnto the old world Noah, Lot to Sodom, Mo∣ses Gene. 6. Gen. 19. Act. 16. 6. to Israell, and here Ionah to Niniuie. But when Paule with Silas and Timothie had gone throughout Phrygia, and the re∣gion of Galatia, they were forbidden of the holy, Ghost to preach the word in Asia. Then came they to Mysia, and sought to go in∣to Bithynia, but the spirite suffered them not. Go to Niniuie. The Iewes would not heare the word of God by Ionah, and
therefore the Lord sent him to Niniuie. They that grieue the spi∣rite, quench the spirite. Then goes the Prophet from Samaria to Niniuie. The word was in Samaria, it went thence to Niniuie: the Gospell was at Ephesus, it is gone out of that Citie, it is come in∣to Reu. 2. 4. 5. England: but it may depart from Englād againe. If any thinke that he standeth, let him take heede least he fall. 1. Cor. 10. 12. But the Prophet goes from Samaria to Niniuie, that was both to shake off the dust of his feete, to witnesse against them their obstinacie and hardnesse of heart: and secondly to let them see that the wickedst Gentiles were more righteous then they, in that they repented at the voice of one Prophet, yea and that with one Sermon: whereas themselues refused, and resisted all the ho∣ly and worthie Prophetes that God sent vnto them. And thirdly it may be to signifie, that the Iewes for their contempt and neg∣ligence should be reiected, and the Gentiles should be receiued into the fauour of God, that they might be an holy and sanctified people vnto the Lord in their stead. That great Citie. Niniuie had. 1500. towres in it, as some write, and 120000 Ionah. 4. 11 litle children, as it is noted in the end of this storie. Therefore it may well be called a great Citie: but the greater it was, the more vngodly it was. For as one mā taketh sicknesse of another: so one man is infected by the wicked wordes and ill exāple of another, and so taught to sinne the more, till the measure of sinne be full. And crie against it, &c. First God biddeth him, Arise and shake off all impediments, and then to go and call them to the battell, and now he bids him crie out against them, and so terrifie them. Euerie Prophet is a crier, as appeareth where the Lord biddeth Esay to lift vp his Esay. 48. 1. voice like a trumpet. Euerie Prophet must both be plaine and bold, and this many times maketh the poore seruaunts of God to speake their minds as plaine & bold as if they sate in iudgement. Iohn was a voyce, a voyce would not serue, he was the voyce of Luke. 3. a crier, and yet he could not make all the crooked straight, nor the rough plaine. And because all the Preachers of the Gospell should crie, that is, preach zealouslie, in the second of the Actes it is written; The holie Ghost came downe in fire, & tongues: but this fire is quen∣ched,
& the tōgs are tied vp, so that they who shold cry are starke dumbe: but though they cannot speake, they can see, they can see if a great benefice fall, though it be a hundred miles off, and Pha∣raoh had more care of his sheepe, then we haue of our soules. If preachers were not deafe, they needed not to crie one to an∣other, but such is the dumbnesse of Preachers, & the deafnesse of all sortes of hearers, that there is great slownesse of followers, so that there is but little good done, and but a few fruites gathered. If ye were not deafe, we neede not to crie, but because ye be dull of hearing therefore we crie with mouth, with heart, with hand, with foote, & with all the powers of our bodies vnto you, & yet how little do you regard it? But are not ye commanded to heare aswell as we to crie? yet the cocke croweth when men are fast a Mat. 26. 70. 72. 74. Prou. 28. 9. sleepe, yea the cocke croweth, and still Peter denieth his maister. Before you crie vnto the Lord, heare what the word crieth vn∣to you, and let not your workes crie for vengeance while your tongues crie for mercy. Pro. 15. 18 When men heare the Preacher speake against pride, hypo∣crisie, couetousnesse, or any other sin, then they looke one vpon another, as though it belonged not vnto them: but who can say his heart is cleane? And crie against it. Our sinnes buffet God on euery side, as the Iewes buffeted Christ, first on the right side, then on the left side, and neuer leaue till they haue prouoked him to crie against vs. When God cries, then we should weepe, considering where∣fore hee cries: for there is nothing that can prouoke the Lord to crie, but sinne, and that hee euer crieth against. Do what you will, and say what you will, and the Lord will not be offended with you vnlesse you sinne: but if you commit sinne, hee is iust, and therefore will not leaue till hee haue by crying slaine either you, or sinne that raignes in you. For as an angrie man euer pur∣sueth that which hee hateth, vntill he hath destroyed it: so the Lord crosseth and followeth vs with his iudgements, vntill hee hath slaine that which most deadly he hateth, sinne. And crie against it, &c. Reproofe is the necossariest office, yet it is least regarded, yea most abhorred For now we think, if one reproue vs, he hateth vs.
But the Lord saith. Leuit, 19. Thou shalt not hate thy brother in Leui. 19. 17 thine heart, but shalt reproue him, and suffer him not to sinne: noting thereby, that if we flatter any in their sinne, or see them sinne, and not reproue them for it, it is a manifest signe that we do it of hatred, how great loue and good will soeuer we pretend toward them: seeing the matter tendes to the hurt of their soules, and the offence of God. Yea if a Preacher reproue sinne, hee is thought to doe it of hatred, or of some particular grudge: and to be too busie, too bitter, too sharpe, too rough, and therefore say, hee should preach Gods loue and mercie, for hee is a preacher of the Gos∣pell, hee tels vs of and threatens with the law, and so throwes vs downe too low, some to dispaire, as though we preached the law onely, or chiefly, and not the Gospell also continually, to them that loath and striue against their sinnes, though they sinne grieuously. Others as though they were galled, will say, let him keepe his text, or they will say, hee is beside his booke, as though no text in Scripture reproued sinne, and so of al doctrines the do∣ctrine of reproofe and reprehension of sinne is most contemned, and least esteemed. But let a preacher preach darke mysteries, or prophane speeches, or vnprofitable fables, or friuolous questions, or curious inuentions, or od conceits, or brainsick dreames & any of these will be more welcome vnto thē then reprehēsion which is most profitable and necessariest of all. Balaams asse neuer spake Num. 22. 28. but once, and then he reproued. Then if Balaams asse reproued Balaam, how much more ought Balaā to reproue asses, or such as will be no otherwise then beastes in their behauiour? But per∣swade your selues beloued, which is most true, though we speake as if we were angrie with you, & threatē as if we would hurt you, & crie against you as if we hated you, yet we loue you in the dea∣rest bloud we haue, and therefore though with persecution, we preach the law to lead you to the Gospel, we preach iudgement, that you may find mercy, we preach hell to bring you to heauen. Whatsoeuer & howsoeuer we preach, we do all to fil your hearts with ioy in beleeuing, and hauing made you fruitfull in all good workes, present you without spot, nay glorious also as a Virgin most beautifull, to the Lord of all grace and glory, Christ Iesus. Hitherto we haue heard of Ionah called, and charged to crie,
but what should he crie? Indeede it is not expressed in this place. But what then? why then the Papistes may say that he was char∣ged to crie against them for neglecting their traditions. Assuredly Ioh. 16. 12. Ioh. 21. 25 Actes. 1. 3. 1. Tim. 6. 20. 2. Tim. 1. 13. and. 22. they may with as great truth and as much probabilitie as they do, gather out of diuerse places of the new Testament, that they ought to be obserued. But Ionah hath not left it doubtfull what he was to crie, for in the third chap. vers. 2. the charge is repeated, and thus expressed: go and proclaime against it the proclamation which I spake vnto thee: he was thē to crie what God had cōmā∣ded him. O that none would crie but what God hath cōmanded. But what did God commaund him to crie? euen that which he afterward cried, Yet fortie dayes, and Niniuie shall be ouer∣turned. Ouerturned? yea auncient Niniuie, faire Niniuie, proud Niniuie must be destroyed. No man sits so high, but destruction sits aboue him, and will fall on all that persist in their defection. Iustice would haue come against them, before it cried against thē, but God the most gratious would haue them cried against, that they might cry out woe and alas for their sinnes, so preuēting de∣serued and threatned vengeance: for they hearing the cry of God cried out of themselues, and that in great humbling to God: so God heard their cries, and tooke pitie on them. Isaiah was commaunded to crie, and hee cried. All flesh is Isa. 40. 6. 7 grasse, yea all the glorie thereof like the flower of the field. The grasse withereth, the flower fadeth when the spirite of Iehouah bloweth on it. Surely the people is grasse. Iohn was commaun∣ded in the spirite of Eliah to crie, and he cried, Prepare the way for Iehouah, make euen in the desert a path for our God. And Isa. 40. 3 Mat. 3. 3. Ion. 1. 2. & 3. 2. Ionah was commaunded to crie, and hee cried. Yet fortie dayes, and Niniuie shalbe ouerthrowne. All the preachers of the Gospell are commaunded to crie and that alowd, not to spare, to lift vp their voyces like a trumpet, to shew Gods people their Isay. 58. 1 defections, and the house of Iacob their sinnes. And then also, if they thereby be truly humbled, to proclaime vnto them, their ini∣quitie is pardoned, they haue receiued of the hand of Iehouah double for all their sinnes: It is required of the disposers of Gods se∣crets, Isay. 40.. 2. 1. Cor. 4. 2 that they be found faithfull. And woe to them that loue the pleasures of sinne, more then the glorie of God. For their wickednesse is come vp before me. For, &c. We haue
heard the charge it selfe giuen, heauie newes, that a most beau∣tifull Citie, a most rich Citie, a most populous Citie, and a most auncient Citie, must be ouerturned, and that within fortie dayes; what is the cause? their wickednesse is come vp before me: As if he had said, Niniuie hath followed her lustes, and forgotten the law, to satisfie her desires, she hath notoriouslie despised her so∣ueraigne, defied all well meaning, all good dealing: and this is knowne to the iust iudge, and at his barre she is arraigned, and her accusers stand crying at the barre for iustice. Therefore she may no longer be forborne, execution of iustice must needes be done: let her therefore prepare for death, and that she may, Crie against her, yet fortie dayes & Niniuie shalbe ouerturned: for their wickednesse is come vp before me. When God sendes criers vnto a people, it is a most manifest signe that their wickednesse is come vp before him, which doth cause him thus to exclaime, thus to crie out against thē. And then if they will not repent whilest Gods criers cōtinue crying amōgst them, the Lord of hostes will rise vp in armes against them. Their wickednesse. Will you see the Niniuites sinnes in a scroll, that withall, you the daughters of Niniuie may see, that wealth and wickednesse go together, prosperitie, and securitie kisse each other? Niniuie (saith Nahum) was like a poole of waters, most populous, and Nahum. 2. 8. 9. full of all store, which to increase, it wholy was full of lying, de∣ceipt, and fraud, full of robberie, oppression, and all violence, a bloudy citie: whereby it increased in wealth, they florished in ho∣nour 3. 1. and 2. 11. 12. Zephan. 2. 15. Nahū. 3. 4. and glorie, and therefore as Zephaniah hath it, was a reioy∣cing, a rioting Citie, sate securely, and proudly cōtemned others, saying, I am, & none is besides me. Moreouer it was the mistresse of witchcrafts, a most Idolatrous Citie, yea sold people through her whoredomes, and nations through her witchcraftes, & made other Idolatrous like her selfe, as 2. Kings. 16. 10. Their wickednesse is come vp before me. Sinne mounts vp on high, like the tempter which led Christ vnto the top of the pinacle to behold all the pleasures of the world at once, and then because we haue falne downe before the God of this world, and tempted the God of heauen, whether he be iust or no, therfore wrath speakes out of the fire, now thou
hast taken thy pleasure, thou must take also thy punishment. A most heauie and grieuous thing it is, if you knew what you are doing here, and what your sinnes are doing at the barre of Gods iust iudgement. For euen now before you came hither, you were seruing the deuill in sinne, but now it is too late to speake of it, and where are they now? flesh and bloud could not stay them, nature could not stay them, pleasures could not stay them, riches could not stay them, nor they could not stay themselues, but they are ascended vp before the face of the eternall God, to stand at his barre and crie for vengeance to fall vpon vs, for com∣mitting such hainous sinnes against the maiestie of God. An arrow is swift, the Sunne is swifter, but sinne is swiftest of all: for in a moment it is committed on earth, it comes before God in heauen, & is condēned to hell. For though Nimrod could not climbe vp to heauen, his sinnes flew vp to heauen: & though we stay below, our sinnes ascend high, like the tower of Nimrod, but they fling vs downe to confusion, and we become Babell. For when we sinne we are as the shell fishe which the Eagle taketh, and flieth into the skie with, and then letteth it fall vpon the rocks, and so dasheth it in peeces, and then deuoures it. For the wrath of God taketh vs vp on high, and throweth vs down low vpon the rockes of shame and contempt, and terrour of conscience: and so hauing crushed vs, and brused our verie bones, consumes vs with double death, the graue deuouring vs, hell swallowing vs. Is come vp before me. To them which aske, how our sinnes ascend and flie vp afore God, I answer, God here speakes vnto vs after the manner of men, who cannot see a thing afore it be brought vnto them, euen where they are, and before them. So that hereby is signified God had seene their wickednesse. We fast as before him, we pray as before him, we giue almes as before him, and we doe euery good thing as before him, be∣cause we do it freely, and as it were, not caring who lookes vpon vs. But we sinne as behind him, because we hide and cloake our sinnes, and commit them in secret, loth that men should spie thē: our conscience in such actions accusing vs, and instantly telling vs, we are about that which we cannot iustifie. And we suppose that we sin behind him, because we sinne here below, saying with
our selues in the consideration of our blinded hearts, as Eliphaz accuseth Iob to haue said. Is not God in the height of heauen? Iob. 22. 12. and see the highnesse of the Starres, how high are they? There∣fore how should God know it? Should he be able to see through 13 14 the darke? The thicke cloudes are a couering to him, that hee may not see, and hee walketh vp and downe the round circle of the heauens. But then chiefly we imagine that God beholdes vs not, when men cannot see vs: as if God could not know, what man cannot espie. But let vs not deceiue our selues, for God seeth not as man seeth. Man can see but onely outward things committed in action, but God seeth, and knoweth, and search∣eth the secretes of the heart, yea the secretst thoughtes and imagi∣nations of it. Againe, man can see but one thing at once, he can not turne his right eye one way, and left eye another: he cannot see before him and behind him with one looke: but God seeth all things at all times. Though we sinne as closely as we can for feare of hatred, or shame of the world, or for any other respect: yet God saith, your sinne is come vp before me. For though we couer it, and hide it, and colour it, yea and as it were burie it as∣well as lyeth in vs, yet all is open vnto him: therefore he saith, your sinne is come vp before me. For when we speake euill, hee is all eares to heare vs, and when we do euill, he is all eyes to behold it. Therefore ô foolish man, do not thinke that God seeth not which man seeth not: for when he lookes vp, hee sees all below also, and when he lookes downe, he sees all aboue also. If he should not, much wicked∣nesse should lye in darknesse vnrewarded, and men should not be terrified from sinne, but rather by the example of others allu∣red to sinne freely secretly. For Ananias might haue gained by his craft, if God had not seene his heart, which men saw not: but God saw his distrustfull and dissembling and corrupt heart, ther∣fore he lost his goods and his life too. Actes. 5. If God had not seene that which men see not, Gehezi might 2. Kings. 5. haue gained a bribe for his labour, when he ran after Naaman the Assyrian, and told him a lye for his profit. But God seeing his fet∣ches, which mē saw not, turned his bribe to a leprosie, & so made him a leper for his labour. A fearefull example for such as take bribes: yet many care not what bribes they take so mē see it not.
The man that said, Be merrie my soule, and take thy pleasure Luke. 12. for many yeares, might haue done it, had not God seene him: but he espied him falling to godlesse securitie, & threatned him, that night to bereaue him of his soule. Forget it not ye that abound in wealth, whose cup runneth ouer. If God had not seene Achan Iosu. 7. take vp the peece of gold, he had kept it to himself for his labour, and no man should haue knowne where he had it. But God see∣ing it (though closely done) rewarded him with shame in the sight of all Israel. O Lord what is man that thou so watchest him! Achan would neuer haue stolne if hee had knowne that God did see him. Gehezi durst neuer haue taken a bribe, if he had thought that God beheld his doings. Wilt thou steale the owner looking on thee? Wilt thou speake treason in the kings hearing? Neither would we lye, nor sweare, nor steale, nor hurt, nor be prophane at any time, if we considered that the Lord seeth vs, and remem∣bred that he watcheth vs: if we would do thus, sinne might go a begging for want of seruice. Therefore if you will marke but this part of my Sermon, that God seeth all, you would refraine from those things secretly, that are to the offence of God, which you for feare or shame will not do before men: and you would say e∣uen whē your hand is at it, I will not do it, because the Lord seeth me. But as when we sinne though in secret, he is all eyes to see vs, and when he sees it requisite to make some examples, to teach all that when man cannot or will not discouer vs, hee will shew that he saw vs, thē he is al hand to punish & plague vs, & in the end to roote vs out frō all our pleasures: so whē we repēt, he is all mercy & loue, & whē we amēd our liues, & leaue all our wicked wayes to walke before him euer after in holinesse, then he is all truth and righteousnesse to forgiue vs all our former wicked life, and to wash vs from all our vncleannesse. Now therefore repent thee of all the euill that thou hast done, lament it truly, run and hie thee as fast as euer thou canst to the throne of grace, proue whether thy repentance will not as boldly stand before God, & as power∣fully crie for pardon, as thy sinnes speedily came vp before God, and vehemently cried for punishment. No doubt the Angell that cried fallen is, fallen is Babylon the great, Reuel. 18. 2. though hee cried vehemently with a loude voyce, cried not so audibly as thou shalt heare the spirite of truth crying and assuring thee thy sinnes
are forgiuen thee, the God of glorie loueth thee, sinne shall no longer raigne in thee, no euill shall hurt thee, no good thing shall Rom. 6. 14. Psa. 91. 10 34. 10. and 84. 11. Rom. 8. 28. 2. Cor. 16. Psal. 16. 11 1. Thes. 5. 22. 2. Thes. 2. 10. Heb. 12. 14. be wanting to thee, all things shall worke together to the best for thee. Wilt thou any more? he shall euer dwell with thee, in whose presence is the fulnesse of ioy, and at his right hand pleasure for euermore. Repent therefore, but repent truly, loath all sin, grieue that thou hast committed any, flie euery sinne, yea whatsoeuer occasions of it, and all appearance of euill: but loue the trueth al∣so, and follow all holinesse, and as much as in you is, haue peace with all men, and the God of peace will increase your peace in Christ Iesus. All which euen this point that we speake of, vz, Whatsoeuer we do God seeth vs, must sufficiently assureth vs of: for this so often repeated speech. Reuel. 2. 2. 9. 13. 19. and 3. 1. 8. 35. I know thy workes; is spoken as to rouse the dead Sardians. 3. 1. and to heate the luke-warme Laodicās 3. 15. so to commend the faith, hope, loue, patience, &c. of the other Churches, and so to stablish and set them forward therein, knowing hee is iust, and a liberall rewarder of them that seeke him. Heb. 11. 6. Their wickednesse is come vp before me. Sinne once committed castes no doubtes of comming presently before God: but the thoughtes of the heart of the carnall man thinking of the way to heauen, are the faint spies that went to see the land of Canaan, which say, that iourney is farther then you are able to go all your life, the way is like a thicket, & the doore like a needles eye: there∣fore it is impossible for you to come thither. But when you send faith, hope, and loue (those messengers of peace and truth) they will bring you word, saying, your ruffes must be ruffled, and your fardingals crusht, pride must be put off, and other sinnes, & none shall be kept out of heauen, but such as loue the world better thē heauen, or such as will take their sinnes with them: for they be vnseeming the fashion of that countrey; so that ere we come thi∣ther, we must leaue them like the shadow when we go into the doore, and we must shake hands with them, and bid them farewell.
THE REBELLION OF IONAH. 3 But Ionah rose vp to flie vnto Tarshish from the presence of the Lord, and went downe to Iapho, and found a ship going to Tarshish: so hee payed the fare thereof, that he might go with them to Tarshish from the presence of the Lord. THE charge giuen to Ionah hath hitherto bene spoken of, now it followeth to bee shewed, how it was by Ionah discharged. First Ionah rebelliouslie neglected it, then being chastized, & so repenting, he faithfullie discharged it. First therefore let vs consider his rebellion, afterward we shall see his correction. But Ionah rose vp to flye to Tarshish, from the presence of the Lord. We cannot stand to speake of Tarshish, nor what it is to flie from God, but this shall be our meditation. Ionah the Prophet was commaunded to go to Niniuie, and there to crie out against sinne, to preach against pride, and all kinde of vngodlinesse, there∣by to reclaime them, and stirre them vp, in laying open their sinne, and the punishment which hanged ouer them, that they might speedily repent, and so turne away from them the wrath of God thereby deserued. How beautifull should haue bene the feete of him that should haue brought so powerfull a message, as should haue wrought such an happie effect! How blessed should Niniuie haue bene when the Lord had vouchsafed them so great mercie? but still one flie or other marres the whole boxe of ointment: as soone as hee was commaunded to go thither, Sa∣than Eccl. 10. 1. stood in the gap, and entised him to go to Tarshish, for hee thought, that if hee could let Ionah from going to Niniuie, then first of all hee should put a singular Prophet out of Gods fauour, and bring vpon him some iudgement, not onely inward, as tor∣ment
of conscience, decay of giftes, or the like: but visible also, whereby the people to whom he had preached might thinke hee was some false Prophet, as they are euer ready to condemne for hated of God, whom they see grieuouslie afflicted. And so se∣condly the people should bee hardned in their sinnes, and obsti∣natly contemne euer after, him, his like, and their preaching too. And thirdly the goodliest, the most populous, and the wealthiest Citie in Assyria should be destroyed, the good with the wicked, the young with the old, one with another, all should vnrepentant dye in their sinnes, and so the verie Angels in heauen should mourne. So that he thought hee should by stopping Ionah, euerie way gaine well by his labour. Therefore he comes to Ionah, hee flatters him, he tēpts him, thus he begins with him; It is good that men looke before they leape, hast makes wast, wordes are not al∣wayes to be takē as they properly signifie: one thing is oftē spokē & another meant: but thinkest thou God meaneth thou shouldest go to Niniuie? Why? doth he regard Idolaters, and his professed enemies, so that to haue them admonished of their ruine, hee will bring shame vpon his owne people? for the very going of a Pro∣phet from Israell to preach to Niniuie, must needs proclaime that there is more hope of most sinfull Gētils thē of naturall Israelites. And how couldest thou seeme so to thinke of thine owne nation, thine owne brethren, thine owne bloud, the chosen of God? or if thou doe, shalt thou not thereby procure their vtter hatred for e∣uer, and make them to detest both thy person, and whatsoeuer thy preaching, whatsoeuer thou hast heretofore, or hereafter shalt teach them? What? for thy faithfull prophecying here among Gods people, will God thinkest thou recompence thee; thee whom hee hath made reuerend, and to bee honored of Kings and Princes of Israell: recompence I say thee with shame and contēpt among heathens, yea with a cruell death, or with a more misera∣ble life? For what other successe may bee hoped for at the Nini∣uites hands of such a message by thee? for thou knowest they haue all Iewes in contempt: therefore when thou shalt come among them, and tell them not these few words onely, and in this forme which God hath spoken them in, for if thou so doe, who will not count thee rather a mad man then Gods Prophet? but at large, that there is one al-seeing, most iust, almightie, and euerliuing
and no moe? and so all their gods are no gods but Idols: and that they aboue all other haue giuen his glorie to stockes and stones, worshipping them for Gods, alluring and enforcing others likewise to dishonour him: that they haue abused his blessings most vnthankefully, most vngodly to all excesse, and are most proud contemners of their betters, and most notorious drun∣kards, gluttōs, fornicators, adulterers, theeues, oppressors, witches, murtherers, and the like, and therefore haue so prouoked him that is most mercifull and patient, that he will without all pitie destroy man, woman, young and old, high and low amongest them, yea their very citie also, and all that is therein, whereby they haue bene so wicked, and that within fortie dayes. When I say, thou being a Iew, shalt tell them this, thus in despight reuile (for so they will take it) thus vtterly condemne them and their gods; will not the best of them mocke and despise thee? will not the rest gnash their teeth at thee, be ready to teare thee in peeces, put thee to exquisite torments, condemne thee to some horrible death, or continue thee in intollerable paines, in a most bitter life? No que∣stion. Thinke not therfore that thy good God, thy most kind and tender father will recompēce thy faithfulnesse, with sending thee so farre to sustaine such miserie. It were impietie to thinke he wil∣led it, it is blasphemy, treble blasphemy to thinke he cōmaunds it: for it is to cōdēne him of vnkindnesse, for thou hast shewed feruēt loue: of vntruth, for he hath promised it should go well with the iust: of iniustice, for godlines should haue the reward due only to wickednesse. Yea he should seeme contrary to himselfe, to charge thee cruelly to murder thy self, which hath commanded all to kill none, if hee should will thee to prouoke that bloudy Citie so. But the very thing it self also argueth, God meant nothing lesse thē to cōmit thee to such dāger, or that thou shouldest do to the proud Niniuites such a message. For to what end shouldest thou so crie against that Citie? to make them flie, & so to free them from de∣struction? How shouldest thou then not be found a false Pro∣phet and God a lyer? What then? To bring them to repentance & then to spare them? How should not God so againe be found vntrue, & thou his lying messenger? What then? To cōuert them, & so to destroy them? What iustice were that? & how cōtrarie to his promise to Salomon? Sam. 7. 14. Therefore it is manifest God
meant not thou shouldest goe and crie so against Niniuie: but signified that thou wert as good, for any good may be done here, to exclaime so like a franticke man against Niniuie, as to preach in Samaria any longer now. Men here are so hardned that they contemne all, partly are so cloyed that they loath all, the best part litle esteeme all that is preached: of none is the word accounted precious, of none reuerently heard: and therfore thou shouldest for a time, to make the word precious, & to shar∣pen mens affections towardes it, giue ouer preaching here, and where thou wilt refresh thy selfe a while. Now here thou mayest not be idle: at Tarshish thou mayst be quiet: thou mayst at Tar∣shish that famous Citie, among the straungers of many coun∣treys heare many straunge things, much delight thy selfe in the varietie of their manners, in the abundance of all things with great pleasure liue. No time so fit as this to see the world. At Iapho thou canst not want shipping thither. Seeme not to make small account of this kindnesse of God, defraud not thy selfe of thy graunted good. Thus Sathan is euer crossing, tempting entising vs when we Exod. 3. 11. and 4. 10. 13. Ierem. 1. 6. Ezek. 3. 14. 15. Nehe. 2. 18. 4. 2. 8. 5. 5. 65. 6. 7. 10. Luke. 22. 31. 32. Mat. 4. 1. Luke. 4. 2. 4 13. are or should be addressing our selues to do the will of our God. So was Moses, Ieremie, Ezechiell, Nehemiah, Christ himselfe tempted, being about most notable workes. What said our Saui∣our to Peter? Sathan hath desired to sift you and winnow you as wheate. Who are these whose perill Sathan so earnestly desireth? euen Peters, and Iames, and Iohns. No maruell, for Christ himselfe though acknowledged the sonne of God, was most fiercely as∣saulted of the tempter fortie dayes, and then indeede was left, but it was onely for a season. Luke. 4. 13. Therefore neuer dreame of a truce with Sathan whosoeuer thou be, whatsoeuer thou art a∣bout to do. For the enemie, the enuious foe, the tempter, the false accuser goeth about continually seeking whom he may deuour. 1. Pet. 5. 8. Now his manner of tempting is, first and most vsually with flattering, but yet verie often with most terrible threatning. For whatsoeuer we do or feele, commeth from one of these three spirites, the spirite of Sathan, the spirite of God, or our spirit. Now our own spirit of it self is alwayes occupied about worldly things, seeking delights in pleasures, not disquiet by threates. The spirite of God is gentle, louing, and meeke, not forcing, nor threatning.
Therefore Christ saith, If any will follow me, let him deny himself, Luke. 9. 23. and take vp his crosse daily, &c. And marke his spirit, he saith not, you shall follow, but you shall denie your selues, and take vp your crosse, but if any will follow me, let him deny himselfe and take vp his crosse: (let him.) The same is to be seene in the Can∣ticles, where he saith; Open vnto me my sister, my loue, my doue, Cant. 5. 2. my vndefiled. For mine head is full of dew, and my locks with the drops of the night. For when she opened not vnto him, ma∣king 3 most vnmeete excuses, though he had most louingly prayed, and liuely vrged her to open, and she most vnkindly, most vn∣worthily had denied, yet hee went his way mildly, without anie 2. 4. 6. threats. But the spirit of Sathan takes another course. For when by lying, and deceipt he cannot allure to sinne, hee threatens most fearfully with sin, griefe or losse of goods, solitarinesse, and want of pleasure, and sometime by his ministers, limmes of his owne like∣nesse, he threatneth death and earthly torments, whatsoeuer they may inflict vpon any. Christ saith, If you will follow me. If you wil: but he saith, I wil make ye follow me, & do as I bid you, you shal haue fire & fagot, scalding lead, and burning pitch, if you will not follow me, you shal, whether you will or no: we wil make you to do as we command, saith his eldest son Antichrist, vsurping au∣thority ouer nations, & inflicting torments on the saints. His order of tempting is first to make vs doubt of the word of God: whether such & such doctrine be true, such and such an action bee com∣manded, such & such a promise, such & such a threatning be cer∣tain. Then secondly he fals to flat denying of it, this doctrine, these promises, these threatnings are false: this thing is not comman∣ded, this action is not condemned. And then comes hee in with his contradiction, contrarie assertions, and countermands. For there is no commandement of God, but the Diuell commaunds the contrarie, and he is euer gaine-saying that which God saith. For our God saith vnto Adam, if you eate of the forbidden fruit, you shall surely die: the diuell came, and he told them, first it is Gen. 2. 17. not certaine you shall die, then you shall not die, then thirdly you shall be as Gods knowing good from euill. God saith, submit Gen. 3. 4. 5. 1. Pet. 5. 5. your selues one to another in brotherly loue: the Diuell saith, first, you neede not to abase your selues so much, secondly you should not yeeld to others, then thirdly, aduance your selues, and
contemne others. God saith, Loue thy neighbour as thy selfe: the diuell saith, first loue litle and outwardly, then loue none but Mat. 22. 39 thy selfe, then thirdly, hate thine enemies, enuie thy betters, dis∣daine thine equals, despise thine inferiours. God saith, labour for the foode which perisheth not: the diuell saith, first care not much Iohn. 6. 27. for it, then secondly contemne it, then thirdlie stir not an inch for it. God saith, Forsake the world, the Diuell saith, first neglect not Rom. 12. 2. 1. Ioh. 2. 18. the world, then loue the world, then thirdlie giue ouer your selues to the world, aboue all follow the world with all the lustes thereof. Now the meanes wherby the diuel tempts, are argumēts fetcht, some from the wit and reason of man, or from the customs of the world: some from the holy Scriptures, either corrupted, or wrong applied. Now in consideration of the persons, then in regard of the thing it selfe, &c. In respect of the persons to whome hee shold preach, and himselfe, Ionah is here tempted, and so thus rea∣soneth with himselfe: I haue long preached vnto the Iewes, which are the chosen people of God, and seeing they will not heare me, it is in vaine to preach vnto these Gentiles, which neuer heard of God or godlinesse, and therefore will esteeme my wordes the lesse. Thus Ionah is loth to loose his labour, and puts it in a doubt where he needes not, because he considered not the great power of God in mens hearts. The Niniuites are heathen people, and therefore (saith Ionah) why should I venture my selfe a∣mongst them? for seeing mine owne countrey men kicke against my words, and cannot abide to heare the word which commeth from the Lord to reproue sin, then how much more shall I be de∣spised by these, and persecuted to death? Thus flesh and bloud standeth staggering when it should do any good, misdoubting troubles, iealous of his owne ease: but when it goeth about to do any mischiefe, it neuer considereth the danger, it weigheth not the following wo: yet doing good, it is vncertaine whether al will not according or euen aboue our hope succeed: it is more likely we shalbe kept safe: but doing euill, mischiefe most certainely is pro∣cured, not danger only, but losse of the best things cōmonly, peace of cōscience or spirituall graces, of some blessings, alway or at least not receipt of those things which much wold reioyce vs. For surely
this was a sore temptation, to bid a man (being in reasonable good estate touching his body and life) that he should go & preach vn∣to a sauage heathen people that neuer heard of preaching, & that this doctrine; That there is but one only true God, to thē who wil Deut. 6. 4. serue a thousand, and cannot abide the contrarie to be spoken. If a preacher were commanded to go and preach at Rome gates, against Anti christes iurisdiction and the idolatry that is so inordinately vsed in that Sinagogue of vncleannesse, seeing that is a matter, for which they torment & kill al that preach it sincerely: I feare it wold hardly come to passe at all, that this preacher wold go from a reasonable quiet estate touching his body, to venter his life among such cruel tirants: I feare he would rather content him∣selfe with his present ease, then commit himselfe to so likelie mi∣serie. If I go and preach vnto these infidels, saying, yet fortie daies, and Niniuie shall be destroyed, then (saith Ionah) it may be, they will repent, and God will haue mercy vpon them, so I shall bee counted a false Prophet for my labour. And thus wee regarde our credite more then the glorie of God, in the obedience of his will: and rather then we would receiue any reproch by our do∣ings (in the sight of the world,) we rather choose to enter into no great action touching the glorie of God, and the good of the Church. In respect of the Israelites and himselfe: If I leaue mine own people, & preach vnto the Gentils (saith Ionah) I shal bring shame vpon Israell before all people, because a Prophet is gone from them for their obstinacie, chusing rather to preach vnto vn∣circumcised Gentils then vnto them, as if there were more hope of the Gentils then of them. So Ionah more feareth the childrens disgrace then the fathers dishonour, and their dispight then his displeasure. Sathan is too well acquainted with mans nature, & so more certainely knowes, then we wisely consider, that all A∣dams sonnes are from labour, easily brought to loiter, more wil∣lingly from feare and paine, to securitie and pleasure: there∣fore seldome or neuer doth he in tempting omit this entisement, it will be for thy ease, for thy delight, for thy securitie. There∣fore he saith to Ionah, not onlie the waie to Niniuie is long and dangerous, thy person and message odious, therefore thy tra∣uell must needes bee tedious, thy troubles greeuous, &c. but also
thy passage to Tarshish is easie, thy securitie there sure, thy plea∣sures many, thy delight great. Yea with this he assaulted Christ himselfe, saying, when he had shewed him all the kingdomes of the world and the glorie of them; All these will I giue thee, &c. And doth he not also euermore perswade vs, this good, this gain, this glorie, this pleasure, or this preferment shalt thou get, if thou thus and thus deale: if you will leaue the societie, the exercises, the profession, and the company of the children of God, and serue, me, and worship me: preferring your couetousnesse, your pride, your lust, before the seruice of God, not being scrupulous to sweare for your gaine sometime, nor to lie for your pleasure, nor to cosin for riches: then you shall not onely be free from the re∣proches wherewith professors are ouerwhelmed, and the con∣tempt wherein they are had, and the manie heauy sighes which they are forced to fetch, but you shall also grow rich soone, and so be well thought of, and had in estimation, and by your wealth liue in ease with all pleasure, procuring euery thing at your hearts desire. Thus Ionah which way soeuer he looke, is tempted on euerie side: tempted to sinne, but not constrained: vrged, but not compelled: for the Diuell hath power to entise to sinne mightily, but not to enforce violently. Loe then comfortes a∣gainst this crosse. Our enemies power is in our fathers handes: and our Sauiour praieth for vs being most glorious in heauen, as 1. Cor. 10. 1. Rom. 8. 34. Luke. 22. 32 he on earth in humility praied for his Apostles, that our faith faile vs not. Behold then also encouragements to fight against his as∣saults; yet see a greater, God hath giuen vs this priuiledge: this promise haue we: resist the diuell and he shall flie from you, Iam. 4. 7. God hath giuen no promise to the Diuell, that if he perswad, he shall preuaile, if he vrge, we shall yeelde: what a shame then is it to vs, that Sathan is bolder in tempting, then we are in resisting? is he not? O that we could truly say, we are as wise, as watchfull, as thoughtfull to withstand Satans assaults, as he is wily, vigilant, and more then diligent to assault. But what doth Ionah, thus as we haue heard, by Satan assaul∣ted? Resists he as manfully as the diuel hath set on him cūningly? Alas no: Ionah is no sooner disswaded to go to Niniuie, then he is perswaded it were great folly: he is assoone resolued as he is enti∣sed to go to Tarshish, thinking it a chiefe point of wisdom to seek
his owne ease, his owne pleasure, his owne sweete delight. One Gen. 1. . said, God spake & it was done. Surely the deuill also but speaketh and it is done: for he is such an orator, that no man can deny him. For who can gainesay him that counselieth as a speciall friend, yea as a most holy Angell? For he would seeme to be not onely care∣full, both to keepe vs from danger, and the feare thereof, and to procure vs all good: but also iealous of Gods honor, fearfull least 2. Kin. 5. 22. 2. Tim. 4. 10 Mar. 26. 48 70. Gen. 14 8 Gen 27. 13. 14. 18. Gen. 16. 43. men should despise the word, and so their owne saluation. There∣fore he made not only Gehezi to take a bribe, Demas to imbrace the world, Iudas to betray his maister, and Cain to kill his bro∣ther: but Rebecca also to perswade Iaacob, and Iaacob to be bold by lying to seeke for the blessing: yea the father of the faithfull to commit folly with Hagar, as here Ionah not to go to Niniuy: least forsooth God shold not be true of his word: as if what to man see∣meth vnlikely, that were with God impossible, and he could not be righteous vnlesse we shew our selues impious. We haue seene some causes why Sathan assaulting vs, hee straight ouercomes vs: would any see more? we haue bene taught his power, mallice, watchfulnesse, and wilinesse: wee haue most fit and sufficient armour ministred vnto vs: we haue a pro∣mise, Ephes. 6. 11. 14. 10. 16. Iam. 5. 7. that resisting him, we shall make him flie from vs. Therefore surely we forget our enemy, or neglect the promise, or take not to vs the whole armor of God, specially we like not that armorbea∣rer humility; Submit your selues to God, and then resist the de∣uill. But moreouer we to our owne certaine perill and paine (so corrupt are we) ioyne with our enemy, more ready to do his will Iam. 5. 7. then Gods word. Hereof no doubt foolish Balaam asked againe and againe, till God seeing him bent contrary to that he had bene commanded, left him vnto himself: & so Balaam went on in sin so Num. 22. 8. 19. 21. long, til the very asse wheron he rode was constrained to reproue him. But wold you howsoeuer Satā tempts, not be turned by him out of the right way? howsoeuer hee fights, not be foild by him? wold you haue him soone to forsake you, speedily to flie from you, that is, would you resist him? for when we begin valiantly to fight, thē forthwith he flies. Cōsider how shameful a thing it is being e∣uery way encouraged to fight, to shew our selues most dastardly cowards: how dishonorable to our captain Christ to yeeld the vi∣ctory to his deadly: enemy how dangerus for our selues: knowing
he is a most cruell tyrant, and most inexorable, that most glorieth, and specially taketh pleasure in putting vs to the most bitter paine that possibly he can, and therefore hauing ouercome vs, will for euer continue vs in most intollerable torments. Yea sayest thou, these things considered, would make vs couragiouslie to encoun∣ter with Satan, and so soone to conquer him, but he comes often as a friend, as an Angell of light: how shall I then descry him, that I may desie him, and make him to flie? How? here indeede is the hardnesse: for he is a notable hypo∣crite, the father of hypocrisie. But thou must follow the counsell of Christ, Reue. 3. 18. Thou must annoint thine eyes with eye salue that thou maist see. Thou must be fulfilled with the knowledge Reue. 3. 18. of Gods will, in all wisedome and spirituall vnderstanding, and Col. 1. 9. moreouer watch and be sober. And lastly consider, first how thy spirit is affected: for our owne spirit (by nature euermore hard) 1. Pet. 5. 8. if it be moued by the spirit of God, is sad, soft and slow: but if it be moued by the spirit of Sathan, is proud, boisterous, and stout; then, whether that which thou art indeed mooued to, be good or euill: if good, that is, agreeable to Gods word, then acknowledge it comes from God, for all good motions are the worke of the spirit of God, howsoeuer they seeme to proceed of our selues. But if it be euill, that is, not agreeable with the word of God, then it is al∣wayes either a lust of our corrupt nature, or a suggestiō of Sathan. Wherefore it is a sure way to say when we are tempted to euill, this motion is of the diuell, for euen our corruption came of his suggestion. For the spirit of man is alwayes tossed betweene these two contrary spirits, the spirit of God procuring our saluation, and the spirit of Sathan seeking our condemnation. So that if a∣ny will get the victorie of Sathan, hee may not bee without the spirituall sword, which is the word of God. Ephes. 6. 17. Yea he must haue the word of God dwell in him plenteouslie. Col. 3. 17. and crie still, open mine eyes O Lord. Psalm. 119. 18. Giue me vnderstanding. 34. and encline mine heart vnto thy testimonies. 36. and beware that he submit himselfe duely, and diligently watch Thus Ionah tempted, hath consented to neglect his charge, and doth he forthwith repent? No, he prepares himselfe to his pur∣posed iourney. But Ionah arose to flie vnto Tarshish. As Ionah
was no sooner tempted to go to Tarshish but he yeelded, so as∣soone as he had yeelded, forthwith he to go. So Ionah made him∣selfe a run-away, and shewed himselfe a disobedient seruant to his God. And in the meane while, Niniuie set on the score, and had no ho with them in working wickednesse: but still filling the cup of all abhominations, ran downe to hell with as much force and speed as they could. So Niniuie is still Niniuie, but Ionah is not like Ionah: for the Prophet is flying, and sin is crying, and so all falles to confusion. But Ionah arose vp to flie vnto Tarshish, &c. Ionah flyeth vnto Tarshish before he would go to Niniuie, and euery one is like the sonne which said he would not, before hee Gen. 15. 25 26. went: and so sinne is borne first, as Esau was borne before Iacob. Therefore if euill may compare with goodnesse in particular acti∣ons, in all mankind corrupt, euill may say, he is the ancienter. But assoone as thou perceiuest any euill cogitation or motion in thy selfe, be thou wrath with it, nip it in the head, put it to death, and then the vncleane spirite that hath long bene strong, and with de∣light dwelt in thee, wil soone be wearie of thy house, and say as the euill spirit said; Here is no dwelling for vs, let vs go to yonder Mat. 8. 31. heard of swine. But Ionah rose vp to flie to Tarshish. Ionah was sent to Niniuie, but he went toward Tarshish. And so it is alwayes with vs, we are euer doing that we should not do. For either we do nothing, or that which wee are not comman∣ded, or else otherwise then we are commanded. Somtime most rebelliouslie we do that which we know the Lord straightly for∣biddeth. And as Ionah tooke Tarshish for Niniuie, so wee take the diuell for an Angell, light for darkenesse, &c. But Ionah rose vp, &c. They that should preach at Niniuie, are flying to Tarshish, and though he be like a drone, yet doth he, euen the non-resident keepe his benefice fasting, feasting himself: but wilt thou keepe it still? go and preach at Niniuie as ye haue bene doubly comman∣ded, or for shame leaue your priuiledge and benefice: but they stand staggering, ashamed to keepe it, and loth to leaue it. For the sweete morsels of Baals Priests are so pleasant vnto them, that they cannot find in their hearts to leaue them, as long as they are able to keep thē. But no maruel that Ionah fled to Tarshish, when
he should go to Niniuie. For this is a stumbling vocation amongst men, yea reiected by the children of this world, which alway kicke against it: so that if you would aske for a painfull vocation, this is it: if for a thanklesse vocation, this is it: if for a contemptible voca∣tion, this is it. For, reprouing we are reproued; blessing, we are cursed; preaching peace, we make warre; proclaming liberty, we are imprisoned; do what we can, we are persecuted; and for our worke worthie of loue, we receiue of the most hatred: of few, yea verie few, not any more then a cold affection. Here of it hath come to passe that Moses and Ieremy called, excused themselues. Exod. 3. 11. 4. 10. 13. Ierem. 1. 6. Ezech. 3. 14. 3. 15. Exod. 5. 22. 23. 1. Kings. 19. 10. and 14. Iere. 20. 7. Ezekiell hauing receiued his charge, went in bitternesse and in∣dignation of his spirit, and seuen daies neglected his charge, as Io∣nah here doth his: and Moses, Eliah, and Ieremie at length com∣plained: and (which to the best men is the greatest griefe) it is as easie almost to wash a Blackmore white, as to conuert a sinner, because Sathan is euer crossing men doing the will of God, but specially hindring the course of right preaching. For the Lord was not so earnest to stop the way of Balaam, least he should commit wickednesse, as the diuell is earnest to stop the way of euery Ionah, least he fulfill righteousnesse, that is, crie against Niniuie, longing, and duly, that is, wisely, and earnestly la∣bouring to conuert Niniuie. But Ionah rose vp to flie vnto Tarshish from the presence of the Lord, &c. The righteous fall, and now no lesse then a Prophet, yea such a Prophet as was the figure of Christ. But who wold haue thought that such a Prophet should flie from the Lord, yea and that when he should do him most seruice? who counteth that no wicked∣nesse now, that he euer thought and taught was rebellion, while he was among the wicked? A fearefull example, therefore let him that thinks he standeth, take heede least he fall, for the way is slipperie wherein we are to walke. When thou remembrest the fall of the Prophet, then consider that thou art much weaker then a Prophet, and therefore the easier to bee encountred and ouerthrown, & the likelier to haue a more greuous fal, except the Lord do mightily vphold thee, seeing such a one cannot stād in the sight of his so mortall enemy, but by him receiueth so greeuous a fall.
Secondly, if thou see Ionah flie, Moses murmure, Dauid fall to adultery, Salomon to idolatry, and Peter to forsweare his maister, then maist thou learne not to trust to thine owne strength, for it is weaknesse, not to thine owne wisedome, for it is sinfull, but seeke Iam. 5. 5. Mar. 12. 20 helpe, and craue strength at the hands of almighty God, who giu∣eth to euery one that asketh indifferently, and hitteth no man in the teeth, which doth not bruse the broken reede, nor quench the smoking flax, but doth rather increase our zeale then diminish it. Thirdly, iudge wisely of the fall of Ionah, not rashly condem∣ning him for his fault, for although Dauid ioyned murther with adulterie, yet hee repented, and is the deare childe of God. And he found a ship going to Tarshish. Ionah was no sooner come to Iapho, but he goes to the hauen, or meets with mariners, and presently vnderstands of a ship not going to Niniuie but to Tarshish. As soone as he set forward to flie from God, Sathan straight wayes prepared a ship, so that temptation and occasion of sinne do alwaies go together. Shall Iudas lacke money, or Ionah stay for a ship? no (saith Sathan) by the mouth of his ministers, here Iudas take thee money and betray thy maister; and Ionah, here is a ship for thee; go hast thee away and flie from the presence of the Lord. For the diuell is al∣waies a very seruiceable, and pleasant deuill to such as flie from God: hee can finde occasion at all times, and meanes, and instrumentes fit for that purpose. If thou wilt flie from God, the Deuill will lende you both spures, and a horse, yea a post∣horse, that will carrie you swiftly, and lustily away vnto all vanitie and vngodly lusts. Therefore if any will aske what the deuils oc∣cupation is, it is to tempt, to entise by all meanes, to prouoke to sin, and then to prouide vs of the meanes to practise our purpose to commit, and as Iames speaketh, to bring forth sin. And he payed the fare thereof. This money was cast into the sea, it did him as little good, as if he had vtterly lost it, it had bene good for him if he had lost it, for it did him much harme. There are many which will spend & wast they care not how much vpon cardes and dice, and vnlawfull games, this money is also cast into the sea, for it doth them much more harme then they know of, it doth them no good, it were good for them they had not a penny to leese. And so men care
not what they pay for vanities and braueries, the most part of which is vnprofitable and rather hurtfull then necessary for them, but only for the vaine vse of the present time, and for some vaine respect: this also is cast into the sea, and better should they bee, if they had it not to lauish, and to their owne and many others hurt so to garnish themselues. Men care not what they pay for their vanities, so it doth please their minde for the present, without consideration of the end and vse thereof, but they will giue little or nothing to do good withall: so that Lazarus can get nothing, and Dauid can get no meate. Shall I take my bread & my wine, and the flesh which I haue prouided for my shearers, and giue Luke. 16. 21. 1. Sam. 23. 10. 11. them vnto one, whom I know not, saith churlish Naball? We can be content to giue any thing, or do anything to win the world thereby, but we will giue nothing, nor do nothing, therby to win the kingdome of God. We haue heard Ionah confessing that hee receiued a charge to go to Niniuie, but he arose, and fled toward Tarshish, and went downe to Iapho, and found a ship going to Tarshish, and paid the fare thereof, and went downe into it: hereafter we shall heare, that being entred the ship, hee went to sleepe, and slept soundly, and being wakened, he confessed not his sinne, but suffered the Ma∣riners to deuise to finde out for whose cause they were so trou∣bled, & at length also the lots to be cast, neuer confessing it til he was enforced to it, what needed he to reherse all this? had it not bene inough to haue said, that he left his businesse vndone, he was a sinner? No, for God would haue men to know the stubborn∣nesse and disobedience of Ionah, in that this thing was not done vpon the sudden, but vpon deliberation, and in no short time, but in some continuance, while he went from Samaria to Iapho: and thence was departed, and had some while sayled. In which space, he had leasure inough to haue repented, but did not. Ionah con∣fessed his sinne, that hee should not once haue listned to Sathans assaults or reasons of the flesh, and when he had listned, he should not haue liked them, and when he had liked them, he should not haue consented to obey them, and when hee had consented, hee should not haue put them in practise: he should not haue fled to∣ward Iapho, and when hee was come to Iapho, hee should not haue gone to the hauen, nd when he came to the hauen, he shold
not haue paid the fare, and when he had paid the fare, he shold not haue entred the ship; and when he was entred the ship, he should not haue hoysed vp the sailes, and sayled, and gone to sleepe. But this he did, teaching that sin runs on wheeles, as it were downe a hill, in all post hast, & neuer stayes till it arriue euen in hell. For Io∣nah thought, because he came safe to Iapho, therefore he may go to the hauen, and because he came well to the hauen, therefore he may pay the fare, and because he paid the fare in peace, therfore he may take shipping & because he entred the ship in safety, therfore he may hoise vp the sailes to go; & because he hoised vp the sailes without danger, therefore he may go securely to sleepe, and safely to saile to Tarshish. So sins follow one another like linkes of a chaine, til the tempest of destruction breake it in sunder. So saith the forborne sinner, I haue sworne, & God did not punish me, therefore I will steale: I haue stolen, & God did not punish me, therfore I will kill: I haue killed, and God did not punish me, then why may I not do what I list? I may do this as well as I haue done other things heretofore. But if Ionah had considered with himselfe that God is the Lord, who is al-seeing & almighty, from whom nothing can be concea∣led, he would neuer haue taken his iourney to Iapho, or when he came to Iapho, he would not haue paied the fare, or when he had payd the fare, he would not haue entred the ship, or when he was gone into the ship, he would not haue hoist the sailes, but rather would haue leapt out from that ship that should carry him from his God, carying him from his duty: but he forgets himself, think∣ing Heb. 4. 13. the creatures can hide him from the Creator, which is an absurd thing to thinke, seeing nothing cā be hid from him. Neither wold any, I say, adde drūkennesse to thirst, or heape sin vpon sin, or suffer an euil thought to take place in them, if they cōsidered that the iust Iehouah beheld them in all their very thoughts. All those that pitie Ionah, let them pitie themselues, for if we consider our owne e∣state, we haue as many & as foule sins in vs, as there were in Ionah, yea in Niniuie. Ionah confessed his sin, that we might confesse. He confesseth it freely, he confesseth it fully, that he knew his maisters will, but not onely did it not, but also tooke another course quite contrary to that which was commanded; and that not in purpose onely, but in deede also, not for an houre, but a long time, not in
strugling with his weakenesse, but in a profound vngodly careles∣nesse, or in striuing to ouer-maister his conscience, accusing him for his wickednesse. And wherefore hath he written it, but to ad∣monish vs narrowly to looke to our selues, and manfully to fight, that we may stand where he fell and when we haue fallen, as free∣ly and fully to confesse it to God alwayes, and to man also, when wisedome commandes? THE FIRST SERMON OF THE PVNISHMENT OF IONAH. Ionah. 1. 4. 5. 6. 4 But the Lord sent out a great wind into the sea, and there was a mightie tempest in the sea, so that the ship was like to bee broken. 5 Then the mariners were afraid, and cryed euery man vnto his God, and cast the wares that were in the ship into the sea, to lighten it of them: but Ionah was gone dovvne into the sides of the ship, and layd dovvne, and vvas fast asleepe. 6 So the shipmaister came to him, and said vnto him, vvhat mea∣nest thou, ô sleeper? Arise, and call vpon thy God, if so be that God vvill thinke vpon vs, that vve perish not. THE sinne is past, but punishment is to come. For after disobedience followeth wrath, the heauie companiō of wickednesse. For although she loue not sin, yet she will be alwaies where wicked∣nesse is, yea also full of strength like a Lion, which will not be tamed. He that made the winds, commanded them, and they obay his voice, the windes and the waters obay him, but man will not obay him. He sayth not that a winde arose, but saith the Lord sent a great winde. Therefore we see the cause of this tempest, and so
of Ionahs punishmēt. The iust iudge of the whole world, may not suffer sin vnpunished, therfore he sends the Lord sēt out a mighty wind. Thē it was not by chāce, nor yet by witchcraft: for the mari∣ners (notwithstāding they were infidels) were not so grosse as toa∣scribe it to any such cause, but rather thought it to be sēt frō some reuenging power, being prouoked to indignation by some parti∣cular person among them, that had committed some hainous fact: else why did they cast lots to know him and finde him out that had sinned, and whose sins did procure this tempest to bee sent? Though this winde had almost drowned Ionah, yet hee said, the Psal. 107. 25. to. 31. Lord sent it, so the Lord sendeth winde to bring ships to land in safety, and the same Lord sendeth wind to drowne, and breake, and sincke other ships. Therefore Iob said when he was bereft of Iob. 1. 21. all his substance at once, and left as poore as might bee, that the Lord had taken them from him, who had first giuen all to him, adding also thanksgiuing euen for the persecuting hand of God, which did so molest him. If some had so much losse by tempest as Iob, and such danger as Ionah, they would surely say with Iob: Blessed be the name of the Lord for it: But moe (it is to be feared) Iob. 2. 9. would say with Iobs wife, Curse God and die. And there vvas a great tempest in the sea. First God spake gently to him, Arise Ionah, go to Niniuie: then he would not goe, but seeing words would not serue, the Lord would take another way, and trie whether that could make him obedient to his voice. So the Lord caused a mightie tempest to arise in the sea, like the messengers that were sent to cōpell folkes to come to the banquet, that seeing the commaundement could not, the tempest might beare rule. For vnlesse it be an imperious crosse, we will not yeeld: so head strong is sin. Therfore it is said, that God sent out a great wind, so that there was a mighty tempest, that sin might haue the foile, and God the victorie. He that sailes to Tarshish, or whither he is forbidden to goe, would haue as good wind as he that sailes to Niniuie, or whither he is commanded to go. But he that doth one thing for another, shall receaue one thing for another, as Achab did, who hoped ac∣cording to the saying of 400. false Prophets, to go vp and prosper, but he went vp and perished. As surely as Ionah thought to ariue
at Tarshish, so surely the Spaniards thought to ariue in England. But as Ionahs companie wondered at this tempest, so at these Spaniards destruction, their fellows at home wondered, yea were astonied, how their inuincible power could be destroyed. But God is strong inough for them that kicke against him, and disdaineth to be crossed of dust and Ashes. And there vvas a great tempest in the sea. The ship went on roundly for a time, the Prophet sleeping, the Mariners sporting, their sailes flaunting, the waters calming, the windes guiding, so merily sin goes on before the tempest comes. The wind blowes not yet, therefore go on yet a litle, and yet a litle more, but suddenly the tempest rushes vpon them before they be∣ware of it, and tumbles them vp and downe, and suddenly all is like to be vndone. He came to the hauen, and paid the fare, and entred the ship, and hoist vp sailes, and went on forward, and all to flie from God, but now it appeares hee fled not from him but to him. Therefore Dauid saith, if I take the morning wings and slie aloft, loe thou art there, If I go into the nethermost depth, thy hand will find me out: therefore whither shall I flie from thee? So that when we thinke that we flie from God, in running out of one place into another, we do but run from one hand to the o∣ther; for there is no place where Gods hand is not, and whither soeuer a rebellious sinner doth run, the hand of God will meete with him to crosse him, and hinder his hoped for good successe, although he securely prophecieth neuer so much good vnto him∣selfe in his iourney. What had he offended the winds, or the wa∣ters that they bare him such enmity? The windes and the waters, and all Gods creatures are to take Gods part against Ionah, or a∣ny rebellious sinner: for though God in the beginning gaue power to man ouer all his creatures to rule them, yet when man sinneth, God giueth power and strength to his creatures to rule and bridle man. Therefore he that euen now was Lord ouer the waters, now the waters are Lord ouer him. But if Ionah had thought that God would haue brought things thus to passe, he durst not haue bin so bold in this enterprise. Ther∣fore wee may see that sinne hath no eyes while it is on going. Tush (saith the foole) it is faire weather yet, while he goeth to the stockes.
So that the ship was like to be broken. We haue heard of the causes and greatnesse of this tempest, the effects follow, wherby the greatnesse of it is the better exprest. First in the ship, then in the mariners. The ship was like to be broken. The ship was faire and goodly, so strong that it might haue en∣countred with instruments of war, and so sure made, that it might haue endured great tempests, and made many voyages. Yet now with one tempest, and at one voyage, it was so deformed, so weakened, in such a taking, that it was like to be shiuered in peeces: & all because Ionah was in it. Such strife is alwayes betwixt Gods Prou. 7. 22 wrath, and mans disobedience. When Gods word will not turne vs, Gods winds, and other instruments of his wrath must threaten to ouerturne vs. Then the Mariners were afraid, and cried euerie man to his God, and cast the wares out that were in the ship, to lighten it thereof. The effects of this tempest in the Mariners were two. First they were afraid, then vsed meanes to appcase the tempest, and saue themselues. Then the Mariners were afraid. Mariners liuing in the sea, almost as fishes, hauing the waters as their necessariest element, are commonly men voide of feare, venterous, and contemners of danger. Yet now seeing the tem∣pest so vehement on a sudden, that their goodly and tall ship was tost almost as a cock-bote, and crackt so, that it was like to bee torne all to peeces, and thereby were fully perswaded it was no common or ordinarie storme, but a reuenging tempest, for some extraordinarie cause, sent out vpon them by some great power prouoked: now they are afraide, they tremble for feare, like women which shrike at euery stirre in the whirrie, and like little children when they are frighted, least their ship breake, or leake, and so sincke, and they loose their goods, their ship, their liues and all. Now these nought fearing fellowes, these high stomacked men, which defied daunger, are brought downe by danger, feare and quake like a young souldier which starteth at the sound of a gunne.
And cried euerie man vnto his God, and cast forth their wares into the sea, &c. The meanes which the mariners vse to saue themselues are di∣uerse. First they crie to their gods, then when that appeased not the tempest, they cast out their wares, They prayed. This is then a manifest signe, that the heathen acknowledge there is a diuine power, seeing and gouerning the whole world: for they wold not haue prayed at all, but that they were conuinced, there was a God, who beheld the affaires of men, and could in extreamest daunger deliuer whom he would. Nature conuinced them, the workes of God made them to acknowledge it. For in man though the lampes be wasted since Adam consulted with the Diuell to be a God: yet there is some little light left, which dwelleth in darke∣nesse like a sparke hid in the ashes: whereby the stately and most glorious frame of the world, withall the wonderfull varietie of the singular effects of all the excellent creatures therein conside∣red, man cannot but acknowledge there is a God. Yea, his mighty power the blinded Gentiles saw so expresly in all the creatures, that they imagined it to be impossible for one God to worke thē all: therefore they thought that there were diuerse gods as there were diuerse seasons, diuerse nations, diuerse trades, diuerse lan∣guages, diuerse and sundrie kindes of all things: and so diuerse na∣tions worshipped diuers gods. When the wicked see that all their inuentions will not bring their enterprises to passe according to their mind, but they are in extremitie and like to be cast away for want of succor, then they flie vnto God, being driuen by compul∣sion as a beare vnto a stake, and they crouch and kneele and make great shewes outwardly, of humiliation and pietie, all in hope of helpe from God, and as it were thinking to deceiue him by their hypocrisie. Euery one vnto his God. This sheweth, that they were of diuerse nations, for among the Gentiles euery nation had a seuerall God to worship. Chamos was the God of the Moabites, and Beelzebub the God of the Ekronits, Dagon the God of the Philistines, and the Ephesians worshipped Diana. In our necessitie we flie euerie one vnto his 1. Sam. 5. 5. Act. 19. 35. God: that is, in the time of necessitie euery one doth flie for helpe and ease vnto that which most feedeth his owne humor, or best
pleaseth him, that wherein he reposeth most confidence, perswa∣ding themselues of sufficient reliefe from that: some run to their coffers, thinking that there it is that is able to procure ease from any troubles: other some run to their delights and wanton sports, supposing that there is no trouble so great, but they will cause them to forget it: some to their glorious attires and costly iewels, imagining they will now as well reioyce their hearts, remedying their griefe, as at other times they haue delighted others eyes, pleasing their sight: some to their daintie meates, and some to their soft beds, and easie standings, hoping by those to feele re∣liefe. In sickenesse we crie, come Phisicke helpe me: in heauinesse we call, come Musicke cheare me: in warre, we sound, come soul∣diers succour me: in quarrels we say, come law defend me. Euer∣more leauing the Creator, which is all goodnesse, and powerfull in himself, running to the creatures, which haue no goodnesse nor power, saue that they receiue from him: neither by their good∣nesse, can do vs good, but by his blessing. And cried euery man vnto his God. They did well in that they prayed, but they prayed not well, for they prayed euerie man vnto his God, that is, vnto fained gods, gods in name, but not in nature, and gods they were that could not helpe so much as themselues. Euery one to his God. Euerie of these mariners did now in their extremitie call vpon his God, euerie one vpon that God which he thought most high∣lie of, & whom he had in his prosperitie reposed most confidence in. Now while none could helpe but one, they cried to manie, and by this meanes while they sought to lay the tempest, they stirred it more: for their prayers being Idolatrous, were so wicked, that the Lord had vtterlie destroyed them, if his mercie had not bene Psal. 144. 15. wonderfull ouer all his workes. They prayed much like the Pa∣pistes, which in extremitie crie out, some to one Saint, some to an other, some to Saints of this place, others to Saints of that place, thinking as these mariners did, if one will not helpe another will. They cryed, &c. They prayed, and their prayers did beat the skie, though they could not lay the tempest. They were not as manie of vs be when we pray vnto God, without a sence of their daunger, or without
great desire to obtaine their requestes. What an hypocrisie is this that is common among vs, to haue vehement speeches, and loud cries, and long prayers without liuelie affection within. They cryed. Here is a distinction of crying to be obserued: The righte∣ous crie and as well when they are in prosperitie, as when they be in calamitie, though manie nothing so feruentlic: but the vn∣godlie then onely, when the hand of God is vpon them, and then also like beares without their pray, alwayes much doubting, sometimes dispayring of helpe although they crie for it. And therefore blessed is hee that hath the Lord for his God: and let them know that crie without faith, without confidence in God, Iam. 2. 7. they doe but crie in vaine. Let not the wauering minded man thinke to receiue any good of the Lord. And cast the wares that were in the ship into the sea. Here is the second meanes which they vsed to helpe thēselues. Now the mariners are content to cast their wares into the sea, in hope of some furtherance to saue their liues thereby. For though many will vēter their liues for riches, yet they rather part with all their riches, thē with their liues. But they cast thē out to appease the tempest, or lighten their ship, but it was sinne that procured daunger: and being cast away, would haue saued all. Which be∣ing retained the tempestabated not, the ship is nothing the safer though it be lighter. If I regard wickednesse in my heart, saith Psal. 66. 18 1. Cor. 13. 3 Cast away sinne, or thou castest a∣way all. Dauid, the Lord will not heare me. And Paul saith, though I cast my life into the fire, if I haue no charitie, if I retaine malice in my heart, it profiteth me nothing, if I cast not away sinne, I cast away all. Some will giue the poore & yet vse extortion & vsurie to get money by: but God saith to such, that if they regard wickednesse in their hearts it profiteth nothing, though they part with all that they haue, & bestow it vpon neuer so good actions, they do but as the mariners did, cast all away their desire nothing satisfied. For though they thinke thēselues beneficiall to the poore thereby, & hope for a reward therfore, yet God will accept of thē but as hy∣pocrites, he will none of their oblations, hee abhorreth their verie prayers. Prou. 15. 8. vntill they haue hūbled themselues & refor∣med their owne hearts before him from such vncleannesse. They cast out the wares into the sea.
They would faine haue laid the tempest, that thus readilie leese the wares, and cast out their verie tackling into the sea, but the sea will not be satisfied the waters must wash the sinner, or there is no safetie, nay the daunger is greater, the sea continuallie more and more troublesome, vexing them. But Ionah was no Ionah. 1. 11 15 sooner cast into the sea but all was quiet, the windes are calme, and sea ceasseth from her raging: ô that iustice were executed, & he that troubled the ship were in the sea. He that troubleth, not he that against all reason is thought to trouble. Then should all be safe, yea peraduenture Ionah to. And they cast the wares that were in the ship into the sea. Obserue here that oftētimes many are punished for one mans Ios. 7. 5. 12 Many pu∣nished for ones sin, therefore suffer sin in none. Gen. 4. 9 sin, as all the host of Israell were punished for the sin of Achan, & here al the mariners & owners of ship or wares for Ionahs sin, &c. To the end that men may learne thereby to admonish one ano∣ther when they see them do amisse, with loue: & not to say with Cain, am I the keeper of my brother? for he that is not carefull to keepe his brother frō sin, is not carefull to keepe himself either frō sin or frō sorrow: therefore let vs take heed that a wicked one be not foūd amōgst vs vnadmonished. I would there were not ma∣ny worse then Ionah amōgst vs. Will you know what I thinke of you? I thinke you are worse then Infidels, Turkes or Pagās that in this wonderfull yeare of wōderfull mercies, are not thankfull, be∣leeue not in God, trust not in him, glorifie not his name: but like Pharaos sorcerers, who seeing the great workes of God which Exod. 8. 19. Moses wrought passing their skill, confessed saying, Surely this is the finger of God: for you cōfesse that it is the great worke of God (as must needs,) but where are the fruits it hath brought forth in you? The Captaine saith, I haue done nothing, the souldier saith, I stirred not, but the Lord sent out a mightie tēpest vpō them, & after that they escaped our hāds, the Lord stretched out his migh∣tie arme against thē, & Pharao is drowned in the sea, so that hee neuer attained the land of promise which he gaped for, and made Mans ex∣tremitie Gods o∣portunity. full accoūt to possesse. Further, herein we may note, that extremi∣tie is Gods oportunitie: for whē the wind had almost ouerturned all, & the waters had almost drowned al, & destructiō had almost deuoured all, thē, & not afore, was Gods oportunitie, to set forth his glorie. First they vsed prayer vnto the diuine powers for
assistance: thē they vsed such ordinarie meanes as they knew best in such a time, by casting out their wares to lightē the ship of thē, which order is necessarie to bee vsed of all Christians in their ne∣cessitie: first, to seeke for aide & assistance at the hands of God, & thē to vse all such good meanes to help thēselues, as God shal en∣able them to, trusting that of his goodnesse he will blesse their en∣deuours, In neces∣sitie, first pray, then vse lawfull meanes. or else may they go ouer all the world to seeke helpe & haue none, for there is no other way. God indeede is the last re∣fuge, but he is also the first refuge which is to be sought vnto. For he will haue vs to acknowledge, that mā liueth not by bread on∣ly; & a horse is but a vaine thing to saue a mā, & except the Lord keepe the Citie, the watchman waketh but in vaine, no meanes can help without his blessing. But thē he will not haue vs carelesse & negligent to vse lawfull meanes: for he neuer or verie seldome worketh without meanes, when the meanes may be vsed by vs. Danger then we haue seene made them to feare, but feare astoni∣shed them not, but gathered their wits together, for they vsed meanes with wisedome to saue thēselues. But whē the Lord sen∣deth calamitie vpon manie of the vngodlie, they haue so guiltie a cōsciēce, that whilst they feele the great hād of God, they are euē distracted of their wits, and made as it were sencelesse, that they know not what they do: yea when trouble comes, it makes them like a heedlesse bee, which buzzeth about she knowes not whi∣ther, or like the swallow, which by cōpulsion of the winde, flieth backward and forward till it fall into the sea: or like Cain whose Gene. 4. head was fraught with feares, so that he knew not whither to go, doubting to be slaine of euery one whom he saw. But whatsoeuer befalleth the child of God, he hath euer matter of consolation, & some moderatiō of mind to beare it withall, expecting a ioyful is∣sue of all. Therefore blessed is he that hath the Lord for his God. But Ionah was gone downe into the sides of the shippe and layd downe, and was fast a sleepe. They prayed vnto their Gods, & their Gods were now deafe while they were tossed, & Ionah is gone to sleepe whē he should haue bene better occupied. We come hither to heare the word, and here we fall a sleepe, but it were far better we were away, for we sleepe when we should heare, and so we sleeping sin, & sleep in sin: therfore let them now giue eare that are a sleepe; for we are
come to Ionahs sleeping, not that we should sleepe with him, but by his sleeping to be warned of our securitie, & we shall see him waked, that we may learne to wake with him. Ionahs fast slee∣ping is noted, to declare the occasion of the ship-maisters speech to Ionah: but chiefly to note the dead securitie of Ionah in his sinne, for as much as though the mariners cried for feare, and cast out their goods, nay the very sencelesse ship seemed to feele the anger of God, and to crie it to Ionah by rolling and cracking, yet Ionah was not once moued thereat, but lay still fast a sleepe. So by Ionah his sleeping we see the nature of all the sonnes of Adam, when they listen to the serpent, they are like changelings, they are cast into a dead sleepe. For when they forget God and his word, and bid conscience adiew, they sleepe in sinne, and that to death, like one sicke of the Lethargie. Ionah signifieth a doue, Ionah therefore was now indeede Io∣nah, I meane, like the doue which Noah sent forth of the Arke. For as the doue being gone out of the Arke, could finde no rest for the sole of her foote till she returned into the Arke againe: so when Ionah rose vp from the presence of the Lord, hee could finde no rest for his minde, neither by sea nor land, vntill he retur∣ned againe vnto the Lord. For the cause of Ionahs going down to sleep was, it seemeth to ease his mind, for it was disquieted, he felt it grieuously troubled, the conscience of his sinne tormented it. Therfore now, ô that Ionah could sleep till the tempest were past, but it will not be, for the tempest is sent purposely to waken him. And he was fast asleepe. See how litle Ionah is ashamed of his sinne: all the world smar∣ted for it, and yet he sleepes: as if he should say, neither the winds blowing, nor the waters roaring, nor the ships reeling, nor the Ionah sleepes whiles all else stirre. wares casting, nor the mariners crying, with all the stirre, could moue him, waken him from his sleepe, or raise him from his sin. Now Ionah might say, I was a sleepe, and all might haue peri∣shed for me, if one God had not helped more then all the rest, for Ionah slept, but God waked, & called to the winds & the waters, saying, tosse him, but you shall not drown him: feare him, but you shall not kill him: whip him, & whē you haue whipt him, send him to me, that I may send him to Niniuie. Ionah was fast a sleepe, whē the winds ouer him were blowing, the waters vnder him tossing
the ship about him reeling, the mariners by him crying, the wares in ouerboord casting. In all their stir Ionah felt nothing, but slept, as if there were no stirring. Yet we go far beyōd Ionah in securi∣ty, for the Lord causeth the tempest to blow down houses beside vs, the heauens to thunder ouer vs, the earth quake vnder vs, the water to ouerflow the lād about vs, the fire to cōsume all that we haue before vs, the aire with cold readie to kill vs, and all things in an vprore round about against vs, thereby alwayes crossing vs one way or other, & all to put vs in mind of our dutie, the neglect whereof is the cause of all these troubles which the Lord doth send: vs but we sleep more deadly then Ionah in our negligence, voyde of feeling, because we consider not what we haue done, we looke not backe on our sinne: yet euery crosse should cause vs to examine our selues throughly and leaue no sinne vnviewed, that we might liuely feele our wickednesse, and so duly repent it, and soone finde release of our miseries: therefore if we sleepe still, and will not be wakened, God will deale more roughly with vs then he did with Ionah, for the Lord caused a whale to swal∣low him, & afterward to cast him vp again, but we shall be swal∣lowed of that serpent which neuer restoreth againe. He should haue bin their teacher if he had not bene a sleep, he shuld haue taught thē to pray aright, if he had had any good fee∣ling in him. But all this while we read not that Ionah once cōdē∣ned his thoughts, not so much as once said in himselfe, Ionah take heed what thou doest, thou knowest how God may handle thee vpon the waters; though thou flie, hee can ouertake thee, though thou hide thy selfe, he will finde thee out, though thou giue thy self to sleepe, he will giue thee no rest, & awake thee to thy grea∣ter woe. How should we be strōg, if a Prophet, & such a Prophet as was the figure of Christ, could not withstand this one tempta∣tion, In Ionahs sleep, two things. 1. Most se∣cure in greatest danger. Actes. 12. 21. 22. Dan. 4. 2. 30. but suffered himselfe to be led away so farre, that when he should run, he lay still, and when he should crie, he held his peace, and when he should zealously bestirre himselfe he is fast a sleepe. In Ionah his sleeping, we obserue two things: The first is, that when we thinke our selues most at rest, then we are in greatest daunger: when shipwracke is most likely then Ionah is asleepe, when Herod is vanting, then he is stricken: when Nabuchadnez∣zar is in his greatest pride, then he is turned out: whē Balthazar
is banquetting, the hand writ his condemnation, when the rich∣man Dan. 5. 4. 5. Luc. 12. 19. 20. Iudg. 16. 25. 30. Suddenly destroyed. saith vnto his soule, thou hast enough, then his soule is taken from him, when the Philistines are sporting, then the roofe is fal∣ling: so destruction ouertaketh sinners when they least thinke of it, like a Leopard which is taken while he sleepeth or a bird when she singeth, therefore suspect thy pleasures like a bayt. The second note is the nature of sinne, which is here expressed 2. Sin plea¦sāt whiles it is in do∣ing. 2. Kings. 5. 27. 30. Gehezies briberie. Gen. 9. 21. Noahs wine▪ Dauids a∣dulterie. 2▪ Sam. 11. 4. Pro. 10. 24 33. (while it is a doing) to be not bitter, but sweet, not painfull, but pleasant: like a harlot which sheweth nothing but her brauerie and beautie. Adam swallowed the forbidden fruite with pleasure, Gehezie lyed for gold with gladnesse, Noah dranke his wine with mirth, Dauid committed whoredome with delight: so sinners go on merily, till wrath ouertakes them at vnwares, like the foole, I will sit a litle longer, and fold my hands together a litle, yet a litle & a litle longer, till pouertie come as an armed man, & Gods iust iudgements as the whirle wind suddenly, vnresistably: thē though thou hast gottē gold with Gehezie, or honors with Hamā, or Na∣boths vineyard with Ahab, or all the delights of the world, if thou haue not an assurance of thine owne saluation, if sinne be still pleasant, if it be not bitter in thy belly, though it be sweet in thy mouth, deceiue not thy selfe, beleeue God: thy hope is but doub∣ting, thy strongest confidence but a vaine trust. Then the ship-maister came vnto him and sayd, what meanest thou, ô sleeper? arise and call vpon thy God. Here Ionah is taken napping: sin hath brought him a sleepe, & now the shipmaister wakēs him. The mariners may do him more A prophet wakened by a pagā. good thē the tempest. Whom sin should waken, peril cannot wa∣kē, the winds are not loud enough, nor the waters rough enough, therfore the shipmaister must wakē him, else all shall be endange∣red. If the winds will not waken him, let the waues waken him: if the waters will not waken him, let the mariners waken him, if hee will not be wakened, let him perish in his sleepe, & dye in his sin. Now marke who is asleepe, and who wakens him, Ionah is a sleepe, and the mariners waken him, an Israelite an Infidell: what a thing is this, that he which is the sonne of Abraham, who is wi∣ser So God often shames his ser∣uants. then a thousand mariners, is now wakened and told his dutie by a mariner? this is a shame for Ionah, that he which had taught Princes, should now be taught his dutie by mariners; he that long
hath and should still wake others, needes oftentimes to be wake∣ned by others, and he that should reproue sinners, is often repro∣ued of sinners. And thus the Lord sometimes shameth his ser∣uants, and doth vexe them with a foolish nation, as hee reproued Abraham by Abimelech, and Balaam by an asse. Gen. 20. 9. Num. 22. 28. Now one might aske Ionah, saying, why didst thou write that thou fledst frō God, or that when thou hadst most neede to pray, thou didst sleepe? If thou hadst not thus layed open thine owne shame; thou mightest haue bin reckened as one of the best Pro∣phets, therfore why didst thou so? Ionah did it to this end, that in him we maie see the reward of disobedience, for as Paule saith, whatsoeuer is writtē, is written for our instructiō, & Ionah would neuer haue written it, had it not bin for our sakes. If he haue done thus much for vs, which way shall we requite him? That which he would haue vs do for him is this, to be warned by him, to sup∣presse all euill motiōs, not suffering them to take effect as he did. What meanest thou ô sleeper? arise. As if they should say, ô retchlesse, altogether carelesse, quite senselesse man, art thou dead, that thou wakest not, or benumd, that thou feelest not, or deafe that thou hearest nothing, or carest thou not whether thou liue or dye? haue not the winds nor wa∣ters raging, nor our loud cries so long thundring wakened thee? canst thou sleepe in all this stirre? doe not our troubles, nor la∣bours, nor losses, nor the common daunger moue thee? what meanest thou? why doest thou not come and labour with vs in this daungerous time? is this a time to sleepe in, when we are all in perill of our liues? shall we crie, and thou hold thy peace? shall we labour, and thou rest? shall we cast away all our goods, and thou lye sleeping, caring for nothing? this is no time to sleepe, it is a time to pray vnto thy God for his assistāce, & to vse the meanes that may saue our liues: vp arise, helpe what thou canst. Ionah hearing this, did not snap like some currish dogges, and bite him that wakened him: neither did he, as in publike dangers most are wont, sit still deuising with himselfe, to shift for himselfe negle∣cting others, but he ariseth, he thanked him that waked him. Many of you come to heare the word, and here you fall a sleep when you haue most neede to be waking, but I am glad I haue now gottē a text to wakē you, for now I cānot read my text but Against sleepers.
I must say, what meanest thou ô sleeper? arise: but I pray you, haue not I wakened you, and yet you sleepe again? If you marke not what is said vnto you, you are a sleepe though your eyes be open: but if you were as wise as Ionah, you would not sleep here in the sight of all the people, but would rather get you to sleepe in some corner, for Ionah went vnder the hatches to sleepe, and would not sleepe in the sight of the mariners. If you were as wise as Ionah, you would thanke him that wakened you, as no doubt Ionah did. Salomon saith, that hee which reproueth, shall Pro. 28. 23. haue more fauour of a wise mā thē he which flattereth. The Lord Iesus saith, wo be vnto that seruant, that whē his maister cōmeth Luke. 12. 37. 45. 46. Mar. 14. 37. he shall find sleeping: canst thou not watch one houre, saith he to Peter? can you not wake while I speake to you? You would all be foūd in the Church whē the Lord cōmeth, but you would not be found sleeping in the Church: you are watched (I see you not be∣low) and none of you can steale a nap & not be espied, but when your eyes be most shut & see least, then most eyes be vpō you, & I can aswell stand in the pulpit vnseene, as you can sit and sleepe there & not be espied. I maruell how you cā sleepe hauing so ma∣ny eyes looking on you, so many clamours in your eares, & God himselfe speaking vnto you. Shall I continue iogging till you be wakened? how lōg shall I preach afore I cā cōuert the vsurer, the extortioner, the drunkard, or the blasphemer, seeing I speake thus long, & cannot conuert you frō your sleeping? What would you do if I read some Homelies vnto you, whereas you cannot wake while I preach vnto you, & speake against you? If you should see a traitor sleep on the hurdle, or if you shuld see mē sleep with meat in their mouths, would you not maruell? yet euē so do you, while I denounce the great iudgemēts of God against you, and while I am feeding some of you, you fall a sleepe, & so I preach in vaine. There is a countrey whereof it is said, that it is night with them, when it is day with vs. I thinke that countrey be here, for how many are here that haue lost their eyes and their eares since they came hither? If all of you were, as many of you bee (I meane a sleep) the strāgers which come hither to beare, would thinke that you were all dead, & that I preached your funerall Sermon, ther∣fore for shame leaue your sleeping. What meanest thou ô slee∣per? arise, sleepe no more, and I will waken you no more.
Arise, and call vpon thy God, if so be he will thinke vpon vs, that we perish not. This is another meanes which they vse: Ionah being wakened, to appease the tempest, now that they see they cannot thēselues allay the winds nor asswage the waters, they desire, they exhort Ionah, to trie what he can do by calling vpon his God. Arise, call vpon thy God, if so be he will thinke vpon vs that we perish not. After that the ship-master had wakened Ionah, hee bids him call vpon his God, as if he had said, watch & pray, he speaks like a Saint, yet he is an infidell, he said not, call vpon our gods, but call vpon thy God. The ship-master would not call him his God, but (saith he) call vpon thy God, and it may be he will helpe vs: but if he had said, call vpō our God, when he said, call vpon thy God, & if he had said, he will helpe vs, when he said, if so he will helpe vs, thē he had shewed some sparke of faith. Because he wāted helpe & comfort, he bids him rise, and because he was fearefull, he bids him pray: it may be (saith he) he wil thinke vpō vs, that we perish not, as if he had said, Ionah, we know that thou hast a God as wel as we, & therefore we say, call vpō thy God, for now euery God is to be tried, therefore if euer thou didst pray in thy life, fall to it now. Thus Sathan leads men a blind way with zeale, in hope of some reliefe being in trouble. They called vpō thē for help, which were neither willing to assist thē, nor able to heare them: & when they perceiued by wofull experience, that there was no kinde of succour to be had that way, they flie to God, and then Sathan la∣boureth to vndermine that confidence and expectation of helpe, & to place in stead thereof doubtfulnesse & infidelitie. Thus Sa∣thā will be sure to loose nothing by his bargaine any way. Ionah (say they) call vpon thy God, for if hee cannot helpe vs, we are all vndone and lost, for we haue called vpon all our Gods, we haue laboured hard to mend our state, we haue castaway our goods to lighten the ship, but all in vaine, for we are no whit the bet∣ter, like the woman which had spent all her substaunce about Phisicke, yet all could not helpe her till Christ came. So the Pa∣pistes Luke. 8. 43. while they are well, they pray vnto euerie Saint and An∣gell for succour against the troublesome times, but in extremi∣tie, or at the point of death none of them can helpe, so that then they are faine to flie vnto God or be destitute, as like Idolaters as
one flie is like another: they are like the heathen, which worship Iuno, Venus, Neptune, Pallas, Iupiter, and the rest, some hold on the one, and some on the other. Some say, if Iohn bee with me, I care not for all the pettie gods, because I hold him chiefe: so ano∣ther saith, if Saint Gabriell be with me, I care not for the rest: and some raise great disputations, whether this Saint, or that Saint, this Angell, or that Angell be better, whether our Ladie of Bul∣len, or our Lady of Rome be surest; whether Saint Iames of Cal∣lis, or Saint Iames of Compostella be strongest: and so like beg∣gers which runne from doore to doore, they run from one Saint to another. If one god will not helpe, another will thinke these: as though the gods were contrarie one to another, and where one bids, the other forbids. So some thought that Ʋenus was a friend to the Troians, and Pallas was not their friend, as fooles thinke of witches, one strikes another heales. Call vpon thy God. They bid him call vpon his God before they knew him, but Infidels desire the faithful to pray for them. the faithfull would not worship a false god though they may be helped by him. By the example of these mariners, if they thought that their god was the true god, (and why else did they worship him) we may learne the substance of euerie temptation that doth vndermine vs, namely that it will bid vs doe this euill, that good Sinne al∣waies pro∣miseth good. may come of it: marke whēsoeuer thou art motioned to euil, if it do not promise thee some goodnes to come of it. But the seruāts of God ought not to do that which is euill though they were sure to gaine all things that can be wished by so doing: for they haue learned their lesson, & how to answer Sathan at such times: why temptest thou me Sathan? for it is written, thou must not do euill that good may come of it; & this is the armour called Scriptū est, Rom. 3. 8. wherewith the Lord ouercame the deuill in the wildernesse. Here also we may see the difference betweene the faithfull & The truly faithfull desire not infidels to pray for them. infidels. For call vpon thy God, saith the ship-maister and the rest. The mariners bid Ionah pray to his God in their behalfe: but Ionah saith not to the mariners, pray to your gods in my behalfe. And this is also manifest, that a Papist will say vnto a Protestāt, & one that liues well, pray for me, but a Protestāt, if he be any thing zealous, will not say vnto a Papist, pray thou for me, knowing that whē a Papist doth pray, he doth it to Idols, Saints or Angels,
or at lest without faith, and therefore their prayers are abomina∣ble in the sight of God, and therefore they will not bid them doe it, because they will not do euill to the intēt that good may come of it. Whereby it is manifest that our Religion is the true Religiō, our aduersaries themselues being iudges. And so Pharao said to Exod. 88. 27. &c. Pharao desireth Moses, Moses not Pharao. 1. Sam▪ 15. 25. Moses, pray for me, but Moses said not to Pharao, pray for me. Saul said to Samuel, pray thou for me: but Samuel said not to Saul, pray thou for me: therefore the mariners had neede of Ionah to pray for them, but Ionah hath no neede of ignorant Idolaters to pray for him. And why should not all pray to Ionahs God, and Pharao pray to Moses God, seeing God hath said, call vpon me in trouble & I will heare thee? Call vpon thy God (say they.) Whē they had cried, and saw no helpe, they distrusted their gods, they thought they would not helpe, indeede they could not. There∣fore they ran to another whom they knew not, hoping to be hel∣ped by him, because they thought som God there was that could do it: so the Papistes run from one god to another, from S. Do∣minicke to S. Francis, and why should they run from S. Dominick to S. Francis, but that they mistrusted Dominicke? they thinke hee will not heare them, and so they goe forward, but in the ende the vnknowen God is thought to be the best: yet the Lord taught not Peter one prayer and Iohn another, but taught them all one prayer vnto one onely God, and to wait still vpon him praying still with assurance he will be a helpe in due time. If peraduenture he will thinke vpon vs that we perish not. This if, perhaps, and peraduenture, cost Adam paradise: God said to Adam, if thou doest eate of this tree, thou shalt surely dye, then Euah reported these wordes thus: lest peraduenture we dye, the serpent seeing her in such a minde, so carelesse or forgetfull of the cōmandement, he came & quite changed the matter, & said, you shall not dye. Thus sinne creeps vpon vs while doubtful∣nesse remaineth in vs, so God saith, you shall be saued, the trem∣bling flesh saith, peraduenture I shall, &c. then commeth Sathan, & he saith, thou shalt die. So that if you will aske what is the faith The sin∣ners faith. of sinners, or if you would haue it defined, it is this: peraduenture yea, peraduenture no: if you will aske me, whereupon this faith is grounded, it is vpon ifs, and ands: this is the faith of the vngodly, to say, if so be God will helpe vs, for they cannot assure themselues
of any helpe. But we may not doubt of our God, and say, it may be, or if peraduenture: for we may freely pray to our God with confidence, & may say, our God & the God of Ionah will surelie helpe vs, & hath helped vs. But yet let vs know that we haue sin∣ned like infidels, & do deserue to be punished like the Egyptians. If so be he will, &c. Thus if commeth in like a litle leauen which sowreth the whole lumpe of dow; & like the moath, which eateth the whole wedding garment, and this same litle theefe hath stolen away all the Papistes faith. Therefore with them, wickednesse lieth sicke in bed, and calleth to euerie one that commeth by, call vpon thy God, and pray for me, if so be he will looke vpon vs and helpe vs: and so their hope when the tempest commeth, is either an ease∣lesse horrour, or a comfortlesse doubting. If so be he will thinke vpon vs. Our God thought vpon vs in the time of trouble, he thought vpon vs and laid the tempest when our enemies called vpon their gods, Saints and Angels. But what do we meane beloued, when mercie is come, to send for iudgement? for though we be saued with Israell, we deserue to be plagued with Pharao, because we are not thankefull for this, namely that the Lord hath thought v∣pon vs in our distresse, for he trauelleth with mercy, & laboureth till he be deliuered, hee goeth laden like a bee, but wants a hiue. There are two hāds, a hand to giue, & a hād to receiue, Gods hād to giue, & mans hand to receiue: the hand of God is a bountifull and a mercifull hand, a hand loden with liberalitie, full of gracious giftes, therefore let vs stretch forth the good hand to receiue it, thankefully to embrace it, chearefully to entertaine it, & carefullie to keepe it, let vs receiue it by the hand of faith, the hand of loue, and the hand of prayer: for who so commeth with this hand shall be filled, and who so commeth without it, shall go emptie away, because they haue despised the wayes of God: for when I instru∣cted Tro. 1. 24. 25. thē, they would not heare, & what I taught thē they would not learne, saith the Lord. Ionah wakened thus, & thus exhorted to call vpō his God, soone no doubt perceiued his dāger, & part∣ly with the horrour for his sin, partly for feare of the deserued & thus threatned drowning, & other punishments, without questiō was grieuouslie vexed. For hee could not but see, that the verie
dumbe creatures were bent against him for his disobedience: the wind blowes as though it would ouer-turne all, the waters roare as though they would drowne all, the ship tumbles as though she were wearie of all, and albeit the mariners had cried, and cast out the wares, as though they would loose all, yet the tempest rageth still, their daunger is grearer then euer. Wherefore now one might haue said to Sathan, Sathan thou perswadest him to flie from his defence for his safetie, and madest him beleeue that he should come safe to Tarshish, and there liue at libertie, and ease, enioying all temporall benefites at his plea∣sure, but now thou hast brought him into the prison of the ship, and it is tost thus by this tempest likelie to destroy him, thou lea∣uest him in his greatest danger, & reioycest that Ionah quaketh at the tempest, & hath his heart aking for feare of the daunger thus threatned, due to rebelliō: yea seekest also to drowne him, & that also in hell, howsoeuer thou pretendest a desire to preserue him frō trouble, & procure him many pleasures, with much securitie: ô most wretched & deceiptfull lyer, he that trusteth his enemie, & he that beleeueth thee, shall euer be deceiued. And now might Ionah say, beware by me, for thus hath the tēpter deceiued me, he hath allured me with flattering fantasies, & perswaded me, that it was but an easie thing to flie from the presence of the Lord, that seeth alwayes all things, & from whō, no man, no nor secret lur∣king Pro. 15. 11. Ier. 23. 24. in any mans heart, can be hid, but all are alwayes in his pre∣sence. Hee made me beleeue that light could be brought out of darknesse, that good may come of euill, for he assured me, that if I would set forth toward Tarshish, I should not onely shun the presence of the Lord, but should liue at ease like one vnknowne, both for my vocation, & also for my behauiour in the execution, thereof, and so I might creepe into a familiaritie with these people, and enioy the benefite of their societie. Otherwise if I went to Niniuie as the Lord commaunded, they would hate & persecute me, yea and so I should end my life in miserie, both because they being Gentiles and I a Iew, they cannot abide me, for the one holdeth the other in contempt: and also because of my message, namelie a prophecie of destruction, grounded vpon a reproofe of their vile and sinfull pleasures. Which message, Sathan perswaded me, would be so hainously taken, that no death nor torment that
they could deuise for me, would be thought sufficient, and so I should bee sure neuer to escape their handes aliue if I went: as though the eternall and most glorious God which sent me thi∣ther, were not able to defend me from all euill when I came thi∣ther, as well as he did Daniell in the den of Lions, and Christ in the wildernesse among the sauage beastes. And when Sathan had thus perswaded me, I beleeued him, and so tooke my iourney to flie from the presence of the Lord, if I could haue performed my intention. But the Lord hath beheld the stubburnnesse and diso∣bedience of my heart, and therefore followeth me with great displeasure: hee hath sent out this tempest vpon the sea, whereby we are all like to be ouerwhelmed, and so neare as we are to the water, so neare we are to death by all likelyhood. THE SECOND SERMON OF THE PVNISHMENT OF IONAH. Ionah. 1. 7. Afterward they sayd euerie one to his fellow, come and let vs cast lots, that we may know for whose cause this euill is come vpon vs. So they cast lots, and the lot fell vpon Ionah. NOw followeth another meane which the mari∣ners vse to appease the tempest. They cast lots. But first they consult & consent to cast lots. The tempest was so strange, that they conclu∣ded with thēselues it was the reuenging power of some angrie God, for the sinne of some notorious wretch that was amongst them. Seeing therfore neither they, nor Ionah praying, had appeased the tempest, but it was rather increased, and no man confessed he was that sinner: they take coūsell, & agree to find him out by lots. Wherein let vs obserue first, neuer a one of thē is of Dauids spirit, who whē he saw the people plagued, said, Lord it is I. Euerie mā
excuseth himself: for euery man would extenuate his owne sin, & diminish it, and euery one thinketh his sinne salued, when he hath excused himselfe. Let Adam be his owne iudge, and hee will say, the woman tempted him to sin, and let the woman bee her owne iudge, and she will say yonder serpent perswaded her to it. Let e∣uerie one be his owne iudge, and there will be such posting off of sinne, that neuer a one will be found guiltie. There is none that wil be so impudent as to say he hath no sinne at all, yet few that will freely confesse they haue grieuously sinned. Therefore these here say euery man within himselfe, though he be a sinner, yet he is no great sinner. None are accounted sinners vnlesse they be open∣ly detected of some notable and hainous crime. If they be dicers, swearers, drunkards, brawlers, pickers, flatterers, prophaners of the Saboth, sleepers at church, and such like, they be not thought sinners: these actions are counted no sinnes, but rather recrea∣tions. For the multitude count none sinners, vnlesse they be thee∣ues, traitors, open and grosse idolaters, and taken with such like capitall crimes: no nor these neither, were it not for feare of the law: as none among the Iewes, but publicans, were counted sin∣ners, all the rest were good fellowes, and iust men. The Papists say, some thoughts, affections, words, and outward actions, not agreeing with the law of God, are easily washt away with a little holy water, &c. they are not deadly, they deserue not the wrath of God, they are but venial. Did you neuer read of these veniall sins in the Scripture? But thinke you they haue nothing but Scripture? yes, they haue decrees, they haue decretals, the cere∣monies whereof obserued, these veniall sins are soone pardoned, and they haue a Pope that can forgiue any sins. Thus they lessen sins, thus they abate the price of sins, & they can buy out sins with mony, or redeeme them with masses, and by a litle short penance, purchase a large and long pardon. And as the mariners, euery man thought he was no great sin∣ner: so Ionah thought with himselfe, though I bee a great sinner, yet am I not so grieuous a sinner as these idolatrous heathens: or if he throughly condemned himselfe, yet vnwilling to be knowne such a rebel, he thought, it may be, it is mostlikely, they are many, I but one, peraduenture therefore the lot will not fall vpon me, like a thiefe, which notwithstanding in his owne heart hee ac∣knowledge
himselfe guiltie of that where withall he is charged yet will not confesse, vntill the matter be throughly sifted, and so clearely proued to his owne face, in such sort, that he cannot for shame, though with shame he confesse, deny it. Therefore, if God had not sifted out this sinner the better, Ionah would not haue beene knowne the man, and the mariners would still haue contended who was the lesser sinner, therefore they consult to cast lots. Let vs cast lots. They did not vse to cast lots, this was no custome among the mariners: but the tempest was so wonderful, that it made them se∣riously to thinke of God, & willing to vse the meanes prescribed Pro. 18. 18. Pro. 26. 33. by God for the ending of doubtfull matters, acknowledging that he ordereth all, and the lot is the sentence of God: by the fal∣ling of the lot, he reuealeth the truth. These like worldlings neuer confesse God, but when he cōmeth in a tempest: they wil not see his mercy vntill his iustice appeare, they will not acknowledge Gods gouernement, before hee bring on them some iudgement: like Pharaos sorcerers, who confessed Exod. 5. 2. not Gods maiestie, while they liued at ease, but when the Lord plagued them then cried out: This is the finger of God. Exod. 8. 19. Let vs cast lots, that we may know for whose cause this euill is vpon vs. Why? what are they the better whē know him? what wold they do with him on whom the lot shold fall? Surely they suppo∣sing, or rather clearely seeing this tempest to be sent from some wrathfull power, & that for some one mans sin amongst thē, they determined, hauing found him, to sacrifice him vnto the God that was so offended by him. God turneth euil into good, but the diuel turneth good vnto euil. The Gentils had a custome in the time of cōmon plague, to sacrifice one for the rest. This custome they took by imitatiō of the Iewes, in offering beasts, & of Abraham in offe∣ring his son: the diuell that father of lyes, & schoolemaister of all mischiefe, teaching them. So the diuel took aduantage to do euill by the seruice of God, in mouing the Gentiles to worke abhomi∣nation, by offering men, imitating the Iewes cōmanded sacrifices. But if they had rightly knowne the true God, they wold haue ta∣ken their sins by the throte, and haue sacrificed them.
Come, let vs cast lots. The mariners were not so wise to preuent the tempest before it came, as they be diligent to allay the tempest when it may not be layd. We ouertaken with Gods iust iudgements, are very care∣full alwayes, to vse all meanes to be rid of them. But who keepeth a watch of his owne wayes, and diligently laboureth to keepe himselfe free from that which necessarily draweth on itselfe Gods iudgements? who purgeth himselfe of his sinnes, least he be sicke? who letteth or fetcheth out his corrupt bloud, of pride, lust, coue∣tousnesse, least he be sore? who keepeth a good diet, and maketh his choise of holy exercises, godly companions, religious confe∣rences, &c. But know we, he is not safe that is not sound, neither he sound that is intemperate. So they cast lots. Whether it be lawfull to cast lots, it is not euident by this ex∣ample, because they were Gentiles, and therfore no president for vs: but so farre may we vse them, as the word doth leade vs, & no further. There are two goates brought to Aaron, that he might Leuit. 16. cast lots, to see which goate should be killed, and which shold not: these goats signifie Christ: for as he died, he liued againe: and as he was buried, he rose againe. Againe, the land of Canaan is par∣ted Num. 33. by lots, to see what part each tribe should inhabit. Againe, that theefe Achan is found out by lots, first by his tribe, then by Iosua. 7. his familie, and lastlie by his particular person. Againe it is said, that Saul was chosen king by lots, & lest anie 1. Sam. 10. shold haue said, that it was his good lucke, his good lot, or chance to be king, therefore the Lord appointed that he shold be annoin∣ted before he was chosen by lots. 1. Sam. 9. Againe, Mathias is chosen by lots to the Apostleship in stead of Acts 1. Iudas. So that it is lawfull in some cases to cast lots, so that they do attribute nothing vnto them, and acknowledge that the lot is cast into the lap, but the disposition thereof is from the Lord: Prou. 16. 33. for they must not saie, that it is their chāce, fortune, or good lucke, for so they make an idol of it, and rob God of the honor due vnto him. For it was not Sauls fortune to be king, but Gods mercie; it was not Achans chaunce to be caught, but Gods iudgement. Lots may be vsed to preuent strife, when all other meanes haue bin vsed, & somtimes before all other meanes, when in wisdome
it is thought the best means. Bretheren often & godlie at first de∣uide their inheritance by lots, as the children of Israel deuided the lād of Canaā. Therfore in the church of Geneua there is an order, that in the time of plague, there should be an house set apart for the sicke to lodge in, and lest they should be vncomforted, they chuse out a minister by lots to do it. So they cast lots. Now we are come to put vp our sutes to the court of Lawyers, to see if they wil do anie thing for God, for conscience, or for loue, vz. that they would end mens sutes quicklie, & let the poore cli∣ents haue equitie. Some saie, that Lawyers be good vntill they be counsellers, like lions, which wil be gentle vntil their tallents grow: be not offended, but amend, for malice speakes not. I am perswaded, that if the lots were cast to see who troubles the ship, it wold fall vpon the Lawyers: be not offended, but amēd, for malice speakes not. A poore client commeth forth accusing one, and going home accuseth an hundred, for so manie seeke to gaine by him, so few seeke to further him, and so manie seeke to hinder him, that all his gaine is but labour and losse. For a small matter manie will come to law, to striue for that which with reason might easilie be attained without such cōtenti∣on; and others seeke to enrich themselues with contending for a small matter at the law with their neighbours, yet in the end loose that they sought, and that they had beside: and so they contend & striue about a thing commonlie til the Lawyer hath gained more by them then the thing which is in controuersie, is worth. These are like the mouse and the frog, which stroue so long about marsh ground, that at length the kite came and tooke them both from it. Others will come vp to law about a small matter, and therein so entangle themselues, that they cannot rid their hands of it, vntill it haue almost vndone them, like a sillie sheep that is hunted of a flie, which runneth from bush to bush, and euerie bush catcheth a locke of him, so that the poore sheepe is thrid-bare ere hee hath done, and hath not a fleece left him to couer himselfe withal. So he runs from Court to Court, to sue, to complaine, to pleade, til he haue spent his cloake for his coate: were it not better to haue cast lots for the coate at first? for the law is like a butlers boxe, play stil on till all come to the candlesticke. Therefore it is lawfull to
ende and controuersie in a hard matter, to vse this meane. Now whether it be lawfull to cast dice, if lots may not bee vsed (as Salomons words, Prou. 18. 18. The lot causeth contention to cease, compared with Heb. 6. 16. proue) but in hard matters, and waightie causes, when the thing is doubtfull, and all good meanes are tried before to auoid strife: that question is decided, Argumēts against di∣cing. which none but voluptuous men make question of, namely, whe∣ther dice-play bee a meete exercise for a Christian soule. Salomon saith, the lot causeth contention to cease, therefore lots are to Pro. 18. ende strife, but these lots make strife, for before thou takest the dice, thou knowest thine owne, and no man striueth to take it from thee, but when thou castest the dice, thou dost (as it were) aske whether thine owne bee thine owne, and makest a strife of no strife. Art thou not worthie to loose the gifts of God which venturest to loose them when thou needest not? doest thou not deserue to forfeit thine owne, which art so greedy of anothers, that thou wouldest haue his liuing for nothing but for turning of a die? Esau did not sell his birthright so lightly, but hee had somewhat for it, which refreshed his hunger, but God hath gi∣uen thee a liuing, and thou spendest it for nothing. The mari∣ners did cast lots to find out the sinner, they did not cast dice to see who should win, as dicers do, for to whom the lot fals, he ta∣kes all, which deserues to loose all aswell as the other, and hath no right vnto it by anie lawe. For God hath not allowed one man to take anothers goods for the tripping of a die, but either they must bee merited, or they must bee giuen, or they must bee bought, or else it is vnlawfull, vngodly, vnconscionable to take thē. Besids the brawles, cosinages, the othes annexed to this game which would not agree with it, vnlesse it had bin a meete compa∣nion for thē; thou takest another mans goods for nothing, where∣as God hath appointed thee to get thy liuing with the sweate of thy browes, for thou takest away that which others sweat for, and wheras thou sholdest liue by working, thou seekest to liue by play∣ing, like the ape which liues by toying. Doth any dicer thinke hee doth well? tell me what thinkest thou? for euerie sinner doth con∣demne in his praier to God, that which he excuseth before men, if they which are gamesters repent it, how can they which are gamesters defend it? Thou shouldest doe nothing but that thou
woldest haue God find thee doing: if he shold come to iudgemēt, woldst thou haue him take thee at dice? I am sure thou wouldest not haue God see thee so vainely occupied: neither canst thou thinke, that Christ, or his Prophets, or Apostles, or his Euange∣lists were dicers, for no such lots are named in the holy Scripture, and yet the Lords day is most prophaned with this exercise, cards and dice, as though they kept all their vanities to celebrate holy dayes. What hast thou to alleadge for dice, now euidence is giuen vp against thē? hast thou any patron to speake for thē, but thy vain pleasure and filthy couetousnesse which are condemned alreadie, and therfore haue no voyce by law? take away these, & take away dice. The patron condemnes the clients, when one voice con∣demnes another: if the exercise were lawfull, such patrons as plea∣sure and couetousnesse would not speake for it. Take thy pleasure therefore in that which is good, and the Angels will reioyce with thee if this were good, God wold prosper them better that vse it: but neither winners nor loosers are gainers. I know not how, but there is not so much wonne as lost, as though the Diuell did parte stakes with them, and draw away with a blacke hand, when no mā seeth; for the winner saith he hath not won halfe so much as the looser hath lost. One wold thinke that some of them should flow, when so many ebbe: there is neuer an ebbe without a flowing, ne∣uer one leeseth but another winneth, but at dice. What a cursed thing is this that turnes no man to good, which robbes others and beggers them selues? the schoole of deceipt, the shop of othes, and the field of vanities. Thou doest not onely hazard thy money (in this gaine) but venturest thy saluation, and castest dice with the diuel, who shal haue thy soule. For euery thing that commeth well to a man, he giueth thankes, but for that which commeth by dice, he is ashamed to giue thankes: which sheweth, that in con∣science that gaine is euil gotten, & that he sought it without God. Can this be good when worst men vse it most? if it were good, the euill would like worse of it then the good, but the more a man sauoureth of any goodnesse, the more he beginnes to abhorre it, & his conscience doth accuse him for it as for sinne. They which doubt whether God do allow it, need but look how he doth pros∣per thē that vse it, but they trust not in God (as the termes of their occupation descries) for they call all their casts chances, as though
they relied not vpon God but vpon chance. Therfore if dice make strife without cause, if they take away others goods for nothing, if we may not liue by playing but by labour, if they which haue bin dicers repent it amongst their sinnes, if the holy men neuer vsed this recreation, but the worst most delight in it, if thou wouldest not haue God see thee when thou plaiest at dice, nor take thee at it when he comes to iudgement, if nothing but pleasure and co∣uetousnesse speake for them, if they do not prosper which take pleasure in it, if they trust not vpon God, but relie vpon chance, if thou doest not onely venture thy money but hazard thy soule, then the best cast at dice is to cast them quite away. And the lot fell vpon Ionah. The lot fell vpon Ionah, not because he was the greatest sinner of them all: for so is the opinion of the common people, to cen∣sure Luke. 13. 1. 2. &c. them worst whom they see most afflicted: If any one bee seene to beare his crosse, then many will say, this is a wicked man, and so thinke well of themselues, supposing that God is not bent against them to punish them as well; but because Ionah should feele the hand of the Lord both punishing, and preseruing him, and be reformed. For God correcteth all his, as he did his sonne, to learne them obedience. But if iudgement begin with the house Heb. 5. 8. 1. Pet. 4. 17 18. of God, what shall become of the vngodly? And the lot fell vpon Ionah. Now when the sinner that troubled the ship is taken, now Io∣nah can hide himselfe no longer. Now he might also feare to be sacrificed by the mariners presently. For the mariners, partly for the paine they had endured, partly for the losses they had sustai∣ned, partly for the daunger wherein they remained, were no doubt as the she wolues robbed of their whelpes, out of mea∣sure furious, and fully bent to sacrifice him on whom the lot fel, to appease the wrathfull God. But God stayed, and restrained the rage of the mariners, and made them afterward willingly to abide the tempest a while, and put themselues to more paine to saue him, endeuoring by rowing to recouer land. For hauing heard of the true God, and though they lost their goods, hauing found God who is all good, shall we (said they) destroy him that hath saued vs? shall we giue him vp to death vnnecessarily, that hath brought vs to life, and assured vs to raigne with God in all glorie
euerlastingly? Surely the thanklesse are gracelesse: especially they that loue not, and shew not forth the labor of loue for their gra∣cious Prou. 20. 1. Psal. 33. 15 Psal. 306. 46. Isa. 10. 6. Ezra. 1. 14. Isa. 3. 24. Nehe. 1. 11. Psal. 105. guide to God: but therefore we may see that the hearts of men are in the hands of God, and he turneth them which way he list, he fashioneth their hearts euerie one, yea euen kings hearts as riuers of waters doth he turne to water, & make fruitfull his vine: to pitie and to persecute, to honor and to shame, to loue and hate his people, to deliuer their power to the beast, Reu. 17. 13. and a∣gaine to eate the whores flesh, and to burne her with fire. 17. 16. 17. Therefore let vs neuer feare to performe our duties whatsoe∣uer to whomsoeuer: for he formeth the hearts of all, who hath promised to honor them that honor him, but to make them con∣temptible 1. Sa. 2. 30. that do despise him. Neither let vs put confidence in man, not in Princes; for their hearts are riuers of water of them Psal. 146. 3 selues fleeting, easily as they be led following. But especially let vs not forget chiefly to make prayers, supplications, intercessi∣ons, 1. Tim. 2. 1. and to giue thankes for all those, on the godlinesse, or pro∣phanesse of whose heartes the flourishing or defacing of the Gospell of Christ Iesus, and the chosen of God doth most de∣pend. And the lot fell vpon Ionah. Now Ionah could not denie, he was that sinner, vnlesse he wold accuse God of vnrighteous iudgement: For the lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposition thereof is of the Lord. Now ther∣fore he must needs confesse it. The windes thundring, the waues tumbling, the ship cracking, the mariners quaking, vpon their gods crying, their wares forth casting, Ionahs prayers requesting, to cast lots consulting, Ionah kept himselfe close, hee would not be thought that sinner. The wind said, I will ouerturne thee, the water said, I will drowne thee, the ship said, I cannot hold thee, the mariners said, we cānot helpe thee, his prayers said, we cannot profit thee: his conscience within bleeding, and God at the doore of his heart knocking, and the lots now ready for casting, sayd threatningly, for thee the tempest is come, thou fugitiue, & we wil discouer thee. Yet Ionah conceales his sinne, so much did hee abhorre the shame of men, of strange men, a few men, fraile men: or the feare of the furie of flesh. Therefore after the windes had roared, and
also the waues raged, and the ship reeled, and the mariners cried, and the lot, his conscience, and God himselfe threatned him: the lot also condemned him, and the feare of being sacrificed by sin∣ners to Sathan terrified him, so that he forthwith repēted through∣ly, and declared it openly, hee confessed his sinne freely. Such a sturre hath God before he can come by his owne: he must crosse vs, and set himselfe, and all his creatures against vs, he must straine our bodies, or leaue our soules, and constraine vs to it, before wee will returne from our wicked wayes, and throughly humble our selues to yeeld him due obedience. O the goodnesse of the great God, ô long sufferance and bountifulnesse vnspeakeable: which not only leadeth, but also in the chaines of loue draweth vs to true repentance. It was Gods great goodnesse to Ionah that the mariners sacri∣ficed him not: greater, that he truly repented: that God continu∣eth him in his calling, and blesseth his (whose flying from God, deserued flinging to Sathan) not so much solemne preaching, as suddaine confession, & short denunciatiō of vengeance, yea made it so powerfull that it conuerted Idolatrous heathens, most hard∣ned Idolaters: first mariners, then Niniuites. For what a blessing felt Ionah, God vouchsafing him of this ho∣nour, to offer them a liuely, holy, and acceptable sacrifice to God, by whom he presently before greatly feared to haue bin offered a dead, vnholy, and so a delightfull sacrifice to Sathan. This feare banished, and that ioy possessing him, what a mercy of the Almi∣ghty did Ionah thinke it? But before he conuerted the Niniuites, he was more to be humbled, fuller to be strengthened, better euery way to be prepared. Therefore God would haue the sea to wash him, the whale to fast him, and yet miraculously safe to preserue him, that being purified, he might pray feruently, and being deli∣uered, find power, comfort and courage aboundantly. Wher∣fore when by lot being taken, and by his owne confession found Iona. 1. 7. 10. the man that had procured the tempest, the mariners in loue and compassion of him, had assayed by rowing to get to land but 13 could not, the sea raging more and more, and Ionah himselfe 12 professed he knew the tempest was sent for his cause, and would be layd, he being cast into the sea: Ionah at length was cast out of the ship into the swelling surges of the tempestuous sea. What
hope of life then left? is there any? to swallow vp all, soone after he is swallowed whole of a whale. Here let vs marke, that after the tempest had terrified Ionah, the mariners reproued him, when they had reproued him, his conscience pricked him, when his conscience had pricked him, the consulting to cast lots grieued him, after griefe for consulting, their concluding to cast lots vexed him: vexed at their conclusi∣on, the lot condemnes him: the lot hauing condemned him, in what an agony thinke we was Ionah: partly, that he should bee held that notorious wretch that had brought this wo? partly, least they in their raging griefe, for their great trouble of body, losse of goods, danger of life, should foorthwith kill him for a sacrifice, to appease the vnknowne angry God? But after this agony the terror of drowning followed, and after that the horror of the huge fish: first least it teare him in peeces, then least it melt him, after∣ward least it poison him: lastly, three dayes and three nights, the comfortlesse horror of darkenesse, and noisome stinch in the fishes belly tormented him. First then see, the windes could not further him, the waters could not beare him, the ship could not hold him, the mariners could not helpe him: and being cast out least all for him be cast away, the whale would not spare him, the stinch would ill feede him, the darkenesse would lesse glad him, and light might not vi∣sit him. Now see then what Ionah got by this iourney. Not∣withstanding all the promises of which Sathan assured him, and all the furtherances which the serpent procured him: he lost his labour, lost his money, lost his ioy, lost his credit, lost his quiet, and saw no hope but to leese his life too: finding plentifully, and bit∣terly feeling dreadfull feares. He trusted to the winds, the winds could not serue him: he trusted to the ship, the ship could not keep him: he trusted to the mariners, the mariners could not hold him: he trusted to the lot, the lot would not spare him: hee trusted to the waters, the waters could not beare him: neither would the whale forbeare him, neither did any thing make shew of likeli∣hood to saue him. Therefore we may see in Ionah, what it pro∣fiteth a man to flie from God, forsaking his calling, and so practi∣sing the euill motions of Sathan, in stead of the knowne will of God. Assuredly, if we follow his flatteries as Ionah did, wee
shall haue as he had, accusing consciences, fearfull hearts, and the wrath of God vpon our heads. For he hath nothing to giue vs, although hee promise and make vs beleeue hee hath great king∣domes: Yes indeed, he hath horror of mind for all that obey him, and hell for the reward of his, which will make all their hearts to ake which receiue it. See secondly in this punishment of Ionah, the iustice of God. The Bee when she hath once stung, doth leese her sting, so that she can sting no more: so doth not Gods iustice punishing sin: for it retaineth power, it hath store of stings to vexe still: when one iudgement is executed, she euer hath other inow ready, ei∣ther of the same kind in another degree more sharpe, or of ano∣ther sort. For all the creatures with their seuerall powers, are Gods darts to strike vs when he commands. Therefore if we be sicke, sickenesse is not dead with vs: if we be poore, pouertie en∣deth not: if we be in danger, danger is not therefore put downe for euer after: and if wee bee vexed, vexation hath not therefore left his sting: his darts, his weapons also are as sharpe now as they were at the first, and sharper too: because we are sinfuller. For according to the sickenesse is the medicine, and wounds more dangerous require more dolorous plaisters. And if thou be disobedient, then hee will leade thee through Leuit. 26. 18. 24. 28. 36. 37. 38. 39. &c. them all, vntill he hath humbled thee, & made thee to glorifie him with obedience, or vtterly destroyed thee. Thirdly, let vs not forget, neither lightly thinke of this, that God knoweth how to punish for sinne, yea most seuerely to cor∣rect his children, though repenting. If our Prophet Ionah here, may not keepe thee some good while in a due meditation of it, let that man after Gods owne heart, the sweete Prophet of Israell 2. Sam. 18. 6. 10. 27. c. . 2 Sam. 12. 13. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. chap. Psal. 30. & 75. Hos. 6. 4. come to thy mind, and in him see, whether God cockereth his entirest friends, or something sharpely, if not bitterly, hand∣leth them, setling themselues in their dregs, or securely seruing the Lord. Lastly, yet consider God is rich in mercy, and full of compas∣sion, loth to punish, vnlesse too farre prouoked, content to shake his rod ouer vs, to make vs feare only, and keepe vs free from fee∣ling his strokes: if that may haue his due worke in vs, that is, recall, reforme, and confirme vs: for as the winds could not ouerthrow
Ionah, nor the waters drowne him: so neither could the whale consume, poison, or annoy him, or ought but feare him, though it had swallowed him, For Ionah remembring God, God shewed he forgot not Ionah. Therefore, when and where Ionah thought verily and speedily to haue perished, then and there God causeth him to be three dayes, and as many nights, most safely preserued. O power omnipotent, ô goodnesse all sufficient, in all things, at all 2. Pet. 2. times! God then aswell knoweth to deliuer his out of all distresse in due time, as to reserue the wicked to the day of iudgement to be punished. And in what danger shall we dispaire? in what ex∣tremities ought not we to hope in our most mighty Sauiour, re∣membring Ionah in the whales belly, Ieremy in the mire of the Iona. 1. 17. Iere. 36. 6. Dan. 6. 22. Dan. 3. 23. Numb. 1. 46 Exod. 17. 3. Exo. 16. 13. Iona. 2. 10. Iere. 38. 13. Dan. 6. 24. & 3. 26. Exod. 17. 6. Exo. 16. 13. Exod. 2. 15. 3. 10. Gene. 29. 20. 41 40. 45. 7. 8. Act. 9. 1. 2. 1. Cor. 15. 10. Mark 14. 71. Act. 4. 11. 12. Iona. 2. 10. Amos. 7. 14. Exod. 2. 3. Iona. 2. 10. Luke. 2. 7. deepe dungeon, Daniel among the fierce Lions, his three compa∣nions in the hote burning fornace, nay 600000 men of war, and three times as many moe, of men and women, young and old, in the wildernesse, lacking now drinke, then meate: and all these de∣liuered out of all daunger, these last miraculously satisfied with drinke out of the rocke, and with meate abundantly from hea∣uen. Secondly, though Ionah be cast into the troublous sea, and swallowed of a huge whale, yet he must preach at Niniuie: though Moses flie out of Egypt, yet he must bee the leader of Gods peo∣ple thence. Ioseph is in prison, but he must be Lord of Egypt, and preserue the Church aliue: who would haue thought, that Saule should become Paul, or forswearing Peter so faithfull a prea∣cher? Suspend then thy iudgement, and wonder at Gods workes, whether of mercy or iustice, and thinke not the worse of a man, though he were cast out of the sea, as Ionah, or basely brough vp as Amos: for the deliuerer of Israell was brought out of the flags, and the conuerter of Niniuie out of a whale, and the saluation of the whole world out of a stall. And the lot fell vpon Ionah. The lot fell vpon Ionah, that he might bee cast out of the ship, that as the ship was almost broken, but not altogether, so Ionah might be almost drowned, but not altogether, almost consumed, almost poysoned in the belly of the whale, but not altogether: & that being in the double deepe duly humbled; and as gold in a fornace, fined and fit for Gods workes, he might thence in a mira∣culous
manner come foorth like Lazarus in his winding sheete, that he might glorifie God once againe, and couragiously crie a∣gainst Niniuie. And the lot fell vpon Ionah. The lot fallen vpon Ionah the Iustice of God (both manifesting the truth incorruptly, & chastising his disobedient seruant seuere∣ly) did appeare: but withal singular mercy shined, & the mariners minds were mollified, in that they sacrificed him not to Sathan, but much more, that he by that meanes truly repented. In somuch that the old idolatrous mariners presently by him were cōuerted; and he cast into the sea, was not drowned; swallowed of the whale, & three dayes continuing therein, perished not, but miraculously was preserued, & most graciously cast on land safe: & lastly, cry∣ing against Niniuie that sinfull citie, had his preaching so mightily preuailing, that he wonderfully humbled them all. This mercy was maruellous, this goodnesse of God to Ionah most glorious. For the Niniuites hearing; Yet forty dayes, and Niniuie shall be ouer∣throwne, first as the mariners had before done, beleeued the word Ionah. 3. 5. of God, though they neuer heard it before. If wee heard the word of God preached as the mariners & Niniuites did, with trembling hearts in the sense of Gods maiesty, it could not be but we shold feele the power of it liuely, and be filled with all ioy in beleeuing speedily. But vneffectuall & fruitelesse is preaching, because there is nothing almost, but vnreuerent & sencelesse hearing. And why shold God teach the heedles to learn? why shold he giue pearls to dunghil cocks, nay to very swine? But they beleeued the word as∣oone as they heard it, though they neuer heard it before: what doth that argue? Surely it sheweth, that the foolish and simple are more diligent & ready both to heare & receiue the word of God, then those that are wise in their owne conceipt, or also in the view Mat. 11. 5. 1. Cor. 1. 26. of the world. What saith Christ? The poore receiue the Gospell. What saith Paul? Not many rich, not many wise. For though we haue knowledge, if our knowledge be like the Pharisies, that is, in Mat. 5. 10. Mar. 23. 13 14. 25. 26. 27. 28. shew of sinceritie only, in counterfet holinesse, & hollow harted friendship thorough hypocrisie, it had bin better for vs that wee had bin ignorant, for it will but leaue vs the more inexcusable. It will be found insufficiēt to saue vs, but sufficient the more feareful∣ly to condemne vs, because we know our maisters will & do it not. Luke 12. 47 48.
Therefore as Peter said to Simon Magus, thy mony perish with thee: so will the Lord say vnto such, thy knowledge perish with Act. 8. 20. thee, seeing it is fruitlesse. But when Niniuie had beleeued God, what did they second∣ly? they speedily, they notably repented, they proclamed a fast, they put on sackcloth, they humbled themselues before the Lord, they earnestly besought him to turne away his wrath from their wofull Citie. Ionah preaching at Niniuie, crying against it, seemeth to haue humbled them, and that without a miracle (with∣out which, scant any doctrine is of credit among Gentiles,) not Iona. 3. 4. only within fortie but within foure dayes: much within forty daies, he conuerteth Niniuie, ruffling Niniuie, old and idolatrous Nini∣uie, long before forty daies bee ended, the seede is sowne, growne, increased mightily, and full ripe, in a soyle in reason most barren. Sow therefore ye seedmen where you are set. If ye sow cheareful∣ly, ye shall reape plentiouslie in due time. Faint not, say not, I haue a stonie, or a starued, or a thornie ground: Niniuie repents in sackcloth. In which willing submission of theirs, & speedie liuelie repen∣tance at the words of the Prophet, after he had bin three daies and three nights in the whales belly, the calling of the Gentiles by Christ, after he had bin three daies & three nights in the bowels of the earth, might well be signified. For they no lesse willingly then the Niniuites, submitted themselues to the Gospel preached: no lesse speedily, and peraduenture more truly repented. For though Iona. 3. 5. 6. now they thus wōderfully humbled thēselues, not the fearful mul∣titude only, but the richest & greatest, the nobles & king also, & so al escaped now: soone after they returned to their vomit, & ne∣uer ceased to ad sin to sin, till they were by often wars miserably wasted, & at lēgth fulfilling the prophesie of Nahum, vtterly cō∣sumed. Nah. 3. 19. Therfore, first for the cōfort of the Godly, since Ahab hū∣bled 1. King. 21. 26 27 himself before the Lord, Ahab I say that had done exceeding abhominably, in following Idols, & sold himselfe to worke wick∣ednesse in the sight of the Lord, submitted himselfe vnder the hāds of God, fasting in sackcloth, though he did al in hipocrisie, had not the euil threatned brought vpō him in his daies, seeing Roboam, & 29 2. Chro. 10. 5. the princes of Israel who had forsakē the Lord, & the whole tribe of Iudah, which wrought wickednesse in the sight of the Lord, &
prouoked him more with their sins, then all that their fathers had 1. King. 14. 22. 2. Chro. 14. 6 done, humbling thēselues before the Lord, & confessing him iust, had not the wrath of the Lord powred vpon thē, by Shishak king of Egypt were not destroied, but shortly deliuered, yea also things prospered in Iudah, though the Lord had threatned to leaue thē in 7 1 the hands of Shishack, albeit they truly repented not: lastly, for as much as Niniuie that blodie citie, full of lies & robbery, the beau∣tiful 5 13 Nahū. 3. 1. 4 harlot, with multitude of fornications, that mistresse of witch∣chrafts, which sold the people through her whoredoms, & the na∣tiōs through her witchcrafts, hūbling thēselues with fasting, & put∣ting on of sackcloth, the Lord repēted of the euil he had threatned thē, & did it not: how assured may we be, that whatsoeuer iudge∣mēt the Lord threatneth vs & howsoeuer he threatē it, it shall not Ionah. 3. 7. 8 10 light on vs, whē we vnfainedly hūble our selues in true fasting, tur∣ning frō our euil waies, & from the heart vowing to serue God in al holinesse? For this is the cleare promise of the faithfull God; If I shut the heauen that there be no raine, or if I cōmand the grashopper 2. Chron. 7. 13 14 to deuoure the land, or if I send a pestilence among my people: If my people among whom my name is called vpon do humble thēselues, & pray, & seek my presence, & turne frō their wicked waies: thē wil I heare in heauē, & be merciful to their sin, & heale their lād. Againe, as generally most plainly saith iust Iehouah: I wil speake suddēly a∣gainst a nation, or against a kingdom (saying) I will plucke it vp, & Iere. 18. 7. roote it out, & destroy it: but if this natiō against which I haue pro∣nounced this, turne frō their wickednesse, I wil repēt of the plague 8 that I thought to bring vpō thē. Let vs thē, ô beloued of the Lord, whosoeuer loue the Lord Iesus, be careful to fulfill the condition, & then confident, nor doubting of the performāce of the promise, by somuch the more, by how much the fewer we be, and by how much the longer and clearer the Lord hath threatned most terri∣ble iudgements. Now for the terror of the vngodly, as manie of them as repent only when Gods hand is vpon them, and then humble themselues outwardly only, & that but only whē the fiercenesse of his wrath appeareth, or else after they haue escaped the feared iudgement, fall to their wonted wickednesse againe: let thē be sure the strong & iust God, that consumed Niniuie slidden blacke, will ouertake them also in his wrath, & for euer turne thē ouer to easelesse woe.
For the greatnesse, the beauty, the strength, and riches of Niniuie, could not withstand the hand of God, or keepe it from destructiō, but rather furthered, & hastened it. For with the more excellent ornaments that it was adorned by the Lord, the more hainous & grieuous in his sight was the abuse of them. Therefore the huge∣nesse, or the strength of this or any other Citie cannot saue it from the iudgement of God, being sinnefull in his sight. Great Sodome is destroyed: great Ierico is destroyed: great Gene. 19. Iosh. 6. 1. King. 24. 25. Reue. 18. 2. Niniuie is destroyed: great Ierusalem is destroyed, & great Rome the roome of all vncleane spirits, stayeth for her destruction, like a whore that stayeth for her punishment till she be deliuered, and al these were and shalbe punished for vnthankfulnesse & contempt of the word of God. Yet Niniuie, Ierico Sodome, nor Rome, haue had halfe the preaching that we haue had yet we are vnthankfull too, thē what haue we to look for, but when Sodom was burned, Gene. 19. 21 Zoar stood safe: whē Ierusalē was destroied, Bethelē stood stil: so the Lord doth alwayes prouide for his people, though he make Iere. 41. 17. neuer so great a slaughter & destruction amongst his enemies. For Gen. 17. 1. 8 the Lord because of his couenāt doth alwayes prouide for his cho∣sen, although they be but a remnant like the gleaning after haruest, or like a cluster of grapes on the top of the vine after the vintage, & Isay. 1. 9. & 17. 5. 6. though there be neuer so great calamity or troble, as we see in the booke of Genesis. 45. chap: whē there was a great time of dearth & scarcity to come vpon the lād where Iacob was, the Lord had sent Gen. 45. Ioseph to prouide for his father Iacob, lest he shold want bread, he or any of his sons, & folkes; and so ordered the matter, that Ioseph was treasurer ouer all the corne in Egypt. And so among the Turks and Spaniards and infidels, the Lord wil find meanes to do them good which vnfainedly loue him, and in the dungeon, in prison, and in bondes, yea and in death, the godly shal find God. FINIS.
Woodcut decorative border; a cartouche with birds at the top, four medallions of kneeling women at the sides and a skeleton seated at the bottom; on either side are inserted the letters P. S. for Peter Short (not in McKerrow). FOVRE SERMONS PREACHED BY MASTER HEN∣RY SMITH: And published by a more perfect copie then heretofore. Woodcut printer's device of Peter Short; a framed open book surrounded by beams of light, with motto Et vsque ad nubes veritas tua; below, the initials P. S. for Peter Short (McKerrow 278). AT LONDON Printed by P. S. for Cutbert Burby. 1598.
The contentes. 1 The trumpet of the soule. 2 The sinfull mans searche. 3 Maries choycc. 4 Noahs drunkennes.
THE TRVMPET OF THE SOVLE SOVN∣DING TO IVDGE∣MENT. By Henry Smith. Ecclesiastes. 11. Chap. 9. verse. The text. Reioyce O young man in thy youth: and let thy hart be mery in thy young dayes: follow the wayes of thine owne hart, and the lustes of thine eyes: But remember for all these thinges thou must come to iudgement. WHen I should haue prea∣ched vnder the crosse, I mused what text to take in hand to please all, and to keepe my selfe out of daunger: and musing, I could not finde anie text in the scripture that did not re∣prooue sinne, vnlesse it were in the Apocrypha, which is not of the scripture: this text bids them that be voluptuous, be volup∣tuous still: let them that be vaine glorious, be vaine glorious still: let them that be couetous, be couetous still: let them that be drunkards, be drunkards still: let them that be swea∣rers, be swearers still: let them that be wantons, be wantons still: let them that be careles prelates, be careles stil: let them
that be vsurers, be vsurers stil: but saith Salomō, Remember thy end, that thou shalt be called to iudgemētat at the last for all toge∣ther. This is the counsel of Salomō the wisest then liuing: what a counsell is this for a wise man, such a one as was Salomon? In the beginning of his booke he saith, All is vanitie, and in the end he saith, Feare God and keepe his commaundements, in the 12. Chapter he saith, Remember thy maker in the dayes of thy youth: But heere hee saith, Reioyce O young man in thy youth Here hee speaketh like an epicure, which saith, Eate, drinke, and be merry: here he counsels, and here hee mockes: yet not after the manner of scorners, although they deserued it in shewing their foolishnes, as it is in the first of the Prouerbes, He laughed at the wicked in derision: As in the 2. Psalme, God seeing vs follow our owne wayes. For when he bids vs pray, we play: and when hee bids vs runne, we stand still: and when he bids vs fast, we feast: and send for vanities to make vs sport: then he laughes at our destruction. Therefore when Salomon giueth a sharpe reproofe, and ma∣keth you ashamed in a word, he scoffingly bids you doe it a∣gaine, like a Schoolemaster which beateth his Scholler for playing the truant, hee biddeth him play the truant againe. O this is the bitterest reproofe of all. But least any Libertine should misconster Salomon, and say that he bids vs be merry and make much of our selues, therefore he shutteth it vp with a warchword, and setteth a bridle before his lips, and repro∣ueth it as hee speaketh it before hee goeth any further, and saith, But remember that for all these thinges, thou must come to iudgement. But if wee will vnderstand his meaning, hee meaneth when hee saith, Reioyce, O young man, Re∣pent O young man in thy youth, and when he saith, Let thy hart cheere thee, let thy sinnes greeue thee: for he meaneth other-wise then he speaketh: he speaketh like Michai in the booke of Kings 2. chap. Go vp and prosper, or like as Eze∣chiel, Go vp and serue other gods, or as Saint Iohn speaketh in the Reuelation, Let them that bee wicked, be wicked still. But if there were no iudgement day, that were a merrye world: therefore saith Salomon, When thou art in thy plea∣sures
flaunting in the fieldes, and in thy braue ruffes and a∣mongst thy louers, with thy smiling lookes, thy wanton talke and merry iestes, with thy pleasant games and loftie lookes; Remember for all these thinges thou shalt come to iudgement. Whilest the theefe stealeth, the hempe groweth, and the hooke is couered within the baite: we sit downe to eate, and rise vp to play, and from playe to sleepe, and a hundreth yeeres is counted little enough to sin in: but how many sinnes thou hast set on the score, so many kindes of punishments shall be prouided for thee: How many yeeres of pleasure thou hast taken, so many yeeres of paine: how many drams of delight, so many poundes of dolor: when iniquitie hath plaid her parte, vengeance leapes vpon the stage: the come∣die is short but the tragedie is longer: the blacke guarde shall attend vpon you, you shall eate at the table of sorrowe, and the crowne of death shall be vpon your heads, manie glistering faces looking on you, and this is the feare of sin∣ners: when the deuill hath entised them to sinne, hee presu∣meth like the olde Prophet in the booke of Kings, who when he had entised the yong Prophet contrary to the commaun∣dement of God, to turne home with him and to eate and drinke, he cursed him for his labour, because hee disobeyed the commaundement of the Lord, and so a Lyon deuoured him by the way. The foolish virgins thinke that their oyle wil neuer be spent: so Dina stragled abroad, whilest she was de∣floured: what a thing is this to say reioyce, and then repent? what a blanke to say, take thy pleasure, and then thou shalt come to iudgement? It is as if he should say, steale & be han∣ged, steale & thou darest, strangle sin in thy cradle, for all the wisedome in the world will not help thee else: but thou shalt bee in admiration like dreamers which dreame strange things, and knowe not how they come. He saith, Remember iudgement: if thou remember alwayes, then thou shalt haue little list to sinne: if thou remember this, then thou shalt haue little list to fall downe to the diuell, though hee would giue thee all the world, and the glory thereof. Salomon saith,
the weede groweth from a weede to a cockle, from a cockle to a bramble, from a bramble to a brier, from a brier to a thorne: Lying breedes periurie, periury breedes hautines of hart: haughtines of hart breeds contempt: contempt breedes obstinacie and brings forth much euill. And this is the whole progresse of sinne, he groweth from a lyar to a theefe, from a theefe to a murtherer, and neuer leaueth vntill hee haue searched all the roomes in hell, and yet he is neuer satisfied, the more he sinneth, the more he searcheth to sinne: when he hath deceiued, nay he hath not deceiued thee: assoone as he hath that he desireth, he hath not that he desireth: whē he hath left fighting, hee goeth to fighting againe: yet a little and a little more, and so wee flit from one sinne to another. While I preach, you heare iniquitie in gender within you, and will breake forth as soone as you are gone. So Christ wept, Ierusalem laughed: Adam brake one, and we brake ten, like children which laugh and crye, so as if wee kept a shop of vices, now this sinne, and then that, from one sinne to another. O remember thy end saith Salomon, and that thou must come to iudgement. What shall become of them that haue tried them most? be condemned most: Reioyce O young man in thy youth. But if thou marke Salomon, he harpes vp∣on one string, he doubles it againe and againe, to shewe vs thinges of his owne experience, because we are so forgetfull thereof in our selues, like the dreamer that forgetteth his dreame, and the swearer his swearing. So wee beg of euery vncleane spirit, vntill wee haue bumbasted our selues vp to the throat, filling euery corner of ourhartes with all vnclean∣nes, and then we are like the dogge that commeth out of the sinck, and maketh euery one as foule as himselfe: there∣fore saith Salomon, If any one wil learne the way to hell, let him take his pleasure. Me thinks I see the dialogue betweene the flesh and the spirit, the worst speaketh first, and the flesh saith, Soule, take thine ease, eate, drinke, and goe braue, lye soft, what else should you doe but take your pleasure, thou knowest what a pleasant fellow I haue bene vnto thee, thou
knowest what dilight thou hast had by my meanes: but the Soule commeth in, burdened with that which hath bene spo∣ken before, and saith, I pray thee remember iudgement, thou must giue account for all these thinges, for vnlesse you re∣pent, you shall surely perish: no saith the flesh, Talke not of such graue matters, but tell me of fine matters, of soft beds and pleasant things, and talke me of braue pastimes, Apes, Beares, and Puppits, for I tell thee the forbidden fruite is sweetest of all fruites, for I doe not like of your telling mee of iudgement: but take thou thy iewels, thy instrument, and all the stringes of vanitie will strike at once, for the flesh loues to be braue, and tread vpon corkes, it cannot tell of what fashion to be of, and yet to be of the new fashion. Reioyce O young man in thy youth. O this goes braue, for while wickednes hath cast his rubs, and vengeance castes his spurres and his foote, and thus she reeles and now shee tumbles, and then she falles, therefore this progresse is ended. Pleasure is but a spurre, riches but a thorne, glory but a blast, beautie but a flowre, sinne is but an hypocrite, honiein thy mouth, and poyson in thy stomacke: therefore let vs come againe and aske of Salomon in good sooth, whether he meaneth in good earnest, when he spake these wordes, O (saith Salomon) it is the best life in the world to goe braue, lie soft, and liue merilie, if there were no iudgement. But this iudgement mars all, it is like a dampe that puts out all the light, and like a boxe that marreth all the ointment: for if this be true, we haue spunne a faire threed, that wee must an∣swere for all, that are not able to answere for one: why Sa∣lomon maketh vs fooles, and giueth vs gawdes to play with∣all: what then, shall we not reioyce at all? yes, there is a god∣ly mirth and if we could hit on it, which is called, Bee merrie and wise: Sara laughed, and was reprooued: Abraham laughed, and was not reprooued. And thus much for the first part. But remember that for all these thinges thou shalt come to
iudgement. This verse is as it were a dialogue betwixt the flesh and the spirite, as the two counsellers: the worst is first, and the flesh speaketh proudlie, but the spirit comes in burdened with that which hath bene spoken. The flesh goeth laugh∣ing & singing to hell, but the spirit casteth rubs in his way, & puts him in minde of iudgement, that for all these thinges now ends reioyce, and heere comes in but: if this but were not, wee might reioyce still, if young men must for all the sportes of youth what then shall old men doe, being as they are now? surely if Salomon liued to see our olde men liue now, as heere he saith of young men, so high as sinne rageth, yet vengeance sits aboue it, as high as high Babel. Mee thinkes I see a sword hang in the aire by a twine threed, and all the sonnes of men labour to burst it in sunder. There is a place in hell where the couetous Iudge sitteth, the greedie Lawier, the griping Landlord, the careles Bishops, the lustie youth, the wanton dames, the theefe, the robbers of the common-wealth, they are punished in this life because they euer sin as long as they could, while mercie was offered vnto them, therefore because they would not bee washed; they shall be drowned. Now put together reioyce and remem∣ber: thou hast learned to be mery, now learne to bee wise: now therefore turne ouer a new leafe, and take a new lesson: for now Salomon mocketh not as he did before, therefore a checke to thy ruffes, a checke to thy cuffes, a checke to thy robes, a checke to thy golde, a checke to your riches, a checke to your beautie, a checke to your mucke, a checke to your graues: wo from aboue, wo from below, wo to all the stringes of vanitie: doest thou not now maruell that thou hadst not a feeling of sinne? for now thou seest Salomon saith true, thine owne hart can tell that it is wicked, but it cannot amend: therefore it is high time to amend: as Na∣than commeth to Dauid after Belzebub, so commeth accu∣sing conscience after sinne. Me thinkes that euery one should haue a feeling of sinne, though this day be like yesterday,
and to morrow like to day, yet one day will come for all, and then woe, woe, woe, and nothing but darkenes: and though God came not to Adam vntill the euening, yet hee came: although the fire came not vpon Sodom vntill the euening, yet it came and so comes the Iudge although he be not yet come, though he haue leaden feete, hee hath iron handes: the arrow staieth and is not yet fallen, so is his wrath: the pit is digged, the fire kindled, and all thinges are made readie and prepared against that day, onely the small sen∣tence is to come, which will not long tarrie. You may not thinke to be like to the theefe that stealeth and is not seene: nothing can be hid from him, and the Iudge followeth thee at the heeles: and therefore whatsoeuer thou art looke about thee, and doe nothing but that thou wouldest doe openly, for all thinges are opened vnto him: Sara may not thinke to laugh and not be seene: Geheza may not thinke to lie and not bee knowne: they that will not come to the banquet, must stand at the doore. What, doe you thinke that God dooth not remember our sinnes which we doe not regarde? for while wee sinne, the score runs on, and the Iudge setteth downe all in the table of remembrance, and his scrole rea∣cheth vp to heauen. Item for lending to Vsury. Item, for racking of rents Item, for deceiuing thy brethren. Item, for falshood in wares. I∣tem, for starching thy ruffes. Item, for curling thy haire. I∣tem, for painting thy face. Item, for selling of benefices. I∣tem, for staruing of soules Item, for playing at cardes. Item, for sleeping in the Church. Item, for prophaning the Sabboth day. With a number more hath God to call to account, for euery one must answere for himselfe. The fornicator for ta∣king of filthie pleasure, O sonne, remember thou hast taken thy pleasure, take thy punishment. The careles Prelate, for murthering so many thousand Soules. The Landlord for getting money from his poore Tenants by racking of his rentes: see the rest, all they shall come like a very sheepe, when the Trumpe shall sound, and the heauen and earth shal come to iudgement against them: when the heauens shall
vanish like a scrole, and the earth shall consume like fire, and all the creatures standing against them: The rockes shall cleaue a sunder, and the mountaines shake, and the founda∣tion of the earth shall tremble, and they shall say to the mountaines, couer vs, fall vpon vs and hide vs from the pre∣sence of his anger and wrath, whome wee haue not cared for to offend: but they shal not be couered & hid: but then they shall goe the blacke way, to the snakes and serpents, to bee tormented of deuils for euer: O paine vnspeakeable! and yet the more I expresse it, the more horrible it is, when you thinke of a torment passing all torments, and yet a torment passing all that: yet this torment is greater then them, and passing them all. Imagine you see a sinner going to hell, and his somner gape at him, his acquaintance looke at him, the Angels shoute at him, and the Saintes laugh at him, and the deuils raile at him, and many looke him in the face: and they that said they would liue and dye with him, forsake him, & leaue him to pay all the scores. Then Iudas would restore his bribes. Esau woulde cast vp his pottage. Achan would cast downe his golde, and Gehezi would refuse his giftes. Na∣buchadnezzar would be humbler. Balam would bee faith∣full, and the Prodigall sonne would be tame. Me thinkes I see Achan running about, where shall I hide my golde that I haue stolne, that it might not bee seene nor stand to appeare for a witnes against me? And Iudas running to the high Priestes, saying: hold, take againe your money, I will none of it, I haue betrayed the in∣nocent bloud. And Esau crying for the blessing when it is too late, ha∣uing sold his birth-right for a messe of pottage. Woe, woe, woe, that euer we were borne. O where is that Diues that would beleeue this, before he felt the fire in hell, or that would beleeue the poorest Lazarus in the worlde, to bee better then himselfe, before that dreadfull day come when they cannot helpe it, if they would neuer so faine, when repentance is too late? Herod shall then wish that he
were Iohn Baptist. Pharaoh would wishe that hee were Moses, and Saul would wish that hee had bene Dauid. Na∣buchadnezzar, that he had bene Daniel. Hammon to haue bene Mardocheus. Esau would wish to be Iacob, and Ba∣lam would wish he might dye the death of the righteous: then he will say, I will giue more then Ezekias: crye more then Esau: fast more then Moses: pray more then Daniel: weepe more then Mary Magdalen: suffer more stripes then Paul: abide more imprisonment then Michai: abide more crueltie then any mortall man would doe, that it might bee, Ite, goe ye curssed, might become yee blessed. Yea, I would giue all the goods in the worlde, that I might escape this dreadfull day of wrath and iudgement, and that I might not stand amongst the goe. O that I might liue a begger all my life, and a leaper. O that I might indure all plagues and sores from the top of the head, to the sole of the foote, su∣steine all sicknes and griefes, that I might escape this iudge∣ment. The guiltie conscience cannot abide this day. The sillie sheepe when shee is taken will not bleate, but you may carrie her and doe what you will with her, and shee will be subiect: but the swine, if shee be once taken, shee will roare and crye, and thinkes shee is neuer taken but to bee slaine. So of all thinges, the guiltie conscience cannot abide to heare of this day, for they knowe that when they heare of it, they heare of their owne condemnation. I thinke if there were a generall collection made through the whole worlde, that there might bee no iudgement day, then God would bee so rich, that all the world would goe a begging, and bee as a waste wildernes. Then the couetous Iudge would bring forth his bribes, then the craftie Lawier woulde fetch out his bagges: the Vsurer would giue his gaine, and the idle ser∣uant would dig vp his talent againe, & make a double there∣of. But all the money in the world wil not serue for one sin, but the Iudge must answere for his bribes, hee that hath money, must answere how he came by it, & iust condemnatiō mds
come vpon euery soule of them, then shall the sinner be euer dying and neuer dead, like the Salamander that is euer in the fire and neuer consumed. But if you come there, you may say as the Queene of Sa∣ba said of king Salomon, I beleeued the reporte that I he ard of thee in mine owne countrie, but the one halfe of thy wise∣dome was not tolde me. If you came there to see what is done, you may say, Now I beleeue the reporte that was told me in mine owne countrie concerning this place, but the one halfe as now I feele, I haue not heard of: now chuse you whether you will reioyce, or remember whether you will stand amongst you blessed, or amongst you curssed: whe∣ther you will enter while the gate is open, or knocke in vaine when the gate is shut: whether you wil seeke the Lord whilest he may be found, or be found of him when you would not be sought, being run into the bushes with Adam to hide your selues: whether you will take your heauen now here, or your hell then there: or through tribulation to enter into the king∣dome of God, and thus to take your hell now heere, or your heauen then there in the life to come with the blessed Saints & Angels so that heere∣after you may leade a new life, put∣ting on Iesus Christ and his righteousnesse. FINIS.
THE SINFVLL MANS SEARCH. Iob. 8. 5. 6. 7. 5 If thou wilt early seeke vnto God, and pray vnto the Al∣mightie: 6 If thou bee pure and vpright: then surely hee will awake vnto thee, and make the habitation of thy righteousnesse prosperous. 7 And though thy beginning be but small: yet thy latter end shall greatly increase. IN a sicke and euill affected bodie (dearely beloued) wee vsually see preparitiues ministred, that the ma∣ladies may bee made more fit and pliable to receiue wholsome medi∣cines. The like, yea, and greater re∣gard ought we to haue of our soules which being not crasie only, or light¦ly affected with sinne, but sicke euen vnto death, had neede to be prepared with threats and exhortations, comforts and consolatiōs, one way or other, that they may be made fit, not to receiue the preparatiue, but the perfection of happie sal∣uation. And for this cause haue I made choise of this part of Scripture, as of a light to shine vnto vs in darkenesse, a direc∣tion to our steps, and a lanthorne to our paths, while we wan∣der through the boistrous waues of this wicked world. The text is plaine, and obiect to euerie mans capacitie, naturally budding vnto blossomes: The first containing our duetie which we are to performe towards God. The second, Gods promises, if we performe this duty.
Our duetie towards God, is implied in these three condi∣tions. First, If thou wilt early seeke vnto God. Secondly, If thou wilt pray vnto the Almighty. Thirdly, If thou bee pure and vpright: so that the whole consisteth on these three poynts. First, what it is that God requireth, namely a dili∣gent Diuision. and speedy search, in these wordes, If thou wilt seeke early. Secondly, how thy search is to be made in prayer, in these wordes: If thou wilt pray to the Almighty. Thirdlie, what effect these thinges ought to worke in vs, a puritie and sinceritie of life, in these words, If thou be pure and vpright. As our duety towards God consisteth in three points: so Gods blessings towards vs, is also three-fold answerable to the same. First, for seeking, he promiseth, he will awake vnto thee. Secondly, for praying vnto him, he will make the ha∣bitations of thy righteousnesse prosperous. Thirdly, for being pure and vpright, he will make thy latter end increase excee∣dingly: yea, though thy beginning be but small. First therefore concerning the search, it is a worke both Cōcerning the search. Psal 107 Matth 6 in desire and labour to bee ioyned to God. In the Psalme this standeth for the burthen of the song: They called vpon the Lord in the time of their trouble, and hee deliuered them. It is but Aske and haue, seeke and finde, knocke and it shall bee opened vnto you. Sauing that here these things are to bee re∣garded, to wit, how, by whom, and when we must seeke the Lord. How? First, faithfully, for if yee haue but as much as a graine of mustard seede, and say vnto this mountaine, Re∣moue, Mat 17. 20 Eccle 35 it shall remoue, and nothing shall be vn possible vnto you. Then next hubly, for it is the humble petition that pearceth the skies, & that shewed the Publican to depart home to his house more iustified then the boasting Pharisie: and they alone that be humble and meeke, finde rest for their soules. And last of all, continually, for wee must not faint in well doing, because the reward is not promised to him that doth, Gal. 6 1. Thes 6 but to him that continueth to doe. But wee may long seeke and neuer finde, except wee seeke the Father by the Sonne: For no man knoweth the Fa∣ther, 1. Tim 2. but the Sonne, and hee to whome the Sonne shall disclose
him: he is the way, the trueth, and the life, and no man com∣meth to the Father but by him. There is one God and one me∣diatour betwixt God and man, the man Christ Iesus. So that if wee sinne, wee haue an aduocate, Iesus Christ the iust, and hee is the propitiation for our sinnes: onely let vs seeke the Lord while he may be found. And to this ende the worde Seeking is vsed in this place, that we may learne, that as the heauens and the planets, and the whole frame of nature were ordained to finish their course by motions and operation: so man, as he was ordai∣ned to a most blessed and happie end, should attaine there∣unto, not by slouth and idlenesse, but by an earnest seeking of the same. The kingdome of heauen is like a treasure, Matt 13. 14 which cannot bee found without seeking and digging. It is like the precious pearle, for which the wise Marchant was content not onely to seeke, but to sell all that he had, to buy it. God hath placed vs here in this world as husbandmen to plough vp the fallowe of our hearts: as labourers to worke in his vineyard: as trauellers to seeke a countrey: as soul∣diers to fight the battell of the Lorde against the flesh, the world, and the diuell. And for this purpose hath hee propo∣sed vnto vs an vntilled land, a vineyarde, a triple enemie to fight against: that wee might remember, that wee must till the ground, if wee vvill reape the fruite: that we must prune the vine, if wee will drinke of the grape: that we must fight if we will ouercome. He that tilleth the land (sayth the wise man) shall bee satitfied with breade, but hee that followeth Prouer. 28 idlenesse, shall be filled with pouertie. Idlenesse is a moath or canker of the minde, and the fruites thereof are wicked co∣gitations, euill affections, and worse actions: corrupt trees without fruite, twise dead, and plucked vp by the rootes, en∣gendering Iude. 1 Prou. 24 in the minde a loathing of God and godlines. Eschue therefore idlenesse, I beseech ye, and by the want ye finde in others, learne instructions for your selues. Be not forgetfull how busie your enemy is, if he finde ye idle: first hee putteth ye in minde of some vanitie: then offereth op∣portunity to practise: then hee craueth consent; and if yee grant him that, he triumpheth by adding practise: hee lea∣ueth
no meanes vnattempted, whereby he may subuert and bring ye to perdition. To one (as to Eua) hee promiseth the Gen. 3 knowledge of good and euill. Another he seduceth with ly∣ing speeches, as he did Pharao the king, whom he deceiued Exod. 7. 22 1. Kings 13 1. Cor. 21 by false Prophets. To the Iewes he pretended the temple of the Lord. To the Heathen hee shewed vniuersalities and an∣tiquities. And to omit particulars, hee leaueth no men vnat∣tempted, whereby he may entangle the soules of the simple, and wrap them in the snares of death. Flie idlenesse there∣fore, and seeke vertue, and the way thereof: seeke learning, as for a iewell, make diligent search and inquisition after her: seeke early, and seeke late. In the morning sow thy seede, and in the euening let not thy hande rest: seeke him in the day of trouble, and hee will deliuer thee, and thou shalt glo∣rifie him. Seeke him, there is the commaundement: he will deliuer thee, there is the promise: and thou shalt glorifie him, there is the condition. To disobey the commaunde∣ment is rebellion, to distrust the promise is infidelitie, to re∣fuse the condition is vile ingratitude. Wherefore let vs seeke, and seeke earnestly, with a feruent spirit, and humblenesse of heart, and let vs perswade our selues that there is no seeking without finding, no opening without knocking. The second circumstance to be considered in this poynt,  is to whome we must seeke for these thinges. Our direction is made vnto God, For euery good and perfect gift is from a∣boue, Iames. 1. 27 descending from the father of lights. And as for manie causes we are to seeke God, and to God alone, so especiallie for these foure. First, because we haue nothing of our selues, nor of any o∣ther creature, but whatsoeuer we haue, wee haue it of God: for what hast thou that thou hast not receiued? in him wee liue, wee moue, and haue our being. Art thou wise in thine owne conceit? O remember that the wisedome of the world is foolishnesse with God. O consider that the naturall man vnderstandeth not the thinges of God. These things are hid 1. Cor. 2 Rom. 1 from the wise and prudent, and are reuealed to babes and sucklings. Alas, what were man if he were once left to him∣selfe? A map of misery, and a sinke of calamitie. Alas, how
were he able to resist the fierie darts of the aduersarie, who 2. Pet. 5 Reue. 2 cōtinually goeth about like a roring lyon, seeking whom he may deuoure? Here ye may note first his malice, for he dai∣ly accuseth vs before the chiefe Iudge of the kinges bench: when hee cannot preuaile in this court, but seeth his billes of accusation repelled, then hee remooueth the matter to the court of our owne consciences, where on the one side hee layeth the bookes of the law, and statutes made against sin: on the other side, the billes of accusation brought in against vs out of the bookes of the lawe, alleadging these strict pla∣ces against vs: The soule that sinneth shall die the death: Curssed is he that abideth not in euery point of the lawe, to doe it. On the otherside, he bringeth in our consciences to wit∣nesse against vs, and then inferreth this hard conclusion: Therefore there is no hope in saluation. Then if hee see that wee appeale from iustice to mercy, and say: At what time soeuer a sinner repenteth, the Iudge putteth all his wickednesse out of his remembrance, hee dealeth with vs, as crafty worldlinges deale in matters of lawe, who when they see their matters passe against them in higher Courts, bring downe their case into the countrie, to be decided by the neighbours: who, either for their sim∣plicity cannot, or for their fauour dare not iudge of the truth of the matter. So our aduersarie, though God himselfe do discharge vs, though our conscience doth testifie our innocencie: yet he accuseth in the third court before men, where he is bolde to powre out his whole venome and poyson of his malice a∣gainst vs, and to forge what lyes, and slaunders, and lybels hee list, because hee knoweth they shall bee receiued as true. Thus hee accused Christ Iesus our blessed Lord and Sauiour before Pontius Pilate, and caused diuers false and vntrue witnesses to come in against him. But if hee were malitious onely to wish our destruction, and not mightie to wreake his malice, wee shoulde haue little cause to feare: but he is mighty, therefore hee is tear∣med
a lyon, the power of darknesse, a great dragon, which Luke. 11 Eph. 6 Reu. 12 drewe to the earth the thirde part of the starres of heauen: that is, with earthly temptation to haue ouerthrowne them, which seemed to shine in the Church of God as Lamps, & Starres. O then how easie is our ouerthrow, if the Lord did not holde vs vp, which shine not as starres in heauen, but creepe like wormes on earth? Yet if hee were but malitious and mightie, it were better with vs, but he is fierce, and therefore called a roring Lyon,  who laying wayt for the bloud of the godlie, stirreth vp bloud-thirstie persecutors, to make themselues drunke with the bloud of the saintes: as most grieuously he did from the time of Iohn Baptist, to the raigne of Maxentius, the space of 294. yeares, slaying some by the sworde, burning other with fire, hanging some on the gallowes, drowning some in riuers, stabbing some with forks of yron pressing others vn∣to death with stones, deuouring many thousands of the ten∣der lambes of Christs flocke. To this malice, might and rage, is added his subtil policy,  which he vseth in circumuenting the faithfull, he doeth not pitch his tentes in any one place, but walketh about from place to place to spie out his best aduauntage, in the night Iohn. 1 he soweth Tares, and in the daie hee hindereth the growth thereof. He proceedeth after further, and addeth to his policie in∣dustrie,  hee considereth our natures and dispositions, and to what sinnes wee doe most incline: and thereunto he ap∣plieth himselfe, sometimes by flatterie, sometimes by feare, sometimes by feeding our humours hee subtilly entiseth vs, sometimes by violence he goeth about to enforce vs, some∣time by changing himselfe into an Angell of light, he ende∣uoureth to betray our soules into his hands, and in whatsoe∣uer estate he findeth vs, hee thereby taketh occasion to lay siege to our soules. Thus ye see noted in a word, the force of our aduersarie: examine nowe your selues, whether yee haue any thing in
your selues, and you shal finde nothing but weakenesse and corruption. It is God that giueth strength to the mightie, wisedome to the prudent, and knowledge to the vnderstan∣ding: he teacheth Dauids hand to fight, and his fingers to Psal. 144 battaile, hee giueth strength to his armes to breake a bowe, euen a bowe of steele: wherefore let neither the wise man glorie in his wisedome, nor the strong man in his strength: but let him that glorieth, glorie onely in the Lord. Secondly, we are to seeke vnto God alone, because none  is so present as he for God, because he is almightie, and with his power filleth both heauen and earth, is present alwayes with them that feare him, and readie to succour them in distresse. I he Lord is neere to all that call vpon him in truth, he heareth our gronings & sighs, and knoweth what things are necessary for vs before we aske. The third reason why wee must seeke vnto God is, none is so able to helpe vs as he: but of this I shal haue particular  occasion to speake when I come to this point, and pray to the Almighty. The fourth reason why we must seeke Christ alone is, be∣cause there is none so willing to helpe vs as he. It is a great  courage to vs to make sute, when we are perswaded of the willingnesse of him to whom we make sute: and I pray ye, who was euer more carefull for our saluation, and more watchfull ouer vs than the Lord? who euer put his trust in him, and was confounded? In this respect he is called a fa∣ther, because, as the father tendreth his sonne, so the Lord doth al those that put their trust in him. Can there bee any more vvilling to helpe vs than Christ, vvhose vvhole head vvas sicke, and vvhose hart vvas heauy for our sakes? yea, in vvhose bodie, from the sole of the foote to the crown of the head, was nothing but wounds and swellings, and sores? But alas, this vvas nothing to that hee suffered for our sakes. He was compassed about with feares and horrours, till his sweat was drops of bloud, & his bones bruised in the flesh, he was whipped and scourged, and chastised with sorrows,
till he cried out in the bitternes of his soule, O Lord, if it bee possible, let this cup passe from me. The heauy hand of God was so grieuous vpon him, that hee bruised his very bones, and rent his raines asunder: hee could find no health in his flesh, but was wounded, yea wounded to the death, euen the most bitter death vpon the Crosse. His tender fingers were nailed to the crosse, his face was wrinckled with wee∣ping and wailing, his sides imbrued & gored with his owne bloud, spurting and gushing fresh from his ribs, the shadow of death was vpon his eies. O what griefe could be like to this, or what condemna∣tion could be so heauie, sith there was no wickednes in his hands? sith he was the brightnesse of his fathers glorie, and the sunne of righteousnesse that shined in the worlde, as to see his daies at an end, to see such throbbing sighs & care∣full thoughts without cause of his, so deeply ingrauen in the tables of his breast. But was this all? no, my brethren, sith his excellency was such aboue al creatures, that the world was not worthy to giue him breath, it was a greater griefe vnto him, to see himselfe made a worme, and not a man, a shame of men, and contempt of the people: to see his life shut vp in shame and reproches, how could it but shake his bones out of ioynt, and make his heart melt in the middest of his bowels? who was euer so full of woe, and brought so low in the dust of death? vpon whom did the malice of Sathan euer get so great a conquest? This though it were exceeding, yet it was not all, no, it was but a taste of griefe in comparison of the rest: beholde therefore (if your vvearie eyes will suffer you to behold) the depth of all miseries yet behind: the sinne that he hated, he must take vpon his owne bodie, and beare the vvrath of his father powred out against it. This is the fulnesse of al paines that compassed him round about, vvhich no tongue is able to vtter, or heart conceiue: the anger of the father burneth in him, euen to the bottome of hel, and deepe sinke of con∣fusion: it wrapped him in the chaines of eternall death: it
crucified him, and threw him downe into the bottomlesse pit of calamity, and made his soule by weeping & vvailing to melt into these bitter teares trickling from his eyes: O God my God, why hast thou forsaken me? O that my head vvere a vvell of waters, and a fountain of teares, that I might weep day & night at the remembrance hereof: but least I linger too long about one flowre, vvhile I haue many to gather, I vvill conclude this point thus in a word: Sith Christ hath suffered these, and an infinite num∣ber such like torments for our sakes, it is blasphemous once to dreame or imagine any to bee more willing to helpe vs than he: nay, he is more readie to heare our prayers, than we to offer them vnto him, insomuch as he complaineth by the Prophet Esay: I haue bene found of them which sought me not, all the day long haue I stretched out my hand vnto a rebel∣lious Esay 65 people, which walked in a way that was not good, euen after their owne imaginations. And vnto Ierusalem hee saith, O Ierusalem, Ierusalem, how often would I haue gathe∣red Math 25 thee together, as the henne gathereth her chickens, but you would not. Wherefore to ende this poynt: Seeke for knowledge, as for a treasure, and for wisedome, as for the wedge of gold of Ophir: No mention shall be made in com∣parison of it, of Corall, Gabish, or that pretious Onix: For Ioh 28 wisedome is more precious than pearles. But aboue all things, seeke it where it may be found and where is the place of vn∣derstanding? Surely, man knoweth not the path thereof: the deepe sayth, It is not in me: the sea saith, It is not in me: death and destruction say, We haue heard the fame thereof with our eares: all creatures say, it is not with vs: but God vnderstandeth the way thereof: and vnto man he saith, The feare of the Lorde is the beginning of wisedome, and to departe Pro 9. from euill is vnderstanding. The third circumstance is, when wee must seeke vnto God: and holy Dauid answereth, Early, euen in a time when hee may bee found. Let vs redeeme the day, which we haue Psal 3 foreslowed so many dayes, wherein wee haue so long hard∣ned
our hearts: let vs take vp this day, and make it the day of our repentance: let vs make it a day of newnes of life, as it is the first day of the new yeere: let euen this moment bee the last of a sinfull life, and the first day to godlines. And as the wise man saith: Make no long tarrying to turne vnto the Eccle 5 Lorde, and put not off from day to day, for suddainely shall the Lordes wrath breake, and in thy securitie thou shalt be destroy∣ed, and shalt perish in the time of vengeance. Art thou a Magistrate, placed in high roome and autho∣ritie, and seated in the throne of dignitie? then vse not this thy might to wrong and oppression, grinde not the faces of the poore, swell not with pride, despising his lowe estate: Sell not thy reghteousnesse for siluer preferring the marchants Amos 8 of Babylon before the citizens of Ierusalem. Art thou a priuate labouring man? Doe thy duetie truelie, be subiect, and liue in dread to displease the good Magistrate. 1. Pet 3 Art thou olde, and hast consumed the flowre of thy youth in wantonnesse? breake off thy course, and frame thy selfe to sobrietie: giue the water no passage, no not a little: for if it haue neuer so little issue, it will ouerflowe thee: and if thou doe slacke the raines neuer so little, thy sinnes will carrie thee (like a wilde horse) thorow brambles and bushes, and will leaue no soundnes in thy flesh: worke this reformation in thy selfe betimes, euen to day, euen this first day of the newe yeere: If yee will heare my voyce, harden not your heartes. Art thou young, and doost begin to flourish like the yong palme tree? O consider, that the onely way to retaine the blossoms of thy beautie, and to keepe thy flowre from wi∣thering, and thy leafe from fading away, is to seeke earlie vn∣to God, and to apply thy minde to vnderstanding, to pre∣uent the morning watches, and to giue thy bodie to bee moistened of the morning dew! For beside the good houres that are well imployed in some good studie and holie exer∣cise, early rising bringeth health to thy body, and increaseth the number of thy dayes. Seeke therefore, and seeke early, consecrate your selues
Nazarites vnto the Lord, touch no vncleane thing, giue no prouocation to the flesh, Striue with the cocke in watchful∣nes, Eccle 12 and rise with the chirping of the birdes: sacrifice your bo∣die a sweete smelling sacrifice vnto the Lorde. This sacrifice is like a sacrifice of fine flowre: it is like the fat taken from the peace offering: yea, it is better than any sacrifice, it is like the flowre of roses in the spring of the yeere, and as the lillies in the springs of waters, and as the branches of Frankincense in the Eccle 32. 47. 50 time of Summer: and as a vessel of massy golde beset with rich stones, as a faire Oliue that is fruitfull, and as the tree that groweth vp to the cloudes. Hauing spoken of the Search, it followeth that I speake of the manner how it is to be made. In prayer, by these wordes, If thou pray vnto the Almightie. I shewed yee before, the force of our aduersarie, receiue now a shield against his force, euen the shield of prayer. He is not to bee resisted by ringing an hallowed bell, nor by sprinkling of holy water, nor by the relikes of Saintes, nor by our owne workes and merites, for these are weapons of his owne making, but by an earnest seeking to God, which search and seeking must be made by prayer, against which his poysoned venome taketh no effect. It is his malice that accuseth: prayer pleadeth thy case before God, and repelleth all his accusations: for all the Pro∣phets doe witnesse, that whatsoeuer wee aske in prayer, if Math 2 wee beleeue, we shall receiue it. It is his rage and furie that should terrifie vs; nay that prayer that strengthened Samp∣son to rent a young Lyon, as one should haue rent a kid, ha∣uing nothing in his hand, shall smite and shut vp the mouth of this Lyon. As for his policie and walking vp and downe, seeking to deuoure vs, it cannot preuaile; For the prayer of the faithfull shall saue them, and the Lorde shall raise them Iames 5. 15 vp, and if they haue committed sinne it shall bee forgiuen them, and after this conflict ended, they shall triumph for euer with Iesus Christ our Sauiour. But in any case see you vnite to your prayer knowledge, that you be not seduced to
offer your petitions to strange gods, as Saintes, stockes or stones. Then consent that we aske only in the name of Christ Iohn 16 Iesus, not for any desert of our owne: for whosoeuer belee∣ueth in Christ, shall haue remission of sinnes, he shall not pe∣rish but haue life euerlasting, hee shall not come into iudge∣ment, Act. 25. 10 but shall passe from death to life. Lastly, a confidence, which is a certaine perswasion of Gods mercie toward vs: this is that prayer, of which the lambe testifieth, That what∣soeuer we aske by prayer, it shall be giuen vs by God the father. A thing (dearely beloued) so precious, that nothing is more accepted in heauen, nothing more gratefull to God: a ser∣uice commanded of God himselfe, taught by Christ our Sa∣uiour, and frequented by the Angels: a thing of more force with God, than any oration of the eloquent. Hast thou not heard how the Sunne stood still in the fir∣mament, and was not suffered to run his course? Iosua and Iosh 6 2. King. 20 Dan. 6. Ezechias prayed, and the Sunne stood still. Hast thou not heard of the stopping of the Lyons mouthes? Daniel prayed and his prayer stopped the Lyons greedy and deuouring throates. Hast thou not heard of the diuiding of the red sea? the Israelites prayed, and the waters of Iorden were dried vp: yea, the Israelites prayed, and the waters stoode about Exod. 14 them like to a wall. Hast thou not heard how the fierie fur∣nace lost his heate? the three children prayed, and the fire Dan. 3 lost his heate. Hast thou not heard howe the heauens were opened and shut? Elias prayed, and the heauens were shut 1. King. 8 vp three yeares: Elias prayed, and the clouds powred downe raine from heauen. O sure fortresse, more forcible than any engine, and stron∣ger than the gates of hell, and to conclude, the summe and substance of all in few words: the only thing whereby mor∣tall men haue the cloudes, and the stars, and the Angels, and all the powers of heauen at commandement. For as Debo∣rah sung in her song: They fought from heauen, euen the Iudg. 4 starres in their courses fought against Sisera: for all creatures haue bene subiect to the prayers of the faithfull, to reuenge
the Lordes quarrell, to helpe the Lorde, to helpe the Lord a∣gainst the mightie. Prayer hath euer bin the cognisance, and the victorie, and the triumph of the faithfull: for as the soule giueth life to the bodie, so prayer giueth life to the soule. O that I could engraue the loue of it in your heartes, as with a Diamond, and so instill your mindes, that my wordes might bee prickes to your consciences, and thereby giue ye occasion to pray often. It is a wonderfull matter to bee a∣ble to perswade men, but if prayer bee able to perswade the liuing God, ô how great is the force therof! it goeth throrow the cloudes, and ceaseth not till it come neere, and will not depart till the most high haue respect thereunto. O that you would therefore pray often, & learne of Christ (the most ab∣solute patterne of our life) to pray continually. He prayed in his baptisme, in the wildernes, in preaching, in working of Luke 6 Luke 6 Luke 6 Iohn 11 Math 26 Iohn 18 Luke 22 Luke 23 Math 19 Psal 40 Rom 8 miracles, in his passion, on the mount, in the garden, in his last supper, in commending his spirite to God at all times, and in all places, that he might leaue vnto vs an example of the same. It followeth, And pray to the Almightie. To those three former reasons which I brought, why wee must seeke and pray to God alone, I added this as a fourth: because there is none so able to helpe vs as the Lord. He that trusteth in the Lorde shall be as mount Sion. If God be on our side, who can be against vs? It is God that iustifieth, who condem∣neth? The Lord destroyeth the counsell of the heathen, hee 2. Tim 4 maketh their deuises to be of no effect. Christ is the Angell of great counsell, wisedome, and vnderstanding, and there is Psal 83 Esay 9 Prou 2 no deuise against the Lorde. The world notwithstanding is come to that frame, that euery man hath got him a strange kinde of beliefe. Some beleeue not the Lawe, but the pro∣phets: some be perswaded in the supremacie, but not in the sacrament: some in free will, but not in merite: some in inuo∣cation on saints, but not in purgatorie: some in pilgrimages and pardons, but not in images: some like the doctrine well inough, but not the preachers: the most beleeue little, yet many beleeue somewhat, few beleeue all: therefore to deale
plainely, because plaine dealing is best, you must not beleeue by the halfes: I meane, you must not repose some trust in God, and some in Saintes, but all in the Lorde. The gods of the Gentiles they haue mouthes and speake not, ees and see not, Psalm 105 eares and heare not. then what can bee looked for at their handes? But the Lord is strong and mightie, a mercifull God: and therefore thorow the Scriptures: he is called a Rocke, a Psalm 18. Fortresse, a strong Tower, a Shielde, a horne of saluation, a refuge; the Lord of hostes, with other such like appellations, that we might bee assured, that our helpe and deliuerance commeth from the Lord. Puttest thou any trust in man, whose breath is in his nostrils? Cursed is he that maketh man his strength & flesh his arme. Surely Pharaoh, and all princes are a broken staffe, on which Iere. 77. 1. King 16 if a man leane, it will strike into his hand and pearce it, & lay him groueling in the dust: It is better therefore to trust in the Psalm 18 Lord, thā to put any confidence in Princes Thinkest thou that Angels, or Saints, or Images can helpe thee? O foolish and impious pietie, to attribute more vnto the Angels, than they dare arrogate vnto themselues. The Angel in the reuelation, forbiddeth Iohn to worship him. As for the image, we reade Reue 19 that to turne the glorie of the incorruptible God, into the similitude of a corruptible creature, is idolatrie. Well may I Rom 1 then affirme with Moses, Cursed be the Image, and the Image Deut 27 maker. The conclusion therefore of this point is this, that we seeke the Lord and his strength euermore, that we pray vn∣to God in humilitie & sinceritie, and in full assurance of faith continually, who without end is to be sought, because with∣out end he is to be beloued. The third thing contained in our dutie is, what effect this seeking and praying ought to worke in vs, comprehended in these words: If thou be pure & vpright: If the cloudes be ful, they will powre forth raine vpon the earth: & vnpossible it is, that a man that seeketh after God and prayeth vnto the al∣mightie, should not bring forth the fruits of a godly life, for if the tree be good, the fruits cannot be bad: & if the head of the
water be pure, it wil send forth pure waters into the cesterns. Wherefore as good motions are stirred vp by prayer, so must they bee fostred by practise of life, according to that of the Apostle: Quench not the spirit, nor grieue the holy one of God, 1. Thes 6 by whome ye are sealed to the day of redemption. He quencheth, dearly beloued, the spirit, which being once lightened with the sparkles of faith, & felt Gods motions in Ephes 4 his hart, doth neglect to increase the one to a flame, & the o∣ther to good workes in his life, but with the dog turneth to his vomit, & with the Sow that was washed, to her wallow∣ing againe in the mire. Therefore (beloued) loue and seeke the Lord, pray to the almightie, be pure and vpright in con∣uersation, fly from sinne as from a serpent; for if thou come neare, it will bite thee. The teeth thereof are as the teeth of a Lyon, to slay the soules of men, and all iniquitie is as a two edged sword, the woundes that it giues cannot bee healed. I dare not stand as I would vpon these pointes, fearing tedi∣ousnes: wherefore let this suffice for the former generall part, concerning the dutie we owe vnto God. Now Gods promises for the performance hereof, yeeld vn∣to vs most plentifull matter of doctrine & consolatiō. First, of his iustice, that as he will suffer no sin vnpunished: so he will leaue no good work vnrewarded, but giueth to euery seueral actiō his seueral hire, ust recompence of reward. Shall the howre come, in which al that are in their graues, shal heare a voice, & come forth, they that haue done wel, to the resurre∣ction of life, they that haue done euill, to the resurrection of condemnation? Shall the Lord search Ierusalem with Lant∣hornes? Shall all foule corners be swept, and all pleites and wrinckles be vnfolded? Shall the sea, graue, death, and hell, giue vp all that is in them? and shall all the dead (both great and small) stand before God, when the bookes are opened? and shall euery man haue prayse of God according vnto his deseruing? Shall wee then discerne betweene the vessels of honour and of wrath, betweene sheepe and goates, the iust and vniust? Finally, shall there be an infallible generall, &
incorrupt iudgement, wherein the booke of all oar offences shall be laide wide open? Now God bee mercifull vnto vs; 1. Thes 5 be fauourable O Lord, be fauourable But to proceede, it is thy nature O Lorde, togather vp the wheate, and burne the tares, to cut downe all fruitles trees, & cast them into the fire, Ephes 4 yea, into a fierie furnace, that neuer shall be quenched, into an vtter darkenesse, where is weeping, wayling, and gnashing of teeth; then be fauourable O Lord, be fauourable. Doth not the Lord spare Dauid, a king and a prophet for murther? doth he not spare the Sichemites for adulterie? nor Absalom for treason? nor Saul for tyrannie? nor Eli for neg∣ligence? nor Achab, Ieroboam, nor Iezabell for crueltie? nor Herod, Nabuchadnezzar, and Lucifer for pride; nor Pharaoh for incredulitie: then be fauourable O Lord, be fauourable to vs, in whom almost euery one of these sins doe dwell and re∣maine. Did the Lorde for corruption ouerflow the worlde with water? did hee burne Sodome for her villanie? did hee cast Adam and Eue out of Paradise, for eating of the forbid∣den fruite? did he stone a poore wretch to death, for gathe∣ring chips on the Sabboth day? then be fauourable O Lorde, be fauourable vnto vs. But dooth not the Lord spare the Ce∣dar tree for his height? nor the Oke for his strength? nor the Poplar for his smoothnes? nor the Lawrell for his greenesse? No verily, from the Cedar that is in Lybanon, euen to the hy∣sop that groweth out of the wall, yea, euery one that brin∣geth not forth good fruite, is hewen downe and cast into the fire: it is a righteous thing with God, to render vengeance to those that disobey him, and to destroy such as haue forsaken the lawe, by euerlasting perdition. Behold, the Lord shal come in the great and latter day of iudgement, when none shall escape his iudgement seat, with Reue 1. 7 2. Cor 5 cloudes shall he come, and euerie eie shall see him, euen they which pierced him thorow, shall also wayle before him, be∣ing sūmoned all to appeare most fearfully before his imperiall throne of maiestie: thē be fauorable O Lord, be fauorable. A∣las, with what eies shal we miserable sinners behold him, so
gloriously sitting in his royall kingdom, with all his mightie and holy angels, and whole number of saints sounding with the voice of the archangell, and trumpet of God, causing the heauens to passe away with a noise, and the elements to melt like waxe, & the earth to burne with the works there∣of? yea, with what eies shall wee behold him, when wee see the Sun darkned, the Moone eclipsed, and the stars fal down from heauen? But alas, when he taketh the furbished blade into his hand, when he is ready to throw the fiery thunder∣bolts of his wrath, vvhen hee summoneth before him the worme that neuer dieth, the fire that neuer shall be quen∣ched, to reuenge vppon the wicked: into what a plight are they then driuen? then leaue they off; be fauorable O Lord, be fauorable, and say to the hils; O ye mountains, come and couer vs, O ye waters come and ouerwhelme vs: wo, wo, wo, how great is this darknes? The godly on the other side are bathed in such streames of blisse, and aduanced to such happines, as neither tongue can vtter, nor heart conceiue. The second thing wee haue to note in his promises is his mercy which exceedeth al his workes. For God, though he haue giuē a curse of the law against sinners, yet seeing Christ for the penitent hath borne the curse, whereby his iustice is not impaired: he is content to accept our weaknesse as our strength, to recompence our imperfection with rewarde of greatest perfection, and that which we can performe but in small part he is content to accept as whole, not for any de∣sert of ours, but in the satisfaction of his son, who paide with the seale of his own bloud, the ransome for our sins, he hath cancelled the handwriting that vvas against vs. Wherefore we are to pray vnto God, that vvhensoeuer our sinnes shall come in question before him, that hee would looke vppon Christ Iesus, the true looking glasse, in whom he shal find vs most pure and innocent, and to shine most cleerely in the righteousnesse which he hath giuen vs by faith: so that wee appeare not in our own righteousnesse, but in the righteous∣nesse of the lambe, who hauing taken away the sins of the
world, and hauing made vs as white as snowe, though wee were as red as crimson, saith, he will be mercifull to our ini∣quities, and wil remember our sinnes no more. Of him do al the Prophets beare witnesse, that through his name al that beleeue shal receiue remissiō of their sins. Againe, Drinke ye all of this, for this is my bloud, which is shed for the remissi∣on of sins. Christ gaue himself for our sins, that he might de∣liuer vs from the curse of the law, euen according to the will of the Father. Christ bare our sinnes in his own body on the tree, that we being deliuered from sin, might liue in righte∣ousnes, by whose stripes we are healed, for we were as sheep going astray, but are now returned to the shepheard and bi∣shop of our soules. It is no more but beleeue, & be saued: be∣leeue, and receiue remission: beleeue, and lay off thine own righteousnes, and inuest thy selfe with the righteousnesse of the vnspotted lambe. Dauid was yong, and after was old, yet in all his daies hee neuer saw the righteous forsakē. Somtimes he scourgeth his childrē, but like a louing father he laieth no more vpon them thā they are able to beare, for he afflicteth thē for his own iu∣stice, because they are sinners: for his wisedome, to exercise their faith: for his mercy, to cause thē to repent: but this is the end of al, he helpeth thē in their distresses, he reuengeth him∣selfe vpon his enemies, & giueth to his people rest and qui∣etnesse. O that we would therefore praise the Lord, and for∣get not al other his singular benefits: O that we would con∣fesse, that his mercy endureth for euer. The third thing to note in his promises, is his boūtiful kind∣nes, in requiting so smal a thing, with so great & liberal bles∣sings: and bindeth himselfe by obligation (as it were) that as sure as we performe the one, so hee will not faile to accom∣plish the other. The fourth, is his patience and long suffering, which is not slacknes, as some men account slacknes: but is patience, be∣cause willingly he would haue no man to perish, but gladly would haue all men come to repentance. Hee is content to
stay our leasure, till we seeke and pray vnto him: and neuer smiteth, till there be no hope of redresse. The fift, is his loue, in that he is content to stir vs vp to holy exercises, & purity of life, & to allure vs with faire promises of aid, & prosperous increase of al his blessings in this world. The particular examination of these blessings would require a larger discourse, thā (fearing tediousnes) I dare presume to trouble ye withal: wherefore a word of each, and so I end. Touching the first, where it is said, God wil awake vp vnto thee, it is a greater benefit than the words import: for it sig∣nifieth, not only that he will heare thee, but that he will also do what thou desirest and satisfie thy request. As long as the sinner sleepeth, the Lord is said to bee asleepe: but as soone as the sinner awaketh from sin, God will arise (saith Dauid) Psalm. 78 and his enemies shall be scattered, and they that hate him, shal fly before him: as the smoak vanisheth before the wind, & as the waxe melteth before the fire, euen so shall the wic∣ked perish at the presence of God. Wherfore as Paul exhor∣ted the Ephesians, so I exhort you, Awake thou that sleepest, Ephe. 5 stād vp frō the dead, & Christ shal giue thee light: awake vnto God, & God wil awake vnto thee, & Christ euen the son of God, the brightmorning star, shal giue thee the light of life. In the second, he promiseth abundance of worldly bles∣sings, in recōpence of praier, for it is said, He wil make the ha∣bitations of thy righteousnes prosperous, that is, the Lord will Reue. 22. 2 Psalm 1. 12 make peace within thy wals, & prosperity within thy pala∣ces: he will cōmand his blessings to be with thee in thy store Prou 28▪ house, and in al thou settest thy hand vnto: he will open vnto thee his good treasures, euen the heauens to giue raine on thy land in due season▪ Thou shalt lay vp gold, as the dust, & the gold of Ophir, as the flint of the riuer: thou shalt wash Iob 22 thy paths with butter, & thy rocks shal powre out riuers of oyle: thou shalt cal saluation thy wal, & praise shalbe in thy gates. Lo, thus shal the man be blessed that feareth God. Psal. 128. Lastly, for being pure & vpright, he wil make thy latter end greatly increase, & that thou maist the lesse mistrust his pro∣mise,
he will do it, though thy beginning be but small. Here (brethren) ye see what a sea of matter is offered me, wherunto if I would commit my selfe, I might discourse vn∣to ye, what strange euents (by Gods prouidence) haue hap∣ned in the world, what great kings and potentates haue bin plucked down from their thrones, and vvhat contemptible persons in the eie of the world, haue bin aduanced to their roomes. How Mardocheus a stranger vvas exalted into Ha∣mons place: how Ioseph and Daniel, the one a bond-man in Hest. 8 Gen. 30 Dan. 6 Egypt, the other a captiue in Babylon, vvere made princes in those kingdomes. But because I vvil not ouermuch trans∣gresse the bonds of modesty, or hold yee longer than in this place I haue beene accustomed: only remember vvhat the Prophet saith; He raiseth the needy out of the dust, and lifteth Psal. 113 the poore out of the mire that he might set him with the prin∣ces, euen with the princes of the world. Remember the example of Dauid, vvhom the Lord chose Psal 78 and tooke from the Ewes great vvith young: that he might feed his people in Iacob and his inheritance in Israel. Remē∣ber Iob. 42 the example of Iob, hovv the Lord turned the captiuitie of Iob, as the riuers in the south, how he blessed the last daies of Iob more thā the first, hovv he gaue him sheep, & camels & oxen, & she asses, in more abundance than he had before, hovv he increased him vvith sons and daughters, euen to the fourth generatiō, so that he died being old & ful of daies. Re member euen our own estate, for vvhom the Lord hath don great things already: as created vs, and redeemed vs, & san∣ctified Psal. 126 vs, and not long since deliuered vs from the gaping iavves of those that sought to suck our bloud. Vpon some he Psal. 41. hath bestovved humility, vvhereby their minds are adorned vvith vertue: honor vpō others, vvherby their persons are in∣uested vvith maiesty: vpon others comlines, vvherby the o∣ther tvvo are graced: vpon others orchards, vvhich they plā∣ted not, or at least vnto vvhich they gaue no increase: vpon others increase of vertuous children, whereby their posterity is preserued vpō others, the free passage of his word, vvhich
a long time had beene obscured by ignorance, the mother of deuotion, as the shauelings call it, but vnder a stepdame of destructiō, as we perceiue it: & though he bestow but som one or two of his blessings vpon vs, yet how much are wee bound for these blessings, to sing praise, & honor, and glory, vnto him that sitteth vpon the throne, and vnto the Lambe for euer. But vpon whom hee hath bestowed all these bles∣sings, O how strictly by good cause are they bound to mag∣nifie the Lord, and to reioice in God their Sauiour. Exa∣mine then your owne consciences, I beseech yee, whether God hath bestowed all these blessings vpon you or no, and if he haue, O what great cause haue yee to come before his face with praise, to sing lowde vnto him with Psalmes, to worship & to fal downe before him, to giue vnto the Lorde Psalm. 99 Psalm. 96 the glory of his name, to bring an offering of thanks▪giuing, and to enter into his courts with praise. And yet who know∣eth whether the Lord hath greater blessings for yee in store? ye may bee sure hee will pull downe the mightie from their seate, and exalt the humble and meeke. Surely, the Lorde doth vse vertue as a meane to bring vs to honor, and who∣soeuer you shall see endued with the vertues of this text, I meane, with seeking vnto God, with prayer and puritie of life: ye may bee sure there is a blessing reserued for him of the Lord, yea, such a blessing, as though his beginning bee but small, yet his latter end shal greatly encrease. God increase the loue of these thinges in our hearts, and make vs worthie of Christs blessings, which he hath plenti∣fully in store for vs: that after hee hath heaped temporall blessings vpon vs, hee would giue vs the blessing of all bles∣sings, euen the life of the world to come. FINIS.
MARIES CHOISE. Luke 10. 38. 39. &c. 38 Now it came to passe as they went, that hee entred into a certaine towne, and a certaine woman named Mar∣tha, receiued him into her house. 39 And she had a sister called Mary, which also sate at Iesus feet, and heard his preaching. 40 But Martha was cumbred about much seruing, and came to him and said, Master, doest thou not care, that my sister hath left me to serue alone? bid her therefore that she helpe me. 41 And Iesus answered, and said vnto her, Martha, Mar∣tha, thou carest and art troubled about many things. 42 But one thing is needfull, Mary hath chosen the good part, which shall not be taken away from her. AS Christ had shewed himselfe louing vnto Lazarus and his sisters, in raising him from Iohn 11 the death of the bodie, and them from the death of the soule: so doe they here shewe their thankefull mindes to Christ againe, the one by receiuing him into her house, and the other by entertaining him into her heart. As hee was God, he was receiued of Mary: as he was man, he was receiued of Martha. They both desired to entertaine our Sauiour: as Ia∣cob and Esau desired to please their aged father: but Mary Gen. 27 made choise of the better part, and was preferred before her sister, as Iacob sped soonest of most dainty venison, and pre∣uented his brother of the blessing. And although the care of Martha in entertaining of Christ be not to be misliked, yet
Maries diligence in hearing his doctrine, is of purpose pre∣ferred, to teach vs, that it is much better with Mary to studie in the worde, and first to seeke the kingdome of God, than with Martha to labour in the worlde, and to neglect that Math 6. 35 heauenly kingdome. And yet notwithstanding, such is the corruption of this rusty age, that our greatest care is to pro∣uide for this present life, as the rich man, Luke. 12. that in∣larged his barnes wherein to put his store for many yeares: but wee neuer or verie late remember to prouide for the life to come, like that other rich man, Luke. 16. that neuer thought of heauen, till hee was tormented in the flames of hell. In the 11. of Iohn, Christ is said to loue the whole fami∣lie, and here he is said to come vnto them. For whome hee loueth hee cannot choose but visite, like the friends of Iob that came to comfort him in his great aduersitie: yea, and Iob 2 the greater loue he beareth vnto any, the oftner hee will re∣sort vnto them, yea, he will come and dwell with them, Ioh. 14. 23. Like Iacob that came downe into Egypt, to his be∣loued sonne Ioseph, and dwelt in Goshen. But Christ is yet Gen 47 more kind then Iacob was, for he came not till hee was sent for with horses and Chariots: but Christ came of his owne Gen 45 accord to this beloued familie. Thus doth he alwaies preuent vs with his blessings: be∣fore he was desired he came into the world, he called his A∣postles before they came to him, and before he was reque∣sted hee came vnto this noble house. O happie house that entertayned such a guest, but thrice happie inhabitants to whome such a guest would vouchsafe to come! When hee came to the swinish Gadarens, they desired him to depart out of their coastes, preferring their swine aboue their Saui∣our: Luke 8 but this godlie familie receiued him into their house, preferring their God before their golde, and the health of their soules before their worldlie wealth. They receiued him into their house, who had not a house wherein to put his head. Wherein their hospitalitie is commended, and Math 8. 19
shall certainly bee rewarded at the dreadfull day: for vvith this and such like workes of mercy, the Lorde shall answere the sentence of iudgement, which is to bee denounced a∣gaynst the wicked, that neuer exercised those workes of mercy. Let vs learne by their example to bee harborous, and giuen to hospitalitie, vvhich is so often commended vnto vs in the Scripture, and shall be so richly rewarded at the last day. Those godly Fathers, Abraham and Lot, entertained Angels in the habite of straungers: so wee may daily enter∣taine Gen. 18 Gen. 19 Christ Iesus in the habite of a poore man, of a blinde man, of a lame man, and whatsoeuer is done vnto anie of these that are his members, he accounteth and accepteth as done vnto himselfe. Nowe as the vertue of hospitalitie is commendable in all sortes of men: so is it more especiallie commended to the Ministers, vvho are expreslie commaunded by the Apostle among other thinges, to bee giuen to hospitalitie. 1. Tim. 3. 2. Vnto the Leuites in the time of the lawe, the Lord appoyn∣ted cities of refuge, tosignifie that the Ministers house shuld Num. 3. 5▪ be the poore mans harbour, and his store their treasurie: but the true Ministers of our dayes haue no cities of refuge for others, for they haue none for themselues: they haue not where with to relieue the wants of others, for they haue not to relieue their owne. When Martha had thus entertained Christ as hee was man, into her house, Mary began to entertaine him as hee was GOD into her heart, she sate at his feete to heare his preaching, for no sooner was Christ come into the house, but that he tooke occasion to teach and instruct the familie, and in stead of bodily foode, which they bestowed vppon him, to giue vnto them the foode of the soule. Thus doth he alwaies shew himselfe a thankfull guest, into what house so∣euer he entreth, hee leaueth better things behind him than he findeth, hee loues not to bee in Zacheus debt for his din∣ner, Luke. 15 for in stead thereof hee bringeth saluation to his house,
neither doth he leaue his supper vnpaid for here, for in stead thereof he bestoweth vpon them an heauenly sermon. This should be the exercise of faithfull Ministers, when they are inuited to great feastes, that as they are called the salt of the Math 5. 13 earth, which serueth to season the meates, to make them sa∣uorie, and preserue them from putrifaction, so they should season the table talke with some godly conference, to mini∣ster grace vnto the hearers, Ephe. 4. 29. These sisters were godly women, and both earnest fauo∣rers of Iesus Christ, and yet in the manner of their deuotion there is such difference, that the worldly affection of the one, may in some sort be misliked, in respect of the godly ex∣ercise and practise of the other: Martha is sore incumbred with much seruing, where a little seruice had bin sufficient, but Mary is attentiue to heare the word of God, which ne∣uer can be heard sufficiently. Mary sitteth to heare the word, as Christ vsed to sit when Math. 5. Luke 4 Iohn 8 he preached the word, to shew that the word is to be prea∣ched and heard with a quiet minde. In a still night euerie voyce is heard, and when the bodie is quiet, the minde most commonly is quiet also. But Martha is troubled with other affaires, and therefore vnfit to heare the word: as the ground that is surcharged with stones, or ouergrowne with weedes Math 5. 13 and thornes, is vnfit to receiue the seede, or yeeld any fruite to him that tilleth it. As often therefore as we come to heare the word of God, we must not come with distracted minds, wee must not trouble our selues with the cares of this life, which (as our Sauiour saith) are thornes to choake the Luke 8. 14 Exod 3 Mark 10 word, and to make it vnfruitfull. For as Moses was vnfit to talke with God till he had put off his shooes, and the blinde man vnfit to come to Christ, till he had throwne away his cloake: so wee must thinke our selues vnfit to heare the worde, and vnapt for euery heauenly exercise, till wee haue put off our shooes, that is, our worldly cogitations and af∣fections, and till we haue cast away our cloake, that is, all lets and impediments which might hinder vs from profi∣ting
in our profession. When our mindes are quiet, we are fit to deale with hea∣uenly matters, therefore the Doctors conferred sitting in the Temple: and God delighteth to deale with vs when we are most priuate: he appeared to Abraham sitting in the doore Gen. 18 Actes 2 of his Tent. The holy Ghost came downe vpon the Apo∣stles, and filled all the house where they were sitting. The Eunuch sitting in his chariot, was called and conuerted by Actes 8 Philips preaching. Marie sate at Iesus feete, yet sate she not sleeping, as many sit at the preachers feete, but she sate at Christ his feete, and heard his word. As Paul was brought vp at the feete of Ga∣maliel, Actes 22 and was perfectly instructed in the law of the fathers. Her humilitie is commended, in that she sate at Iesus feet, to shew that the word is to be heard with all humilitie: her diligence and earnestnes appeareth, in that shee would not depart to helpe her sister, to signifie that the hearing of the word must be preferred before all worldlie busines. Her diligence and humilitie serueth to condemne our negligence, and contempt of Christ and his word: we do not sit at Christ his feete, nay wee rather set Christ at our feete, when we are so negligent in hearing of his word. Wee are as slovve to come to the Church, as the Rauen Gen 8 vvas to come to the Arke, and as loath to spend any time in the seruice of God, as Pharaoh vvas loath to let the Israelites Exod 8. 32 goe to serue the Lord. If a commoditie vvere to bee seene vvhereout some profite might arise, how careful vvould vve be to procure it? vvhat paines vvould vve take to get it? Ab∣solon 2. Sam 15 vvas not more desirous of a kingdome, than the rich men of our time are desirous of golden gaine. But if it be a matter of cost or trouble, if they cannot heare the worde preached without some hinderance to their worldly busines, and some extraordinarie charge to their purse, then like the Gadarenes, they are content to take their leaue of Christ and Luke 8 Math 13. 49 his worde, and had rather lose that heauenlie pearle, than they would parte from their worldlie pelfe.
Thus in Christ wee haue the patterne of a good pastour, and in Marie the patterne of a good hearer: Let Ministers learne by his example, to take all occasions to preach the 2. Tim 4. 2 worde, to bee instant in season and out of season▪ and let Christians learne by her example, first to seeke the king∣dome of God and his righteousnesse, and then to prouide for Math. 6 the things of this life. While Marie was carefull for the foode of the soule, Mar∣tha was curious to prouide foode for the bodie, her greatest care was to entertaine Christ, & to make him good cheere, to testifie her thankfull minde vnto him that had done so great thinges for them, hee had raised her brother Lazarus from death to life, therefore he was worthie to bee well en∣tertained. If Elias deserued to bee well dealt withall at the hande of his hostesse, whose sonne he had restored to life: or Elisa 1. King 17 2. King 4 deserued such entertainement for her sonnes reuiuing: then surely our Sauiour Christ was worthie to bee welcome he∣ther, where he had raised Lazarus out of his graue, wherein he had lien by the space of foure dayes before. It was well done therefore of Martha to shew her thankfull minde vn∣to Christ, but it was not well done at that time to shew her selfe Iohn 11 thankefull in that manner, it was then time to heare the worde: for at that time Christ preached the worde, it was no time for her to spend that time in other affaires, and to neglect the greatest affaire, the meanes of her owne salua∣tion. It was not vnlawfull for Martha to labour, no more than it was vnlawfull for Peter to sleepe: but when Christ was preaching, it was no time for her to bee so busie in seruing, no more than it was time for Peter to sleepe, when Christ Math 25 willed him so earnestly to watch and praye. When Christ preached out of Simons shippe to the people that stoode Luke 5 vpon the shore, it was no time for Peter to play the Fisher∣man. But when Christ had left speaking, and commaunded him to lanch into the deepe, then it was time for Peter to let
downe the net. There is a time wherin we ought to labour in our vocation, and a time wherein we ought to heare the word, and as wee may not vtterly neglect our lawfull cal∣lings, to follow Sermons: so must we not bestow the Sab∣both, which is consecrated to the seruice of God, in follow∣ing the workes of our vocation. All things haue their ap∣pointed time (saith the wise man) Eccle. 3. and euery thing is seemely in his conuenient season, but when thinges are done preposterously and out of order, there followeth con∣fusion. Although Martha did not heare Christ, yet did she labour for Christ: marry in our dayes will neither labour for Christ, nor heare of Christ: but as the Israelites were wearie of their Num 21 iourney in the wildernes, and lothed that heauenly Manna; so these men are wearie of euery godly exercise, and are soone cloyed with the word of God. The fiue foolish Virgins wasted their oyle to no purpose, Mat 26 and while they went to buy, were excluded the marriage: and these foolish men spende this time of grace vainely and wantonly, as though after this life there were no time of iu∣stice and vengeance to bee feared. The day serueth for their pride or profite, the night is spent in sporte and pleasure, and no time is left to heare the worde. When we are praying, they are playing: when we are preaching, they are eating and drinking, like the olde worlde, that ate and dranke, that married wiues, & gaue in marriage, while Gen 6 Noah was preparing the Arke for the sauing of his house∣holde. And as Baals priestes wounded themselues to serue Heb 11 1. King 18 their idol: so these men take dangerous courses, & strange∣ly trouble themselues to serue the diuell. Now Martha findeth her selfe agrieued, and begins to enuie her sisters exercise, as Iosephs brethren enuied him for Gen 37 1. Sam 17. his dreames: and the sonnes of Ishai, that disdayned their brother Dauid, for his forwardnesse in the combat with Goliah. These two sisters, that in other things agreed so well to∣gether, in this doe differ so much, that Christ must haue the
hearing of the matter, and decide the controuersie, Martha plaieth the plaintife, and accuseth her sister. Mary the de∣sendant answereth by her aduocate, and Christ himself that tooke vpon him the office of an Aduocate, is become the Iudge, and giueth sentence on Maries side: Martha com∣plaineth of her sisters slouthfulnes, and seemeth after a sort to blame our Sauiour for winking at it, requiring him to see the matter redressed speedily. But Christ first reprooueth Marthaes curiositie, and then excuseth, yea, and commen∣deth Maries care. In Martha it appeareth how willing wee are to please our selues in our owne conceites, and how rea∣die to conceiue amisse of others doings, yea, sometimes to preferre out owne defects; before the perfections of other men. If Dauid chasten his soule with fasting, it shall bee tur∣ned to his reproofe: If he put on sackcloth, to testifie his cō∣trition, they iest at him, and the drunkardes make songs of Psal 69 him. If Iohn Baptist be temperate in his apparell and diet, they will say he hath a diuell. If Paul answere discreetly for Luke 7. 33. himselfe, he shall be charged to bee madde with ouermuch Actes 26 Luke 7. 34 learning; yea, if our Sauiour Christ himselfe frequent the cō∣panie of sinners, to reclaime them from sinne, they will not sticke to call him a friend and companion of Publicans and sinners. Amongst vs, if there be any that bee more forward in religion than the rest, & more diligent to heare the word, as Marie was, there shall not want some or other to censure them at their pleasure, yea, to find fault, & to condemne thē for so doing, yet are not the godly to bee discouraged here∣with, or to desist from their godly exercises: for as the Lord answered for Marie, when she held her peace: so the Lorde will defend their cause, and take their part against their ad∣uersaries The Lorde cannot abide to heare his seruants ill spoken of, but is alwayes readie to maintaine their right, and to answere for them. He will not suffer Laban to speake an ill worde to his seruant Iacob. And if Aaron & Miriam mur∣mure Gen 3. 24 Num 12 against Moses, the Lorde will punish it with leprosie. What a comfortable thing is this to the godly, yt the king of kings will take their partes, and will not suffer them to su∣staine any wrong? He is a most sure and trustie friend, that
will not abide his friends to be backbited or ill spoken of, but either he will answere in their defence, or he will finde some meanes to stop their mouthes, and restraine the slaunderous tongues of their enemies, as sometime he stopt Balaams pas∣sage, Num 22 when he went to curse his people, & caused the dumbe beast to speake, and to reprooue the madnes of the Prophet, 2. Pet. 2. 15 rather than hee would haue his people to be cursed. The repetition of Marthaes name argueth the vehemen∣cie and earnestnesse of this admonition The Lord is faine to be very earnest and importunate with vs, before hee can re∣claime vs. So when God spake vnto Abraham, hee called Gen 22 him twise by name: Christ called Peter thrife by name, Iohn 21. to cause him make his three-folde confession, to make amends for his three-folde deniall. And when the Lord spake vnto Samuel, he called him 4. seuerall times by name, before he answered: for such is the great mercie of 1. Sam 3 God, that he is content to admonish vs often of our duetie, & such is the dulnes & peruersenes of our crooked nature, that wee cannot be gained by the first admonition: but the Lord must cal vs oftē & earnestly, before we wil hearkē vnto him. There are two thinges in this speach of Christ to be obser∣ued. The first is, his modest reprehension of Marthaes im∣moderate care: the other is, his friendly defence of Maries choise. Though Martha was very careful to entertaine Christ in the best manner, yet if he perceiue any thing in her wor∣thie of reprehension, hee will not sticke to tell her of it: hee will not soothe her in her saying, nor smoothe her in her own conceit, for all the trouble and cost that shee bestowes vpon him. If we be often inuited to some mans table, and kindly entertained, it would be vnkindly taken, if wee should finde fault with any disorder: but for as much as all Christ his ac∣tions are the instructions of Christians therefore euery Chri∣stian, but especially Preachers, whom it more specially con∣cerneth, must learne by this example how to behaue them∣selues, when they are inuited to great feastes, namely, to speake their conscience freely when they see a fault. The best requitall that we can make for our good cheare, is to giue good counsell and wholesome admonition to them that in∣uite
vs. When Christ dined with the Pharise, Luke 11. and was misliked for not washing before dinner, he tooke occa∣sion to reproue their hypocrisie, their outward shewe of holi∣nesse, Luke 14 which was the sin of the Pharises: and at an other time he noteth them, for pressing to the chiefe places at banquets, & sheweth what modestie is to be obserued in sitting down to meate, and what guests should be bidden to our table. So should Preachers behaue themselues tovvards those that in∣uite them to great feastes, vvhen they see perhaps some fault or disorder, either in the master of the house, or in some other of the guestes, to say vnto them thus, or otherwise as the case requireth: I will warne you of one thing that will doe you good, that you would leaue your vsurie and extortion, your couetousnes & oppression, that you would leaue your swearing & blaspheming the name of God, that you would forbeare to prophane the Lordes Sabboth, that you would leaue your pride and excesse in your diet and apparell, that you would forbeare to speake ill of any behind their backes, or to beare any malice or hatred to any of your neighbors. These are the faults which are easie to bee espied almost in euery place, and these are the faultes which the faithfull minister of Christ Iesus should not leaue vnreproued where∣soeuer he commeth. But as Elias told Ahab of his Idolatrie, though he were his king, and Iohn Baptist tolde Herode of 1. King 18 Math 14 Marke 6. 20 his adulterie, though he did many things for him, and heard him gladly: so should the Preachers reprooue the people for their notorious offences, notwithstanding some fauours and curtesies receiued from them. If Christ had cause to finde fault with Martha for her too much diligence in his entertainement, it seemes he was not curious of his diet, but would haue bene content with sim∣ple cates: he was no delicate or daintie guest, he did not af∣fect or delight in sumptuous banquets, or costly fare, hee rather requireth a religious heart, a constant faith, a willing minde to heare the word, with an earnest care to liue there∣after. These are the thinges wherein the Lorde delighteth, these are the iuncates which he desireth, and which hee pre∣ferreth
before all earthly cheare. Thus is Martha reprehended for her curiositie: now let vs see how Marie is excused and commended for her godly care. One thing is necessarie (saith Christ;) and what is that one thing? Euen to heare the word preached, which is the power of God to saluation, to euery one that beleeueth. A man may better want all thinges, than that one needefull thing, and yet we desire all other thinges, and neglect that one thing, which is so needefull. This one thing hath Marie chosen, and therefore hath chosen the better part. Marthaes part is good, because it prouideth for this present life: but Maries part is better, be∣cause it leadeth to eternall life. It is good to bee occupied about our calling, to get our liuing: but it is better to bee occupied in hearing the worde, which is able to saue our soules. As the head and the foote are both needefull in the bodie, so Mary and Martha are both needful in a Common∣wealth: man hath two vocations, the one earthly, by his la∣bour, the other heauenly by his prayer. There is the actiue life, which consisteth in practising the affayres of this life, wherein man sheweth himselfe to be like himselfe, and there is the contemplatiue life, which consisteth in the medita∣tion of diuine and heauenlie thinges, wherein man sheweth himselfe to be like the Angels: for they which labour in their temporal vocations, doe liue like men, but they which la∣bour in spirituall matters, liue like Angels. When they heare the word, God speaketh vnto them: when they pray, they speake vnto God, so that there is a continual conference be∣tweene God and them, because they are continually exer∣cised in hearing and praying. Christ loued Martha for her hospitalitie, as Isaac loued Esau for his venison. So did he loue Marie for her diligence Gen. 25. 28. in hearing his word, as Rebecca loued Iacob for he arkning to her voice. A nurse which hath her breast full of milke, doth loue the child that sucks it from her: and Christ which hath his breast full of heauenly milke, is glad when he hath children to sucke the same. Let vs therefore (as the Apostle willeth vs. 1. Pet. 2. 12.) laying aside al maliciousnesse, and al
guile, and dissimulation, and enuie, and all euill speaking, as new borne babes desire the sincere milke of the word, that we may growe thereby to bee perfect men in Christ Iesus: let vs breathe after the fountaine of liuing water, which springeth vp vnto eternall life, as the faintie Hart desireth Psalm 42. 1 the water brooke to quench his thirst: and for as much as many things are so troublesome, and one thing is so neede∣full, let vs seeke that one needful thing, the end of all thinges, euen to feare God and keepe his commaundements, which Eccle 12. 13 Heb 11. 6 we learne by hearing the word of God, wherby faith (with∣out the which it is impossible to please God is begotten and nourished in the hearts of men. Rom 10. 17 This is that good part which Mary hath chosen, by so much better than her sisters choise, because it concerneth a better life, and hath the fruition of this present life. Mary hath a double portion: she heard the worde, and ate of the meate which her sister dressed, for godlinesse hath the pro∣mise 1. Tim. 4. 8 of this life, and of the life to come. As for all other things, whether they be honors, promotions, pleasures, and what not? They serue only for the maintenance of this pre∣sent life, which is so short and subiect to mutabilitie: but the word of God is the foode of the soule, the bread of life, 1. Pet 1. 13 that immortall feede which bringeth forth fruite vnto eter∣nall life. Let the worde of God therefore be pretious vnto Luke 21. 33 vs, because it is so permanent: for heauen and earth must passe, but the word of God endureth for euer. If we make 1. Pet 1. 25 choise of any thing beside, it must bee taken from vs, or wee shall bee taken from it: but if wee make choise of this one thing, it shall neuer be taken from vs, neither in this world, nor in the world to come. The Lord graunt that we be not only hearers; but doers of the word, that it may be truly said of vs, as Christ said of his Disciples that heard his preaching, Iames. 1. 22 Behold my brother, my sister and mother: or as he answe∣red Math 12. 50 Luke 11. 28 the woman that commended his carnal kindred, Blessed are they that heare the word of God, and keepe the same. FINIS.
THE FIRST SERMON of Noahs drunkennesse. GEN. 9. 20. 21. Noah also began to be a husband man and planted a vineyard: And he dranke of the wine and was drunken, and was unco∣uered in the middest of his tent. FIrst we are to speake of Noah, then of Cham his wicked sonne, and af∣ter of Shem and Iapheth his good sonnes: In Noah, first of that which hee did well, and then of his sinne. In Cham, first of his sinne, and then of his curse. In his brethren, first of their reuerence, and then of their blessing. Nowe wee will speake of the Father, and after of his children. Then (saith Moses) Noah began to be a husband∣man. This is the first name which is giuen to Noah af∣ter the floud, hee is called an husbandman; and the first worke which is mentioned, was the planting of a vineyard: one woulde thinke when all men were drowned vvith the floud, and none left aliue to possesse the earth but Noah and his sonnes, that hee should haue founde himselfe something else to doe, then to plant vineyardes: and that the holie Ghost shoulde haue intituled him King of the worlde, and not an husbandman of the earth, seeing there bee no such men as Noah was, which hath more in his hand, then anie king hath in the world or shall haue to the worlds ende: but hereby the holy Ghost would shewe, that God doth not respect kings for their titles, nor men for their
riches as we do, & therfore he nameth Noah after the worke which he did, not after the possessions which he had, an hus∣bandman. It seemeth that there was great diuersitie be∣tweene this age and ours. For if we should see nowe a king go to plough, a nobleman to driue the teame, a gentleman keepe sheepe, hee should bee scorned for his labour more then Noah was for his drunkennesse: yet when wee reade how this Monarch of the world thought no scorne to plaie the husbandman, we consider not his princely calling, nor his ancient yeeres, nor his large possessions to commende his industrie, or modesty, or lowlie minde therein. Which may teach vs humilitie, though wee learne to disdaine hus∣bandrie. Of whom will we learne to bee humble, if Kinges giue examples, and the sonne of God humbleth himselfe from heauen to earth, and yet wee contemne the example of the Kinges of the earth, and the example of the king of heauen. The time was when Adam digged and delued, when Dauid kept sheepe, and all the house of Iacob were called men occupied about cattell: but as they for this were abo∣minable to the Egyptians (as Moses saith in the same verse) so they which doe like them are abhorred of their brethren: and they which liue by them, scorne them for their worke, which would be chastned themselues, because they worke not. There was no arte nor science which was so much set by in former times, and is now profitable to the Common∣wealth: bringing lesse profit vnto it selfe, that may so iustly complaine of her fall without cause, and her despite from them which liue by her, as this painefull science of husban∣drie: that it is maruell that any man will take paine for the rest, to be contemned for his labour, and be a scorne for the rest, which might hunger and starue, if he did not labour for them more then they doe themselues. No maruell then though many in the poore countries murmure and com∣plaine, that other cannot liue by them, and they cannot liue
themselues: but it is maruell if their complaint do not grow in time to rebellion, and pull others as lowe as themselues: for why should the greatest paine yeeld the lesse profit? yet this is their case; for if you marke, you shall see that the hus∣bandman doeth bate the price of his fruites so soone as the dearth is past, though hee raiseth it a little while the dearth lasteth: but they which raise the price of their wares with him, seldome fall againe, but make men pay as deere when the dearth is past, as if it were a dearth still. Thus a plentiful yeere doth damage him, and a hard yeere doth vantage them. So this painful man is faine to liue poorely, fare mean∣ly, go barely, house homely, rise early, labor daily, sel cheap, and bye deere, that I may truely say, that no man deserueth his liuing better, no man fulfilleth the lawe neerer: that is, thou shalt get thy liuing in the sweat of thy browes; then this poore sonne of Adam, which pickes his crums out of the earth. Therefore he should not bee mocked for his labour, which hath vexation enough though all men speake well of him: and in my opinion, if any deserue to be loued for his in∣nocencie, or for his trueth, or his paine, or the good which hee brings to the Common-wealth, this Realme is not so much beholding to any sort of men (but those that feed the soule) as those which feed the body, that is, those that labor the earth: yet you see how they liue like drudges, as though they were your seruants to prouide foode for you, and after to bring it to your doores: as the beasts serue them, so they serue you, as though you were another kind of men. I can not thinke vpon their misery but my thought tels me, that it is a great part of our vnthankefulnesse, that we neuer con∣sider what an easie life and liuing God hath giuen vnto vs, in respect of them. If the Apostles rule were kept, they which do not worke should not eate: but nowe they which do not worke, eate most: and the husbandmen which worke, eate not, but are like Bees, which prepare foode for other and pinch them∣selues. Let vs consider this, for they had not one law and we
another: but the same cursse which was denounced vpon Adam, was denounced vpon all his children, that euerie man should get his liuing in the sweate of his browes. Al∣though I know there be diuers workes, and diuers gifts, and diuers callings to work in: yet alwaies prouided, they which do not worke should not eat, for in the sweat of thy browes, that is, in labour and trauell, thou king, and thou Iudge, and thou prelate, and thou landlord, and thou gentleman, shalt get thy liuing as Adā thy father did, or else thou doest auoide the cursse, and a greater cursse shall followe: that is, they which will not sweat in earth, shal sweat in hell. Adam had foode aswell as thou, and so had Noah, and more then thou, vnlesse thou hadst all, for they had all and yet they might not bee idle, because their handes were not giuen them for nothing: Some worke with their pen, some with their tongues, some with their fingers: as nature hath made nothing idle, so God would haue no man idle, but that he which is a Magistrate, should do the worke of a Ma∣gistrate: he which is a iudge, should do the work of a iudge: he which is a captaine, should do the worke of a captaine, he which is a minister, should doe the worke of a minister: as when Noah was called an husbandman, hee did the worke of an husbandman. This contempt of the country, doeth threaten danger to the land as much as any thing else in our daies, vnlesse their burden bee eased, and their estimation qualified in some part to their paines. Thinking that you haue not heard of this theame before, seeing the wordes of my Text did lie for it, thus much I haue spoken to put you in mind how easily you liue in respect of them: and to certifie our minds towards our poore brethren, which in deed seeme too base in our eies, & are scorned for their labours, as much as we should be for our idlenesse. Then (saith Moses) Noah began to be a husbandman. In that it is here said that Noah began, it doth not disprooue that hee gaue not himselfe to husbandrie before, but it im∣porteth: that Noah began to set vp husbandrie againe after
the floud before any other: so this good man recomforted with the experience of Gods fauour (vvhich had exempted him and his seede out of all the vvorld) and reioicing to see the face of the earth againe after the waters vvere gone, though an olde man, and vveake then he vvas, yet hee retur∣neth to his labour afresh, and scorned not to till and plant for all his possessions, as though hee were an husbandman: such a lowlines is alwaies ioined with the feare of God, that they yt are humbled with religion, do not thinke themselues too good to do any good thing. Here note by the way, that none of Noahs sonnes are said to begin this worke, but No∣ah himselfe, the olde man, the hoary head and carefull Fa∣ther begins to teach the rest, and shewes his sonnes the vvay how they should prouide for their sonnes; and howe al the vvorld after should liue by labour and trauell, till they return to dust: so the old man vvhome age dispenceth vvithall to take his ease, is more vvilling to prouide for the vvantes of his children, then they are vvhich are bound to labour for themselues and their parents too, as the Storke doeth feede the dam vvhen she is olde, because the dam fed her vvhen she vvas young. What a shame is this to Shem and Iapheth, that is, to vs vvhich are young and strong, that the father should be called a laborer vvhen the sonnes stand by? Now, the ground vvas barren because of the floud, and could not bring foorth fruite of it selfe, because of the cursse: therefore it pitied Noah to see the desolation and barrennes, & slime vpon the face of the earth, vvhich hee had seene so glorious and sweet, and fertil, vvith all maner of herbs and fruits, and flowers before. Therefore he setteth himselfe to manure it, vvhich vvaited for nothing now, but a painefull labourer to till and dresse it, that it might bring forth delightes & profits for sinful man, as it did before. By this vve may learne to vse all means for the obtaining of Gods blessings, & not to lose any thing vvhich vve might haue or saue for want of paines, for that is sin. As Salomon noteth in the 24. of Pro. vvhen he reproueth ye slouthful husbandmā, because his field brought
foorth Nettles and Thistles in steade of grapes, not because the grounde woulde not beare Grapes, but because the slouthfull man woulde not set them. Shall God command the earth and all his creatures to increase for vs, and shall not we further their increase for our selues? as wee increase and multiply our selues, so wee are bound to ioyne hande and helpe, that all creatures may increase and multiply too, or else the Fathers should eate the childrens portion, and in time there should be nothing left for them that come after: this regard Noah seemeth to haue vnto his posteritie, and therefore hee gaue himselfe vnto husbandrie, which is com∣mended in him vnto this day, and shall be recorded of him so long as this booke is read: whereby wee are warned, that he which liueth only to himselfe, is not to be remembred of them which liue after: But as Dauid cared how the realme should be gouerned after his death, aswell as he did during his life: so though we die and depart this worlde, yet wee should leaue that example, or those bookes, or those workes, behinde vs, which may profit the Church and Common∣wealth when vve are dead and buried, as much as wee did vvhen vve liued among them. Euen as Noah planted a vine∣yard, not for himselfe, but for the ages to come after. Some do thinke that Noah planted the first vineyarde, and drunke the first vvine, and that there was no vse of grapes before: vvhich opinion they are led vnto, that they might excuse Noah and mittigate his faulte; if hee did sup too deepe of that cup, the strength and operation vvhereof vvas not knowne vnto him nor vnto any man before. But it is not like, that the excellent liquor and vvholsome iuice of the grape did lie hid from the vvorlde so many hundreth yeers, and no doubt but there vvere vines from the begin∣ning, created with other trees: for how could Noah plant a vineyard, vnlesse he had slippes of other vines or grapes that grew before, seeing he did not create fruites but plant fruits as vve doe? for this is principally to bee noted, that so soone as he had oportunitie to doe good, he omitted no time, but
presently after the floud was gone, and that the earth began to drie, he plied it with seedes, and wrought it till he saw the fruites of his labour. By this we learne, to omit no occasion to doe good, but when so euer wee may doe good, to count it sinne if we doe it not. But if we be so exercised, then all our workes shall pros∣per like the vineyard of Noah, because the fruite of the vine dooth cheare the countenance and glad the heart of man. Therefore some haue gathered vpon the planting of this vineyard, a signification of gladnes and thankefulnes in No∣ah for this late deliuerance, as the Iewes by their solemne feastes did celebrate the memoriall of some great benefit: but I rather iudge▪ that God would haue vs see in this exam∣ple, what men did in those dayes, and how we are degene∣rate from our parents, that we may prepare against the fire, as Noah prepared against the water. This is worthie to bee noted to, that God did not so re∣gard his husbandrie, but that he had an eye to his drunken∣nes, and speakes of his fault aswel as his vertue; whereby we are warned, that though God blesse vs now while wee re∣member him, yet hee will chasten vs so soone as wee forget him: though we be in a good name now, infamie will rise in an houre: though we be rich at this present, pouertie may come sodainely: though we bee well while wee are heere, yet we may fall sicke before night, euen as Noah is praysed in one verse, and dispraysed in an other: euen now God commends him for his lowlines, and now discommends him for his drunkennes: as though hee had forgot all his righteousnes so soone as hee sinned, and would call in his praise againe. This was to shewe; that Noah was not saued from the floud, because he deserued to bee saued, but because God had a fauour vnto him: for he which was not drowned with water, was drowned after with wine. As the Pharises when they had done well were proud of it, and lost their reward: so
when Noah had done a good worke, he spotted it with sin, and was dispraised where hee was praised, as though God repented him that he commended him. He planted well, but he drunke not wel: therefore that which was good did him hurt: then seeing hee was trapped vvith a good worke, vvhatsoeuer we doe, wee may remember howe easie it is to sinne, if wee misse in the matter, or in the maner, or time, or the place, or the measure, as Noah did. Hee which planteth the vineyarde, is worthy to taste of the grape, but if thou haue found hony (saith Salomon) eate not too much least thou surfet: So if thou hast found wine, drink not too much least thou surfet. A little wine is better then a great deale, and if thou wilt followe the Apostles counsell, thou must drinke it but for thy stomackes sake, least that happen to thee, vvhich thou shalt heare of this noble Patri∣arch. Though hee vvas neuer so righteous before God and men, though he escaped the destruction, which lighted vp∣on all the world, though he had al the foules of the ayre and beasts of the lande at his command, though hee passed the pilgrimage of man nine hundreth yeeres, yet Noah was but a man: so auncient, so righteous, so mightie, so happie: Noah shewed himselfe but a man, for drinking the wine which himselfe had planted, he was drunken. This is Noahs fault, he was drunken with his owne vvine, as Lot was de∣filed vvith his owne daughters. If Cham his sonne had ta∣ken too much, and stript himselfe as his father did, the holie ghost would scarce haue spoken of it, because he was a man of no note; but when the father forgate himselfe and gaue this offence, marke the maner of the holie Ghost, as though he would shew you a vvonder: hee displaieth Noahs drun∣kennesse, as Cham displayed his nakednesse: as if he would say, come and see the strength of man. Hee which vvas counted so righteous, hee which beleeued the threatning like Lot vvhen the rest mocked, he to whom all the foules of the ayre, and the beastes of the earth flocked in couples as they came to Adam: hee vvhich was reserued to de∣clare
the iudgementes of God, and to beginne the worlde againe: Noah the example of sobrietie, the example of moderation is ouercome with drinke, as if hee had neuer beene the man. How easie, how quicklie the iust, the wise, the prudent, hath lost his sence, his memorie, his reason as though he had neuer beene the man. And how hard is it to auoid sinne, vvhen occasion is at hand, and pleasant opportunitie tempteth to sinne? it is ea∣sier for the bird to goe by the net then to breake the net: so it is easier for a man to auoide temptations then to ouer∣come temptations: therefore God forbad Balaam, not onelie to curse the people as Balacke woulde haue him, but hee forbad him to goe with Balackes seruauntes, knowing that if hee went vvith them and sawe the pompe of the Courte, and hearde the king himselfe speake vnto him, and felt the tickling reward, it woulde straine his consci∣ence, and make him doubt vvhether hee shoulde curse or blesse. Peter but vvarming himselfe at Cayphas fire, vvas ouer∣come by a silly Damsel to do that vvhich he neuer thought, euen to forsweare his Lord God: therefore Daniell vvoulde not eate of the kinges meate, least hee should bee tempted to the kinges vvill, shewing vs that there is no vvay to escape sinne, but to auoide occasion. Therefore Dauid prayeth, Turne away mine eies from vanity: as though his eies would drawe his heart as the baite tilleth on the hooke. Noah thought to drinke, he thought not to be drunke: but as hee vvhich commeth to the field to sounde the trumpet is slaine as soone as he vvhich commeth to fight: so the same vvine distempereth Noah vvhich hath distempered so manie since. Where hee thought to take his rewarde, and taste the fruite of his ovvne handes, God set an euerlasting blot vpon him, vvhich stickes fast till this daie, like a barre in his armes, so long as the name of Noah is spoken of, that vvee cannot reade of his vertue but vvee must reade of his sinne, vvhereby euery man is vvarned to receiue the gifts of God
reuerentlie, to vse them soberly, and to sanctifie himselfe, before he reach foorth his hand vnto them, that they may comfort and profit vs, with that secret blessing which God hath hid in them, or else euery thing, the best giftes of God may hurt vs: as the pleasant wine stained and confounded the great Patriarch, when he delighted too much in it, which hee might haue drunke as Christ did at his last Supper, and this disgrace had neuer bene written in his story, but God would haue a fearfull example like the pillar of salt, to stand before those beastes, whose onely strife is to make triall, who can quaffe deepest, and shewe all their valiantnesse in wine. Because there is such warning before vs, now wee haue the drunkard in schooling, I will spend the time that is left, to shew you the deformitie of this sinne. If any heare mee which haue bene ouertaken with it, let them not maruell why he cannot loue his enemies, which loueth such an ene∣mie as this, which leadeth till he reeleth, dulles him till he be a foole, and stealeth away his sence, his witte, his me∣morie, his health, his credit, his friendes: and when shee hath stripped him as bare as Noah, then shee exposeth him like Noah to Cham, and all that see him doe mocke him: it is a wonder almost, that any man should bee drunke that hath seene a drunkard before, swelling and puffing, and fo∣ming, and spuing, and groueling like a beast; for who would be like a beast for all the world? Looke vp on the drunkard when his eies stare, his mouth driuels, his tongue faulters, his face flames, his handes tremble, his feete▪reele: how vgly, how monstrous, how loathsome dooth hee seeme to thee? so loathsome doost thou seeme to others when thou art in the like taking. And how loathsome then doest thou seeme to God? Therefore the first lavve vvhich Adam receiued of God vvas abstinence, vvhich if he had kept, hee had kept all vertues beside, but intemperancie lost all. In abstinence the lavve came to Moses, and he fasted vvhen he receiued it, to shevv
that they which receiue the word of God, receiue it sober∣lie. A temperate man seldome sinneth, because the flesh which dooth tempt is mortified, least it should tempt: but when the handmaid is aboue the mistris, and a man hath lost the image of God, and scarse retaineth the image of man; all his thoughtes and speeches and actions must needs be sinne, and nothing but sinne, because the band of vertue sobrietie is broken, which kept all together▪ when didst thou wante discretion to consider? when didst thou want pati∣ence to forgiue? when didst thou want continencie to re∣fraine? when didst thou want hart to pray, but when sobri∣etie was fledde away, and intemperancie filled her roome? if shame let to sinne, it casteth out sinne: if feare let to sinne, it casteth out feare: if loue let to sinne, it expulseth loue: if knowledge let to sinne, it expulseth knowledge, like a co∣uetous Landlord, which would haue all to himselfe and dwell alone. There is no sinne, but hath some shewe of vertue, onely the sinne of drunkennesse is like nothing but sinne: there is no sin but although it hurt the soule, it beautifieth the body, or promiseth profit, or pleasure, or glorie, or something to his seruantes: onely drunkennesse is so impudent, that it descrieth it selfe: so vnthankefull that it maketh no recom∣pence: so noysome that it consumeth the bodie, which ma∣nie sinnes spare, least they should appeare to be sinnes. E∣uery sinne defileth a man, but drunkennesse maketh him like a beast: euery sinne defaceth a man, but drunkennes taketh away the image of a man: euery sinne robbeth a man of some vertue, but drunkennesse stealeth away all vertues at once: euery sinne deserueth punishment, but drunken∣nes vpbraides a man, while the wine is in the stomacke, and though he would dissemble his drunkennesse, yet hee is not able to set a countenance of it, but the childe descrieth him, the foole knowes that he is drunke, because his face bewray∣eth him, like the leprosie which brast out of the forehead: so worthily hath he lost the opinion of sobrietie, which hath
lost it selfe. His sonne thinkes himselfe more master now then his father: his seruant makes him a foole: his children leade him like a childe, his wife vseth him like a seruant: and although his drunkennesse leaueth him when hee hath slept, yet no man seekes to him for counsell after, no man regards his word, no man reckens of his iudgement, no man is perswaded by his counsell, no man accountes of his lear∣ning, no man hath any glory to accompany with him, but so soone as drunkennes hath made him like a beast, euery man abhorreth him like a beast, as they did Nabuchadne∣zar: the spirit flyeth from him least hee should grieue it, his friendes goe away least he should shame them, and no ver∣tues dare come neere least he should defile them. How many thinges flie out when wine goes in? how is it then that he which loueth himselfe, can be so cruel to him∣selfe, that he should loue his life and shorten his life? that he should loue his health, and destroy his health? that he should loue his strength, and weaken his strength? that hee should loue his wealth, and consume his wealth? that hee should loue his credit, and cracke his credit? that hee shoulde loue his vnderstanding, and ouerturne his vnderstanding? that he should loue his beautie, and deforme his beautie? The Po∣ets neede faining no more, that men are transformed into beasts, for if they were liuing now, they should see men like beastes: some like Lyons, some like wolues, some like foxes, some like beares, some like swine: who is the beast when the beastes satisfie nature and man satisfie appetite? when the beastes keepe measure and man exceeds measure? when the beastes are found labouring, and man founde surfeting? who is the beast? I haue read of a bird which hath the face of a man, but is so cruell of nature, that sometime for hunger she will set vpon a man and slay him: after when she comes for thirst vnto the water to drinke, seeing the face in the wa∣ter like the face of him whome she deuouted, for griefe that she hath killed one like her selfe, takes such sorrow, that she neuer eateth nor drinketh after, but beats, and frets, & pines
her selfe to death. What wilt thou doe then which hast not slaine one like thy selfe, but thy selfe, thy very selfe with a cup of wine, and murderest so many vertues and graces in one howre? As Esau sold his land and liuing for a messe of pottage, so the drunkard selleth his sence, and witte, and memorie▪ and credit for a cup of wine. Thou hast not murthered thy bro∣ther like Caine, but thou hast murthered thy selfe like Iudas: as the Rechabites abstaining from wine, as Ionadab bad thē, obtained the blessing which God had appointed to the Is∣raelites: so let vs take heede, least they which we account I∣dolaters, whilest they fast and watch, obtaine the blessing which God hath appointed for vs (get away the blessing) while we sit downe to eate, and rise to playe. Therefore, as Christ said, remember Lots wife, to I say, remember Lot: one houre of drunkennesse did him more hurt then all his e∣nemies in Sodom: remember Noah, one houre of drunken∣nes discouered that which was hid sixe hundred yeeres. Ten times more might be said against this vice: but I haue said e∣nough to make you abhor it, I haue said as much as I would. Some goe about to acuse Noah because he was an olde man, and therefore might soone be taken cupshot: some be∣cause the wines were hotter in those countries, then they are with vs; some because of his change of drinkes, which had not woonted himselfe to wine before: some because as most men delight in that which by great labour they haue brought to passe of themselues. So no maruell though Noah had a longing to his owne grapes; following heerein the example of a curious Cooke, which dooth sup and sup his broth, to tast whether it be wel seasoned, that he may mend it if he can, or mende the next: but as the flye by often dallying with the candle, at last scorcheth her wings with the flame, so taking hee was ta∣ken, and at last was drunke: yet this is imputed to him for his fault, that he was drunke, as the punishment which fol∣lowes dooth witnesse. Such is the prouidence of God,
that his mercie might be glorified in all, he hath concluded all vnder sinne, and suffered the best to fall, that no man might trust in his owne strength, and that wee seeing their repentance, may learne to rise againe how grieuous soeuer our sinnes be. If we haue bene idolaters, if adulterers, if per∣secutors, if murmurers, if murtherers, if blasphemers, if drun∣kardes: Aaron, and Moses, and Lot, and Abraham, and Da∣uid, & Salomon, and Peter, and Paul, and Noah, haue bene the like; who raigne now in the kingdome of Christ with his angels, and so may we, if we repent like them. These ex∣amples saith Paul, are not written for our imitation, but for our admonition. Thus you haue seene Noah sober, and Noah drunken. Whereby we may see that a man may bee drunke with his owne wine, he may surfet with his owne meates, hee may lust with his owne wife, he may offend with his owne giftes, his owne honor may make him proud, his owne riches may make him couetous, his owne strength may make him ven∣turous, his owne wit may make him contentious: there∣fore, as the childe pluckes out the sting before hee takes the hony, so let euery man, before he receaues the giftes of God, sit downe, and looke what baites, what snares, what temptations sathan hath hid in them, and when he hath taken out the sting, then eate the hony, and hee shall vse the bles∣sings of Christ as Christ did himselfe. FINIS.
Woodcut decorative border; a cartouche with birds at the top, four medallions of kneeling women at the sides and a skeleton seated at the bottom; on either side are inserted the letters P. S. for Peter Short (not in McKerrow). TVVO SERMONS preached by master Hen∣ry Smith, with three prayers thereunto ad∣ioyned: And published by a more per∣fect copy then heretofore. Woodcut printer's device of Peter Short; a framed open book surrounded by beams of light, with motto Et vsque ad nubes veritas tua; below, the initials P. S. for Peter Short (McKerrow 278). AT LONDON Printed by P. S. for William Leake. 1598.
The contentes. 1 The sinners conuersion. 2 The sinners confession. 1 A praier for the Morning. 2 A praier to be said at all times. 3 Another zealous praier.
THE SINNERS CONVERSION. The Text. Luke 29. verses, 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 1. Now when Iesus entred and passed through Iericho, 2. Behold there was a man named Zaccheus, which was the chiefe receiuer of the tribute, and he was rich: 3. And he sought to see Iesus, who he should be, & could not for the prease, because he was of a low stature. 4. Wherfore he ran before, and climed vp into a wild fig tree, that he might see him, for he should come that way. 5. And when Iesus came to the place, he looked vp, and sawe him and said vnto him, Zaccheus, come downe at once: for to day I must abide at thine house. IN the end of the chapter before going, wee may see how Christ healed a man, blind in his bodily sight, namely Bar∣timeu,s whereby he sheweth himselfe to be the Phisition of the bodie: Here wee shall see how hee cured one blinde in mind, namely Zaccheus, whereby hee sheweth himselfe to be the Phisition of the soule, and therefore the Sauiour of the Ephe 5. 23 whole man. In speaking of Zaccheus and his conuersion, we will ob∣serue foure circumstances. First, the place where he was cal∣led, which was Iericho, Secondly, the person that was called Zaccheus the Publican. Thirdly, by whom and how he was called, by the voice of Christ. And lastly, the effect and fruit of his calling, his good confession. The first circumstance. First therefore for the place where hee was conuerted, it appeareth to bee Iericho, a Cittie not farre distant from Ierusalem. It was sometime a notable Cittie, till it was subuerted and ruinated by the Lordes Champion Iosua. It was builded againe in the dayes of Ahab, by Hiell the Bethelite, and remaineth at this daie with the rest of that Ios 6 1 Reg 16, 3 4
holie land, vnder the Turkish Empire. Vnto this Iericho, the Lorde of heauen and earth vouchsafeth to come in the likenesse of a seruant. And as Iosua compassed Iericho seuen times, minding to destroy it, so Christ the true Iosua, resorted oftentimes to Iericho, minding to saue it. But as in the de∣struction of Iericho, Iosua spared none but Rahab the har∣lot: so Iesus in his iourney to Iericho, conuerted none but Zaccheus the Publican. When Iosua had conquered & ra∣sed Iericho, he sowed salt in it to make it barren, and cursed him that should attempt to builde it vp: yet in this barren soyle Christ hath his spirituall haruest, and in this cursed Ci∣tie he hath a holy Temple, a blessed building. Samaria that wicked Cittie affourdeth many that beleeue in Christ. Ioh. 4. 39. And out of Galile, from whence they thought no good thing might come. Iohn 1. vers. 46. Christ called diuers of his Apostles, and euen in Iericho this cursed Cittie, Christ Iohn 7. 52 hath a rich mā that is to be saued. In euery place Christ hath his chosen. There is neither Iew nor Gentile, Barbarian nor Scythian, bond nor free, but Christ is all in all, to all that call vpon him, Rom. 10. 12. The second circumstance. Nowe followeth the description of Zaccheus, which is most plainly & fully set forth vnto vs. The holy Ghost spea∣king of Zaccheus and his conuersion, comes in with an Ec∣ce, Behold, as if it were a wonder that Zaccheus should bee conuerted. Zaccheus was a Gentile, a Publican, and a rich man, and therefore behold a miracle, as if in the conuersion of Zaccheus, these three should be conuerted at once. Zaccheus was a Gentile, a meruaile to see a Gentile be∣come Rom 2. 28 a Iewe: that is, to beleeue in Christ. He was a princi∣pall Publican. A strange thing to see a chiefe Customer to giue ouer his office: and hee was rich also: a rare matter to see a rich man to enter into the kingdome of God: and ther∣fore Math 19. 23 beholde a miracle, as if at this daye, the Turke, the
Pope, and the King of Spaine, were at once perswaded to forsake their idolatry and superstition. Christ going to Ieru∣salem, conuerteth a Gentile, to signifie the calling of the Gentiles: he conuerteth a Publican, to shew that notorious sinners may hope to be saued, if they repent and amend, as Zaccheus did. Hee conuerteth a rich man, to shewe that all rich men are not excluded from the kingdome of heauen. Hee was called Zaccheus before his conuersion, but hee was neuer truely called Zaccheus till Christ called him so. His name signifying, simple, pure, honest; but his life was subtile, impure, and most detestable. Thus many are called by honest names, whose deedes bewray their dishonest na∣tures, and vices oftentimes are shrowded in the habites of vertue, like Esops Asse, masking in the Lions skinne, till his long eares detect his follie; or like the Crowe that is decked in others plumes, till euery bird do plucke his feather. Zaccheus by his profession was a Publican, and therefore much detested of the Iewes: for Publicans were the Ro∣maine Officers, appoynted to gather and receiue publique custome or tribute of the Iewes, who were at that time in subiection vnto the Romaines. And amongst these Offi∣cers, Zaccheus was the chiefe, and (as it seemeth) Ouer-seer of the rest that were in Iericho, and therefore in chiefe ha∣tred among the Iewes, as one that chiefely fauoured the Ro∣mans tyranny, and serued to abridge their countrie libertie, which ought not to be subiect to any nation. Besides, he contemned the ceremonies of the Iewes, and regarded not their Religion, nor liued after their lawe, and therefore with the rest of the Heathen Publicanes, was ex∣communicate out of their Synagogue, Math. 18. Thus was hee hated for his profession, because hee was a Publican, and for his religion, because hee was a Heathen. Yet was he beloued for his wealth, for rich men haue many friends. Prou. 14. 20. And though they do neuer so wicked∣ly, yet haue they some to take their parts. If they speake ne∣uer so proudely, yet are there some to praise their saying,
Eccle. 13. 23. 24. Zaccheus was a Publican, and therefore rich: for Publi∣cans must needs be rich, and Vsurers wil bee wealthie. But rich Publicans make poore Princes, and wealthy Vsurers make many beggers. In euery Prouince there were manie Publicans, and therefore much poore people in euery place: for where there be many Caterpillers, the fruit is soone con∣sumed, and where there bee many extortioners, beggers must needs abound. By the Lawe of GOD, there might be no beggers in Is∣raell, Deut 15 but when so many Publicans were suffered to receiue tribute of the Iewes contrarie to Gods Lawe, no maruaile though so many sate and begged, contrarie to Gods Law. Luke 18. Iohn 9. Acts 3. By the Lawe of God, There ought to be no beggers among Christiās, Psal. 32. 25 but when so many vsurers are tolerated in a Christiā Common-wealth, contrary to the Lawe of Christ, Luke 6. 35. no maruaile Leuit 35. 36 37 Mark 14. 7 though we haue so many beggers, contrariy to the minde of Christ. The poore (saith Christ) ye shall haue alwaies with you, but when you will you may do them good and we shal be sure to haue the poore amongest vs alwaies, but wee must make such good prouision for them, that they bee not faine Psalm 37 to beg their bread. Thus was Zaccheus rich to himselfe, for hee was a Publi∣can, but he was rich toward God also, for he had a desire to Luke 12. 21 see Christ. Almighty God, who is rich in mercy, Eph. 2. hath so inspired his heart with the desire of heauenly riches, that whereas before his whole delight was in seeking of worldly wealth, nowe his greatest care is to seeke for heauenly trea∣sure. Hee now forgetteth what his profession is, and begins to be of a newe profession: and hee whose heart was whol∣lie set vpon earthlie profit, is nowe like olde Simeon, most desirous to see his Sauiour. The Tetrarch Herod desired to see Christ, and despised him vvhen hee sawe him. Luk. 23. 8. 11. but Zaccheus the Publican, desired to see Christ, and reioiced when he saw him, like Abraham that desired to see
the day of Christ. Iohn 8. 56. and therefore of the seruant of Sathan, Zaccheus is nowe become the childe of Abraham, vvhich reioiced to see the daye of Christ. Hoppie were his eies that sawe so blessed a sight, for many Prophets and righteous men haue desired to see and to heare those things Luke 10 that Zaccheus both sawe and heard, and could not see nor heare the same. If Iacob thought himselfe happie, if that he might but see his son Ioseph before his death, then surely Gen 45 thrise happy Zaccheus, vvhose hap it was, not only to see (as Iacob did) but to reioice (as Mary did) in Christ his Sauiour. As Zacheus vvas desirous to see Christ in earth, so I would haue the rich men of our time, desirous to see Christ in hea∣uen. For although vvith the eies of our body vve cannot see Christ as Zaccheus did, yet vvith the eyes of our faith vve may behold him as Stephen did, Acts 7. But if our faith bee so vveake sighted that vve cannot see Christ, yet let vs haue a desire to heare Christ in his vvord, vvhereby our faith may be increased, for faith cōmeth by hearing the word of God. Rom 10 1. Reg 10 And as the Queene of the South desired to heare the vvise∣dom of Salomon, so let vs be desirous to heare the vvisdome of Christ our sauiour. King Salomon left some bookes in vvriting, vvherein is seene some part of his vvisedome, and Christ our king, hath left vnto vs his most sacred vvorde, as it vvere a taste of his vvisdom, sufficient matter for our saluation. This is that hea∣uenly Iohn 20. 31 food, Math. 4. 4. vvhereby our soules are fed vnto eter∣nall life, let vs therefore labour for that heauenly foode: and as the Israelites vvere carefull to gather Manna to sustaine Exod 16 their bodies, so let vs bee as carefull to heare the vvorde to feede our soules. The people in the time of Christ, Iohn 6. 24. tooke great paines to followe Christ both by lande and sea, and many now a dales (I confesse) are very forwarde to follow his faithfull ministers, but as they followed Christ so fast to fill their bellies, so these frequent sermons for fashion Iohn 6. 26 to serue the time. Zaccheus is desirous to see Christ, a godly care, but yet
he could not obtaine his purpose: a thing common; for eue∣ry one that hath any good motion, hath alwayes some hin∣derance to crosse the same, and Zaccheus hath a double im∣pediment Two impe∣diments. to hinder his honest enterprise: The prease of the people, and his little stature. Whereof the former, that is, the multitude, is alwaies wont to be an enemie to those that would come to Christ. This hindered the blinde man from receiuing his sight, Luke 18. for the people rebuked him that he should hold his peace, till Christ called him and ope∣ned his eyes. This hindered them that brought the man sick of the Palsie, Mark. 2. for they could not come at Christ for the prease, till they vncouered the roofe of the house, and let downe the bed wherein the sicke of the Palsey lay. This hindered the healing of the deafe and dumbe, Mark. 7. till Christ tooke him a side out of the multitude, and cured him. This hindered the raising of the Rulers daughter, Mat. 9. till Christ had thrust out the Minstrels and the multitude, and then restored the maide to life. Finally, this hindered Zaccheus here from comming vnto Christ, til Christ vouch∣safed to call him to himselfe. Thus alwaies a multitude that is prone to euill, doth withdraw and hinder vs from appro∣ching vnto Christ: and therefore we must not follow a mul∣titude to doe euill, nor decline after many to ouerthrow the truth. Exod. 23. The second impediment that hindereth Zaccheus from seeing Christ, is his little stature. Hee was so lowe of sta∣ture, that he could not see Christ aboue the multitude: but Christ was aboue the multitude, and therfore could see Zac∣cheus though he were so lowe of stature. For God looketh 1. Sam 16. 7 not on the coūtenance, nor on the height of a mans stature, but the Lorde beholdeth the heart, and preferred little Da∣uid 1. Sā 16. 12 before Eliab his eldest brother, because hee findeth in him a better heart to serue the Lorde. And Zaccheus in his little bodie hath a heart and mind prepared to seeke and see the Lord. Zaccheus was so low that he could not see Christ, but manie amongst vs are so high that they will not see
Christ. The common people in time of Christ, were so desi∣rous to follow Christ, that neither lamenesse, nor blindnesse, nor sicknes, could stay them from comming to him; but the common people in our time, are more readie to followe their sport and pastime, then to come to the Church to heare of Christ. And as for our rich men, who seeth not that they will make great haste to see a commoditie, but will scarce come out of doores to heare a Sermon? They come to Church, as Nichodemus came to Christ Iohn 3. 2 by night, as if they were ashamed to come to Church: but they runne after profit to get riches, as Geheziran after Na∣aman 2. King 5 the Syrian to get a bribe. Thus hath Zacheus two lets: that he could not see Christ, the one in the people, the other in himselfe: and wee haue manie lettes to withdrawe vs from Christ, some are exter∣nall, and without vs, as the inticements of the worlde, and some are internall and within vs, as the lustes of our owne flesh. The prease of the people hindereth Zaccheus from seeing Christ in his humilitie, and the multitude of our sinnes Esay 59. 2 doe presse vs downe, that wee cannot see Christ in glorie. Zaccheus was a man of little stature, and that hindered him from seeing Christ in earth, and we are men of little faith, & that is the cause we cannot behold Christ in heauen. Though Zaccheus was a man of little stature, yet it ap∣peareth that he was not a man of little wit: For when hee could not come to the sight of Christ for the multitude, he had the wit to run before, and to clime vp into a tree to ob∣taine his purpose. And for the most part it falleth out, that men of low stature, are men of high conceite, and the shor∣test bodies, haue the sharpest wits, God so prouiding, that the defects of their bodies might be supplied with the giftes of their minde. Now Zaccheus, that before was loth to moue his foote from the custome-house for losing his profite, beginnes to runne after Christ for feare of a greater losse, like Elisa that left his plowing, and ranne after Elias to fol∣low his new vocation. But Zaccheus dooth not onely runne, 1 Reg 19
but also climbe vp into a tree to see Christ: A strange thing that Zaccheus a rich man, and a cheefe customer, shoulde behaue himselfe so childishly in the sight of so great a mul∣titude; but the desire he had to see Christ, made him forget himselfe: and to committe such thinges as were not fitting for his state and credite So they that will followe Christ, Rom 18 must make account to doe many thinges contrarie to the fa∣shion of the worlde, and their owne liking If Christ him∣selfe were content to leaue the glorie which he had with his father to come downe to vs, shall not wee bee content to leaue the reputation which we haue with men to go vp to him? But alas, where is there any almost, that preferreth not the fruition of this earthly prison, before the profession of that heauenly mansion: and had rather hazarde the hope which they haue of eternall glory, then leese the present enioying of their fading pleasure. The ambitious man hunteth after honor, and wil not leese an inch of his estimation. The couetous man seeks after pro∣fite, and countes (like Iudas) all lost that comes not to his Iohn 12. 6 bagges. And the voluptuous man bestowes his time in plea∣sure, and thinketh that his chiefe felicitie. Thus euery man makes his heauen of that wherein hee most delighteth, and is content to take great paines to accomplish his fonde de∣sires. But here Zaccheus is of another minde, for being a pub∣lique officer, he climbes into a tree, which stood not with his grauitie: and being a rich man, he runs to see Christ, which was not for his worldly profite; yea he takes great paines to see Christ, not respecting his ease or pleasure. Thus must we be affected if we desire to come to Christ, that neither honours nor preferments, nor profite, nor plea∣sure, nor kindred, nor friendes, bee able to holde vs backe, Wee must be readie not onely to runne, but also to climbe (if neede require) as Zacheus did: that is, to take some paine and trauaile to haue a sight of Christ. Math 3. 22 Luke 14. 29 1. King 10 The Queene of the South, vndertooke a great and tedious
iourney to heare the wisedome of Salomon, but we are loth to take any paine to heare one that is greater then Salomon. The people in Dauids time brought so much treasure, and so many gifts to the building of Gods Tēple, that the priests 1. Chr 29. 9 were faine to bid them cease, but a great part of the people in our time, are so sparing of their paines and coste, that they thinke that very time mispent which is imployed in the ser∣uice of God: and that money ill bestowed, which is giuen to the maintenance of his ministers. When Zaccheus could not see Christ for the multitude, he climbes vp into a tree, that groweth in the way where he was to passe, that from a tree he might behold him, which was to suffer on a tree for mans saluation. So when wee can∣not drawe neere to Christ by reason of our sinnes that presse vs down, we will climbe vp by a liuely faith, which is the tree of life, that groweth in the way to eternall life, that so with the eyes of our faith, we may beholde him that died for our sinnes vpon a tree. It was a wilde figge tree that Zaccheus climbed, but not like that vnfruitfull one which our Sauiour curfed: for this Math 21. 19 bare most pretious fruit, euen such as Christ himselfe vouch∣safed to plucke. A happie tree that bare such pretious fruite as Zaccheus was, but thrise happie Zaccheus, that so hap∣pilie climbed on that happie tree. This tree grew in the way that Christ was to passe, for else Zaccheus might haue climbed to no purpose: So if wee desire to finde Christ, we must seeke him in the way where he hath promised to shewe himselfe vnto vs, that is, in his ho∣ly Temple, where his word is duely preached, and his sa∣craments reuerently administred, for where two or three are Math 18. 20 so gathered together, hee hath promised to bee present a∣mongst them. The third circumstance. When Christ came to the place, he looked vp & saw Zacheus. As Zaccheus ranne before to see Christ, so Christ fol∣lowed
after to see Zaccheus. Sathan for his part went a∣bout 1. Pet 5. 8 Iohn 10 like a roaring Lyon, seeking to deuoure him, but Christ for his part goeth about like a good shepheard, minding to saue him. And although Sathan a strong armed man, had Luke 11. 21 taken some possession in the heart of Zaccheus, yet Christ a stronger then hee commeth vnarmed, and taketh from him his harnesse wherein he trusted, and rescueth the spoile. Christ comes to the place where Zaccheus was, because otherwise it had bene vnpossible for Zaccheus to come to his presence: for vnlesse the Lorde vouchsafe to come vnto vs, wee cannot attaine to the presence of God. As no man might haue any accesse to King Assuerus, except hee stret∣ched Hester 4 out his golden Scepter: so no man may come to Christ, vnlesse hee bee called by the golden Scepter of his sacred worde. Christ looked vp and saw Zaccheus, before Zaccheus could looke downe to behold him. Thus doth the Lord preuent vs with his mercie, whom he might cast off in his iustice: and if he perceiue in vs a willing minde to come vnto him, hee is content to come first vnto vs. And like that good Father, Luke 15. to behold vs while wee are yet a great way off, and to haue compassion on vs. When Iobs three friendes that came to visite him in his Iob 2. 12 great calamitie, lift vp their eies a farre off, they knewe not Iob, because he was so sore afflicted. But Christ who is the mirror of true friendship, cannot so soone forget his friends, howsoeuer they be disguised. He knoweth his owne sheepe wheresoeuer he seeth them, Ioh. 10. whether they be vnder the fig-tree as Nathaniel was, or vpon the fig-tree as Zac∣cheus Iohn 1 was, he hath respect vnto them. And if they haue a de∣sire to seeke, they shall be sure to find, Math. 7. And if they labour and are heauie laden, he wil refresh them, Matth. 11. Christ is now come to the place where Zacheus is to be cal∣led; and as Abraham, Gene. 22. lift vp his eyes and sawe in the bush a Ramme that was to be sacrificed, so Christ lifting vp his eyes, saw in the tree Zaccheus the sinner that was to
be conuerted. And now begins the conuersion of Zaccheus, for now Christ begins to speake vnto him. Zaccheus desired onely to see Christ, but now Christ cal∣leth him by name, and offereth his owne selfe vnto him. This was more than Zaccheus expected, and yet no more than Christ vouchsafeth, namelie, to giue more than is desired. The sicke of the Palsey that asked health, obtained also for∣giuenesse Luke 5 1. King. 3 12. 13 of sinnes. Salomon desired wisedome, and the Lord gaue him wisdom & abundance of wealth beside. Ia∣cob asked but meat & clothing, and God made him a great Gen 28. 20 rich man. And Zaccheus desired onely to haue a sight of Christ, and was so happy as to entertaine him into his house. Thus the Lorde that is rich in mercy to all that call vpon Rom 10. 12 Ephe 2. 4 Ierem. 29 him, vseth oftentimes to giue more then we aske: and hee that is alwaies founde of them that seeke him with their whole heart, is found also sometime of Gentiles that knewe not God, Esay. 65. 1. Let vs therefore that were sometime Rom 10. 20 Esay 55 sinners of the Gentiles, seek the Lord as Zaccheus did, while he may be found, & call vpon him while he is nigh. He will bee founde of them that seeke him hartily, and is nigh to all them that call vpon him faithfully, Psal. 145. 18. Zaccheus come downe at once. Now Christ begins to call Zaccheus from the tree to be conuerted, as God called A∣dam from among the trees of the garden to be cursed, Gen. 3. Before, Zaccheus was too low, and therefore was faine to climbe, but now he is too high, and therefore he must come downe. And we (for the most part) are either too high, or too low, too hot, or too cold, too quicke, or too slouthfull in the Lords busines. Sometime we flocke together to heare a Sermon, like the people, Luke 5. that pressed vpon Christ to heare the worde: and anon wee runne to see some pleasant pastime, like the Athenians, whose eares alwaies itched to Actes 17 heare some newes. Who make more shewe of conscience and religion, then they that shew themselues most irreligi∣ous and vnconscionable? Who seemed more confident and vertuous in Christ his cause then Peter? and not long after, Math 26.
who more trayterous and faint-hearted? Many can say with Peter, that they will not sticke to dye before they will deny Christ, but when it comes to the trial, they are ready to abiure Christ and his religion, before they will hazard either life or liuing. He that will come to Christ, must come at once, without delay, for delayes (specially in the matter of our saluation) are most dangerous, and repentance may not bee deferred. We must make no tarrying to turne vnto the Lord, nor put off Eccle 5. 7 from day to day, least the wrath of the Lord breake foorth so∣dainly, and we be destroyed in our securitie, and perish in the time of vengeance. When the Lord is minded to doe vs good, he will haue vs come quickly like Ioseph, Gen. 45. 9. that in the time of famine, would haue his father Iacob to come downe quickly vnto him, to soiourne in Egypt, where there was some plentie of foode. As the children of this world are very nimble to worke wickednesse, so the children of light should bee as nimble to follow goodnesse. Iudas was nimble to betray Christ, Iohn 13. 27. and the bad debters Luke 16. could sit down quick∣ly to misreckon their creditor: so let vs come quicklie to heare of Christ, that Christ may accept of vs quicklie; let vs be nimble to make our account before, that we do not (like Luke. 14. 28 the foolish builder) come short of our reckoning. But why must Zaccheus come downe so hastily? euen to entertaine Christ into his house. For today (saith Christ) I must abide with thee. This was ioyfull newes to little Zac∣cheus. Not long before, hee wanted meanes to see Christ, but now hee hath opportunitie to entertaine him into his house. There was more humanitie in Christ then in Zac∣cheus: for if Christ had not bidden himselfe to dinner, he had not bene bidden for Zaccheus. So if Christ doe not offer himselfe vnto vs in his afflicted members, he may goe long Math 35. 40 enough before we will offer him any entertainement. As of∣ten as the poore craueth any reliefe at our hands, let vs ima∣gine that Christ asketh something of vs: but as Zaccheus
must entertaine him presently without delay, so let vs bee readie to helpe them presently, because they stand in neede of present helpe. And as hee must receiue Christ into his house, so we must make account to receiue his needy mem∣bers into our houses. And as the vniust stewarde procureth Luke 16 himselfe friendes with his masters goods, so let vs make the poore to be our friendes, by our beneficence and bountie to∣wardes them, that so receiuing them (when they haue need) into our earthly houses, they may receiue vs when we stand in greatest neede, into euerlasting habitations. They that were inuited to the marriage, Matth. 22. refu∣sed to come; but Christ is cōtent to come to Zaccheus house before he was inuited. Wherein also hee sheweth his great humilitie, in comming before he was requested, as they be∣wrayed their great arrogancie, in refusing to come being solemnely bidden. It was a part of great humilitie, that he that was most free from sinne, would vouchsafe to come in∣to a sinners house: but it was a signe of great humilitie, that he would be wray his great necessitie, and seeke for succour it a sinners hand. Alas poore humble Sauiour, who though thou bee Lord of heauen & earth, as thou art the sonne of God, yet as thou art the sonne of man, hast not whereon to lay thy head, Matth. 8. How iustly did thy Prophet Ieremie wonder at thy humble pouertie, saying, O thou hope of Israel, the Sa∣uiour Ierem 14 thereof in the time of trouble, why art thou as a stranger in the land, or as one that passeth by to tarrie for anight? The sonne of God vouchsafeth to come; and that vnrequested, to a sinfull mans house a speciall fauour: but he disdaineth not to make his necessitie knowne vnto him; O strange hu∣militie! Here therefore appeareth the singular humanitie & great humilitie of Christ to sinfull men; he offereth himselfe to be their guest, if hee finde them willing to entertaine him for their guest. And Zaccheus no doubt was willing to en∣tertaine him: for although Christ heard not the voyce, yet he heard the affection of Zaccheus inuiting him to dinner.
As therefore Zaccheus was willing to receiue Christ into his house, so let vs be ready to receiue him into our heartes. For as Christ said to Zaccheus: This day I must abide at thy house, so he saith to euery one of vs: This day I must abide in your heartes. Wherefore as the Prophet Dauid saith, Open your Psalm 24 gates that the King of glorie may come in: so I say vnto you, Open your hearts that the word of God may enter in. This day the word of God may abide in your hearts, for this day the word is preached vnto you; and who knoweth whether hee shall liue to heare it the next Sabboth; To day therefore if ye will heare his voyce, harden not your heartes: as did the Israe∣lites, Psal 95 least if you harden your heartes, his voyce be heard no more amongst you. This day you may gather this heauenly Manna, as the Israelites might gather their Manna sixe daies Exod 16 together, but tomorrow (perhaps) and sixe dayes after, you may not gather it, as on the seuenth day Manna might not be found. The Lord graunt that you may gather sufficient food for the sustentation of your soules, that as Elias the pro∣phet iournied in the strength of the meate that the Angell brought him, euen vnto Horeb the mount of God, so you in . Reg 19 the strength of this spirituall meate which heere I bring you, may be able to passe through the daungerous wayes of this troublesome world, vnto Gods holy Mountaine, the hauen of all happines, whither he bring vs that hath deerely bought vs with his pretious bloud, euen Christ Iesus the righ∣teous: to whome with the Father and the holy Ghost, three persons and one God, be gi∣uen all glory and maiestie, world without end, Amen. FINIS.
THE SINNERS CON∣FESSION The Text. Luke, chap. 19. vers. 6. 7. 8. 9. 6 Then he came downe hastily, and receiued him ioifully. 7 And when all they sawe it, they murmured saying, that he was gone in to lodge with a sinfull man. 8 And Zaccheus stood forth, and sayd vnto the Lorde, Be∣holde, Lord, the halfe of my goods I giue to the poore: and if I haue taken from any man by forged cauillation, I restore him foure fold. 9 Then Iesus sayd vnto him, This day is saluation come vn∣to this house, forasmuch as hee is also become the soune of Abraham. YOu heard the last Sabboth, how Zacheus the Publican was called to be a Christiā: now you shal heare the fruit of his conuersion. No sooner had Christ called him from the tree, but that he came downe hastilie, and receiued him ioi∣fullie. This was the fruit which it had in the heart of Zaccheus, namely, obedience to the voice of Christ: a fruite more pre∣tious and acceptable vnto God, than the most pleasant fruits which Eden yeelded, and a sacrifice more sweet and accep∣table vnto him, than all the sacrifices which the law requi∣red. This is the sacrifice where with the Lorde is pleased, e∣uen when his voice is obeyed, 1. Sam. 15. 22. The voyce of the Lord is a glorious voyce, and mighty in operation, diui∣ding the flames of fire, and shaking the Cedar trees. So the Psalm 29 voyce of Christ is a glorious voyce, his voyce is mightie in Heb 4. 12 operation, diuiding the soule and the spirit, and shaking Zaccheus from the wilde figge-tree, whereinto hee had cli∣med. The same God, to whose commaund, the windes, the sea, Math. 8. the diuels and death it selfe obey, here commaundeth Zac∣cheus
to come downe at once, and he commeth downe ha∣stilie to receiue him to his house, and he receiueth him ioy∣fully. As Zaccheus could not come at Christ till he was cal∣led, so no man can come to Christ except the Father drawe Iohn 6. 44 him: and as Zaccheus could not chuse but come, when he was called by the voyce of Christ: so when any man is cal∣led effectually by the preaching of the Gospell, hee cannot chuse but come to Christ: for where there is an effectuall calling, there is grace giuen also to obey the same. Ro. 8. 30. The Lord is faine sometime to cal vs oftē, because we know not the voyce of him that calleth vs, as hee called Samuel three times, before he answered: because at that time Sa∣muel knew not the Lord, 1. Sam. 3. 7. But as soone as he vn∣derstood that it was the Lord that spake vnto him, he repli∣ed presently, Speake on Lord, for thy seruant heareth. So when the Lorde calleth any man effectually by the preach∣ing of his worde, all the partes and powers of his bodie doe yeeld their obedience, the eare listneth, the tongue confes∣seth, the heart beleeueth, the head deuiseth, the hand perfor∣meth, the foote runneth, the eye directeth, and all concurre to do thy wil, O God, Psal. 40. 7. Such and so effectuall is the voyce of Christ in the hearts of his chosen, that it maketh Saul of a bloudy persecutor to Actes 9 Math. 4. become Paul a painfull preacher: it causeth Peter of a sillie Fisher-man, to become a catcher of men: and Zaccheus here of a vile Publican, to become a zealous Christian. And such also is the nature of the word preached, wheresoeuer it 1. Cor 3. 7 pleaseth the Lord to giue successe and increase thereto, that it is able to transforme the mindes of men, to be get faith in the hearts of Infidels, and (in a worde) to saue such as are or∣dained to eternal life, Acts 13. This is the power of the word Rom 1 of God, euen to cause a consenting to the truth thereof: and this is the propertie of the children of God, to yeeld all obe∣dience to the word of God. Assoone as Christ calleth Zac∣cheus, he comes downe presently, like the light in the crea∣tion, that was made as soone as God sayd, Let there be light. Here therefore of Zaccheus that obeied the voice of Christ,
let vs learne obedience to the voice of Christ: for as Christ biddeth Zaccheus to come down, because he was too high: so he saith to euery one of vs, Come downe, because wee are too high minded. But with vs the voyce of Christ is not so effectuall, as it was with Zaccheus: for hee was content to come downe at the first bidding: but we must be often bid∣den to beware of pride and ambition, and yet wee will still bee climing. There are fewe so high that are content vvith their calling, but as Haman was alwaies aspiring til he came Hest 7. to the gallowes, so many amongst vs are alwaies climing, till they catch a fall. Againe, as Christ sayd to Zaccheus, To day I must abide at thy house: so Christ sayth to vs, To day my poore afflicted members should receiue some succour at your handes. But as the Priest & the Leuite, Luke 10. passed by the wounded man leauing him halfe dead: so we (for the most part) passe by our needy brethren, leauing them vnr eleeued. Thus are we euery way disobedient to the voice of Christ. He teach∣eth vs to be humble as he himselfe is, Matth. 11. 29. and we waxe proud and insolent as Sathan is. He willeth vs to bee mercifull, as our heauenly father is, Luke 6. 36. and wee are cruell and vnmercifull, as the rich glutton was, Luk. 16. This is the cause vvhy the earth deceiueth and rendreth not her fruit, Esai. 24. 5. This is the cause why the sword deuoureth abroad, and the pestilence destroieth at home, Deut. 28. 15. Leuit. 26. 24. 25. and in a worde, this is the cause of all the mischiefes and calamities that are threatned, euen because vve are obstinate and rebellious against the Lorde, wee are vndutifull and disobedient to the voyce of Christ, that cal∣leth vs so louingly to come vnto him, Mat. 11. 28. Zaccheus vvas called but once, and he commeth quickly, but we are called oftentimes, and almost euery day, and that by the voice of Christ himselfe: for, he that heareth you (saith Christ, Luke 10. 16.) heareth me: and yet wee cannot find the way to Christ. The word of God, vvhich is the lanterne vnto our feete, and the light vnto our paths, Psal. 119. hath bin plainly and plentifully preached amongst vs these ma∣ny
yeares, and yet many amongst vs haue not yet learned to come to Christ. Zaccheus comes quickly when Christ calleth him, let vs therefore learne of Zaccheus to come quickly when Christ calleth vs. We must bee quicke in the Lords busines, for God cannot abide loyterers standing all the day idle, Matth. 20. and as he loueth a cheerefull giuer, 2. Cor. 9. 7. so he liketh a cheerefull follower. It followeth therefore that Zaccheus receiued him cheer∣fully. Still Zaccheus us is a receiuer: before hee was a receiuer of custome, now he is a receiuer of Christ. Zaccheus recei∣ued Christ two wayes: first, into his heart when hee desired to see him: and then into his house when hee gaue him hos∣pitalitie. Many receiued Christ to house, but not into their hearts, and therfore receiued him grudgingly: but Zaccheus receiued Christ first into his heart, and then into his house, and therefore receiued him ioyfully. Of Zaccheus his ioy∣fulnesse, we must learne to be ioyfull when we do any thing for the cause of Christ: we must bee glad to harbour Christ in his members, as Zaccheus was ioyfull to harbour Christ himselfe. As before in comming downe from the tree, Zac∣cheus shewed his obedience: so here in receiuing Christ in∣to his house, he sheweth the loue that hee bare vnto him. If Zaccheus had not loued Christ, he might haue sent him to some common Inne: But Zaccheus is content to receiue Christ into his owne house, yea, he reioiceth to haue gotten so good a guest, like Abraham that vsed to sit at the doore of Gen. 18 his tent, & reioiced to entertaine strangers that went by the way: and therefore though Zaccheus were a Gentile borne, yet herein hee sheweth himselfe the child of Abraham, be∣cause he doth the works of Abraham, Iohn 8 vers. 39. So did Abraham and so must we doe, if we will shew our selues to be the children of Abraham. When Abraham thought only to haue entertained men, hee reeiued the Angels in the shape and likenes of men: and Abraham Gen 18. 3 when Zaccheus thought to entertaine the sonne of man, he receiueth the sonne of God himselfe. Let vs therefore (as the Apostle willeth vs, Heb. 13. 2.) be mindfull to entertaine
strangers, for as much as thereby some haue receiued An∣gels into their houses vnawares: and why should not wee Lot Gen 19. 3 hope to entertaine the like or better ghestes, if we bee giuen to hospitalitie, as those godly Fathers were? For as the An∣gels came to them in the likenes of men: so Christ himselfe comes to vs in the likenes of a poore man, of a lame man, & of a blind man: and when he commeth, he commeth hun∣grie, or thirstie, or naked, or harborlesse, or sicke, or impriso∣ned, and happie are they that feede, or cloath, or harbour, or visite him, when he commeth thus afflicted. When Abra∣ham entertained the Angels, he was not only busie himself, but his wife and all his housholde were careful to make pro∣uision for them so when Zaccheus receiued Christ into his house his whole family (no doubt) were no lesse willing & carefull to entertaine Christ, then their master was: & there∣fore not only to Zaccheus, but euen to his whole house sal∣uation is promised, because the whole familie reioyced at Christ his comming. Let rich men learne of Zaccheus, to entertaine Christ in his needie members, and let rich mens seruaunts learne of Zaccheus familie, to shewe themselues mercifull like their mercifull masters, that they may receiue the rewarde of mercy and hospitalitie at the last day, Come ye blessed, for I was harborlesse, and ye tooke me in. General∣ly, Mat 25 as Zaccheus gladly receiued Christ: so let euery one that is able, bee glad to distribute to the necessitie of the poore Saints: if we haue much, let vs giue plentifully: if wee haue little, let vs giue gladly of that little: if wee bee not able to giue a peny, yet happily we may afford a morsell of bread: but if not that, yet there is none so needie, that cannot giue a cup of colde water, and euen so small a gift shall not lose his iust reward, Matth. 10. 41. Zaccheus receiued Christ in∣to his heart, but many amongst vs are readie to driue Christ out, and to receiue Sathan in stead of him: Zaccheus recei∣ued Christ into his house, but there are many rich men a∣mongst vs, that like Diues, Luke 16. will not affoorde poore Lazarus the crummes that fall from their table: but as the damsell, Actes. 12. opened not the doore for ioy when shee
heard Peters voice: so by contrary, these men for very griefe shut their gates when they perceiue a begger there Finally, Zaccheus was ioifull when hee entertained Christ, but ma∣ny amongst vs are sorrowfull when they should relieue the poore: like churlish Nabal, 1. Sam. 25. that reuiled Dauid, when he should haue relieued him. So long as Iob prospered, hee kept a worthie and a wor∣shipfull house, hee suffered not the straunger to lye in the streetes, but opened his doore to the Traueiler that went by the way, Iob. 31. 32. but now many gentlemen of the coun∣trey are content to suffer the stranger, the fatherlesse and the widdow, not onely to lye, but euen to starue and die in the streetes with hunger and colde, and neuer receiue them to house or harbour, nor affoord them any reliefe or succour. But as the voyce of Abels bloud did crie from the earth to God, for vengeance against his brothers cruelty: so the voice Gen 4. 10 of the poore and their pittious cries, shal enter into the eares of the Lord, and their guiltles bloud (which is powred forth in euerie place without all compassion) shall pull downe hasty and suddaine vengeance from heauen vpon the heads of these vnmercifull cormorants, vnlesse while this time of mercie lasteth, they shewe mercy to their distressed neigh∣bours. Thus you haue heard howe Zaccheus behaued himselfe in entertaining of Christ▪ nowe you shall see the behauiour of the Pharisies in disdaining at Christ. When all they saw it, they murmured, saying, that hee was gone in to lodge with a sinfull man. Before, they hated Zaccheus for his vices, be∣cause he was couetous: now they enuy him for his vertues, because he was giuen to hospitality. For the wicked wil al∣wayes haue some thing to finde fault with in the children of God, like the sonnes of Iacob, Gen. 37. that hated their bro∣ther Ioseph, because of his dreames: and like Saul that vn∣happie king, that enuied Dauid for his happie victories, 1. Sam 18. 29. Thus the wicked when they cannot charge the godly with any grieuous crime, they begin to grudge at their wel doing: and therefore not onely Zaccheus is hated
for receiuing of Christ, but Christ is hated also for being his guest. When they could not accuse Christ for sinne, they accuse him for companying with sinners: for they must still bee accusing some or other, for one thing or other, like their father the diuell, that both by name, Reuel. 12. 10. and by nature, Iob. 16. 7. is a continuall accuser of the brethren. It had beene the duetie of the Pharisies to haue receiued Christ, and made much of him as Zaccheus did: but they are so farre off from entertaining him themselues, that it grieueth them to see Zaccheus giue him entertainmēt. And surely, such is the peruerse nature of the wicked, that they will neither receiue the grace of GOD when it is offered them, nor willingly suffer any other to imbrace the same: like the wicked Iewes, Acts 13. 50 that would neither be∣leeue the doctrine which Paul preached, nor coulde abide that the Gentiles should bee brought to the faith of Christ. The high priestes thought thēselues too high, to haue poore humble Christ amongst them: the Scribes and the Pharisies in their own conceit vvere too good, too vvise, and too holy to receiue him into their company: and not content to se∣quester and estraunge themselues from Christ, they disdai∣ned also that he should bee conuersant vvith Publicans and sinners, as though he vvere not vvorthy to bee conuersant a∣mongst men. If it vvere the office of Christ to conuert sinners, vvhy Mat 9. 13 should the Pharisies be offended at him, if hee vvere some∣times conuersant vvith sinners to vvorke their conuersion? If Christ vvere a Phisition to cure the sicknesse of the soule, Math 9. 13 that is, to saue the people from their sinnes, vvhy should the Pharisies murmure at him for keeping of companie vvith Zaccheus, that was sicke in soule? for as it is expedient for the Phisition to visite his patients for their better recouerie, so it was conuenient Christ should visite sinners for their speedier conuersion. But as the Phisition that resorteth to sick persons, is not straight way infected: so the soules Phi∣sition that conuerseth with sinners, is not thereby polluted. And therefore, as Christ performed his office though the
Pharisies murmured, so let the ministers of God learne by his example, to performe their dueties, though the wicked be offended. It was the office of Christ to call sinners to re∣pentance, yea he came to call Pharisie sinners, aswel as Pub∣lican sinners, if the Pharisies woulde haue confessed them∣selues to bee sinners, as the Publicans did, but because they Luke 18 stoode so much vpon their owne righteousnesse, and despi∣sed others, therefore Christ denounceth so many woes a∣gainst them, and preferreth the penitent Publican that tru∣sted Math 23 in the Lords mercy, before the proud Pharisie that tru∣sted in his owne merites. Though Paul was a Pharisie, and Actes 23. 6 the sonne of a Pharisie, yet he shameth not to confesse him∣selfe one of the chiefe sinners which Christ came to saue. So if the Pharisies that murmured at Zaccheus would haue bin saued, they should haue cōfessed themselues chiefe sinners, as Paul did. They should not haue accused Christ for kee∣ping 1▪ Tim 1. 15 company with sinners, but they should haue accused themselues for not keeping companie with Christ. The iust man (sayth Salomon, Prouer. 18.) is the first accuser of himselfe: but the Pharisies are so farre from accusing of themselues, that they begin to accuse Zaccheus and Christ together. Thus the Pharisies of our time, that make religion a cloake to couer their corrupt dealing, haue this propertie to thinke other men to bee hainous sinners, and themselues onely to be righteous: in so much, as they will not sticke to speake like that proud people that was wont to say, Depart from me, for I am holier then thou: & like that presumptuous pharisie, Luk. 18. I thank God I am not as others are, extortio¦ners, vsurers, adulterers, drūkards, or such like: I sanctifie the Sabboth, which other mē prophane: I frequēt sermōs, which they neglect: I reuerence the name of God, which they blas∣pheme: I pay tithe, which others with-hold: and fast often∣times, which they do seldom, or neuer. These were the spee∣ches Math 15. 7 Luke 11. 44 Luke 11. 1 Actes 26. 5 Math 23. 25 27 of the Pharisies, that liued in the time of Christ, whō he so often calleth hypocrites: and these are the speeches of the hypocrites of our age, that seeme to liue after the straightest sect of our religion, Acts. 26. They wash the outside of the
cup, and of the platter: that is, they iustifie themselues, and seeme maruallous holy in the fight of men, which can discern by the outward appearance onely: but vnto God that seeth and searcheth the secrets of the hearts and reines, they appeare like painted tombes full of dead mens bones, and all filthines: that is, they haue their inward parts full of rauening, and all kind of wickednes Wherefore, as Christ said to his Disciples, Except your righteousnesse exceede the righteousnesse of the Math 5. 20 Scribes and Pharisies, you cannot enter into the kingdome of heauen: so I say vnto you, that except your righteousnesse ex∣ceede the righteousnesse of these Pharisaicall hypocrites, ye cannot be saued. These holy Pharisies did vse to call the Pub∣licans, not vsurers, nor extortioners, as they themselues were: but by the generall name of sinners, as though they themselues were free from sinne. Thus the Papistes at this day doe vse to call the most sincere professors of the Gospell, not Lutherans, Caluinistes, Zuinglians, or Protestants, as they were wont to call them: but now they tearme vs heretikes, a name more odious than any other, whereas in the meane season, they themselues are of all others the greatest heretikes. So the A∣theists of our time, when they cannot accuse the godly that are amongst vs of vsurie, or briberie, or extortion, or drunken∣nesse, or any such notorious sinne, they call them hypocrites, which is the summe of all: when as in very trueth, they them∣selues doe best deserue that name: but it makes no matter what they call vs, neither are wee to be moued at their des∣pitefull speeches: for as the bitter taunts of these murmuring Pharisies could not hinder Zaccheus in his conuersion, so the slaunders of these godlesse men must not discourage the ser∣uants of God from their good profession. The Pharisies did Zaccheus great wrong for calling him sinner, when hee had repented of his sinne: and the Atheistes at this day doe great∣ly wrong the true professors, in calling them hypocrites, which haue truely repented of their former sinnes, and ende∣uour by all good meanes to leade a godly life. Therefore as Zaccheus preferred his soules health before all their murmu∣ring: so it behoueth vs to looke to our soules saluation, not∣withstanding
all the reproches and slaunders that are deui∣sed against vs. And as the Pharisies might call Zaccheus sin∣ner, but could not hinder his conuersion: so the malitious worldlings may take away our goods, our good names, yea and our liues also, but cannot depriue vs of our saluation. Wherefore as our Sauiour said to his Apostles, Feare not them Math. 10. that can kill the bodie, and then can doe no more: so I say vnto you, Feare not the frownes of the wicked, for they are not a∣ble to hurt your better part: seeke not to gaine the fauour of the world, for the whole world is not able to saue a soule, but feare to offend him that is able to destroy both bodie and soule in hell, and seeke to please him that is able to saue them both in heauen for euer. Now followeth another fruite of Zaccheus conuersion: namely, his good confession: for, as hee beleeued with the heart vnto righteousnesse, so hee confessed with the mouth Rom 10. 10 vnto saluation. When Zaccheus was mocked of the Phari∣sies, it seemeth that he should stoope downe for shame: but when he was thus reprooued and reuiled by them, the Scrip∣ture saith, that he stood vp in signe of gladnesse. As the Apo∣stles Actes 5 went away reioycing that they were coūted worthy to suffer rebuke for the name of Christ: so Zaccheus the Publi∣can went forth reioycing, that hee was reproched for the cause of Christ. Before, Zaccheus was a Publican, and there∣fore stood in sinne very daungerously, like the house that is Luke 6. 45 builded vpon the sand, readie to bee ouerturned with euery tempest: but now Zaccheus is become a true Christian, and therefore stands in righteousnesse very safely, like the house that is built vpon a rocke, free from any danger of falling. Behold Lord, the halfe of my goods, &c. There are two parts of this confession. The first is his gift to the poore: the second is, the restitution of his vniust gotten goods. Before, Zaccheus was an oppressor of the poore, now he is a great benefactor to the poore: before he was an encrocher vpon other mens goods, now he is a distributer of his owne goods: before, hee was a receiuer and a taker, now he is a restorer and a giuer: neither doth he giue sparingly, but he giueth li∣berally,
laying vp a good foundatiō against the time to come. Now hath Zaccheus found that pretious pearle, and for ioy 1. Tim 6 Math 13 thereof, he is content, not to sell, but to giue all that hee hath to enioy the same. When the rich Ruler (in the former chap∣ter) was willed to sell all that he had, & to giue it to the poore, Luke 18 he went away very sorrowfull, for he was very rich: but Zac∣cheus, perhaps as rich as he is content of his owne accorde & vnbidden, to bestow halfe his goods vpon the poore, and that with a cheerefull mind. If Zaccheus had giuen onely the third part of his goods, no doubt but Christ would haue ac∣cepted it, for he accepteth the widdowes farthing, because it was giuen with a willing minde: but if hee had giuen all his Luke 21 goods to feede the poore, as the Pharisies gaue their almes to be seene of men, yea, or his bodie to be burned, as some Ro∣mans 1. Cor 13 haue done to get renowne, it should haue bene to no purpose, because it was done to a wrong end. Now, as Zac∣cheus was rich in the goods of this life, so was he rich in faith also; neither was it an idle or dead faith that Zaccheus had, but it was a faithfull & a liuely faith, a faith that worketh and laboureth by loue, such as is required at the hands of Chri∣stians. Gal 5. 6 Saint Iames saith, Shew me thy faith by thy workes: and here Zaccheus doth shew his faith by his workes. Before, hee was exercised in vngodly works, which are the fruits of infi∣delitie: but now he is exercised in the works of mercie, which are the fruites of a liuely faith. Zaccheus is very liberall in re∣lieuing the poore, but he is liberall of that which is his owne: so there are many now a dayes that are very liberall, but it is of that which is none of theirs; for as Nadab & Abihu offered strange fire vnto the Lord, so these men offer strange goods Leuit 10 vnto the Lord. There are some amongst vs, that thinke to make amends for their vniust dealing by giuing part of that to some good vses, which they haue gotten by bad meanes; if they haue gotten a pound by vsurie & oppression, they are cōtent perhaps to giue a pennie to relieue the poore. But, as it was not lawfull for the Israelites to bring the price or the hire of a harlot into the house of the Lord: so it is not lawful for vs Deut 23 to apply the gaine of our ill gottē goods to the seruice of god.
The halfe of my goods I giue, &c. Zaccheus saith not, I haue giuen, as an vpbraider of God: or, I will giue, as a delayer, that meanes to giue away his goods after his death, when hee can keepe them no longer: but hee saith, I giue, to signifie that his wil is his deed, and that he mea∣neth not to take any dayes of payment for the matter. For as before he ranne apace to see Christ, and came downe hastily to entertaine Christ in his owne person▪ so doth hee here giue quickly to relieue Christ in his needy members. This is Zac∣cheus last wil and testament, that he maketh before his death, and seeth the same prooued and performed before his eies. If therefore we desire to doe any good to any of our poore bre∣thren, let vs learne of Zaccheus to do it quickly, while we are aliue, for time will preuent vs, and death will preuent vs. I know there would bee many that would bee willing to giue some part of their goods to the poore before their death, as Zaccheus did: but that they knowe not what neede them∣selues may haue thereof before they die, and therefore for the most part they will hardly forsake or leaue their goods, till their goods forsake and leaue them. But herein they shewe themselues to doubt of Gods prouidence, and as it were to di∣strust of his payment, who hath promised to repay whatsoe∣uer is giuen vnto the poore, as it were lent vnto himselfe, and that not secretly, thogh they did their almes neuer so secretly: but the Lord will reward them opēly, as our Sauior speaketh. Ma. 6. The wise preacher; Eccl. 11. willeth vs to cast our bread Pro 19. 17 vpon the waters, that is, to be liberall to the poore, whose wa∣try eyes bewray their great necessity: or, as (others expound it) to hazard and aduenture some of our goods vpon our nee∣dy brethren, as Merchantes do aduenture their goods vpon the seas: for although they may seeme to bee in great perill and danger of perishing in the waters, yet commonly it fal∣leth out, that by the blessing of God they returne with greater profit. So albeit the reliefe that is bestowed vpon our distres∣sed neighbors may seeme to be lost, yet as the wise man saith, after a time we shall find it againe: and as the precious oyle descended from Aarons beard to the skirts of his clothing, so Psalm 133
certainely the oyle of mercie and charitie which wee powre into the woundes of our distressed brethren, shall descend into our owne soules, and as the widdowes oyle was encrea∣sed Luke 10 1. King 17 in the cruse, because shee releeued the Lordes prophet, so shall this pretious oyle bestowed vpon the poore, be re∣turned vpon our heads in great measure. Thus is Zaccheus liberall, as you see: for he giueth away halfe his goods, but he giues it not to the rich, that might giue to him againe, but he giues it to the poore that cannot requite him: to teach vs vpon whom we should bestow our almes. As God that is rich in mercie, giueth all things vnto vs that can not requite him: so the rich men of this world (if they haue any sparke of mercie in them) should giue vnto the poore that cannot requite them. But amongst vs in euery place almost, it is far otherwise: for if any thing be to be giuen, not they that are poorest and stand in greatest neede, but they that can make best friendes are best preferred. Thus Diues is still inriched, Luke 16 and Lazarus is still reiected. If we send to a great man, wee send an oxe for a present: but if wee send to a poore man, Matt 12 we send a crust for an almes. Therefore, as Christ said to the Iewes, that the Niniuites should rise in iudgement against them, because they repented at Ionas preaching: so it may be said vnto vs, that Zaccheus shall rise in iudgement against vs and condemne vs; for he shewed great mercie vpon the poore, but we are voyde of all compassion. Thus you haue heard the first part of Zaccheus confes∣sion, wherein you see his liberalitie to the poore. Now you shall heare the second part of his confession, wherein he pro∣miseth restitution of his vniust gotten goods. Before, Zac∣cheus gaue to the poore the half of that which was his own: now he restoreth that which is none of his, to the right ow∣ners. And because he had detayned their goods so long, to their great losse and hinderance, therefore he doth not only restore the principall, which he had taken from them, but he alloweth them then costs and damages they had sustai∣ned. As Ioram king of Israel caused to bee restored to the Shunamite her house and land, and all the fruites and pro∣fits 2. King 8
of the same, which were wrongfully kept from her seuen yeres together: so Zaccheus the customer restoreth to those that hee had oppressed, their goods which hee had gotten from them by fraudulent dealing, with all the fruites and profits that might come thereof during the time of his vn∣iust profession. So liberall was Zaccheus to the poore, that he gaue them halfe his goods: and so little got Zaccheus by his vsurie and oppression, that for euery penie hee restored foure. If the Vsurers and extortioners of our time would re∣store foure-folde for that they haue wrongfully gotten, I feare mee they would haue but a small halfe to giue to the poore & but a little left to helpe themselues. There was no law to compell Zaccheus to make such restitution, except he will confesse himselfe to be a theefe, because he was an Vsu∣rer, and then the law of God requireth such restitution. And surely Zaccheus seemeth after a sort to confesse his theft, be∣cause he promiseth foure-fold restitutiō. If a man had stolne a sheepe, the law of God requireth that hee should restore Exod 22. 1 2. Sam 12 foure sheepe for one: and the ancient Romanes had this law, that Vsurers should forfeit foure times so much as they tooke for vsurie. If the same law were now to vse against our theeuish Vsurers, as it was sometime among them, wee should not haue such complayning of the poore both in pri∣sons and streetes. But if these great theeues (I meane our biting Vsurers) that rob and spoyle without ceasing when they haue no neede, might finde no more fauour, than those pettie theeues which rob and steale sometime, when they are driuen thereto by extreame necessitie, then surely the Common wealth would soone be disburdened of that pe∣stilent brood of Catterpillers wherewith it is pestered. I wish them betimes to looke to their owne estate, and with Zac∣cheus to forsake their damnable trade. If they haue liued he∣therto by the gaine of vsurie, let them now lament their sin, and call to God for mercie and forgiuenes, let them make restitution of that they haue wrongfully taken, and grieue that they haue so long detained yt which is none of theirs.
For as no sinne is pardoned without repentance to God, so vsurie is not pardoned without repentance to God: and as the sinne of theft is not remoued, before restitution be made to men (if the partie be able,) so the sinne of vsurie (which is a secret theft) is not remitted, before restitution bee made to those that are oppressed and spoyled by this secret theft. Thus you haue seene how Zaccheus that was once a hoor∣der of his goods, as our rich men are, is now a liberall dispo∣ser of his goods, as I wish they were. Hee that lately was a Camell laden with riches, and therfore vnapt to go thorow a needles eye, hath now like the Camell cast off his rich la∣ding, and therefore may enter in at the narrow gate. Some Math 19 rich men would rather haue lost their liues, than forgone Math 7 their goods, and for halfe that losse would haue proued ve∣rie pensiue▪ but this was the ioyfullest newes that euer came to Zaccheus house, sweeter to him than all his gold and sil∣uer: that where as before, he was in the state of damnation, now saluation is promised to him and his house: and where∣as before, he was the seruant of Sathan, now hee is become the childe of Abraham. Now Zaccheus house is become Gods house, and Zaccheus himselfe is the sonne of Abra∣ham, and therefore no cause why Christ should not resort to Zaccheus house. As Christ said to the penitent theefe, This day shalt thou be with me in paradise: so hee sayth here Luke 23 to the penitent Publican, This day saluation is come vnto thy house, and this day thou art become the childe of Abraham. Christ loueth not to bee long in any mans debt: for as hee saith to Zaccheus, To day I must abide at thy house: so hee saith to the same Zaccheus, To day, and hence forth for e∣uer, thou and thy house must abide with me in heauen. Here is a happie change: in stead of a little worldly treasure, sub∣iect to losse by theeues, and to spoyle by rust and moths, to haue all store of heauenly treasure, which neither theeues can steale, nor cancker can corrupt: in stead of an earthly Math 6 house, subiect to fire and falling, to haue a house giuen of God, not made with hands, but eternall in heauen, 2. Cor. 5.
vers. 1. Who would not rather chuse with Zaccheus to giue halfe his goods to the poore, that he may be an heire of sal∣uation, and the sonne of Abraham to rest in his fathers bo∣some, than with Diues to keepe all from the poore, and to be tormented in those eternall flames? That rich glutton that denied the crummes from his table, challenged Abraham Luke 16 for his father, but he was refused, because hee had not the faith nor workes of Abraham: but Zaccheus, though by na∣ture Iohn 8, 39 he were not the child of Abraham, yet by grace hee is become the child of Abraham, because hee walked in the steps of that faithfull Father. Abraham beleeued before hee Rom 4. 12 was circumcised, so Zaccheus beleeued before hee was cir∣cumcised. As Abraham left his countrey and all that he had Gen 32. 1 Actes 7. 3 when God called him, so Zaccheus left his office and the most part of his riches, when he was called by the sonne of God: and as Abraham desired to see the day of Christ, and Iohn 8. 56 saw it and reioyced; so Zaccheus desired to see Christ, and he saw him and reioyced. Now is Zaccheus a Gentile be∣come the child of Abraham, and not only he, but his whole house also is become the house of Abraham: for when Zac∣cheus is conuert his whole house is conuerted. As the ma∣ster is, such are the seruants: if he bee godly and religious, they prooue godly and religious: if he bee an Atheist, they Psalm 18 prooue Atheistes likewise. Therefore keepe no companie with the wicked, for it is most pernitious: but associate thy selfe with those that feare the Lorde, that thou also mayest learne to feare the Lord: who for his mercie graunt that we may with Zaccheus be desirous to see Christ, ioyfull to re∣ceiue Christ, liberall to releeue the members of Christ, and readie to make amends when we haue wronged any of our brethren, that so with Zaccheus wee may be heires of salua∣tion, and the true sonnes of Abraham, to reigne with Christ in heauen for euer, by the meanes and merites of him, that dyed and rose againe for vs. To whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be all glory. Amen. FINIS.
A praier for the Morning. O Lord prepare our hearts to pray. O Lord GOD our heauenly Father, wee thy poore and wretched creatures, giue thee most humble and hear∣tie thankes for our quiet and safe sleepe, and for raising vs vp from the same. Wee beseech thee for Iesus Christs sake, to prosper vs this day in our labour and trauell, that it may bee to the discharging of our duetie in our vocations, prin∣cipally to thy glory, next to the profite of this Church and common-weale, and last of all to the benefite and content of our masters. Grant deare father, that we may cheerefully and conscionably do our businesse and labours, not as men-pleasers, but as seruing thee our God, knowing thee to bee the chiefe master of vs, and that thou seest and beholdest vs with thy fatherly eyes, who hast promised reward to them that faithfully and truely walke in their vocation, & threat∣ned euerlasting death and damnation to them that deceit∣fully and wickedly do their works and labours. We beseech thee O heauenly father, to giue vs the strength of thy spirit, that godly and gladly we may ouercome our labours, and that the tediousnesse of their irksome labour which thou for our sinnes hast powred vpon all mankind, may seeme to vs more delectable and sweet. Fulfill nowe O Lord these our requests, for thy sonne our Sauiours sake, in whose name we pray as hee himselfe hath taught vs. Our father, &c.
A godly praier to be said at all times. BEcause I haue sinned, O Lord, and done wickedly in thy sight, and prouoked thee to anger by my abhominable wickednesse, making my body which thou hast ordayned as a vessell for thine honor, an instrument to most detestable filthines, O Lord be mercifull vnto me, and pardon me this great wickednesse: looke not vpon me, good Father, with the eyes of iustice, neither doe thou drawe against mee the sword of iudgement, for then howe shall I that am but dust, stand in thy presence, when thy vvrathful indignation com∣meth forth as a whirle wind, and thy heauy displeasure as a mighty tempest: seeing the earth trembleth, the depths are discouered, and the verie heauens are shaken when thou art angrie? Exercise not therefore thy fury against me, that am but chaffe before the winde, and as stubble against a fla∣ming fire: though I haue sinned grieuously in thy sight, pre∣ferring my wicked desire, before thy holy commandement: esteeming the pleasure of a moment, before eternal & euer∣lasting ioyes: nay, which is worse, making more account of vilenes and vanitie, and extreame folly and madnes, then of the glory and maiesty of the most excellent, wonderful, and blessed God, nothing dreading his displeasure, whose wrath maketh the diuels to quake, & burneth vnquenchable vnto the bottomles pit of hel; whose might is so great, that by the breath of his nosthrils he can in the twinkling of an eye de∣stroy a thousand worlds: yet am I bold, prostrating my selfe before the throne of thy maiesty, heartily to beseech, and humbly to intreate thee, that thou wilt not deale with me according to my merires, for I haue deserued yt thou shoul∣dest raine down fire & brimstone from out of heauen vpon me to deuoure me, or to open the earth vnder me, to swal∣low me vp quick vnto hell: but thou art gratious and ful of compassion, and rich in mercies, therefore do men put their trust vnder the shadow of thy wings. I haue none in heauen to flie vnto but thee, nor in earth of whom I may receiue a∣ny comfort, but at thy fauorable hands, which are stretched
out day and night, to receiue all that by earnest repentance turne to thee, being ready to ease al those that are ladē with the burthen of their sin, and to refresh their distressed con∣sciēces. In the multitude of thy mercies I approch vnto thee O Lord, desiring thee to looke down from the height of thy sanctuary, vpon me poore and wretched sinner, and to wipe away mine offences, & to blot out my misdeeds, especially, this my vngratious, vncleane, and vngodly act, that it may not come vp in remembrance with thee, nor be imputed to me for euer, for thy sonnes sake, O Lord, in whom thou art well pleased, in whome thou wast fully satisfied vpon the crosse for my sinnes: grant me free pardon and remission of that I haue so foolishly by my exceeding frailetie, commit∣ted against thee in this shamefull deede. But O thou my vn∣cleane and vnthankefull soule! my vngodly and rebellious heart! what did I sinful wretch & execrable caitife, so blind∣ly and desperatly attempt? Howe art thou become quite senselesse, that thou wast so ready to anger thy most louing God, and to prouoke thy most mightie Iudge, that thou mightest satisfie thy filthie flesh, suborned both by thine & Gods most malitious aduersarie, to grieue and vexe the spi∣rit of the Lord, and to damne thy selfe for euer? Hath not God of his singular fauour, made the heauens of olde, and placed the Sun and Moone in thē, two glorious lights, with innumerable starres, a wonderfull workmanship, for thy vse and benefit? Hath he not lifted vp the cloudes by his strong arme, and heaped treasures of raine, haile, and snow, to doe thee seruice? Hath he not in the midst of the world▪ laid the foundations of the earth, that thou mightest haue a stable habitation, and mightest from thence beholde euerie way thou lookest, the walles of his beautifull palace? Hath hee not gathered the waters into one place, and made the drie land appeare, and drawne forth by his power a pure sub∣stance of aire betweene heauen and earth, that fishes might multiplie in the seas, fowles in great abundance flye in the open face of the firmament, tender plants, hearbes, flowers, and trees in al variety, grow and fructifie vpon the groundt
yea creeping things, cattell and beastes increase in infinite number, in pastures, fields, gardens, orchards, and groues; & all these to do thee pleasure? Hath he not further giuen thee springs and riuers gold and siluer, pearles and iewels; euen plentie of streames, stones, and mettall, to furnish thee with whatsoeuer for profit thou needest, or for pleasure desirest? Hath he not made thee Lord and ruler ouer al his creatures, euen ouer the huge Elephants, the Whale, the strong Lion, and Vnicorne, and horse of warre? ouer the sauage Tigers, Beares, & Wolues? ouer the mighty Eagle, Griffin, Vultur, Ostrich, and Hawke? Art thou not clad and defended, fed and inriched, cheared and renowned by these his creatures, and that all the parts of thy body, and sences of thy minde, might be pertakers of his goodnesse, and with his sweetnes refreshed, comforted and delighted in great measure? yea, aboue all this, hath hee not breathed into thy body an im∣mortall soule, that thou mightest remaine with him in glory for euer? Did he not at the first frame thee like vnto him∣selfe, that he might therefore loue thee as his sonne? Did he not cast into thy spirit the beames of his wisedome, that thou through thy vnderstanding mightest beholde him and his glorie, and stirred vp sparkes of goodnesse in thy heart, that thou mightest by thy affection imbrace him and his bountie, and bee made perfectly blessed by his infinite hap∣pinesse, who when Adam thy vngratefull father, by dis∣trusting him that had faithfully promised, was throughlie a∣ble to fulfill his will, and resolutely determined, exceeding∣ly to aduance him, hauing giuen him this whole worlde in testimony thereof, by discontenting his minde with the ex∣cellent estate hee was placed in of vnspeakeable loue, vn∣lesse hee might bee as good as God himselfe, proudly desi∣ring to make dust the fellowe of him who was from euerla∣sting, infinitly full of wisedome, power, grace and maiestie, and had done al this at the perswasion of the most traiterous rebell of his right gratious king, and spitefull enemie of his most bountifull master, euen then when this most villanous conspiring with Gods notorious aduersarie, had deserued
immortall hatred against him, and all that pertained vnto him: yea thee as yet vnborne, but contained in him, whose whole masse by his impious disobedience, became by iust iudgement a temple of cursed estate for euer, and for euer: thou also thy selfe bringing foorth fruite of contempt of his law, who is most holy, merciful and mightie: yet euen then I say, of vnspeakable pittie and compassion intended, nay promised, nay laboured to deliuer him and thee from that dreadfull vengeance which ye had purchased by your own wicked and vngracious demerits, and to reconcile you base abiects and vile castawaies, and yet stubborne and spitefull haters of the great God Iehouah, who when there was no meanes to be found in heauen, nor seas, nor in the earth, nor vnder the earth, but that he should damne his onely begot∣ten Sonne, the very brightnes of his glory, who neuer offen∣ded him, but was an eternall delight vnto his soule, and re∣ioycing vnto his spirit, that thou mightest be saued, a grosse lumpe of slime and clay, still vexing him by thy wickednes; yet deliuered his sonne into the full power of Sathan, to put him to a most shamefull death, by the hands of most dete∣stable persons, and did cast him farre away out of his fauor, and threw him downe into the bottomlesse pit of his vnsup∣portable wrath & indignation, that thou mightst be placed betweene his owne armes in the kingdome of heauen, in all royalty and glorie, as his deare and entirely beloued sonne. Why therefore wast thou O my vnholy and vnthankful na∣ture, so ready and prone, so violent and headlong, to com∣mit things highly displeasant in his sight, who in a manner, and as far as it was possible, slewe himselfe for thy safetie, when he had no creature so disobedient vnto him as thee? O thou my inwarde soule, and spirit of my minde awake, and stand vp to defend thy self, for thou art besieged with migh∣tie enemies, the prince of darknes, the rulers of the aire, the spiritual craftinesse and policies of hel! why arisest thou not thou sluggard? thy foes in great number are prepared with many ambushments, hauing a huge armie all maliciously
bent, with venemous darts to pearce thorow thy heart: they are entred thy hold at all fiue gates of thy outwarde sences: yea, they haue broken downe thy inward doores, and haue left thee but one window towards heauen to escape by, e∣uen thy praiers, whereto the spirit of God waiteth thy spee∣dy comming: make hast O thou heauie with sleepe, or thou art taken by thy cruell enemies, whose handes are of yron, and their teeth of steele, to grind thy very bones to powder: hearken no longer to that stinking harlot, thy wicked appe∣tite, which lying in thy bosome, desireth nothing but thy vt∣ter destruction: she perswadeth thee that thou art in no pre∣sent danger, that she may reioyce at thy miserable ende. It may be thou art fed to the slaughter, that though thou go on a little waie in thy pleasant path, thou maiest returne backe vvhen thou wilt, and thy little wandering wil not greatly be regarded. O thou vnwise and sottish of heart! when wilt thou vnderstand? Hath the sonne of God indured such paine for the smallest of thy sinnes, and makest thou so light ac∣count of so grieuous crimes? Doth the law thunder curses, and plagues, and euerlasting torments against thy least in∣ordinate motions, and didst thou not dreade to performe so shamelesse a practise? Knowest thou not that the eyes of God, and his Angels behold thee doing that thou wouldest be ashamed to do in the presence of vngodly men, or vn∣cleane beastes? or doest thou not consider howe thou didst grieue the spirit of God, who hath vouchsafed of his infinite mercie to dwell in thy bodie to this ende, chieflie that hee might mortifie thy carnall lusts? Why didst thou then defile his temple, which he hath sanctified to be an house for him∣selfe to dwel in? take heed thou driue not out so worthy and noble a ghest, by such swinish and fleshly behauior, vvho if he once depart, then shalt thou be an hold for diuels, and le∣gions of damned spirits, that they may stuffe thee full of all manner of iniquitie, and then at length become pitch and brimstone to maintaine the fire of Gods scorching wrath in thy sinewes, spirits and inwarde bowels, drinking out in
full measure the dregs of the wine of his rage and fury▪ and canst thou be so blind and retchlesse, that for the vaine plea∣sure of sinne for a little vvhile, thou vvilt constraine God to torment thee euerlastingly, who it may bee euen at this in∣stant, if thou vvilt still trie his patience and long sufferance, will suddenly take thy spirit from thee, or come in iudgemēt to recompence all sinners by his finall sentence in the bur∣ning of the vvhole vvorld, the stipend of horror, shame, con∣fusion, and vtter reprobation? & weigh vvith thy selfe, that to approch to God, is the chiefest ioy of his chosen, to beholde his glorious countenance in the face of his son, vvhereas thy sinnes doe seperate thee from him, and make thee afraid to speake to him by praiers, vvhich is thy chiefest and greatest solace in this mortall life: how much more vvill thy vngod∣lines make thee wish delay of the last iudgment, the speedy and present comming vvhereof is a chiefe prop of our fight, in the middest of so many troubles and temptations: and withall, remember how the diuell that roaring Lion labou∣reth by this impure acte, to make thee most filthy and loth∣some in the sight of God, and reioiceth to see thy gratious Father, mercifull Sauiour, and comfortable sanctifier, so a∣bused and withstoode, and angred by thee whome he hath wonderfully made, carefully preserued and deerely redee∣med, and tenderly loued, that if it may be thou shouldest by vtter Apostasie, dishonour him in the face of the world, who hath aduanced thee in the presence of all his Angels: and though thou bee so sure in faith, that thou canst not vtterlie fall (the consideration whereof should make thee more du∣tifull, and not encourage thee in a sinfull course) yet maiest thou by little and little, and by often falling, bring thy selfe into a better liking, both of the wicked and of wickednes it selfe) whom thou oughtest to hate with a perfect hatred, and then God by iust iudgement cast thee into a sure sleepe, that thy filthines may be seene of men, and thou condemned to the griefe of the righteous, and scorned to the shame of the vngodly, & in the mean season, by prouoking Gods iudge∣ment,
be spoiled of thy goodly ornaments, of thy godly de∣sires, of religious thoughts, of zealous affections, of christi∣an communication, of holy indeuours, of assured perswasi∣ons of faith, of stedfast waitings through hope, of constant suffering by patience, and heartie reioycings from loue. In the perfect consummation of which things, because all hap∣pines consisteth, beware thou carelesse wretch, least sud∣denly by thy abhominable filthinesse, thou either for a time wholely depriue thy selfe of comfortable feeling of these thinges, or much diminish thy present graces and blessings receiued of the holy spirit, to the glorie of God the Father. But vvhy do I vtter my voice, or striue to make a dead car∣kasse moue? O quicken thou me that art the fountain of life, and cal thou out of heauen thy dwelling place, that my wā∣dring soule may heare the voice of her shepheard, and fol∣low thee whither soeuer thou leadest: nay of thy tender com¦passion take me vp vpon thy shoulders, and carrie me gent∣lie into thy fold againe: for theeues haue stolne me away, & haue bound my feet so that I cannot go, and they watch for mee vntill thou art gone, that they may carry mee awaie quicke from thy pastures: O doe thou therefore present∣ly deliuer me, and giue mee thy helping hand: O cast thou downe by thy spirite my raging luste, and by thy grace subdue mine vntamed affection. I am weake O Lorde, and vnable to resist the force of my mightie aduersary: send thy helpe from aboue, and saue me out of the iawes of the cruel lion: thou hast deliuered me out of the mouth of hel; O let not the gates therof any more preuaile against me: let me not any longer be occupied in vngodlines, lest mine enemie triumph ouer me, saying in his malicious hart, There, there, so would I haue it. Let this sinne be farre from me O Lord, least I should defile my selfe any more with this notorious wickednesse: worke therefore in mine heart an vtter dete∣station of it, that I may euer hereafter keepe my selfe pure & vnspotted for thy kingdome. Thou that art able to make of stones children to Abraham, mollifie I pray thee my stonie heart, that all maner of sonnelike affections may be imprin∣ted
therein: plucke vp O good father these rootes of bitter∣nesse, that no vnsauorie fruite may come of the tree, which thou by thine owne hand hast planted. I desire, I looke, I cal, I cry, for thy assistance, that I may conquer this vnruly mo∣tion. O blessed Sauiour that hast graunted so many petitions vpon earth, to them that were carefull for the body, fulfill I pray thee, this my desire; not for health, nor strength, nor riches, nor honor, nor for food, nor apparell; but for thy hea∣uenly grace and inspiration: yea let me lose all those, rather than to be left to my sinfull flesh that I should be ruled any longer thereby Mortifie good Father in me the old body of sinne, and giue vnto mee a new body, purged from these dead workes to serue the liuing God: renew my spirite day∣ly, that I may cast away these works of darknesse: let it be e∣nough O mercifull Father, that my weaknes in fayling here∣tofore, hath bene made knowne vnto me, least I should bee too proud. Now let thy strength appeare in putting this mine enemie vnder my feete, that thereby I may be bold to put my confidence in thee. Why should my body made by thine hand, and my soule framed according to thy image, be giuen ouer as a pray into the hands of Sathan? Deliuer me O Lord from the snare of the hunter, and preserue mee from the hand of mine enemie, who lyeth in wait for my spiritual life and laboureth my euerlasting destruction: so shall I praise thee for thy great goodnes, and magnifie thy name for giuing me conquest ouer my aduersarie that is too strōg for me. To thee I flie for succour till the tempest bee ouer∣past, hide me I pray thee vnder thy shield and buckler, that none of the fierie dartes of Satan take holde on mee. Good Lord, for the loue thou bearest vnto mankind, or thy sonnes sake, who hath taken our nature vpon him, grant that I may not be tempted aboue my strength, and that in all tempta∣tion I may flie vnto thee, as a horne of my saluation, yeeld∣ing thee most humble and hartie thankes, for that thou hast giuen me a desire to withstand my sinfull flesh; which thy worke I beseech thee for thy name sake, to perfect and ful∣ly accomplish.
Math. 26. 41. Watch and pray, least ye enter into temptation: the spirite is willing, bu the flesh is weake. Another zealous Prayer. ETernall God, almightie, and all mercifull: we thy vnworthie seruants, prostrate before thy throne of grace, doe yeelde our selues bodie & soule vnto thee for all thy benefits, which thou from our birth hast heaped vpon vs, as though we had alwayes done thy will although we be oc∣cupied about vaine things, neuer marked, neuer loued, ne∣uer serued, neuer thanked thee so hartily for them, as wee e∣steeme a mortall friend for the least curtesie. Therefore wee come with shame & sorrow to confesse our sinnes, not smal, but grieuous; not a few, but infinite; not past, but present; not secret, but presumptuous; against thy expresse word and will: against our owne conscience, knowledge and liking, if any had done them but our selues. O Lord, if thou shoul∣dest requite but the least of them at our hands, Satan would challenge vs for his, & we should neuer see thy face againe, nor the Heauens, nor the earth, nor all the goodnesse which thou hast prepared for man. What shal we doe then, but ap∣peale vnto thy mercie, and humbly desire thy fatherly good∣nesse, to extend that compassion towards vs, which thy be∣loued sonne our louing Sauiour hath purchased, so mightily, so gratiously, and so deerely for vs; wee beleeue and know, that one drop of his bloud is sufficient to heale our infirmi∣ties, pardon our iniquities, and supply our necessities, but without thy grace our light, our strength, our guide, we are able to doe nothing but sinne, as wofull experience hath taught vs too long, and the example of them which are void thereof, whose life is nothing els but the seruice of the world, the flesh and the deuill. Therefore good father, as thou in
speciall fauour hast appointed vs to serue thee, like as thou hast ordained all other creatures to serue vs; so may it please thee to send downe thy heauenly spirite into this earthlie mansion, to illuminate our mindes, mollifie our heartes, change our affections, subdue our reason, regenerate our willes, and purifie our nature to this duetie; so shall not thy benefites, nor thy chastisements, nor thy worde returne voide, but accomplish that for which they were sent, vntill wee be renued to the image of thy sonne. Good Lord we beseech thee, looke downe in the multitude of thy compas∣sions vpon thy militant Church, this sinfull realme, thy gra∣tious handmaide our dread Soueraigne, her Honourable Counsell, the ciuill Magistrates, the painefull Ministers, the two Vniuersities, the people that sit in darknesse, and all that beare thy Crosse. Gather vs into one communion of thy truth, and giue vnto euery man, a spirite to his calling, that wee being mindfull of the account, and that wee are called Christians, may firmely resolue, speedily begin, and conti∣nually perseuer in doing and suffering thy holy will. Good Lorde blesse and sanctifie our meeting, that no temptation hinder me in speaking, nor them in hearing, but that thy word may be heard and spoken as the word of God, which is able to saue our soules in that day, howsoeuer it pleaseth thee by weake and foolish things to magnifie thy self There is no cause, O God most iust, why thou shouldest heare sin∣ners, which art displeased with sinne, but for his sake which suffered for sinne, and sinned not: in whose name we are bolde to lift vp our hearts, hands, and voy∣ces vnto thee, praying as he hath taught vs: Our Father which art in heauen, &c. FINIS.
