e560_27 99864410 165206
Numb. 1. THE DIVINE PENITENTIAL MEDITATIONS AND VOVVES OF HIS LATE Sacred Majestie IN HIS SOLITUDE AT HOLMBY-HOƲSE, Faithfully turned into Verse. By E. R. Gentleman. —Respiciat Deus. Bene cogitata— Senec. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1649.
To the READER I Here present unto thee a flower plucked out of that most excellent store∣yard  mean∣ly turned into vers, there∣fore I may boldly applaud, and admire the one, and referre my owne unto thy censure, yet if this findes acceptance (from Loyall Subjects) it will incite me to proceed with the other Meditations; which if I shall not be so fortunate as to performe, I hope some more happier, & Deviner Muse will with an Elaborate
Penne Dilucidate unto the world what is deficient in my Skill, but not in will, I am farr from desiring any plaudit; Menan∣der. Om∣nis insipience arrogantia & plausibus capitor Every foole is won with pride and his own flattering applaude, but as I should be sorry to affect the one, so I hate, and disrespect the other, it shall be sufficent to me, if I please them, who are Ravi∣shed with these Divine Meditations; which like A Diamond cannot lose their Luster although they were mantled in Cimmerian-Darkness; The world must confesse with me that they are obstacles to our profound Mercuralists, who can extract such Sences out of the Sacred Scripture, that are again the sence of com∣mon reason, which yet catch poore silly people by Shooles, as Fishermen with Drag nets take their Fishes, yet are not (or will not) our Trumpettors be sensi∣ble
of it, but either encourage them, or remain silent as in a Lethargie; And thus, since neither our former, nor present sufferings can refine, or cleanse our drossie & leprous soules: HOW may we hope that our correction is ended? or that the rod shall be burnt? Marius Nictor.Nil hostes, nil dira fames, nil deing morbi Egerunt, fuimus qui nunc sumus ijs{que} periclis Tentati, nihilo meliores reddimur unquam, Sub vitijs nullo colparum finum manentes. Nor foes, nor famine, nor diseases have Work't any change in us, that which we were, We constantly remain, and still do crave To be entangled in the self-same snare. No time can our depraved manners move, In vice we dwell, in endless sin's our love. Which as it is too true, so must we still expect heavier Judgments, & none but such who have the grape of Canaan. A good onscience will be able with patience to endure them; Acts 27. 'twas that made PAUL couragious in the turbulent A∣driatical Sea (when the Mariners dispaired) the tempestuous Euroclidon blowing, and suffer∣ing 14. dayes want of meate and light; Homer. 'Tis a good Conscience that is like the Herbe Ne∣penthes
which driveth away all sadnes, 'tis a good Conscience that without Musick, or Wealth, or Honour, or Liberty, nay in a forced and unlawfull Death, is happy, and merry alone, 1 Pet. 2.17. And it is that which I wish unto all who fear God and honour the King; For Conscience is individuall and inseperable, there is no putting of it to flight, or flying from it; Lypspol: nec fugere, nec fu∣gare poteris, it was bread and borne with us, and saith (as Ruth to Naomi) I will go with thee whither soever thou goest. Therefore since our Kingdom is become a Pantheon (next after the Scripture,) I may well prescribe this Panacea, which sure none will refuse for, Seneca.Miser esse mavult, esse qui faelix potest? Who miserable doth desire to be, That may be linked to felicity? Yet if any shall (as I am confident many wil) find fault with me, I only desire them, either to mend what I have most willingly begun, or lay them away, and not afford them any spare time for reading. Farewell.
Penitentiall Meditations AND Vowes in the KINGS Solitude at Holmby. GIve eare to my words O Lord, consider my Meditations, and hearken to the voice or my cry my King, and my God, for unto thee will I pray. GIve eare unto my words (O Lord) My Meditations think upon To voice of my sad cry accord. My King my God to thee alone, I'le offer up my supplication. I said in my hast, I am cast out of the sight of thine eyes: neverthe∣lesse, thou hearest the voice of my supplication, when I cry unto Thee. I unadvisedly did say, That I am cast out of thy sight, Of thy clear eyes more bright then day. Yet thou to heare me dost delight. When I with cryes to thee show my sad plight. If thou Lord shouldest be ex∣tream to mark what's done amisse, who can abide it? But there is mer∣cy with thee, that thou mayst be feared; therefore shall sinners fly unto thee. If thou (sweet Lord) shouldst be extream To notifie what's done amisse, Who can abide't? but thy bright beame Shines mercy, which with feare must kiss, Therefore shall sinners fly to thee for blis. I acknowledge my sins before thee, which have the aggravati∣on of my condition; the eminen¦cy of my place, adding weight to my offences. My leprous sins I with contrition Acknowledge now before thy Grace, Which ponderous are by my condition, The Eminency of my place Adding much weight to them, which me deface.
Forgive I beseech thee, my Per∣sonall, and my Peoples sins; which are so farre mine, as I have not improved the wer thou gavt me, to thy Glory, and my Subjects good. Forget, forgive, I thee implore, My Persnall, and my Peoples ill Which are so added to my store, As I improv'd nos power, and skill, Thou gav'st me, for thee, & their hurt to kill. Thou hast now brought me from the glory and freedom of a King, to be a Prisoner to my own Subjects. And now thou hast dejected me, From what my Glory did disclose, And freedom of a Majesty, To be a Prisoner unto those, Who're my own Subjects, yet their King oppose. Justly O Lord as to thy over∣ruling hand, because in many things I have rebelled against Thee. But justly 'tis (most mighty Lord) As to thy over ruling hand, Because that I thy will defer'd, And contrary to thy Command, In opposition against thee did stand. Though thou hast restrained my Person, yet enlarge my heart to thee, and thy grace towards mee. And yet although thou hast restrain'd My Person, O enlarge my Heart, To thee my God, my God unfain'd, And let me have a greater part Of thy good Grace, for to o're way my smart I come farre short of Davids Pyety, yet since I may equall Davids afflictions, give me also the comforts, and the sure mercies of David. I come far short of Davids zeale, Yet since in afflictions equall his I only unto thee appeale, For Davids Comforts (happy bliss!) And the sure mercies which he did not miss. Let the penitent sence I have of my Sins, be an evidence to me thou hast Pardoned them. O let the feeling penitent sence Which of my numerous sins I have, Be unto me an evidence, That thy seal'd pardon will me save, And that thoust buryed them within Christs grave.
Let not the evills which I & my Kingdomes have suffered, seeme little unto thee, though thou hast not punished us according to our sins. Let not the evills which both I, And all my Realmes have suffered, Seeme little to thy Majesty, Although thou hast not punished Ʋs; with such paines as our great sins have bred Turne thee (O Lord) unto me; have mercy upon me, for I am de∣solate, and afflicted. Turne thee (O Lord) turn unto me, Have mercy on thy Servant God, For I am fraught with misery, O I am desolate, and thy rod Hath much afflicted me my God! my God! The sorrows of my heart are enlarged: O bring thou me out of my troubles. The sorrowes of my bleeding heart Encreased be, enlarged are, O from thy mercy do not part, But fetter from me leane dispaire, Bring thou me out from troubles, and my care. Hast thou forgotten to be gra∣cious, and shut up thy loving kindnesse in displeasure. Hast thou forgotten for to be A gracious and a loving Lord? Hast thou shut up thy bowells free, Thy loving kindness and thy word In black displeasure, not for to be stird O remember thy Compassions of ould, and thy loving Kindnesses, which have been for many gene∣rations. O now remember, call to mind, Of old thy sweet compassion, Thy kindnesses which all did finde, And which had a Relation, To all thy Saints for many a Generation. I had utterly fainted, if I had not believed to see thy goodnesse in the land of the Living. Lord! I had fainted utterly If that my faith had not confirm'd My drooping heart to know that I, Should see thy goodness great enthron'd, Within the Land of th' living, ever own'd. Let not the sins of our prosperity deprive us of the benefit of thy af∣flictions. Let not the gilded swelling sins Of our prosperity be show'n, To take from us thy sweet blessings, To take from us most wretched ones. The benefit of thy afflictions.
Let this fiery Tryall consume the drosse, which in long peace and plenty wee had contra∣cted. O let this purging fiery Tryall Consume the Canker and the dross, Which we (who never us'd denyall) In our long peace and plenty gross, Contracted had, not to our gain but loss. Though thou continuest mi∣series, yet withdraw not thy grace what is wanting of prospe∣rity, make up in patience, and re∣pentance. Though thou continuest miseries, Thy grace yet do not Lord withdraw, What's wanting of prosperities, Make up in patience and in awe, As in repentance that we've brake thy Law. And if thy anger be not yet to be turned away, but thy hand of justice must be stretched out still. And if thy anger be not yet For to be turn'd from us away, But that thou dost account it fit, Thy hand of Justice still should stay, Stretch out, sharp punishment on us to lay. Then will I make all the world to see, and my very enemies to enjoy the benefit of this Vow and Reso∣lution of Christian Charity, which I now make unto thee O Lord. Then will I make the world to see, And all my foes joy with content, The benefit of my Vow so free, And Christian Charities intent, Which now to thee (O Lord) from me is sent. As I do freely pardon for Christs sake those that have offended me in any kind. As I do freely now forgive For Christ my worthy Saviours sake, All those who any wayes did strive Me miserable for to make, Or yet their malice on me for to stake. So my hand shall never be a∣gainst any man to revenge what is past, in regard of any particular injury done to me. So shall my hand (which hate doth shun) Ne're lifted be 'gainst any one, For to revenge what's past and done, In reference unto what was showne, Particularly 'gainst me, or yet my Throne. We have been mutually punish∣ed in our unnaturall divisions for thy sake O Lord, and for the love of my Redeemer have I purposed this in my heart. We mutually were punished, By civill Warres unnaturall, For thy sweet sake (O Lord my Head) And for's sake who for me did fall, This have I purpos'd in my heart to all.
That I will use all meanes in the wayes of honesty and indempnity; which may most fully remove all feares, and bury all jealousies in forgetfulness. That all meanes I will use to stay In the blest wayes of honesty, Indempnity to give, which may Must fully make all feare to fy, And in forgetfulness combe jealousie. Let thy mercies be towards me and mine, as my resolutions of Truth and Peace are towards my People. O let thy mercies be to me Thy Servant Lord, and unto mine, As these my Resolutions free, Of canded Peace and Truth incline, To those, whom thou didst unto me designe. Heare my Prayer O Lord, which goeth not out of fained lips. Blessed be God, who hath not turned away my Prayer, nor taken his mercy from me. O Lord my God my prayer heare, Which out of lips fain'd go not out Blessed be God, who from my prayer, Hth never turn'd himsef about, Nor taken his mercy from me so to doubt. O my soule, commit thy way to the Lord, trust in him, and he shall bring it to passe. O my poor humble seeking soule, Commit thy way to the Lord alone Trust in him, who doth all controle, And then be sure (as it will be known) That he shall bring to pass, for what you moane. But if thou wilt not restore me and mine, what am I that I should charge thee foolishly? But if thou (from thy Providence) Nor me, nor mine wilt not restore, What am I, what preheminence, Have I a silly worm most poore, To charge thee foolishly, whom I adore? Thou, O Lord, hast given, and thou hast taken, Blessed be thy Name. Thou, thou O God, omnipotent Lord, Hast, given, each thing from thee came, And thou who rulest with a word, Hast taken from us wormes the same, Observed be! O blessed be thy Name! Let it I beseech thee be against me, and my Fathers house; as for these sheepe, what have they done? O let it Lord (I thee intreat) Be turn'd from them, on me to light, And on my Fathers House and Seate, For as these poore sheepe in right What have they done? what hurt is in their sight Let my sufferings satiate the malice of mine, and thy Churches Enemies. But let their cruelty never ex∣ceed the measure of my cha∣ity. Let these my sufferings satiate The cankered malice of my foe, And such who thy pure Church do hate. But let their cruelty never out-goe, My charity which J would have here flowe.
Banish from me all thoughts of revenge, that I may not loose the reward nor thou the glory of my patience. Banish from me revengfull thoughts, That so I may not with offence. Lose the reward which will be brought, And which to me thou wilt despence, Nor thou the glory of my patience. As thou givest me a heart to for∣give them, so I beseech thee forgive what they have done against thee and me. As thou to me dost give a heart To pardon, and forgive them free, So I beseech thy love impart Forgivenes to them speedilie, For what they've done against, both thee and me. And now (O Lord) as thou hast given me an heart to pray unto thee: so heare and accept this vow which I make before thee. And now (O Lord) as thou hast gave Me such a plyant heart to pray, To thee, who solely canst me save, So hear, and take without delay, This vow, which I before thee make this day If thou wilt in mercy remember me and my Kingdoms, in continu∣ing the light of thy Gospell, and settling thy true Religion among us. If that thou wilt in mercy (Lord) Think on me, and my Kingdoms too, Continuing the light of th'word, And settling of Religion true, Amongst us all so errors to escew, In restoring unto us the benefit of the Lawes, and the due executi∣on of justice. And in restoring (from thy might) The benefit to every one, Of th'fundamentall Laws upright, With the due execution Of reall Justice, seated in her Throane. In suppressing the many Schismes in Church, and Factions in State. In weeding, and suppressing all The poysonous Schismes which from hate, Ʋpon the Church in weight do fall, And suddainly to discipate, The Hydra factions of the State, If thou wilt, restore me and mine to the ancient Rights, and Glory of my Predecessors. If that thou wilt Lord me restore, And those who are unto me nigh. To what we did injoy before, To th'ancient Rights, and Majesty Of my true Predecessors seated high,
If thou wilt, turne the hearts of my people to thy selfe in Piety, to me in Loyalty, and to one another in Charity. If thou my peoples hearts will turne, Vnto thy self in pious Love, And make their loyall zeale to burne To me their King, and cause them move, To Charity, and onely it to prove. If thou wilt, quench the flames, and withdraw the fewell of these civill Warres. If that thou wilt extinguish quite, The flames which cause such during scarrs, And from thy goodnes infinite Withdraw our mind for moving jarres, And the apt fewell of continued Wars. If thou wilt, blesse us with the freedom of publick Counsells, and deliver the honour of Parliaments from the insolency of the vulgar. If for to blesse us thou'rt content, With publick Councells to be free, And keep the power of Parliament From the insolence of such, who be Breakers of Laws, and vulgar in Degree. If thou wilt, keep me from the great offence of enacting any thing against my Conscience, and especial∣ly from consenting to sacriligious rapines & spoilings of thy Church. If thou'lt keep me from that great sinne Of acting any thing, which I By conscience know should not have been And cheif, not to consent to fly To spoile thy Church most sacreligiously. If thou wilt, restore me to a capa∣city of doing good, both to the Church and State. If that thou (Lord) wilt me restore To a capacity, that so I may endeavour more and more To praise thee in the good I'le doe But to the Church, and State, which now is low. Then shall my soul praise thee, and magnifie thy name before my people. Then shall my never fainting soule, Praise thee thou Lord of glorious might. Then will I laud without controule And Magnifie (as it is right) Thy blessed name before my peoples sight.
Then shall thy glory be dearer to me then my Crowne, and the advancement of true religion both in purity and power, be my cheif∣est care. Then shall thy glory be more deare Vnto me, then my Crowns now are, And true Religion in its feare As in its purity most faire, For to advance, shall be my cheifest care. Then will I rule my people with justice, and my Kingdome with Equity. Then will I rule impartially My People all as they will finde, With Justice, which shall hate defy, And all my Kingdoms to their minde With equity, which is with love combinde. To thy more immediate hand shall I ever owne as the rightfull succession, to the mercifull restau∣ration of my Kingdoms, and the glory of them. As I'le the true succession owne Vnto thy more immediate power. So the kinde restauration Of these my Kingdoms evermore To thee I yeeld, with all their glorious store, If thou wilt bring me againe with Peace, Safety, and Honour, to my cheifest City, and my Parliament. If thou wilt bring me from thy pitty With Peace, with safety, and with Fame, Againe unto my cheifest City, And my true Parliament, whose Name I honour, nor do it desire to shame. If thou againe wilt put the Sword of justice into my hand, to punish and protect. If Lord, thou once wilt put againe The Sword of Justice in my hand Impartially for to remaine, To punish those who hate Command, And a Protector for the good to stand. May my People and the Church be happy, if not by me, yet with∣out me. O may my people ev'ry one, And thy pure Church (thy beautuous love) Be happy, let their joy be knowne, If not by me, yet (God above) Without me sinner let them prosp'rous prove. June 18. 1649. Imprimatur IOHN DOWNAME. FINIS
