a3094 e458_18 99864510 116740
A MEANES TO Reconcile the present distempers of these Times, as things now are. Set out By a Member of this present Parliament. Tempora mutantur, & nos mutamur in illis. Scinditur incertum studia in contraria vulgus. Vivitur ex rapto, non hospes ab hospite tutus: Nec socer à genero fratrum quo{que} gratia rara est. Nulla fides pietas{que} viris qui Castra sequuntur. Venalésque manus ibi fas, ubi maxima merces. Nulla salus bello, pacem nunc poscimus omnes. LONDON, Printed in the Yeare, 1648.
The Preface. THere was lately set out in Print, a Paper, Entituled, The Wonder, Or, Propositions for a safe and well-grounded Peace. I must con∣fesse, that the Preface and the Propositi∣ons came from me, though not the Title: The meannesse thereof I desire may not be lookt upon, to the prejudice of the matter, but the Zeale of the Author to the quiet and peace of his Native Coun∣trey: For, the Bloodshed, Rapine, and Destru∣ction, which now rageth amongst us, must daily by the Continuance thereof, not onely make the Cure more desperate, but likewise declare the wrath of God to be more heavy upon us. For if Tully a Heathen Orator pleading a Cause for his Clyent could say, Iugulare Civem ne Iure bonus quisquam vult, mavult enim comme∣morare secum possit perdere pepercisci, quam cum parcere potuisset perdidisse: Much more cause have we that are Christians to avoid this needlesse shedding of so much of our owne native blood, as is daily in every corner of the Kingdome shed amongst us, to the unspeakable grief of all good men: So that it may be said as Saint Paul once said to the Corinthians, I heare there are Conten∣tions among you. Is there not a wise man among you, but that you must goe to strife one with another? The speedy ending of these Distractions (which I conceive may be easily and soone ended) if every man would lay
aside his owne particular, and onely looke to the safe∣guard of the shippe wherein we are all Imbarkt, and in the preservation whereof all our lives and fortunes doe consist. This by the perswasions of some freinds hath induced mee to publish such Reasons for the more cleare manifestation & Inducement of the former Propositions, my selfe (knowing my owne Integrity) makes me no way ashamed to own them. I am unwilling to impute blame to any partie, but rather that things past, may be past over, with the most candor and least bitternes, though my own sufferings have been as much and as causeles, as most mens have been. Only thus much I may justly say for my self, as the Mag-pye did in the Poet, when she was stript of all her feathers, being askt the question how she came to be so naked? made Answer, Quid fuerim, quid sumque vide, meritumque requiri, Invenies nocuisse fidem: This is all my end, onely desiring God to give such successe to this endevour by so weak a means as may tend most to his glorie, the good & peace of this our native Coun∣try, my selfe being alwayes ready to serve the Com∣mon-wealth with the uttermost of my endeavours in the wayes of Peace and Truth. Hen: Anderson.
The PREFACE. HAving since the first beginning of this Parli∣ament observed the differences therein, both in their breeding & continuance; the people holding themselves grieved with illegall pressures put upon them, both in the freedom of their Persons, the propriety of their Goods, and the liberty of their Consciences; and these wrought by particular men for sinister ends by their interests in Court, to the disturbance of the quiet and peace of the Kingdome, as it stood establish'd by Law: These occasioned a desire by most men, not only to prevent the like for the fu∣ture, but also the punishing of such as were conceived to be Authors, Procurers, or Supporters thereof, thereby to deterre others from doing the like hereafter: And this trench't upon both Courtiers, Lawyers, and Divines. The meanes to reconcile and prevent which, as the times now are, hath incited me, being a Member of this present Parliament; and conceiving my self in duty bound to tender my best advice for the speedy ending of this most barbarous and unnaturall War that is now raging amongst us, which can produce no better effect, if not timely ended, then a generall destruction of the Nation, who are now become a Scorne and Contempt to all Neighbours, (who were before look't upon with great honour and respect, yea, not without envy.) Besides, the high wrath of Almighty God, by the courses held and obser∣ved in the prosecution thereof: I professe by this advice, not to look upon my self, but meerly the good of my native
Country; and that, which I conceive my self bound to, both by the Oath of Allegeance, Supremacy, and the Protestati∣on which I took this Parliament. And this without respect of any party, further then my judgement shall lead me to. And I shall likwise give this testimony of my owne sincerity herein, that I being a Commoner of this Kingdome, and knowing no where else to live but in England, & here, under a peaceable and free Government. In all just things, shall adhere to the Common-wealth, and the liberties of the Sub∣ject; yet no way hereby to detract from the King, what may justly be due to the Regall Power, and which it can no way be abridged of, without too much diminution: I have alwayes conceived, & still do, that the Regall Power ought to be limi∣ted by the Law: And if it be debarr'd of its due course in the execution thereof, God defend, but the people upon generall complaints should have remedy therein, especially to prevent the like in succeeding times, considering the Government we live in is a mixt Government, by consent betweene the King and the People, as to my sense doth manifestly appear by the words of the Oath of Coronation; which being obser∣ved, the people, as bound in Conscience, ought to yeeld the King all due Honour and Obedience to His just Commands. Thus I have declared unto you, the opennesse of my heart, herein, leaving the following advise to your best judge∣ments, with my Prayers to God to give such successe therein, as I, in the Integrity of my heart doe desire.
A ready way (as is conceived) to com∣pose the present Differences, as the Times now are. VVith the Reasons inducing thereunto. By a Members of the House of Commons this present Parliament. 1. THat the King be immediately sent for to come to Hampton-Court, without any Conditions or Guard whatsoever, but according to His Majesties own pleasure. That the King being under restraint, and not at his free libertie, can doe no Act which can bind him either by the Law of the Kingdome, or Civill Law; both which lawes doe make void all Acts whatsoever which shall be done either per minas or dures of Imprisonment, so that necessarily he must be at his free libertie without any restraint or tye but his owne free disposition before he be in a Capacity to grant or confirme any thing, which cannot possibly be whilst there is any restraint, upon his person, or Armes afoot to enforce a non-performance. That no Treaty or Capitulation can be had betweene a King and his people, but the people must have their desires from the King by way of Entreatie and request:
Which in all just things the King ought to deny. And this appeares and is manifest by the preambles of the Acts of Parliament of this Kingdome, Which for the most part are declared to be granted at the humble Desire and request of the People. 2. That the King, before His comming to Hampton, doe Publish His Proclamation of free pardon to all His Subjects of what quality or condition soever, and for all faults whatsoever, against Himself, His Crown and Dignity. That the publishing of his Proclamation of free Pardon shews his Mercy to all his People, which is a particular, which the Kings have as Incident to the regall Authority, and ought by them to be afforded in Iustice to the people, but onlie where Necessitie or needfull Severitie inforces the con∣trary for the Example of others in the future. This will take away from the People all their just feare of being prosecuted according to the strictnes of the Law for their Crimes which they have committed against the King, his Crowne and Dignity. It is in his own free power to grant a pardon either generall or speciall for all things concerning himselfe, Which pardon shall close the hands of all Iudges and Sub-ministers in any Court of Iustice to proceed against any Delinquent so pardon∣ed for any fore-past Crime. The King can grant no more then what concernes himself, the people must necessarily concurre in the granting of any thing that may concerne themselves. And this can no way be done but by an Act of Parliament in a free and legall Par∣liament by consent of the three Estates of the Kingdome law∣fully Assembled, King, Lords, and Commons, wherein the
King doth consent for himself, the Lords for themselves, & the Commons by their Representative body by them Autho∣rized by a free and unawed or constrained Election of their Deputies; which they shall appoint to consent for them: And such Act shall conclude all men, because all men do consent therein by themselves or their lawful Deputies. 3. That the King be forthwith restored to all His just Revenues and Regall Power, which by Law is due to Him. Without His revenue be restored unto Him, He cannot sub∣sist, much lesse maintain the Royall Dignity which His An∣cestors hath flourished in; to the great dishonour of the Nati∣on, to have a King not able to maintaine His State and Dig∣nity without the oppression of His People; and without which he cannot manage the affaires of the Kingdome incident to his Office: For it is an old Adage, Indigentem operare bonaest Impossibile; And for a King to live by perpetuall begging, is to make Him and His Government hatefull to His People. If the King be abridg'd of the Power of the Sword, he shal have no meanes to compell or force Obedience to His just Commands, nor maintain His People from the oppression of greater men: But every man will do what seems good to Himself against His Inferiour; for onely fear of punishment makes bad men fear to offend: And take away the Power of the Militia from the King, (which is inseparable from the Crown) and neither ever hath, nor can be taken away from the Crown, then you take away the Kings Coercive Power to inforce Obedience to the due execution of His Lawes, or the meanes to suppresse any Rebellion, Riots, Routs, or other misdemeanours whatsoever.
4. That His Majesty take a Corporall Oath not to Governe any way but according to the known Lawes of the Kingdome. And whatsoever Sub-minister of His shall do otherwise, to the prejudice of the Subject, ei∣ther in point of liberty of their persons, or propriety of their goods, He will grant them no pardon, but leave them to the justice of the Law. And likewise to give His Royall Assent to an Act of Parliament for His Suc∣cessours to take the like Oath, the beginning of every Parliament before both Houses, for the same. That this Oath is no more but the same that Kings do take at their Coronation, and therefore no prejudice can insue to the King by the often taking thereof. That it is a securing of the people for the true perfor∣mance thereof, by often taking of it; and by so doing, it shall the better be kept in memory, both by the King and the States of the Kingdome. It will keep in awe all Judges and other officers of the Kingdome, when they shall find themselves incapable of having any pardon for such offences, and the King made incapable from granting any such Pardon, as a person who by the Law can do no wrong to his people; but it must be His Ministers, who by this shall be in perpetuall fear of doing injustice to the Subject. It shal take from the King and His Successours all causes of discontent or grievance which may justly grow between the King and His People in the point of extending the Pre∣rogative beyond its due bound. It will be a meanes to procure a hearty and willing Obe∣dience from the people to the Kings, their desires when they govern no way but according to the Law. This manner of way is presidented in the Iteration of the
Oath by Magna Charta, which was confirmed thirty times at least, by several Acts of Parliament: which one Act might have serv'd for a Law, if it had not been thought fit by our Ancestors to be often regranted for the more firme obser∣vance thereof. That the taking from the King His Power of pardoning in these Causes, is no more then the taking away His Power to pardon a wilfull murther, which He cannot pardon, as the Law now is. That in case of blood, the next of kin may bring an Ap∣peale for their Ancestors death, which the Party cannot be letted of by any pardon whatsoever. 5. That a Proclamation be published for the Disban∣ding of all Souldiers within the Kingdome, and bring∣ing in of their Armes within ten dayes after such Procla∣mation upon paine of High Treason, against all Refusers and their Abettors. There can be no cause to keep an Army afoot to the oppres∣sion of the People, when there is no enemy to oppose, as there cannot be, when the King is established in His Govern∣ment. That the Kingdome is so impoverished and wasted by the late warres, that it is not able to bear the charge of an Army any longer. That the Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdome are so ru∣ined in their estates already, that there is no possibility that it can be recovered in a long time, neither will they be any way able either to contribute to the publick necessities, or well able to pay their debts. This is most effectuall for the disbanding of all Armies without delay; and may by such a Proclamation be more spee∣dily and easily effected.
6. That the Church-Government may stand as it is Established by Law, having respect to tender Conscien∣ces, until such time as it shall be altered by due course of Law. 7. That His Majesty will be pleased to promise the speedy convening of a National Synod of forty Divines of His Majesties owne Subjects. And that the Refor∣med Protestant Churches may be entreated to send some of their Divines, such as themselves shall make choice of to assist therein, for Establishing and Rectify∣ing such an Unity and Conformity with all other Pro∣testant Churches as shall be by consent agreed upon, whereby to preserve Unity with them, both in Doctrine and Discipline; which agreement His Majesty will Consent to have confirmed by Act of Parliament. That no unity can be preserved either in Church or State, wherein there is no set forme of outward Government pre∣scribed. That the Government being established by Law, ought, and must be observ'd till it be altered by Law: And that O∣bedience is to be given to it, whilst it is a Law; And that the Magistrate ought to enforce Obedience to it. That it will avoid all disturbance in the Common-wealth, concerning difference of Opinions in point of Religion; a thing most necessary to be prevented. That if there be any thing in the Church Government now established, either Superstitious or Superfluous, which tender Consciences may take offence at, and may well be for∣borne; It will be necessary for the publique Peace and quiet of the Kingdome, to forbeare the strict execution of the Law for the present in such particulars.
That for the framing of Conformity with all other Pro∣testant Reformed Churches, whereby the Papists and Secta∣rists may have no advantage to scandall our Religion, ei∣ther in respect of diversity of Opinions, or outward Ceremo∣nie: A National Synod may be conveened in this King∣dome, of Divines and learned men, whereby not onely the tenets of our Religion should be expressed in terminis, but likewise the outward forme of Discipline to be used in the Church. That it will be much for the Honour of the King and our Nation, that the Kings of England should take upon them the Protection and Defence of all the Protestant Reformed Churches, and likewise to be the Head thereof. As the Kings of Spaine make themselves the Head of the Catholique League, and to this purpose that the Reformed Protestant Churches may be invited to send their Divines to this Synod, that Agreement may be had with them in eve∣ry point concerning either Doctrine or manners in the out∣ward Discipline: And such Agreement to be established here by Act of Parliament; which all men shall Conforme upon a penalty. This may be a just Reason to prohibit all private Conven∣ticles and meetings, wherein private Opinions are broached amongst the people, who thereby are drawn into Publique Factions, and do raise Sedition and Tumults for Religion, to the disturbance of the Peace of the Kingdome. 8. That His Majesty will be pleased to promise to give the Royall Assent to such Bils to be made Lawes, as shall be presented unto Him by both Houses, in a full, free, and Legall Parliament, which shall no way intrench upon His Majesties Legall Prerogative, Honour, or Pro∣fit, but onely such as tend to the better Government,
and ease of the Subjects, for the future. This is but just for the King, to grant what the people shall desire, not trenching upon His own due Rights. This granted, secures all men for whatsoever by-past, that a free Parliament shall think fit to do. The King can do no more but for what concernes Him∣selfe. 9. That His Majesty will be pleased to grant these for the present under His Hand. And which He will confirme at His first comming to Liberty to some House of His own. More, the King cannot do, by reason of His Imprison∣ment, and may befit He should promise to do, for the present quiet and Peace of the Kingdome, as now things are, at His first comming to Liberty. 10. And if these shall be refused to be done, either by King or Parliament, the blame may justly be imputed to lie there: And are very necessary to preced a Perso∣nall Treaty, wherein all Interests may be taken into con∣sideration. Si quid novisti rectius istis, Candidus imperti; Si non, his utere mêcum. HEN: ANDERSON. FINIS.
