A887 E1176_4 R204909 99864357 116585
PLAIN TRVTHS OF DIVIVINITY. Collected out of the sacred Scriptures, & set forth by way of question and answer the best way conceived for the information of the judge∣ment of the Christian Reader. Wherein is set forth many excellent things which are not commonly publshed. Especially the destruction of Antichrist, and the yeare when it shall be: The coming of the Lord Christ to judge∣ment, and his reigning with his Saints for ever upon this earth, at the restitution of all things. Collossians 3.16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you rich∣ly in all wisdome, teaching and admonishing one ano∣ther, &c. 2 Timothy 2.27. Consider what I say. and the Lord give thee understanding in all things. LONDON Printed for J. K. And are to be sold at the signe of the white horse in Pauls Church∣yard 1647.
To the Right Honourable and Religious Lady, Margaret Countesse of Carlile the Authour presenteth the ensuing book wishing grace and peace to be multiplyed. Right Honourable, I Have presumed upon your fa∣vour to present this my poore labour to your Honour not doubting of your favour∣able acceptance from him, who desireth your further increase in the knowledge of the truth of God, you have given many testimonies of your love to Religion by your carefull walking in piety to the good example of o∣thers, which hath rejoyced my heart, to heare from time to time, I desire nothing more then that you might go on till you receive the crown of glory. It is not in vain to know God and the Lord Iesus Christ, but life eter∣nall, I have endeavoured in this ensuing booke to set forth some grounds and prin∣ciples of the knowledge of God and
of Christ by way of Question and an∣swer, the easiest way I conceive) to get know∣ledge, and it may be your Honour may find it more plain and easie to be understood then other Catechismes, I have laboured herein to set forth, how and after what manner a poor sinner comes to be justified, and how he walks being justified, both towards God and man, as also something concerning the destruction of antichrist, and the felicity of the Church for ever, with other things necessary to be known of us in these times. It may be you may find in the reading of it some things you never heard of before, both profitable and comfortable if your Honour shall be pleased to accept of this my poore labour, J shall take it as a great favour, and shall be obliged to remain Your humble Servant John Alcock.
To the truly Religious Christian that desires to know and yeild obedience to the will of God revealed in his word, Grace and peace be multiplyed. CHristian Reader I heare present thee with a few points of Divinity by way of Que∣stion and Answer, The way which I have conceived to be best for the Information of Iudgement, The substance of it I writ about twenty sixe yeares past. The reasons that moved me thereunto were. First to keepe in my owne memory the truths God had taught me. Secondly that ha∣ving gathered these heads of divinity into order, I might the better teach my family, to whom I could explaine any thing therein contained, (knowing my
owne sence and meaning which I could not so well doe out of other mens workes I have since the first writing of it perused it and somewhat inlarged it, (and would have done more if weaknesse of body had not seized upon me,) After which some iudicious friends of mine having read and considered it thought it worth their labour to write it out, as also worthy the publishing in Print, and advised me thereunto perceiving some things in it necessary to be made publique, which are not in other mens workes, nor commonly taught I have therefore yeilded to their desires herein. And also it was my own desire to do good to the Church and people of God, whose ser∣vant I am and the least of them, who am not wor∣thy to be accounted one of them, yet doe I make bold to present this small talent of mine unto thee intreating the to read and consider it, if it be the truth (as I know it is) receive it with meeknes of heart. It may be thou mayest find some truths in it which thou hast not formerly taken notice, of which may be profitable unto thee, And some Scriptures cleared from the false expositions of some men which it may be they have led the into some error & hindred from some comfort, that otherwise thou mightest have had in the knowledge of the truth I hope thou wilt not repent thy cost nor thy labour in rea∣ding it.
I wish unto thee Christian Reader all happinesse, and thy profit by this poore worke of mine, If thou findest good by it Blesse God and remember me in thy prayers, who will remember thee dayly and de∣sires thine and his owne furtherance in the truth, and remaines. Thine in the Lord Jesus Christ. I.A.
A Catechisme, or certain Principles of Christian Religion. Question. SEeing that Knowledge is so much de∣sired and sought after of most men, what knowledge is most necessary, and chiefly to be desired of all men? Answer. The true knowledge of the true God Jeremy 9.24. Quest. Wherefore is the knowledge of God most necessary and chiefly to be desired? Answ. Because it is eternall life to know God aright Jo. 17.3. Qu. But God is invisible how can wee there∣fore come to know him? Ans. Although he be invisible yet he hath revealed, and manifested himselfe, and there∣fore
it is possible to come to the true know∣ledge of him. Qu. Where hath he revealed, and manifested himselfe? Answ. In his workes, and in his word, Psalm 19. Qu. Is it possible to know God by his Workes? Ans. Yes, it is possible his eternall power and God-head are seene from the Creation of the world, and his goodness and mercy in the wise governing, and upholding all things in the same, Rom. 1.20. Quest. Which is that Word of God, wherein he hath manifested himselfe? Answ. The old and New Testament. Quest. Hath he therein more clearely manife∣sted himselfe then in his workes? Answ. Yea, for besides the workes of Crea∣tion, which we spake of before, there are also, many great workes of God, recorded in his Word and many names hee hath taken unto himself; And many Attributes, which shew and declare unto us what he is; as also the Testi∣monies of the Saints and holy men of God, which have had experience of his Attributes, and have given unto him many excellent Ti∣tles declaring what he is and Christ Jesus him∣selfe, hath evidently declared him unto us, all
which is to be seene, and learned in the Scrip∣tures, Gen. 17.1. Exod. 12.41, 42. Chap. 13.21, 22, 23. Exod. 34.6.7. Quest. But God is infinite and we are but fi∣nite creatures how can we therefore come to know him who is of such an excellent glory, dwelling in that light unapprochable? Ans. We may notwithstanding attaine to so much knowledge of him even in this life as will make us happy, and wee must content our selves to know him, as he hath revealed him∣selfe in his workes and Word and not curious∣ly, besides the Word to seeke to find him out, and to comprehend him, who is incomprehen∣sible, Exod. 33.20. Quest. What is God? Answ. God is a Spirit, most wise most ho∣ly, Eternall, infinite &c. one in Essence or be∣ing but yet made knowne unto us to be three, namely. Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost, John 4.24. 1 Sam. 2.23. Ier. 23.24. Esay 41.4. & 44.6. Revel. 1.17. Levit. 11.44. 1 Io. 5.7. Quest. Who made the World? Answ. This onely true God whom we have according to our measure set forth, Gene∣sis 1. Quest. Whereof did he make it? Answ. Of nothing.
Quest. How is it possible to make something of nothing? Answ. With man it is impossible, but with God it was possible. Quest. What meanes did he use to make it? Answ. No other meanes, but his almighty Power and Word. Gen. 1. Quest. Did he, when he had created all things, leave them to themselves? Ans. No, for then all things must needs have perished but as he did Create all things by his Word so he doth continue to preserve, and uphold all things by the same word, Acts 17.28. Qu. Who made man? Ans. God made him. Gen. 1.27. Quest. VVhereof did he make him? Answ. Of the dust of the earth, Gen. 2.7. Quest. What manner of creature, did God make man at the first. Ans. A most glorious and excellent Crea∣ture. Quest. Wherein consisted his glory and excel∣lency? Ans. Chiefly, in that he was made in the Image of God. Qu. Wherein did that Image of God, where∣with Adam was indued chiefly consist? Ans. In excellency of wisdome, knowledge,
purity, and righteousnesse, and freedome of will, and the like Graces that God bestowed on him, Gen. 1.27. Chap. 2.20. Eccles. 7.29. Qu. Was he not Created glorious in regard of his Body? Answ. Yes, farre more excellent, then any other creature whatsoever Gen. 1. Qu. What are those Attributes that God did chiefly manifest in the Creation of man? Answ. His wisdome, and his love in making him the excellentest of all his workmanship, and in making him Lord over all the Crea∣tures, creating them all for his use and bene∣fit. Gen. 1.28. Qu. Did man continue in this excellent and happy estate? Ans. No, he fell from it, Gen. 3.6, 7. Qu. Then it seemes Man was made mutable and subject to change. Ans. Yea, for to be immutable is proper on∣ly to God and it was not the purpose of God to make him a God, but hee indued him with freedome of will to the end hee might make choice either of Good or evill. Qu. What was the cause of Adams Fall from that estate? Ans. His disobeying the Commandement of God in eating the forbidden fruit, Gen. 3.6, 7.
Quest. How came he to disobey the Comman∣dement of God. Answ. By hearkening to the temptation of Satan, and yeilding thereunto, Gen. 3. Quest. Are all the Posterity of Adam guilty of that sin. Ans. Yea, because all men proceed out of his loynes, and therefore hee having fallen, all his posterity are fallen with him, and are pol∣luted with corruption of nature as well as he, and so lyable to the same Curse threatened against Adam. Quest. Did God purpose to destroy all the posterity of Adam for that sin. Answ. No, God had a purpose from all eternity to save some, and to make them ob∣jects of his mercy; And to leave others to make them objects of his Justice, Ephes. 1.5. Rom. 9.22.23. Quest. Wherefore did God purpose to save some, and to leave others? Answ. It was his good will and pleasure, that so he might manifest both his Attributes of Justice and mercy and so might bee glori∣fied in the salvation of some, and in the rejecti∣on of others, 1 Thess. 5.9. Quest. Was there no power or abillity left in Adam to free himselfe from that miserable estate whereinto he was fallen.
Answ. There was no power at all left in him, But God in his infinite wisdome and love did find out a way, for to redeeme sinfull man out of that lost condition whereinto he was fallen by breaking the Commandement of God. Quest. What way or meanes is that which God did fore-ordain to worke the redemption of sin∣full Man? Answ. The way and meanes appointed of God from all eternity was onely by Iesus Christ. Quest. What is Iesus Christ? Answ. The eternall and onely begotten Son of God, the second in the undevided Trinity, Luke. 3.22. Esay 9. Heb. 1.2.3.6. 1 Iohn. 5.7. Quest. Then he was true God? Answ. Yea, he was indeed very God equall with the Father and Holy Ghost, Iohn. 1.1. Quest. Was he not true man also? Answ. Yes, he was true man also, for he tooke upon him the seed of Abraham, Iohn. 1.14. Heb. 2, 16. Quest. Wherefore was it needfull that our Re∣deemer should be God? Answ. It was needfull he should be God for these causes. First that the satisfaction that was to be
made might be of an Infinite valew, because an Infinite Iustice was offended. Secondly because he might be able to beare that wrath of God due for our sinnes, and to over come him by suffering death that had the power of death that is the Devill. Heb. 2.14. Quest. Wherfore was it needfull that he should be Man? Answ. It was needfull he should be man for these causes. First it was man that had sinned therefore that nature that had sinned was to make satis∣faction. Secondly if he had not beene Man also, he could not have suffered death, for the Godhead cannot possibly suffer, and therefore we say, that he was Man that he might suffer, and he was also God that he might overcome by suf∣fering, Heb. 2.14. Quest. Seeing there was such a necessity that he should be Man also as well as God, tell me by what meanes he came to be Man? Answ. He was conceived by the Holy Ghost after a most wonderfull and unspeakeable manner and borne of a Virgin, Luke 1.35. Chap. 2.7. Quest. Was he conceived and Borne as soone as Man had sinned?
Answ. No, but a long time after Man had sinned, even in that fullnesse of time that God had appointed, Gal. 4.4. Quest. How then were the Patriarks and fore∣Fathers saved that lived before the comming of Christ in the flesh? Answ. They were all saved by the sacrifice of Christ that was to be offered up and to be performed. Quest. How could that be? Answ. Because God did accept of it, as if it had beene performed, for he was that lambe slaine from the beginning of the World, Revel. 13.8. Quest. How could he be slaine seeing at that time he had not assumed Mans nature unto him∣selfe? Answ. He is said to be slaine in this respect, namely in the decree and Councell of God, who had decreed this way, and means to worke Mans Redemption, and Christ Iesus the se∣cond in Trinity did willingly undertake, this great worke, and thus it was done with God, and his Iustice satisfyed, for he calleth things that are not, as if they were, he so accounteth of things not actually done, as done, being de∣creed by him, Rom. 4.17.
Quest. What great workes did he after he had taken upon him the nature of Man? Answ. He wrought many great miracles he raised the dead. he made the blind to see, and healed all manner of diseases and taught his Fathers will Io. 11.43.44. Luk. 7.15.22.4.40.43. Quest. Was he obedient to the Law? Answ. Yea he was obedient to the Law and did fulfill it in every thing that it did command or require, Psal. 40.7.8. Quest. Then he was free from Sinne? Answ. He did no Sinne at all, neither did guile ever enter into his mouth, 1 Peter 2.22. Quest. Was it needfull he should fullfill the Law? Answ. Yes it was needfull for us to have such a Redeemer as could perfectly fullfill the Law for us, who could not fullfill it our selves, Gal. 4.4.5. Rom. 8.3.4. Quest. Then it seemes that whatsoever Christ did doe, was only for the Redemption of the e∣lect? Answ. It was all for that end, for he was wholly given unto them as the Prophet Esay saith, unto us a Child is borne Esay. 9. Quest. Was he not bound to fullfill the Law for himselfe? Answ. The Law was never given unto him
for to be a rule for him to walke by, for he needed no Law, being free from that Corrup∣tion of nature which all the posterity of Adam were tainted and corrupted with. Quest. If he were free from Corruption of nature, wherefore was he Circumcised and Bap∣tised? Answ. It was as himselfe saith to fullfill all righteousnesse, not that there was any need in him of the Circumcision of the heart, or that washing and purging signified by Bap∣time; but he submitted himselfe to both to te∣stifie his willing subjection to the will of his Father, and to teach us by his example to doe the like Mathew 3.15. Quest. Had he any enemyes, seeing he was so innocent and blamelesse? Answ. Yes he had many enemyes, especial∣ly the Scribes and Pharises that did persecute him, and when that time appointed was come, did also put him to death, Math. 26.3.4. and Chap. 27. Quest. Wherefore did they put him to death? Answ. There was no cause worthy of death found in him as the Judge himselfe confessed, Luke 23.14. Math. 27.24. Quest. Could he not have delivered himselfe, nut of their hands, (seeing he was God) and
have confounded his enemies by his Almighty power and word? Answ. Yea he could have prayed to his Fa∣ther (as himselfe saith) and he would have sent him more then twelve legions of Angells, but he came into the World to suffer and to fullfill, whatsoever was prefigured and prophe∣ned of him to be fullfilled by him, Math. 26.53.56. Quest. Was his death prefigured and foretold in the Scriptures? Answ. His death was shadowed out in the Paschall Lambe, and in the sacrifices, and fore∣told by the Prophets in very many places of Scripture and that in expresse words Esay 53. Daniell 9.26. Quest. Was it needfull that he should dye for to worke the Redemption of Man? Answ. It was needfull, for he did nothing in vaine, and God would have him to suffer death to the end he might deliver man from death, And the Justice of God, did require that he should dye, for God had threatned death to Adam upon his disobedience, and therefore that God might manifest himselfe to be just, and his wrath also against out sinnes, and yet also notwithstanding manifest his mercy to∣wards Man, God would have him to suffer a
shamefull death, who was able (being God and Man) to beare that wrath, and satisfie the Justice of God which could not have been sa∣tisfied unlesse that Christ himselfe had suffered death. Quest. What death did he suffer? Answ. They did Crucifie him upon the Crosse between two theeves. Mathew 27.38. Quest, Wherefore did they put him to so shame∣full a death? Answ. It was so foretold that he should be so used by the Iewes, for as his death was foretold, so also the manner of his death, Esay 55.12. Quest. Then the Jewes did nothing unto him, but that which God had decreed and foretold by his Prophets? Answ. Not any thing at all, Io. 19.24.28.29. Acts 2.23. Quest. Wherefore did God decree to put his onely Son to so shamefull death? Answ. To the end he might manifest his Iustice and wrath against Sinne, and also his exceeding great mercy and love unto Man, that notwithstanding his Iustice did require, so shamefull a death, yet did not spare his owne Sonne but gave him to death to redeeme us, Io. 3.16.
Qu. Seeing that all men as well the Elect as others, are all borne the children of wrath, and are lyable to the curse of God, and Condemnation, what is required of us, that we may be free from that Curse and escape condemnation? Answ. A new Birth is required, as our Sa∣viour himselfe witnesseth, except a man be borne againe, he cannot enter into the king∣dome of heaven, Io. 3.3.5. Quest. What is that new Birth. Answ. It is a most admirable and also a su∣pernaturall worke of Gods Spirit, whereby all the Elect are made (of children of wrath) heires of eternall Glory and happinesse, Titus 3.5, 6, 7. Quest. Whereof doth this new birth consist? Answ. It consisteth of these two parts, name∣ly of Water, and the Spirit that is to say, of Repentance and of Faith, Jo. 3.5. Titus 3.5. Quest. After what manner doth the Lord effect, and worke this new Birth in the Elect? Answ. The Lord doth it two wayes, in∣wardly by his Spirit, and outwardly by his Word, opening their eyes to see their misery, and that there is mercy to be had if they doe repent, Ezek. 36.24, 25, 26, 27. Ephes. 1.13. Rom. 10.14. Ezek. 33.11. Quest. VVhat is the first peculiar worke that
God vouchsafeth to worke in them whom he hath apurpose to save? Answ. The first speciall and peculiar worke that God doth worke in them is Repentance. Quest. But is not Faith wrought in men be∣fore Repentance and doth not repentance proceed from Faith as a fruit and effect thereof? Answ. No, not that faith which is peculiar to the Elect, that is never wrought before Re∣pentance, neither is Repentance a fruit or effect of Faith, but an effect of the Spirit as faith also is. Quest. VVhat Faith is that which is wrought in men before Repentance. Answ. It is commonly called historicall faith, the object whereof is the truth of the Scriptures, and it is a gift of the Spirit, com∣mon as well to those that shall perish, as to those that shall be saved. Quest. VVhat Reasons have you to perswade you, that Repentance is the first peculiar worke that God doth worke in them whom he hath a purpose to save? Answ. I have very many Reasons to per∣swade me thereunto. Quest. VVhat is the first Reason? Answ. My first Reason is, the constant and unchangeable order, that the holy Ghost hath
observed throughout the Scriptures, in requi∣ring Repentance and Faith, alwayes requiring Repentance in the first place, Mark. 1.15. Math. 3.2. Luk. 3.3. Acts 2.38. Acts 3.19. Quest. But order in setting downe things in Scripture proves nothing? Answ. But this is more then order in setting it downe in the first place, for, I say, it is re∣quired in the first place, and the holy Ghost doth not require that first of us, which it plea∣seth him to worke last, but requires that first, which he pleaseth first to worke. Quest. VVhat is your next Reason? Answ. Because, untill we have true Repen∣tance wrought in us, we have no right unto any speciall promise, for the speciall promises of Grace and Mercy, are made only to the Peni∣tent and Broken-hearted, and therefore before Repentance, they cannot have faith in any of those speciall promises, Esay 61.1, 2, 3. Acts 3.19. Quest. VVhat is your next Reason? Answ. Because no man, before he have Re∣pentance truly wrought in him, can receive the forgivenesse of his sinnes, for Repentance is required, that men may have their sinnes done away, and therefore forgivenesse of sinnes doth follow Repentance, and so consequently
Faith doth follow Repentance, Acts 2.38. and 3.19. Quest. But doth it follow that because Remissi∣on of Sinnes doth follow Repentance, that there∣fore Iustifying Faith doth follow Repentance? Answ. Yes it doth because whosoever is Justified by Faith his Sinnes are forgiven at the same instant, but no mans Sinnes are forgi∣ven, untill he have true Repentance wrought in him, therefore no Man is Justified by Faith, before his heart be broken and true Repen∣tance be wrought in him. Rom. 5.1. Quest. What other reason have you for to prove this point? Answ. Because whosoever is Justified by Faith is at peace with God, Rom. 5.1. But no Man is at peace with God, untill he have truly re∣pented, therefore no Man is Justified by Faith untill he have truly repented. Quest. But are not Men first at peace with God and assured of his love, and afterwards come to true Repentance for their former Sins? Answ. No certainly it cannot be, for the speciall thing that the party repenting doth seeke for is the pardon of Sinnes and peace with God, and to be assured of his love, and therefore it cannot be, that he doth enjoy peace, seeing it is that which above all o∣ther
things he so earnestly seeketh and desireth, Luke 15.18.19. Quest. Doth not this seeking of peace with God and desire to be reconciled unto him, argue that he doth enjoy peace and that he is reconciled unto God? Answ. No certainly, for the desire of a thing, doth argue the want of the thing desired, and not the having of it and so this desire of peace doth plainly shew the want of it. Quest. What is Repentance? Answ. Repentance is a powerfull worke of Gods Spirit (wrought in the hearts of such as shall be saved,) whereby the heart is broken and turned from the pleasing delights of Sinne, into a great feare and sorrow for them, and Confession of them unto God, and into an ex∣ceeding desire of peace and reconcilliation with God, Luke 15. Acts 11.18. 2 Tim. 2.25. Ioel 2.12.13. Heb. 6.1. Proverbs 28.13. Quest. Is this Repentance that you have here described of necessity to salvation? Answ. It is of absolute necessity as Christ himselfe testifieth, where he saith except ye re∣pent you shall all perish, Luke 13.5. Quest. But is it of necessity, that all those parts described in the definition of Repentance should be effected before a Man can be capable of the promise.
Answ. This is that constant order, which God hath and ever will keepe in effecting this great worke of his, to humble them for their Sinnes, to cause them to see, and to confesse and acknowledge their misery, and also ear∣nestly to long and desire after peace and re∣concilliation with God, which are indeed the very substance and severall parts of Repen∣tance. Quest. But is not leaving of all knowne evill, and doing of all knowne good the parts of Repen∣tance? Answ. No it is not, these are indeed the e∣fects of fruits, ever following Faith and com∣monly called by the names of mortification, and vivification, which is a dying unto Sinne, and a rising to newnesse of life. Quest. What reason can you give, to proove that this is not Repentance? Answ. Because Repentance must of ne∣cessity alwayes goe before Justifying Faith (as is formerly proved) but this leaving of all evill and doing of Good, ever followes af∣ter Justifying Faith. Quest. But it may seeme, that if that be repen∣tance, which you have described then Iudas had true repentance, for he was both sorowfull and al∣so confessed his Sin?
Answ. No, he never had that Repentance, for then he should have been received to mer∣cy, for although he was sorrowfull, and confest he had sinned, he never attained that broken heart, nor he never sought or desired pardon, and reconciliation with God, for hee knew it was in vaine, for he had sinned against the holy Ghost. Quest. But is not Repentance and Faith wrought both at one and the same instant of time. Answ. No, for Repentance is that worke of the Spirit, which prepares the heart, and makes it fit, to receive the assurance of grace and peace, which is by faith, and therefore, that which is a preparation to a thing, must alwaies goe before the thing, for which the preparation is made. Quest. But is there any distance of time be∣tweene Repentance and justifying faith? Answ. There is not any thing passeth be∣tweene Repentance and Faith, for they do not cease repenting and bewailing their lost con∣dition, nor seeking and desiring after Grace and mercy, untill such time as they be satisfied; But where God doth bestow this grace of faith, he doth alwaies find them Repentant and re∣penting sinners. Quest. VVhat is Justifying faith?
Answ. It is a gracious worke of Gods Spi∣rit, wrought in the hearts of such as are peni∣tent, whereby they are assured of the free par∣don, and remission of all their sinnes, and of peace and reconciliation with God through Je∣sus Christ, Rom. 5.1.5. Quest. VVhy doe you in your definition of Faith adde these words (wrought in the hearts of such as are penitent) seeing they are not of the definition of Faith? Answ. I adde those words to shew forth the only objects in whom it pleaseth the Lord to worke this excellent worke of Faith. Quest. Doth Iustifying faith give assurance, to the Penitent and broken heart, of peace with God? Answ. Yes, it doth, as St. Paul testifieth Ro∣mans the fift, and the first verse, being Justified by Faith, we have peace with God through Je∣sus Christ? Quest. But may not this Faith bee lost at no time after the receiving of it? An. It cannot be lost, but it may be greatly weakned through carelesnesse, by falling into sinne, as David did, Psal. 51. Quest. But may they not be deprived of the Assurance of Gods love for a time? Answ. Yes, they may want the comfortable
assurance thereof, but they have then, a pro∣mise to rest upon, which is, That whom the Lord loveth, he loveth to the end, and there∣fore David in his extremity said, hee remem∣bred the Lords mercies of old. Quest. But is not the beleeving of a mans sins to be pardonable justifying faith? Answ. No, it is not, for so all men may be∣lieve their sinnes to be pardonable, except they have sinned the Sin against the holy Ghost and many have this faith, that shall not be saved, but shall perish for ever. Quest. But is this Iustifying faith of necessi∣ty to be obtained of us in this life? Answ. It is of great necessity, for it doth mi∣nister unto us the greatest comfort that can be desired, assuring us of freedome from the grea∣test evill, and giving unto us a lively hope of the greatest good, making all the speciall pro∣mises to be ours, whereby wee are upheld in the greatest afflictions that can befall us in this life. Quest. VVhat are the speciall effects that doe follow this faith? Answ. There are these foure inseparable companions, which are the effects of faith, namely, Peace, patience, Hope and Love, a dy∣ing unto sinne, and a rising againe to newnesse
and holinesse of life, Rem. 5, 1, 2, 3, 4 5. 1 John 4.19. Quest. VVherein consisteth the death to sinne or mortification? Answ. In the exercise of the three first effects mentioned namely, Peace, Patience and Hope. Quest. That we may the better understand these things, describe unto me what these three effects are somewhat distinctly, and first what that peace is? Answ. The peace which here I meane, is peace with God through Jesus Christ, so that whereas before, God had a controversie with them, now is reconciled unto them, so that now they are at rest, fully perswaded, God be∣ing with them, nothing may prevaile against them, as it is written, If God justifie, who may condemne, Rom. 8, 33.34. Quest. VVhat is the second effect, namely pa∣tience? Answ. It is a vertue wherewith they are ar∣med against all assaults of their enemies to beare their injuries to suffer and indure their wrongs and though they be compassed with a body of sinne, and many lusts doe assault them, yet endure all in quietnesse sustained by the Word, which saith, In patience possesse ye your soules, Luke 21.19.
Quest. What is Hope which is the third ef∣fect of Faith? Answ. Hope is the Anchor of the Soule, whereby they are stayed and upheld expecting those eternall good things to come, which God hath promised to his people, and which by faith they believe shall bee performed, and this is that hope that maketh not ashamed, Rom. 5.5. Quest. Wherein consisteth that newnesse and holinesse of life, which is called vivification, and the new resurrection? Answ. It consisteth in the fourth and last effect of Faith, namely love, which is the light and perfection of a Christian, which is caused by the love of God shed in their hearts, and doth extend it selfe, first to God their Father, and to the Lord Jesus Christ, their Redee∣mer, next to their Brethren, the begotten children of God then to all men, even their enemies, doing good unto them for evill, pray∣ing and mourning for them, Mathew 5.44. Acts 7.60. 1 Cor. 13. 1 John 4.19, 20 21. Quest. What is the outward meanes, which the Lord hath appointed for the working of these graces in them whom he will save? Answ. The outward meanes is the preach∣ing of his Word, which is the Instrumentall
meanes that doth beget the Lord adding there∣unto the power of his Spirit, and so it becomes powerfull and effectuall for the conversion of his elect, being preached either by those that are allowed Preachers in publike, or by pri∣vate Christians, exhorting in private. Qu. May wicked and unregenerate Ministers convert soules unto God? Answ. No, they cannot, for this is a worke peculiar to such as are members of Christ, who only have this power to worke this great work of conversion, having the ministery of re∣conciliation committed unto them. Ier. 1.23.24 Quest. Why cannot they convert soules, seeing they preach the same word of God that others doe? Answ. They cannot for these Reasons; First, though they preach the same Word, yet is it not by them, delivered in the power, and evidence of the Spirit. Secondly, God hath not promised his pre∣sence with them, to make his Word powerfull and effectuall in their mouthes, for the con∣version of others, Jeremy 23.21, 22, 32. Thirdly, none can be said to convert, but on∣ly such, as by the power of the Spirit in them∣selves, doe worke upon the hearts and consci∣ences of others, the same grace that themselves are partakers of.
Fourthly, they that convert soules, shall shine as the stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3. but no unregenerate man shall have that glory, therefore they cannot convert soules unto God. Quest. Doth the law of the Decalogue or ten Commandements admit of Repentance? Answ. No, it doth not, but adjudgeth every transgressor to eternall condemnation, Deut. 27.26. Gal. 3.10. Quest. But the Apostle saith, that the Law was our schoolemaster to bring us unto Christ, Gal. 3. Answ. The Apostle intends there the Cere∣moniall law, and not the law of the ten Com∣mandements, and indeed the Ceremoniall law did preach and teach us, as a Schoolemaster, to bring us unto Christ, in every thing, and wee may observe also, that the Apostle saith, that the Law was our Schoolmaster, so that it ap∣peares plainly, the appostle intends there the Ceremoniall law, and not the morall. Quest. But the Law sets forth our misery, whereby we come to know our wretched condition? Answ. Yes, indeed it doth, but leaves us there without all hope or helpe of cure, for it cannot afford us any helpe at all, even like a man that wounds another, and leaves him
for dead, but is not able to helpe him. Quest. What part of the word of God doth require and admit of repentance? Answ. It is the Gospell that admits and re∣quires Repentance Mark. 1.1 2, 3, 4. Quest. VVhat is the Gospell? Answ. It is a free declaration of Gods grace, mercy and love for Christs sake. Quest. VVhen was this Gospell first preached? Answ. First, it was preached to Adam in these words, The seed of the woman shall breake the Serpents head, and afterwards to the Fa∣thers and Prophets, and by our Lord Jesus Christ, and his Apostles in a wonderfull great measure. Quest. If the law doe not admit of Repentance, to what end serveth it? Answ. There is a double use of the Law; It is set downe first, for the unregenerate man, that he may not deny the punishment denoun∣ced against him, and also that it may take ven∣geance against him, justly for his sinnes. Secondly, it is also set downe for a holy and regenerate man both that as often as he lookes upon it (and alwayes he ought to looke into it) he may so often bewaile his wickednesse, and quake at it; And as often as he calls it to mind (and night and day hee ought to call it to
remembrance) so often he may thinke of the riches of the mercy, and of the love of God, by giving him thankes by Jesus Christ, his Lord and Intercessor, who so mercifully hath set him free from the wrath of this just and holy law. Quest. Are all the Rites and Ceremonies (which God commanded the Iewes to observe) utterly a∣bolished? Answ. They are all abolished, which did any way tipe and shadow out Christ, which was then to come in the flesh, Gal. 3.24, 25. Quest. VVhat use is there then to us of the Ceremoniall law? Answ. Yes, it is of some good use unto us, for therby we may see how fitly every Tipe did sha∣dow forth in something Christ, & seeing it per∣formed in and by him, we may behold the wis∣dome and truth of God, and also the obedience of Christ to the will of his Father, and we may also have the greater Assurance against all Jewes, and other opposers and enemies of Christ, that indeed he was the Messiah promi∣sed, because he fully accomplished whatsoever was before shadowed out to bee performed by him, or to be fulfilled in him. Quest. Are we not bound to abstaine from those meats forbidden to the Iewes, and to observe those festivall dayes commanded to be kept by them?
Answ. No, we are not, for those meats were forbidden to the Jewes, to put a difference be∣tween them and the Gentiles, but now the par∣tition wall being broken downe by Christs death, all meats wholsome and good for food, are lawfull to be eaten, and from those holy dayes, and other like Ceremonies, wee are set at liberty by Christs deaths; Therefore who∣soever doth teach them to be observed by us, doe teach a divellish doctrine, to bring into bondage again the Church and people of God, from which Christ hath set us free, Levit. 20.23, 24, 25, 26. Ephes. 2.14. Collo. 2.16.17.20.21. Gal. 5.1. Quest. Did the Lord leave his people the Iewes without sending any to teach and instruct them? Answ. No, the Lord did not leave them, but sent unto them his Prophets to teach, and to instruct them in the Law and promises of God, and to bring them to repentance. Quest. Did they kindly entertaine those Pro∣phets? Answ. No, for they being all of them, (ex∣cept a small Remnant) uncircumcised in heart, did persecute them, and put many of them to death, for speaking to them in the name of the Lord, Math. 23.37. Acts 7.52.
Quest. Did not the Lord therefore take away his Prophets from them, and leave them destitute, because of their contempt of them? Answ. No, the Lord, for that small Rem∣nants sake, did not long leave them without some Prophet, or holy man to teach and in∣struct them, that they might be saved. Quest. What were the speciall Sacraments which the Lord vouchsafed unto the Iewes? Answ. They were two, Circumcision, and the Passeover Gen. 17.10.11. Exod. 12. Quest. What did Circumcision teach them? Answ. Circumcision did teach and preach unto them the Circumcision of the heart, which Circumcision of the heart God did espe∣cially require and call for. Ier. 4.4. Rom. 2.28. Quest. What was signified by the Passeover? Answ. Christ Jesus, who was indeed the true Paschall Lambe, the substance of that Ceremo∣ny who was in fulnesse of time to be sacrificed for them, Gal. 44. 1 Cor. 57. Quest. Then it seemes that all those Rites and Ceremonies had a spirituall intent and signifi∣cation? Answ. Yes, certainly they had, but yet ma∣ny of the Jewes remained blind and ignorant thereof, and contented themselves with the performance of the outward worke, and never
saw the spirituall intent and mistery of them, by which meanes they might have become pro∣fitable unto them. Quest. Why doe we commonly distinguish the times, before the comming of Christ, and the time since his comming, by these termes (of under the Law, and under the Gospell) was not the Gospell preached before the comming of Christ in the flesh? Answ. Yes, it was preached to Adam, and to the Patriarkes, and also by the Prophets, (as we said before) but yet to very few, but the Nation of the Jewes and but darkly unto them, under Tipes and shadowes; But since his com∣ming, it hath not onely been published to them, but almost to all Nations in the world, and therefore in regard of the abundant Revelation of the Gospell, the accomplishing of the worke of mans Redemption, and the powerfull worke of God, causing so many to entertaine and em∣brace it, therefore doe we call this the time of the Gospell, or the joyfull time, wherein the glad tydings of salvation is brought not only to Jewes, but to Gentiles also. Quest. When began this Gospell to be so plen∣tifully preached? Answ. It began first to be preached by Iohn Baptist, and afterwards by Christ, and by the
Disciples sent out by him but more abundant∣ly by the Apostles, after the Death, Resur∣rection, and Ascention of Christ, Math. 28.20. Quest. We have formerly spoken of the death of Christ, now tell me what became of him after the Iewes had put him to that shamefull death? Answ. He was Buried Io. 19.40, 41 42. Quest. By whom was he buried? Answ. By Ioseph of Arimathea, who went to Pilate, and begged the body of Jesus, and layd it in a new Sepulchre, which he had hewen out for himselfe Iohn 19.38. Quest. Did he continue long in the Grave? Answ. He rose againe the third day, Math. 28.6. 1 Cor. 15.4. Math. 16.21. Quest. Wherefore did Christ rise againe? Answ. To shew unto us that hee had over∣come all the powers of the Divell, Hell, and Death, and the Grave, for our Justification, Rom. 5.25. Quest. To whom did hee shew himselfe after his Resurrection? Answ. To Mary Magdalen, and the other Mary, Mark. 16.9. and to two Disciples as they went to Emmaus, Mark. 16.12. Luke 24.13. And to the eleven Apostles, as they sate toge∣ther, Iohn 20.19. and to more then five hundred
Brethren at once, and also at sundry other times, when they were together, hee shewed himselfe unto them alive after his passion, by many infallible proofes and testimonies, Acts 1. Quest. How long did he remaine with them after his resurrection? Answer. He was seen of them after his re∣surrection by the space of forty dayes, Acts 1.3. Quest. VVhat did hee with them all that time? Ans. He spake unto them of the things per∣taining to the kingdome of God, Acts 1.3. Quest. What speciall promise did he make un∣to them before his departure? Answ. That they should be baptised with the holy Ghost, Acts 1.5. Quest. What became of him after that he had spoken unto them of those things? Answ. He was taken up into heaven out of their sight, a cloud receiving him, Acts 1.9. Quest. What appeared unto them as they looked after him? Answ. Two men appeared in white apparell, telling them that the same Jesus, which was taken up from them should so come in like manner, as they had seen him goe into heaven, Acts 1.10, 11.
Quest. What became of the Disciples after his the Ascention into heaven? Ans. They returned to Jerusalem, from the mount called Olivet, Acts 1.12. Quest. What did they when they came to Jeru∣salem? Answ. They continued together with one accord in supplication and prayer, and did choose another Apostle Acts 1.14. Quest. How did they chuse him? Answ. They appointed two, Joseph called Barsabas, who was surnamed Iustus and Ma∣thias and when they had prayed, they cast lots, and the sort fell upon Mathias, and hee was numbred with the eleven Apostles, Acts 1.23, 24 25, 26. Quest. When did Christ performe that pro∣mise, which he made unto them namely that they should be baptised with the holy Ghost? Answ. At the feast of Pentecost, which was within few dayes after his Ascention Acts 2. Quest. In what manner was it performed? Answ. They being all met together in one place there came a found from heaven and fil∣led all the house and there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sate up∣on each of them, and they were all filled with the holy Ghost, and began to speake with other
tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance, Acts 2.1, 2.3, 4. Qu. What happened thereupon? Answ. Many were amased and wondered at this great worke, and others mocking, said they were full of new wine Acts 2.12.13. Quest. How did the Apostles cleare themselves, of that false accusation? Answ. Peter stood up with the eleven, pro∣ving that they could not be drunke, because it was but the third houre of the day, and also that this was, but the fulfilling of a promise, which the Lord had made by the mouth of the Prophet Ioel, Acts 2.16. Ioel 2.28, 29. Quest. What did the Apostles after they had thus cleared themselves from that false accu∣sation? Ans. Peter preached unto them the death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ, telling them, that they had taken him, and by wicked hands, had crucified and slaine him, Acts 2.23. Quest. What followed thereupon? Answ. They were pricked in their hearts, and cryed out to Peter, and the rest of the A∣postles, Men and brethren, what shall we doe? Acts 2.37. Qu. What counsell did they give them? Answ. They exhorted them to repent, and be
baptised in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sinnes Acts 2.38. Quest. What followed upon this exhortation? Answ. They that gladly received the Word, were baptised and the same day there were ad∣ded to them about three thousand soules, and they continued in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship and in breaking of Bread and pray∣ers Acts 2.41 42. Quest. What followed upon this great worke, wrought upon those men? Answ. Feare came upon every soule and they that beleeved sold their possessions and parted their goods to all men as every man had need, and they had all things common Acts 2.44 45. Quest. Were any great workes done by the A∣postles? Answ. Yea many wonders signes, and mi∣racles were done by them. Acts 5.12. Quest. What was the principall end of those mi∣racles? Ans. God did thereby beare witnesse to their doctrine that it was his, which they did preach, by giving them power to worke such miracles, Heb. 2.4. Quest. Were the people moved by those mira∣cles to receive their doctrine? Answ. Yea, very many were moved there∣with,
and wondring at the miracles, believed their doctrine, and were baptised even as ma∣ny as were ordained to eternall life. Quest. Were none moved by their preaching, to believe their doctrine, but such as were ordai∣ned to eternall life. Answ. Yes certainly such was the power of their ministery, that many others believed the truth of their doctrine, and were baptised, as Simon Magus, and doubtlesse divers others, which never received the speciall benefit of the Gospell which they preached, Acts 8.13. Math. 13. Qu. May such outward Christians be suffe∣red to partake with the faithfull in the holy things of God? Answ. Yes they may be suffered to partake with them in the outward ordinances, the Word and Sacraments untill such time as they appeare to be hipocrites, and become offensive to the Church and people of God, and then they are to be cast out of the Church by ex∣communication. Qu. Doe those outward Christians rest con∣tent with that common worke of grace in them? Ans. Yes many of them do so long as they live and also conceive themselves to bee in a good estate, to be the children of the Free-woman,
whereas indeed they are children of the Bond-woman; others fall away, to an open and malicious opposition of the truth of God formerly professed by them, Mat. 25. Io. 8.33.39.40. Math. 26.14, 15, 16. Quest. Doe not many of them goe on very far in the profession of the truth? Answ. Yes doubtlesse, many are greatly in∣lightned by it, and receive it with joy, and goe on joying, and rejoycing in it for a time, and doe tast of the heavenly gift, and of the powers of the world to come, and are made partakers of the holy Ghost, and sanctified by the blood of the Covenant, Math. 13.20, 21. Heb. 6.4, 5, 6 Heb. 10.29. Quest. Is it possible for such to fall away and perish? Answ. Yes, it is possible for such to fall a∣way, and to tread under foot, the Son of God, and to account the blood of the Covenant, wherewith he was sanctified an unholy thing, and to despite the Spirit of Grace, Heb. 10.29. Quest. May they be truly said to be sanctified that fall away and perish? Answ. Yes, they may be truly said so to be, and are so indeed, as the Apostle sheweth, Heb. 10.29. Quest. Doth not the Apostle there speake
of them, according as they made shew to be, and not as if indeed they were so? Answ. No certainly for there the Apostle declares unto us what great effects of the Spi∣rit men may be partakers of and yet fall away, and perish for ever. Quest. What is that Sanctification which men may have and yet perish? Answ. It is an outward washing or cleans∣ing caused by the holy Ghost inlightening the understanding, causing them to see the benefit offered in the Gospell, by which meanes they come to a liking of it, and doe for a time re∣ceive it with joy, and are in many things con∣formed to the obedience of the same, forsaking many of their evill wayes, wherein aforetime they had tooke delight, Heb. 6.4, 5. Math, 13.20, 21. 2 Pet. 2.20.21. Quest. Are these effects of the Spirit vouch∣safed unto them, to the end they might be saved? Answ. No certainly, but God doth it to gaine glory unto his name, and to leave them without excuse, who doe quench that light in them, and willingly resist and contemne that grace that is offered in the Gospell, 2 Peter 2.21. Quest. What is their Sinne which they com∣mit called in the Scripture?
Answ. The sinne against the holy Ghost, Math. 12.31, 32. Q. Why is it called the sin against the holy Ghost? Answ. Because it is committed directly a∣gainst that light evidenced unto their conscien∣ces by the holy Ghost Mat. 12.31, 32. Heb. 10.26. Quest. I pray you give me a briefe definition of that Sinne? Answ. It is a wilfull opposition, and rejecti∣on of the Gospell of God, after the holy Ghost hath inlightned them and perswaded their hearts of the truth and benefit of the same, Heb. 6.4. Heb. 10.26.29. Quest. Is it possible to come to know any of them that commit this sinne? Answ. Yes, it is possible, else would not the Apostle have told us, that there is a sinne, which we should not pray for 1 Iohn 5.16. Quest. How doe you know that the Apostle meanes this sinne in that place, which hee would not have us pray for? Answ. Because all other sinnes are pardona∣ble, and therefore may be prayed for, but this sinne is unpardonable, and therefore not to be prayed for, Mathew 12.32. Quest. How comes it to passe that this sinne above all others should be unpardonable? Answ. Because the very way and meanes of
salvation is despised and rejected, after they have received the knowledge of the truth, and therefore it is impossible to renew them againe by Repentance, seeing they crucifie to them∣selves the Sonne of God afresh, and put him to an open shame Heb. 6.6. Quest. How doe they crucifie to themselves the Sonne of God? Answ. Even like as the Jewes did reject Christ, and crucifie him when hee was with them upon earth, so these men doe now reject him, and doe crucifie him, by their wilfull con∣tempt of him, and his sacrifice; And as the Jewes did, so doe they, put him to an open shame, and so rejecting that sacrifice, which was ordained of God from all eternity to take away sinnes, it is impossible their sinnes should be pardoned, for there remaineth no more sa∣crifice for sinne, Heb. 10.29. Quest. Doe men come on a sudden to commit this fearfull sinne. Answ. No, but by degrees for first there is a light esteeme of the Gospell and of the grace offered therein. Secondly, a looking back to their pleasures past with some liking of them. Thirdly, a yeelding consent of the will and affections to the flesh, for the embracing of
them againe, and so by little and little, returne like the dog to his owne vomit againe, and like the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire, 2 Pet. 2.22. Quest. Doe all the Reprobate commit this sinne? Answ. No, because many of them, are never so farre inlightned by the holy Ghost, to see and perceive those things, which those doe that fall into that sinne. Quest. Is not their estate more miserable that commit this sinne then others that doe not com∣mit that sinne, and yet notwithstanding shall perish for ever? Answ. Yes certainly, for although the estate of others be miserable, yet the misery of these shall farre exceed, for to whom much hath bin committed, of him much shall be required, and he that knoweth his masters will and doth it not, shall be beaten with many stripes, 2 Pet. 2.21. Quest. Doe not such as commit this sinne, prove dangerous enemies to the Church of God? Answ. Yes assuredly, none greater enemies to the truth, and to the people of God, then those that once have professed the truth, and afterwards have turned from the holy Com∣mandement delivered unto them, and there∣fore
they are carefully to be taken heed of, and to be avoided, 2 Pet. 2.21. Quest. What differing effects doth the holy Ghost worke in those that shall be saved from those that commit this horrible sinne? Answ. The holy Ghost doth worke in them that shall bee saved, a farre more excellent worke, namely, that great worke of regenera∣tion, consisting of these two principall effects of the Spirit, Repentance and Faith Io. 3.5. Quest. Are none partakers of these two effects of the Holy Ghost but such as shall be saved? Answ. Not any one and none that are parta∣kers of those effects of the Spirit, can possibly commit that sinne, but all others, that are one∣ly inlightned by the holy Ghost, to see, and know the way of salvation, are in danger of fal∣ling into that sinne. Quest. What is the best way for such to take, to be free from committing that sinne? Answ. The best way is, not to content them∣selves with that common grace of inlightning onely, but to labour to find in themselves those two effects of the Spirit, Repentance and Faith, and to be earnest with the Lord by pray∣er, that he by his Spirit, would worke effectual∣ly, for the breaking their hearts, and humbling them, that so he may raise them up againe ac∣cording
to his promise, and never to give rest unto their soules, untill the Lord by his Spirit assure their hearts of peace and reconciliation with him. Quest. But is not the prayer of all such as are unjustified abominable, how can wee therefore hope that God will heare us, or grant our re∣quests? Answ. The prayers of all those that are un∣justified, are not abominable, but only the prayers of such wicked as hate to be reformed, and cast the word of God behind them, but the prayers of such as desire to bee humbled for their sinnes and to have their hearts broken, and brought in subjection to the will of God, and earnestly desire to be reconciled, and to be at peace with God are not abominable, but are pleasing unto God and are many times heard, and granted by him. Quest. But God heareth and granteth the re∣quests of none but for Christs sake, and all unjusti∣fied men are out of Christ therefore how can it be that God should heare them or that their prayer should be pleasing unto him. Answ. True it is, that all unjustified persons are out of Christ (that is) are not ingrafted in∣to him by faith; And also God heareth and granteth no requests, but for Christs sake;
But yet notwithstanding, God doth heare the requests of such as are not actually in Christ, for Christs sake, for God is mercifull to all his Creatures onely in Christ, and many thousands enjoy mercies from the Lord for Christs sake, that shall never enjoy salvation by him: And therefore though men be not actually justified, yet they may pray for Christs sake, for the things they stand in need of, and bee heard of the Lord, and their prayers pleasing, and not sinne else would not the Apostle have advised Simon Magus being in the gall of bitternesse, to pray that if it were possible the thought of his heart might be forgiven him, Gen. 16.13. Chap. 21.16. Acts 8.22. Quest. May any one of those that are made partakers of that new birth and ingrafted into Christ, fall away and perish? Answ. No, it is not possible, for God is un∣changeable in his love, where hee once loves, with that speciall love hee ever loves, for the gifts and calling of God are without Repen∣tance, Rom. 11.20. Io. 12.1. Rom. 5.10. Quest. But they fall into many sinnes after regeneration, and therefore may not God justly cast them off? Answ. True it is they fall into sinnes after regeneration, and if wee looke upon Gods
Justice only we cannot say, but hee might cast them oft; But yet God wil be true in his pro∣mise, and as he did manifest his mercy, and love unto them in their new birth so will be mani∣fest his mercy in preserving them, so that al∣though they doe sinne daily, yet shall it not condemne them; For God doth justifie them through Christs death, and if God justifie, who may condemne Rom. 8.33.34. Quest. Then it seemes that the stedfastnesse of man in Grace, consists not in his owne power and strength but in the unchangeable, Decree, and mercy of God? Answ. No, assuredly it consists not in his owne power and strength, but in the unchange∣ablenesse of Gods love for they are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, wherein consisteth some part of mans happi∣nesse for now by Grace he is set into a better estate and condition then Adam was by his Creation, who was subject to change, 1 Pe∣ter 1.5. Quest. Doth not the knowledge of this Do∣ctrine concerning mans stedfastnesse in grace make men secure and carelesse in the committing of sinne? Answ. No certainly, it is not possible, that any of those that are regenerate should make
such an use of it, but rather they considering Gods rich mercy and abundant grace, showed towards them, doe labour to deny ungodlinesse, and worldly lusts, and doe endeavour to live soberly, righteously, and godly, seeing the grace of God that bringeth salvation unto all men, hath so plentifully appeared unto them, Titus 2.11.12. Rom. 12.1. Quest. Doe not many of the regenerate fall into great sinnes after their regeneration! Answ. Yes certainly, wee have examples thereof, in Noah, David and Peter, who did fall into great sinnes after they were regene∣rate, Gen. 9.21. 2 Sam. 11.4.13 14, 15. Chap. 12.9. Mat. 26.70.72.74. Quest. What great dammage doth come unto them by their Falls seeing they cannot fall away and perish for ever? Answ. The dammage is very great, for be∣sides the dishonour of God (whose glory ought to be deare unto them) they deprive themselves of their sweet peace, joy and com∣fort, which they did enjoy, and doe cast them∣selves into great trouble of mind, sorrow, and feare, and many times cause the Lord, to punish them for their sinne with some tem∣porall punishment, 2 Sam. 12. Psal. 51.
Quest. What is required of men falling into Sinne after Iustification? Answ. That they should repent of their Sins and seeke earnestly at the hand of God, for the pardon of them as David did Psal. 51. Quest. Is it in mans power to repent? Answ. No it is not, it is the gift of God, 2 Tim. 2.15 Quest. Wherefore then doth the Lord require of man to repent and beleeve seeing he is unable to performe the same? Answ. The Lord requires of us to repent and beleeve becaue they are workes to be perfor∣med by us, and that we seeing our selves un∣able to performe them might be mooved to seeke for them at the hands of God, who is the only giver of them. Quest. What need is there for them to repent who have formerly received pardon of their Sinne and cannot possibly perish because Christs death was a full satisfaction not only for their Sinnes past, but for all that ever they should commit du∣ring this life? Answ. Yes certainly Repentance is very needfull for them, and therefore the Apostle councelleth them, (amongst the rest of their spirituall armour Ephesians 6. to have their feet shod with the preparation of the Gospell of
peace, which is Repentance) for by their sinne they having dishonoured God and greeved his Spirit, and having also deprived themselves of their sweet Communion they had with God there is no other way to obtaine their peace, joy, comfort and sweet Communion with God againe but by Repentance, as we may see by the example of David Psal. 51. Quest. Then Repentance doth not cease in men assoone as they are justifyed and reconciled unto God? Answ. No assuredly, for although they have attained the thing their soules so much desired in the day of their trouble and their wounded soules be healed and refreshed, yet doe they still retaine their soft and melting heart which doth daily mourne and lament for the body of Sin, and remnant of Corruption that is left in them whereby they are led Captive to Sinne and to offend their Lord and Redeemer who hath been so rich and abundant in mercy towards them, Rom. 7.23.24. Quest. Then it seemes that the estate of a true Christian in this life is a very sorrowfull and mournfull estate? Answ. It is true indeed their life is full of sor∣row, this is their time of mourning and wee∣ping, they of all others are subject to many per∣secutions
disgraces and reproaches, besides the corruption that is within them which pur∣sues their soules daily, so that if their hope were only in this life, they were of all men the most miserable. But yet notwithstanding in the midst of their afflictions and persecutions, the Lord doth give them inward joy and comfort by his Spi∣rit, farre exceeding all worldly Joy that this world can afford, and none but they have any sound Joy; but they only doe possesse that Joy, which is unspeakable and full of glory, and which shall never be taken from them, Io. 16.22. Quest. From whence proceedeth that unspeake∣able Ioy which the faithfull doe enjoy? Answ. It proceedeth from the apprehension of Gods love unto them, who hath remitted their Sinnes, and assured them of peace and re∣conciliation with him, 1 Io. 4.10.19. Quest. What is the first and principall cause of mans salvation? Answ. The first and principall cause is the Infinite love and mercy of God, Io. 3.16. So God loved the world &c. Quest. Was there no other moving cause to moove him, o pitty man, but his owne love?
Answ. No certainely neither needed there any other, nor could possibly be a greater cause, then his owne love, goodnesse and mercy to moove him thereunto. Quest. Was not Christ the principall cause of man salvation? Answ. No assuredly, he was indeed the ma∣teriall cause, but not the efficient or principall mooving cause, for howsoever it be true that every person in the Godhead, did our of their infinite love decree from all eternity the sal∣vation of man, yet in the effecting, and accom∣plishing of the same, every person hath his di∣stinct operation and worke appropriated unto him, so that we cannot without confusion at∣tribute that to one person which is proper and peculiar to another. Quest. Declare unto me briefly the severall worke of every person in the Godhead distinctly and severally in the working of the Redemption of man? Answ. The worke appropriated in Scrip∣tures to the first person, namely the Father is of his meere love to have sent his onely Sonne; and the worke of the Son is to be sent and to take mans nature upon him, to suffer death, to satisfie the Justice of God, and to effect and bring to passe that great worke of mans Re∣demption,
and the worke of the third person the Holy Ghost is to inlighten the understanding of the elect in this great mistery, and to make effectuall unto them this Redemption, which Christ hath wrought for them. Quest. Might not the Lord have saved man∣kind out of his owne love and goodnesse without the sending of his Son to take upon him our nature and to suffer death? Answ. Whether he might or no, we will not dare to conclude, but that which may be pro∣fitable for us we will affirme, that certaine it is, that this way, which the Lord hath ordayned, and also made knowne unto us, did best stand with his Iustice, and doth serve the more to manifest his Attributes of wisdome, power, goodnesse, love, and mercy, then if he had saved man without the giving his Sonne to death for him. Quest. Who are they that have the speciall be∣nefit by the death of Christ? Answ. All have benefit thereby, but the elect only have the speciall benefit of Redemption and Justification by him, And all the rest of the Sonnes of Adam have a common benefit en∣joying for Christs sake the continuance of the world and the abundant blessings thereof. Quest. What difference is there betweene Re∣demption and Justification?
Answ. There is this difference, Redempti∣on is a worke, which Christ hath wrought for all the Elect, even for them also which are yet unborne: and Justification is the free declara∣tion of Gods eternall love free grace and mer∣cy, which he worketh in his good time in the hearts of his Elect, making knowne unto them, that the Redemption which Christ hath wrought is for them, and that they have part and portion therein. Quest. Wherein consisteth mans Iustifica∣tion? Answ. It consisteth in the free remission and taking away of the guilt and punishment of Sin, and in the imputation of Christs righteous∣nesse, Acts 10.43. Psal. 32.1. Rom. 4.6, Quest. By what meanes doe they come to bee thus freed from the guilt and punishment of sin. and also to have the righteousnesse of Christ im∣puted unto them? Answ. By the meere grace and favour of God, for as there was nothing but his owne love to move him to elects them, so there was nothing but his owne love to move him to ju∣stifie them Ephes. 2.8. Quest. How is this made knowne unto them? Answ. It is revealed unto them by the holy Ghost, who assureth them of peace and recon∣ciliation
with God through Jesus Christ, and also worketh in them faith to lay hold and to apply unto themselves the speciall and peculiar promises of the Gospell. Rom. 5.1. Ephes. 8. Quest. Are not all men set free, from the guilt and punishment of sinne by the death of Christ? Answ. No certainly; none but those whom God did make choyce of from all eternity to be vessels of mercy. Quest. Wherfore should God make choice of some and leave others, seeing all had sinned alike in Adam and all alike corrupted? Answ. There was nothing in man at all, in one more then in another, but it was his good pleasure, nothing moving him thereunto but his owne will. Rom. 9. Quest. Did the Lord then make some men of purpose to destroy them, and to condemne them for ever? Answ. The Lord did decree from all eter∣nity, to save some, and to leave others, but yet notwithstanding, hee did not create them of purpose to destroy them; For the end of mans Creation, was the glory of God, and in their Creation he did not intend the destruction of the creature, but his owne glory; and he made man righteous, but he brought destruction up∣on
himselfe by rebelling against God, Hosea 13.9. Eccle. 7.29. Quest. Then the Lord is not the Author of mans condemnation? Answ. He is not the Author thereof, but man himselfe, for God at first did make man righteous and holy, and gave him power to o∣bey and serve him, but hee willingly of him∣selfe fell to disobey the command of God, and so made himselfe liable to eternall wrath and condemnation. Hosea 13.9. Eccle. 7.29. Quest. Why did not God make man so absolute perfect in himselfe, that he could not possibly have fallen, but might have stood in his perfection of himselfe? Answ. It could not possibly be, unlesse hee should have been God, for it is proper only un∣to God to be so absolute perfect and immuta∣ble, and cannot bee in any creature whatso∣ever. Quest. Doe not the good Angels stand in their state of perfection and glory by themselves? Answ. No verily, it is through the free grace and goodnesse of God, that they stand and not of their owne power, and that they and we also might see our owne weaknesse, and that we all stand through his grace, he suffered both An∣gels and man to fall.
Quest. Why did not God as well punish all the Angells as some of them, seeing hee punished all mankind for Adam's sin? Answ. The case is not alike, for we all sin∣ned in Adam, being in his loynes, and are therefore polluted with corruption of nature, and doe bring forth the evill fruit of sinne and rebellion against God. But it was not so with Angels, they did not proceed from one another by naturall generation, and therefore not in the same manner corrupted, but were all crea∣ted glorious creatures; And it was but some of the Angels that sinned, and therefore none but them that sinned were punished; And al∣though he suffered all men to fall, yet he pro∣vided a remedy to restore part of them againe through Jesus Christ, and to make them heires of glory for ever. Quest. Is not the remedy sufficient to redeeme all mankind that had fallen through Adams transgression? Answ. It is sufficient doubtlesse, being a price of an infinite value, and all men are thereby set in a possibility of salvation, and as we said be∣fore all men enjoy good by Christ, yet notwith∣standing, God did not purpose nor intend to give his Sonne to death, to redeeme all man∣kind, and so to save them for ever, but only for
those whom he had elected and made choice of, to be vessells of mercy, in his wisdome from all eternity, the Lords workes and doings are unchangeable. Quest. But the Lord exhorts all men to repent, and to turne to him, promising to pardon their sins if they do repent; How then is it that God did not purpose to save all mankind by Christs death? Answ. It is true indeed, that all men are exhorted to repent, and the promises are made generally to all that doe repent, but none doe repent, but only the elect and chosen of God, and therefore none but they enjoy the speciall promises of grace and mercy. Quest. But what is the reason that all doe not repent, that so they might have right unto those speciall promises of grace and mercy through Christ? Answ. The fault is in man who through the corruption of his heart, resists this grace and mercy offered, and so hardens his heart in sinne, choosing rather to enjoy his pleasure here then to humble himselfe to walke with God to enjoy his grace and mercy for ever. Quest. Have the Elect any more power in themselves, then others, to repent and turne to the Lord? Answ. No, none at all, but Repentance is
the gift of God, (as we said before) and it is he that by his Spirit doth effect this great worke in them, 2 Tim. 2.25. Quest. Why doth not God give repentance to all, and so save all by Christ, that so all men might for ever glorifie and praise his mercy? Answ. It was his purpose from all eternity, as well to set forth the glory of his Justice, as of his mercy, and therefore as he did not in∣tend, nor purpose to save them by Christ, so neither would he bestow upon them any speci∣all benefit tending that way. Quest. Wherefore doth God call and exhort all men to repent, seeing all cannot attaine there∣unto? Answ. Hee doth it for these Reasons; First, because his elect are mingled amongst others, and therefore he doth send his Word, and call upon all men to repent. Secondly, he doth it to manifest to all the freenesse of his grace, that he is ready to re∣ceive all that come to him. Thirdly, to leave all men without excuse, and that their condemnation might more ma∣nifestly appeare to be just, seeing that grace and mercy was offered them and they willingly refused and rejected it, and at that great day of Judgement, every mouth shall bee stopped,
and every one appeare culpable before God. Quest. But seeing that God hath elected sonne, and rejected others, is it not therefore in vaine to heare or reade the word of God, to pray unto him, or to use any meanes to come to the knowledge of the way of life and salvation? Answ. No verily, for seeing these things are required of all men, all are bound to take knowledge thereof, and to reject or refuse them, is to reject and refuse God, who offers his grace therein, and doth by them worke grace in his elect, now seeing some there are, that reape benefit by the use of them, and that no man can conclude of himselfe, that God hath not elected him, it is not in vaine to use the meanes, but it is meere madnesse and folly to refuse and reject them. Quest. But by this meanes men may come to such a measure of knowledge, and to bee so farre inlightned that they may be in danger to commit the sin against the holy Ghost, and so make their condemnation the greater? Answ. This commeth not by the carefull use of the meanes, but by the abuse thereof, and light esteeme of the grace offered, and there∣fore they are to take heed of those things that may be any occasion thereunto. Quest. Is it necessary that this doctrine con∣cerning
Gods Predestination should bee made knowne, seeing that it may bee hurtfull to many, making some secure and carelesse in using any meanes of salvation, and also causing others to despaire? Answ. It is necessary to bee knowne, and therefore hath the Lord beene pleased to re∣veale it, and doubtlesse no hurt shall come thereby to any of the elect, but exceeding much good, for it serves greatly to humble them, and to let them see, that it is no defert of theirs, but the free grace of God, who might have chosen others, and rejected them; And as for the rest, they will abuse every truth, though it be never so good and profitable, and therefore seeing God hath been pleased to re∣veale it, the Elect are not to be deprived of this Benefit, because of the abuse of them by the Reprobate. Quest. Wherefore is it, that in Scripture our Justification is attributed unto Faith? Answ. We are said to be justified by Faith, not that Faith justifieth of it selfe, but because it is a gift of God, whereby man believeth that which the Spirit declareth and evidenceth to the conscience, namely, the pardon of sinne, and assurance of grace through the blood of Christ.
Secondly because all our owne workes are ex∣cluded in the matter of Justification before God, and there is no cause of boasting, for our salvation is onely of the Lord, Hosea 13.9. Quest. If good workes doe not justifie before God, to what end are they so often required? Answ. They are required for divers ends. First because by them we shall glorifie God and adorne our holy profession, Math. 5.16. Secondly we shall by them be a means to win others to love our profession and give good ex∣amples to others to doe the like and to follow us. 1 Pet. 2.12. Thirdly by this means we shall stop the mouthes of the adversaries 1 Pet. 2.15. Fourthly we shall have comfort, if we be brought to suffer, and be accused as evill doers wrongfully, 1 Pet. 2.19. Fifthly we shall by them make tryall of the truth of our faith and of the graces that are in us by the exercise of them as occasion is offe∣red. Quest. But doe not good workes deserve no∣thing at the hands of God? Answ. No certainly, no workes that we can doe can possibly deserve any thing at the hands of God; for when we have done all that we can, we may truly say we are unprofitable servants, Luke 17.10.
Quest. If good workes deserve nothing where∣fore is it that so many promises are made in Scrip∣ture unto good workes? Answ. God hath thereby set forth his boun∣ty to stir us up; who are backward of our selves, adding thereunto promises of reward, But such is our weakenesse and great imperfections in our best workes, that we haue cause rather to be humbled for our wants in the performance of them, then to challenge any thing at the hands of God for the same, & yet certaine it is, that the good workes of Gods Children shall be rewarded, though not for the worthinesse of the worke, yet for the truth of the promiser, who hath promised to reward the gift of a cup of cold water to one of those that belong to him, so that we have no cause to be backward in good workes, but to be forward in the doing of them. Math. 10.42. Quest. Are all men rewarded for their good workes? Answ. Yes certainly the righteous, God re∣wardeth all, either here in this life or after this life; but he in a more especiall manner rewar∣deth the good workes of his Children even those workes of love and mercy extended to∣wards the Saints their Brethren, Math. 25. Quest. Are there Saints now upon the earth?
Answ. Yes verily, there have been, are, and ever shall be Saints upon the earth, Psal. 16.3. Quest. But seeing all men are corrupted and even after regeneration the remnants of Sinne still continue in them can the name of Saints be properly given unto them? Answ. Yes it may be well given unto them for God so accounts of them as being without Sinne, beholding no iniquity in them, Num∣bers 23.21. Canticles 4.7. Ephes. 5.27. Quest. If God behold all things and nothing be hid from his all-seeing eye, how can it be but that he should see those Sinnes which his elect doe daily and continually fall into? Answ. It is true that God beholdeth all things and cannot be ignorant of those Sinnes which they fall into, yet notwithstanding God doth looke upon them in Christ and beholds them all righteous and holy in him, imputing the rigteousnesse of Christ unto them, Rom. 4.6.7. 1 Cor. 1.30. 2 Cor. 5.21. Quest. What is that righteousnesse of Christ which is imputed unto the Saints, and for which they are accounted holy? Answ. All the righteousnesse of Christ what∣soever, his active obedience performed to the law, his passive obedience in suffering whatso∣ever was due unto them for Sinne, and what
the Justice of God could require at their hands; yea all the holinesse that is in Christ, ei∣ther of his nature, as hee was man, or of his actions as he was Mediator betweene God and man is all imputed unto them, 1 Cor. 1.30. Rom. 5.19. Esay 9.6. Quest. Then by imputation they are absolute, holy and righteous? Answ. Yes verily, they are so, even absolute, pure righteous and holy, Numb. 23.21. Quest. Have they no other holinesse, but this which is imputed unto them? Answ. Yes verily, for as God doth impute holinesse unto them, even the holinesse of Christ (in whom alone they are accepted as righteous) so also doth hee worke holinesse in them, by his Spirit, making them in some mea∣sure conformable to Christ, renewing and san∣ctifying, and making them holy, and causing them also to work holinesse and righteousnesse, which is one maine end of their election, and of their Redemption by Jesus Christ Ephes. 1.4 Luke 1.74 75. Quest. Then it seemes that this holinesse is not attained by any power or vertue that is in them? Answ. No verily, it is the free gift of God, Ephes. 28.
Quest. By all this that hath been said, I ga∣ther that God did not elect any unto salvation, upon the foresight of any workes or holinesse that was to be in them? Answ. It is very true, he did not, but it was his owne love and free grace that moved him, for they are elected and chosen of God, not for any foreseene holinesse, but to be holy, being his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good workes, that they should walke in them, Ephes. 2.10. So that good workes are no cause of their Election but their Election is the cause of their good workes, and good workes are an evidence both to themselves, and to others also of their election, but no cause thereof, 1 Pet, 1.2. Ephes. 1.4. Quest. Whereof doth that Church of Christ consist, unto which all the speciall promises are made? Answ. It consisteth onely of such as are re∣generate, who are all Saints, the members of Christ, who are honoured with so many glori∣ous Titles being called the Church, and body of Christ, his Spouse his habitation, his Tem∣ple, Sion Jerusalem, and many such like 2 Cor. 6.16. Ephes. 5.23. Cant. 4.8.9.10. Psal. 87. 1 Cor. 3.16.17. Gal. 4.26. Ephes. 5.30. 1 Cor. 12.27.
Quest. What are those speciall promises that are made unto this Church? Answ. All promises of this life, and of that which is to come, 1 Tim. 4.8. Quest. What are those speciall promises that concerne this life? Answ. They are such as concerne every one of them in particular, or all in generall assem∣bling together. Quest. What are those promises that concerne every one of them in particular? Answ. All good things, as protection, pro∣vidence, peace, joy, comfort, the assurance of his love, and the hope of eternall good things to come which doth comfort them in the midest of all their tryalls that befall them in this life, Esay 43.1, 2, 3. Esay 54.7, 8, 9, 10. Ioh. 13, 1. Titus 2.13. 2 Cor. 4.17.18. Quest. What are those promises that concerne them all in generall assembling together? Answ. They are such as pertaine to the ru∣ling, and governing, teaching, instructing and comforting of this Church, being met toge∣ther in the name of Christ, and to the well or∣dering of the same for the benefit of the whole body of Jesus Christ, Ephes. 4.8 11 12, 13. Quest. But the members of this Church are dispersed, and cannot meet together, how can
some few members of the same, reape any benefit by any speciall promise made unto the Church in generall? Answ. Yes doubtlesse they may, and the Saints doe assuredly reape great comfort and benefit thereby, yea every Congregation, and company of Saints meeting together in the name of Christ, may expect and tooke for the performance of the promises made by Christ to the whole Church, for that which is made to the whole Church, is made also to every part thereof. Quest. What are those speciall promises that concerne the Saints being gathered and met toge∣ther in the name of Christ? Answ. Unto them thus meeting together hath Christ promised his presence to be in the middest of them, and hath given unto them the keyes of the kingdome of heaven, to bind and loose, promising them to confirme and ratifie in heaven, what they agree upon in earth, bind∣ing in heaven whom they bind on earth, and loosing in heaven whom they loose on earth, promising them also perseverance (notwith∣standing the great malice of their Adversaries) the gates of hell shall never prevaile against it, Math. 16.18 19. Math. 18.20. Math. 18.18.19, 20.
Quest. Doth not this power of binding and loosing, belong to any other but onely to the Saints? Answ. No certainly, it belongs to none o∣ther but onely to them, neither are any fit for such a worke, but onely the Saints, neither is the promise of binding in heaven, and loosing in heaven them who are bound on earth, and loosed on earth, made to any other, but only to the Saints, the true members of Jesus Christ, and therefore whosoever they be that lay claim or title to this power, and are not Saints, doe claime and challenge that unto which they have no right, Math. 16.18, 19. Math. 18.19.20. Quest. But is it not given to the Pastors and Ministers of the Church? Answ. Yes, it is given chiefly unto them, if they be Saints yet not only to them, but also (with them) to the rest of the Saints their Brethren. Quest. But all the Saints are not fit to be im∣ployed in this great worke? Answ. It is true that all the Saints may not be fit for this worke, and therefore those are to be employed in the great affaires of the Church, who have the greatest measure of Grace, be∣stowed on them, according to that saying of
the Apostle, 1 Pet. 4.10. as God hath distributed to every man, so let him minister &c. yet the least Saint is not to be despised or contemned who may be helpfull to the body whereof by Christ they are made members. 1 Cor. 12.21. Quest. Is it possible for the Saints in this life to know one another? Answ. Yes doubtlesse, God doth declare and evidence them by his Spirit, even to the consciences of his children, that so they, may rejoyce in the fellowship one of another, and perform the duties required of them one to another, to the performance of which the reward is promised, which they cannot perform unlesse they know one another, Math. 25. chap. 10.40, 41, 42. Quest. But hipocrites may countterfeit true grace, and make a show of holinesse, and Satan can transforme himselfe into an Angell of light? Answ. All this is true, you say but yet the Saints having the Spirit of Christ in them, and knowing the nature of true grace, are able to judge of and to discerne true grace from the counterfeit showes of hypocrites. Quest. But hipocrisie is hid in the heart, and it is proper to God to know the heart, and the A∣postle saith, 1 Cor. 2.11. That no man knoweth
the things of a man, but the spirit of man which is in him. Answ. It is true also, but yet notwithstand∣ing the hearts of others are manifest unto them, when God shall reveale them unto his Saints, by making such a cleare evidence of his grace to appeare, so that they may discerne the same worke of grace in others, that is in them∣selves; For it is impossible that true grace should alwayes lye hid, but it will be manife∣sted, at one time or other, to the comfort and rejoycing of the rest of the Saints. Quest. But by the parable of the Draw-net, in the thirteenth of Mathew it doth appeare that there may be wicked men in the Church undisco∣vered, and not knowne to be hypocrites, untill the great day of the Lord? Answ. It is true, there may bee such, for I doe not say, that all hypocrites may be discer∣ned and knowne, but that it is possible for the Saints to know one another even in this life. Quest. If all the Saints may be discerned and knowne, then those that are not discerned to bee Saints are to be judged hipocrites? Answ. We cannot so conclude of them, for though they bee nor, as yet discerned and knowne, yet afterwards they may be, or they may be Saints, and depart this life undiscerned,
through want of the fellowship of the Saints who onely are able to discern the truth of grace in the Saints. Quest. But how may we discern and know o∣thers to be Saints? Answ. It is very hard to set down any par∣ticular notes whereby they may be knowne, because the graces that do demonstrate them to be Saints, are inward, and therefore are bet∣ter conceived, then can be expressed in word by us, neverthelesse, if we can upon good ground assure our selves that we are Saints let us see and observe wherein we go beyond an hypocrite in the injoying of any speciall and peculiar grace and then let us expect and look for the same grace in others, and wheresoever we find that blessed worke of grace and fruit of the good tree ingrafted into Christ by a lively faith we may certainly conclude he is a good tree because he bringeth forth good fruit. Quest. But the most holy and righteous do daily sinne, and do that which is evill, and hypo∣crites may also do many good things, even works which are very good in outward appearance. Answ. It is true indeed, but yet notwith∣standing the evill which the Saints do, is none of their fruit nor the good that hypocrites do is none of their fruit. It cannot properly be
called their fruit, for the fruit is that which doth discover the tree, either to be good or e∣vill Matth. 7.16.20. Rom. 7.19. Quest. What is then the fruit of the good tree that doth discover it self, and prove him to be a good tree. Answ. The fruit of the good tree ingrafted into Christ is manifold, but principally it is love, which hath its first beginning from the apprehension of Gods love to them, and is first returned to God again, and to the Lord Jesus Christ next to their brethren the begotten of God, & to all men even to their very enemies, doing good even to them that hate them. Mat. 5.44. 1 Joh. 4.19. Chap. 5.1. Quest. What is the fruit of the evil tree? Answ. It is also manifold, but principally it consists in the contrary to this fruit of the good tree, as contempt of God and despising and hating of his truth and children. Quest But hipocrites may dissemble a love unto God, and to his truth and children? Answ. It is true, but yet they cannot so dis∣semble to make the children of God believe and account them for Saints yet they will hope the best of them, untill their dissimulation be made manifest and they discovered to be evill trees.
Quest. But is it possible to know them to be Saints of a sudden assoon as they come to converse with them? Answ. No certainly, especially in these times wherein we live, for no doubt corrup∣tion doth beare great sway in many that no doubt are Saints, and the power of Grace doth not manifest it self in many, by reason of many discouragements that they meet with, and for want of examples to go before them to incourage them; and therefore it is very hard to discern them, & hence it comes to passe that it is held an impossible thing to know them in this life. Quest. How are the company of Saints called in the Scriptures? Answ. They are called by many honoura∣ble names and titles, as the Church of Christ, his body his spouse, his habitation, his Tem∣ple, Sion, Jerusalem the pillar and ground of truth, and many such like. Ephes. 5.30. 1 Cor. 12.27. Cant. 4.8.9.10. 2 Cor. 6.16. Gal. 4.26. Quest. When is this Church and company of Saints to be found? Answ. This Church is dispersed over the whole world, even amongst the very heathen. Quest. How can it be that there should be a∣ny Saints in such places, seeing they are ignorant
of Christ, and there is no name under Heaven whereby we may be saved but onely by the name of Iesus Christ? Acts 4.12. Answ. It is true, neither are they saved by any other name under heaven, but by Christ alone. Quest. How can they be saved by him, who never came to know him, either to come, or come in the flesh? Answ. It may well be notwithstanding, for there is left in man, even since his fall, a certaine knowledge of God, and that he is to be feared and served, and there is also a law written in their hearts condemning of them for disobeying the law of God, whereby they come to see themselves miserable, and to be lyable to the wrath of this just God, though they know not how they came to be so at the first, and also they see the goodnesse of God extended towards them manifested in his crea∣tures God also working in them by his spirit, perswading them, that if they will seek mercy at his hands, he will be mercifull to their souls as well as to their bodies and this mercy of God is extended unto them for Christ his sake, though they know not by whose meanes and for whose sake they receive it. Rom. 2.14, 15.26. Acts 14.17. Rom. 1.19, 20.
Qu. Is there not a communion and fellowship a∣mongst the Saints although they be thus dispersed Answ. Yes verily they have a spirituall communion and fellowship, all partaking of the same grace, all being begotten by one fa∣ther, all born of water and spirit all partakers of one precious faith, all ruled and governed by one and the same holy spirit, who worketh in them a love to one another, though they ne∣ver beheld the faces one of another, and do joy and rejoyce in the happinesse and prosperi∣ty one of another, and for that end are dayly sutors to God in prayer one for another. Ephes. 2.14. Chap. 4.4.5.6. Quest. What is the duty of the Saints being made known one to another? Answ. Their duty is to assemble themselves together in the name of Christ, to worship God, to pray unto him, and to praise him to exhort, comfort, and build up one another, and to rejoyce in the fellowship one of another, and to pray with and for one another and to minister comfort one unto each other both in spirituall and temporall things as they are able and the necessity of their brethren require. Heb. 10.25. Mat. 18. Iude 19.20. Heb. 13.16. Quest. What speciall promise is made unto them being thus assembled in the name of Christ?
Answ. A most excellent and comfortable promise of Christ his gracious presence to be in the middest of them to direct them, that whatsoever they agree on, on earth as touching any thing that they shall ask him, shall be done for them of his Father which is in heaven, Mat. 18.19. Quest. Is not this promise belonging to gene∣rall assemblies that meet in publick congregati∣ons and may not they expect this promise to be performed unto them. Answ. If that the Saints, in the publick con∣gregations do meet together after this manner that we have declared then they may expect the fulfilling of this promise of Christ, but none but onely the Saints, have this promise made unto them. Quest. But we hope that there are Saints in every publick assembly, doth not this promise of Christ therefore belong unto them. Answ. It cannot be denyed, but must be ac∣knowledged, that Christ will be with his peo∣ple in the publick assemblies where his true worship is performed, and his word truly preached yea at all times, but this promise of Christ, his presence is a peculiar promise made to the Saints when they assemble together and agree upon any thing, to ask that may be for
the glory of God, and the good of their bre∣thren, Math. 18. Quest. Why will Christ be with this Church, and with no other? Answ. Because there is a neare union and conjunction between Christ and his members, even as between the head and the members of our bodies; He having redeemed them with his bloud, and hath taken upon him to provide for, and to furnish this Church with all neces∣sary graces, being unto them a Priest, a Pro∣phet, and a King, Heb. 4.14. Acts 3.22. Esay 9.6. Quest. How is Christ a Priest unto them? Answ. By offering up himselfe once for them unto God, a living sacrifice for to make reconciliation between God and them, and also by presenting of himselfe before God for them, and by offering up and presenting their pray∣ers, and causing them to have acceptation at the hands of God, through his presentation, Heb. 2.17. Rom. 8.34. Heb. 9.14. Revel. 8.3, 4. Quest. How is he a Prophet unto them? Answ. By making knowne unto them his Fathers will, revealing unto them the way of life and peace, making knowne unto them heavenly misteries, teaching and instructing them by his Word and Spirit, and also by send∣ing
his Ministers, and enabling them for that great worke, by all which they are built up and grow in grace and knowledge, and all wis∣dome, and heavenly understanding in the will and wayes of God. Quest. What are the continuall ministers that Christ hath left in his Church to teach and in∣struct it untill his second comming? Answ. He did at first give unto them Apo∣stles, Prophets and Evangelists whom hee vouchsafed to make the Pen-men of the Scrip∣tures, who were to be guides unto all the rest, that were to succeed them, he also hath ordai∣ned other Ministers in his Church, as Pastors and Teachers to bee Expositors of the Scrip∣tures and for the applying them to the consci∣ences of the people; For the gathering toge∣ther of his Church, and the edifying of the bo∣dy of Christ which are knowne and distingui∣shed, from the rest of the Church, not so much by any outward calling by man, but by the ex∣cellency of gifts and graces bestowed on them, and their faithfull employing their gifts, and discharge of that office that they are called un∣to by Christ, Ephes. 4.11. Ephes. 4.12. Quest. How doth Christ manifest himselfe to be a King unto his Church? Answ. By giving unto them holy and just
lawes, precepts and ordinances, to be observed of them, and also by ruling and governing them by the Scepter of his Word and Spirit, subjecting their hearts, wills, and affections unto him, and to his truth, to love, desire, and embrace the same, and to yeeld all subjection unto him. Qu. Wherein are the Saints chiefly to be exer∣cised whilest they remaine here, for their mutuall comfort, and increase of grace in them? Answ. In the holy use of the word of God, Prayer, and the Sacraments. Quest. Wherein is that word of God contai∣ned? Answ. In those bookes of Scripture, which we commonly call the old and new Testament, in which are contained many holy directions, and gracious promises, and consolations, able to sustaine them in the greatest miseries that can befall them. Quest. To whom is the word of God com∣mitted? Answ. To all the whole Church of God for their instruction and comfort. Quest. Who may dispence the word of God unto others? Answ. All they whom God hath given wisedome and understanding therein, and hath
showed the misteries thereof, they are to mini∣ster unto the rest of the body according to their measure of grace received. Quest. What is prayer? Answ. It is a calling upon God with the heart in the name of Christ Iesus, for all law∣full things that we stand in need of. Psal. 142.2. Iohn 16.23.24. Quest. What things are necessarily required in our prayer unto God? Answ. There are these three things requi∣red in prayer, First confession which is the acknowledge∣ment of our sinne and miserie, and unworthi∣nesse to receive Psal. 32.5. Secondly Petition, which is the asking of things needfull. Mat. 7.7. Thirdly thanksgiving which is the acknow∣ledging of his power goodnesse and mercy, and the returning him praise and thanks for his former mercies bestowed on us. Quest. Have we any example or patterne ac∣cording to which we are to frame all our prayers. Ans. Yea a most absolute and perfect form given unto us by Christ Jesus himself in the 6. of Matthew commonly called the Lords prayer. Quest. Are we not bound therefore unto that prayer to use it and none but it.
Ans. For the matter contained in it we are, but not the form of words, and although we may use the same words yet also we may by the example of the Apostles, use another form of words, and yet offend not against that most absolute rule, so long as we desire nothing, but what is therein contained. Quest. May we joyne in prayers with those that reade their prayers in a book? Answ. Yes doubtlesse if their prayers be good for the matter, and performed with re∣verence and affection, even as well as we may with those that use an ordinary form although they do not read it in a book or with those that conceive prayer, for therein are we stinted as well as in joyning with them that pray out of a book, and we may inlarge our desires in joyning with one and with the other. Quest. When are we to use prayer? Ans. At all times, upon all occasions, we are to lift up our hearts to God by holy requests, e∣ven in every thing we take in hand, and also in the publick meetings of the Saints, but there are other special times, wherein every Christian hath liberty to make choice of the fittest time in his own wisdome and discretion, as he hath need. Quest. What is a Sacrament?
Ans. A Sacrament is an outward visible signe appointed by God to teach unto his peo∣ple spirituall and heavenly misteries. Quest. Do the Sacraments teach any other thing then that which the word of God doth? Ans. Not any other thing is taught thereby but the very same thing is visibly preached and presented to our eyes by visible signes, which we heare with our eares preached out of the word of God. Quest. How many Sacraments are there now apointed by God continually to teach and instruct his Church? Answ. Onely two, Baptisme and the Sup∣per of the Lord. Mat. 28.19. Chap. 26..27. &c. Quest. What is Baptisme? Answ. It is a teaching signe, whereby is vi∣sibly preached unto us, by the water and the outward washing, Regeneration, the new birth of water and the Spirit that is Repen∣tance and faith required of all that will enter into the Kingdome of Heaven. Io. 3. Quest. Is Baptisme necessary to salvation? Answ. The things signified by the outward signes of water and washing which indeed is Baptisme is of necessity to salvation, as our Lord testifieth Io. 3.5.
Quest. Are not the outward signes of necessity to salvation? Answ. No they are not of that necessity, for many no doubt may be partakers of that new birth signified by the outward washing, which never heard of the outward Baptisme. Quest. But what if any shall contemne and despise the outward Baptisme? Answ. It is not possible for any that know it to be an ordinance of God, and despise it, and will not be baptised, it is impossible for such to be saved. Quest. Are all the elect regenerate when they are outwardly baptised? An. No certainly for many of them live many yeares before that work be wrought in them, but God doth work in them that great work of Regeneration at what time it pleaseth him. Quest. But doth the Lord require of us to submit to his own ordinance and will he not work that which is signified thereby? Answ. The Lord will have us obedient to his ordinance, and it is his goodnesse to afford unto us such an excellent help, to teach and in∣struct us, & to confirm unto us the truth of his promise by such an outward visible signe or seal, but he hath not any where promised that he will work that work of grace in them at that
instant in their outward Baptisme or by it. Quest. But there are promises made unto Bap∣tisme of eternall life, and such promises belong to none but the regenerate therefore they are al∣so regenerate in Baptisme. Answ. It is true that in Scripture there are made promises of eternall life unto Baptis∣me; but there are two Baptismes, spoken of in Scripture the one, men may be partakers of & perish, which is the outward washing and the other which is the inward washing, whosoever are partakers of shall assuredly have eternall life, which is indeed the Baptisme of the spirit, which whosoever are partakers of have put on Christ and are buried with Christ, and are baptised into his death, and so shall also live with Christ in eternall glory. Quest. May Infants be baptised, seeing they cannot understand what is done or meant by Bap∣tisme? Answ. Yes doubtlesse they may as well as children might bee circumcised, both Sacrament signifying one and the same thing, and therefore they being as capable of the thing signified now, as they were then, may be baptised for the Lord would thereby shew unto us that we are all born polluted and defiled, our nature being corrupted, and that children
have need of that inward washing of the spirit signified by outward Baptisme, and al so to teach us that Infants may be saved as well as o∣thers seeing he would admit them to be parta∣kers of that his ordinance. Quest. Whhat is the Sacrament of the Lords Supper? Answ. It is also an outward signe whereby is represented unto us by the breaking of the Bread, and the pouring out of the Wine the Lords death the breaking of his body and the pouring out of his blood and by the receiving of those signes of Bread and Wine is set forth unto us the participation and communion of the faithfull in his death and in whatsoever he hath done for them and it is their thankfull re∣membrance thereof till he come, 1 Cor. 11. Quest. Who are to partake of this Sacrament? Answ. It was instituted onely for the Saints, who are ingrafted into Jesus Christ by a true and lively faith: and for their comfort a one. Quest. May not others bee admitted to this Sacrament? Answ. They ought not to be admitted if they be knowne to bee wicked, and contemners of good things, and indeed they ought not to pre∣sume to eat thereof, considering the danger and damage that comes by unworthy eating
and drinking thereof, 1 Cor. 11.28.29. Quest. What is the danger in unworthy eating, and drinking thereof? Answ. They provoke the Lord to lay judge∣ments upon them, for abusing his ordinance, which was ordained onely for the helpe and comfort of the faithfull, and so eat and drinke damnation to themselves, 1 Cor. 11. Quest. What great things hath the Scriptures foretold us, that are yet unfulfilled the perfor∣mance whereof wee are to expect in these latter dayes? Answ. The destruction of Antichrist, that man of Sinne; The restoration of the truth from those errors abroad in the world the comming downe of the Turkes upon the Christians, and the comming of the Lord unto Judgement, 2 Thes. 2.8. Revel. 21.11. chap. 1.17.16. chap. 18. Rev. 20.8, 9. Ezek. 38.2. and chapt. 39.1. Quest. Is the time of the destruction of Anti∣christ layd downe in the Scriptures? Answ. Yes certainly. Quest. But is it possible to find out the time of his destruction? Answ. Yes assuredly, for the Lord hath cau∣sed it to bee written for that end, that the Church of God might know it, and might reape the greater comfort thereby, in not one∣ly
knowing, that he shall be destroyed, but also in knowing the yeare of his destruction, they may have their mindes setled and patiently wait, and not doubt the fulfilling of that pro∣mise concerning his destruction. Quest. But is not times and seasons, onely knowne unto the Lord? Answ. Times and seasons are known also to the Church, when it pleaseth God to reveale them for the comfort of his people as we may see that the time of deliverance of Israel out of the captivity in Babilon was revealed and made known unto Daniel, which he found out by books that were written. Quest. In what place of Scripture is the time of Antichrists destruction layd downe? Answ. In the booke of the Revelation and the eleventh chapter, where hee is limited to raigne forty two moneths, which is moneths of yeares, which amounteth to 1260 yeares; The end of which time shall bee in the yeare 1666. as appeareth in the last verse of the thir∣teenth chapter, where the very period and fi∣nall determination of Antichrist is layd down, in which yeare the destruction denounced a∣gainst him shall fall on him. Quest. Shall there not be a restoration of the truth till the destruction of Antichrist?
Answ. The truth hath begun to appeare al∣ready, and still shall more and more; but the full restauration thereof shall not bee till all the darknesse of Antichrist bee removed, and his destruction accomplished Revel. 11.11. Quest. Is not the truth fully knowne published, preached, and professed now at this time in those Kingdomes, where Antichrists power is abo∣lished? Answ. No certainly much darknesse still re∣maines even amongst them and great confusi∣on, which shall at that time be more fully disco∣vered, and the truth made knowne, and errors and Heresies abolished by such whom the Lord shall raise up, in and about that time, and for that end. Quest. Are we not to expect the truth to bee more fully discovered, then now it is, before the destruction of Antichrist. Answ. Yes assuredly for it is the light of the truth maintained by the Saints, which shall in a speciall manner abolish Antichrists dark∣nesse, and also shall be the greatest meanes of his destruction: for the people of God shall by the light of the truth more, fully discover his abominations, and cause the Princes of the earth to see how grossely they have been delu∣ded and abused by him, and so they shall with
one consent, set themselves against this great enemy of Christ to roote him out and to exe∣cute the judgement that the Lord hath denoun∣ced against him, Revel. 19.11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Rev. 17.16. Quest. Shall the Church of God enjoy any great prosperity after the destruction of Anti∣christ? Answ. Yes certainly, for then they shall be freed from their great and violent oppressions, and have free liberty to professe and practise the whole will of God, and enjoy the commu∣nion and fellowship one of another, their in∣ward graces shall be great, and excellent their love shall abound one towards another, conti∣nually rejoycing in the hope of that crowne of glory, which is layd up for them in heaven, 4 Esdras 11.46. and chap. 12.34. 2 Tim. 4.8. Re∣vel. 19.1.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Quest. Shall the whole Nation of the Jewes be converted, and receive the Gospell of Christ, before the comming of the Lord to judgement? Answ. We hope many of them shall be called before that day; But that the whole Nation shall be called and receive the Gospell, we have no ground in Scripture so to thinke. Quest. But the Apostle in the eleventh chap∣ter to the Romans seemes to intend to prove that
they shall all be called before the day of the Lord? Answ. Whosoever do so collect and gather from that chapter doe misunderstand and mis∣interpret the Apostle, for his purpose is not to prove that all the Nation of the Jewes shall be called to Christ, in the latter end of the world; but to shew unto the Gentiles (lest they should wax proud against the Jewes) that God had a people amongst the Jewes, and that hee had not cast them all away, but that hee had a remnant according to the election of Grace, even amongst Abrahams naturall seed, whom he would call, when it pleased him; many were called in Pauls time, and no doubt but many since that time, and we hope that yet there are many of them that belong to the Lord, which shall be called when the darknesse of Antichrist is expelled, and the light of the truth appeareth and shineth by the Church, but wee are not to expect any such generall calling of them. Quest. Doth not the Apostle say in the 26th verse of that thapter, that all Israel shall be sa∣ved; Is not here therefore a sure ground to build upon, for their conversion to Christ? Ans. The Apostle there meanes by all Israell, all the elect of God, both Jews and Gentiles, and not onely the Nation of the Jewes, as may be proved by these Reasons;
First, because the Apostle saith in the twenty fift verse that in part blindnesse, or hardnesse is happened unto Israell untill the fulnesse of the Gentils be come in which is even till the com∣ming of the Lord to Judgement, as appeareth, Luke 21.24. Therefore by all Israell is not meant the Jewes onely but all the elect of the Jewes, and of the Gentiles. Secondly, because the Promise of the deli∣verer in the Testimony of Esay alleadged, by the Apostle, was made to the Elect Gentiles, as well as to the Elect Jewes, and the elect Gen∣tiles, reape the same benefit by the Deliverer; And this promise also pertaines to none, but to the Elect of the Jewes and Gentiles, not to all the carnall Jewes, but onely to the elect, the Spirituall seed of Abraham, consisting both of Jewes and Gentiles; For the test doe not reap this benefit, namely, to have their ungodlinesse turned away, Esay 59.20. Rom. 9.6.7.8. Rom. 2.28.29, Gal. 3.29. Thirdly, (by all Israell) cannot bee meant, that in the latter dayes, all the Nation of the Jewes shall bee converted; Because this great calling, which is pretended to be, is not once mentioned in the booke of the Revelation, and therefore not shewed unto Iohn, and yet he was taken up, and was promised to have shewne
unto him the things which should be hereaf∣ter, Revelation 4.1. But this great conversion of the Jewes; he saw not, and yet hee saw all things to the setting up of the new Jerusalem, in everlasting glory and beauty, therefore cer∣tainly we are not to expect any such matter, neither in this place doth the holy Ghost in∣tend any such thing. Quest. But it may seeme that this promise is made onely to the Iewes, because is made to Ja∣cob, and they only are the posterity and seed of Jacob? Answ. It is not made only to the naturall Jewes, for we are to know, that when any such speciall promise is made in Scripture, of turn∣ing away ungodlinesse, and taking away of sins from Israel or Iacob, that promise is made and intended, as well to the Elect Gentiles, as to the Elect Jewes, even to all Abrahams spiritu∣all seed which are called by those names of Is∣rael and Iacob who although they be Gentiles in the flesh, yet indeed are Jewes in Spirit and truth, Rom. 2.29. And Abrahams, seed and Heires according to the promise; Gal. 3.29. Quest. What then may be the mistery that the Apostle speakes of in the 25 verse of that eleventh chapter to the Romans? Answ. The mistery is Gods giving some up
to hardnesse and blindnesse, and his giving Grace unto others, at the consideration where∣of, the Apostle breakes forth into admiration in the 33 verse, saying, O the depth of the riches, both of the wisdome, and knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his judgements, and his wayes past finding out, Rom. 11.33.34.35.36. Quest. But all the Prophets have prophesied of the returne of Israel, and of his restouration, to such an excellent estate of glory and happinesse and freedome from evill, as they never yet enjoyed, are we not now therefore to expect it in these latter dayes? Answ. Whatsoever the Prophets have pro∣phesied to be fulfilled, and is not yet performed we are to expect; But wee are to know that those speciall promises, are made only to the Elect, and to all the Elect, when they shall all be gathered together, and delivered from all their Captivities and sorrowes, which Restau∣ration of Israel is not to be expected of us to be performed untill the comming of the Lord unto Judgement as appeareth, Acts 3.21. Quest. But the Prophets doe speake of bring∣ing them into their owne Land againe, even the promised land: therefore it must needs be in this life? Answ. That doth not follow, for they shall be
brought into their owne Land, and enjoy it for ever and ever, even that Land which was pro∣mised to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all their spirituall seed, and they shall possesse it for ever, not as it is now earthly and the curse remaining upon it, but after it shall be purged, and the curse taken away and made a heavenly habitation, fit for Abraham himselfe (to whom it was first promised, and never yet performed unto him, but shall bee then made good unto him) and for all his spirituall seed to dwell in for evermore. Quest. But where this restoration is promised, there is mention made of Building of houses and planting of Vineyards, eating and drinking, &c. which cannot be after this life? Esay 65. Answ. We know not what is intended by such like things, nor what shall be at that day, nor what these things may adde to our happi∣nesse; And therefore being ignorant of these things, let not us wrest the Scripture out of the way, to frame a meaning which the Lord neuer intended, because we imagine that these things cannot be after this life; And wee are also to consider that in many places where this Resto∣ration of Israel is promised there are also such things spoken of, as cannot be expected in this life, as namely, that there shall be no sorrow,
no mourning, nor death, nor that any uncleane thing shall enter amongst them. Quest. You said before that the Church of God after the destruction of the great Antichrist, should enjoy much prosperity and peace, shall they then have no enemies? Answ. Yes assuredly, the true Church of God shall never want enemies to try them, and to exercise their patience, but they shall be freed for a time, from those great and violent persecutions, which they did suffer, during the long and tedious Raigne of the great Anti∣christ of Roma, who sought by all meanes, to root out all the seed and generation of the Church. Quest. Shall this their peace and prosperity long continue? Answ. No verily, for the devill shall stirre up other enemies, Gog and Magog, the Kings of the East, even the Turke and his adherents, and they shall envy the prosperity of the Church and shall come down upon the Chri∣stian Nations, and compasse about the Tents of the Saints, and the beloved City and to seeke to root out her name from off the earth Ezek. 38.10.11.12. Revel. 20.8.9. Quest. What will bee the effect of this his malice?
Amsw. He shall cause through his cruelty many to fall away from the profession of the truth of Christ: to Mahometisme or heathe∣nisme so that the Sunne shall be darkened even Christ himself and his truth shall be obscured and his glory darkned. And the Moon, that is the States and princes of the world shall not give their light of help and comfort and protection of the church by their powers they being beaten down by the power of these great adversaries, And the stars &c. (that is the Ministers and preachers of Christ) shall sall from heaven that is, from the Church, even to Mahometisme or heathenisme, all which hath been foretold us by the Lordhimself in Matthew 24. verse 29, Quest. What shall follow thereupon? Answ. God himselfe will tight for his peo∣ple wonderfully, and will consume and destroy all those enemies by fire from heaven, and de∣liver his Church from all her enemies Revel. 20.19. Quest. What are we further to expect to fol∣low therepon? Answ. The speedy coming of the Lord to judgement. Quest. After what manner will be come? Answ. He shall come in the cloud's with
majesty power and great glory, even with ten thousands of Angel; and Saints to the rejoy∣cing and comfort of the god and the con∣founding of the wicked. Iude ver. 14. Quest. What is the end of his coming? Answ. For the manifestation of his own glory in his Saints, and to deliver his Church and people from all their miseries and captivi∣ties and to regain his own Kingdome and to crown his Saints with eternall glory, and to execute his wrath and vengeance upon all those that have not known him, nor obeyed his Gospel Jude 15. ver. and this he will per∣form upon the generall resurrection of all, and er the n iting of their soules and bodies to∣gether again. Quest. How will he effect this? Answ. He will cause his Angels to gather his elect together before him on his right hand to whom he will pronounce that comfortable sentence, saving come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdome prepared for you from the beginning of the world, &c. Psal. 50. Matt. 2.31. Matth. 15. Quest. What shall become of the wicked and ungodly? Ans. They standing on his left hand, he will pronounce unto them a, heavy sentence, even
the sentence of condemnation, saying unto them Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels. Matth. 25.41. Quest. Shall the Reprobate blaspheme God after this life for the pains they shall endure? Answ. No assuredly they shall not, and far be it from us to have such a conceit in our minds for althouh they have done it here in this life too abundantly, yet then there shall be no man that shall open his mouth against the Lord, but shall acknowledge the judgement passed against him to be just and righteous, and so all shall be forced by paine to glorifie the Lord God of heaven and earth for evermore, for all povers shall be brought into subjection to the Lord Christ, and none to resist him any more, 27. Psal. 8.46. Psal. 66.4. and 72.11. and 86.9. Dan. 7.27. 2 Esd. 9.12.13.14. Heb. 2.8. Quest When Christ hash passed the sentence of judgement both to the Saints, and to the un∣godly, will he return again into heaven? Answ. We never read in all the Scriptures of his return, for he comes thither to possesse his own Kiugdom, and to fit upon the throne of David for evermore, raigning over his people in all majesty and glory in his own throne. Re. 3.21.
Quest. Shall then the happinesse and glory of the Saints be upon this earth? Answ. Yes certainly, but not as it is now corrupt but When all things that came in by reason of the curse for mans sinne, shall be re∣moved and taken away quite, and all things be made new, for nothing that came in with the curse can abide there where Christ hath his Kingdome and throne of glory. Quest. But the Apostle Peter saith 2 Pet. 3.10. that the Earth and the works there shall be burnt up, and all things here below shall be dissol∣ved? Answ. True it is that whatsoever came in with the Curse shall bee dissolved and burnt up, and all taken away, and nothing thereof shall remain, but onely what was cre∣ated before the curse, and all things shall be made new, as in the first crearion of them and far more excellent and durable as the same A∣postle saith we look for net heavers and a new earth, according to his promise wherein dwel∣leth righteousnes. Quest. Where is this promise made that the Apostle speaks of? Answ. In the 65. Chapter of Isaiah where the promise is made and set downe in plaine words.
Quest. But shall not the happinesse of the Saints be for ever in heaven for the Apostle Pe∣ter saith, that the inheritance of the Saints is re∣served in heaven and Paul saith, we have an house not made with hands, but eternall in the heavens. 1 Pet. 14. 2 Cor. 5.1. Answ. True it is, that the inheritance of the Saints is reserved in heaven, and it is eter∣nall, but this that is reserved in heaven, shall come down from heaven Christ himselfe will bring with him that new Ierusalem and cloath his saints with that house which is from heaven which was so desired by the Apostle Paul 2 Cor. 5.2. the beauty and glory of that estate is set forth in the 21 chapter of the Revelation which shall be so great that the heart of man can de∣sire no more, for there shall be a fulnesse of all things. Quest. But what places of Scripture do prove that the Saints shall have their glory and happi∣nesse upon this earth? Answ. There are many places of Scripture to this purpose and I will instance some of them; and first I will begin with the promise of God made unto Abraham concerning the land of Canaan, it was promised to him and to his seed for ever. Gen. 13.15. Chap. 15.17. But Abra∣ham never yet enjoyed the fulfilling of that
promise, therefore at that great day of the Lord, it shall be made good unto him and his seed for ever, for it was given unto him for an everlasting possession. Gen. 7.18. Quest. But Abraham seed after four hundred yeares did possesse that land, was not then the pro∣mise fulfilled to Abraham? Answ. No assuredly there was a further ex∣tent in that promise then was performed un∣to his naturall seed, and that was but a type of the great possession that should be given to him and his spirituall seed for ever. Gen. 17.8. Quest. What is the next Scripture that proves the Saints eternall happines to be on this earth. An. The next is Matth. 5.5. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth, and Psal. 37.11. But the meek shall inherit the earth, and shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace. Which promises must needs be understood of the life to come and not of this life for they are promises for the time to come, and not of the time present, for we know by experience that the meek do not now in this life inherit the earth; but this promise shall be performed un∣to them at that great day of the restauration of all things. Quest. What is the next Scripture to prove this?
Answ. The next is Revelation the 5. and the 10. ver. the sweet song of thanksgiving of the 24 Elders, the latter part whereof is their ac∣knowledgement in these words and hast made unto us our God Kings and priests and we shall raign on the earth; which is spoken of the time to come and not of the time present, for now is not their time of reigning but of suffering. Quest. What other Scripture is there to prove this point? Answ. Out of the 11 chap. of the Revelation ver. the 15. where after the sounding of the se∣venth trumpet there were great voyces heard in heaven, saying. The Kingdomes of this world are become the Kingdomes of our Lord and of his Christ, and he shall reigne for ever and ever, as also Dan. 7.14.27. So that then Christ shall reigne as King upon this earth, and all powers shall serve and obey him for evermore. Quest. But if the Saints glory and happines shall be upon this earth it will be conceived that it cannot be so great, glorious and excellent as is ex∣pected to be, and as the Scripture sets it forth to be, and for the most part of our preachers they do tell us that it shall be in the highest heavens? Answ. For the happinesse and felicity of the Saints which they enjoy, it shall be so great so glorious, so excellent, although upon this earth
as possible may be no heart can desire more, nor no tongue can expresse it, for that place must be very full of joy, comfort, blessednesse, and happinesse, where Christ dwells, and is their King, what can be wanting unto them? there is fulnesse of joy at his right hand, and pleasures for evermore. O what sweetnesse of comfort shall they find in his presence. yea un∣speakable; the Scriptures are plentifull in ex∣pressing, these things for the comfort of the faithfull, even whilest they live here in this na∣turall life, who do live by faith expecting those good things to come, and whatsoever our Preachers do tell us of the happines of the saints to be for ever in the highest heavens; if they did well consider the Scriptures they would speake according therereunto. Quest. But what is the reason they conceive so, that the glory and happinesse of the Saints shall be in the highest heavens? Answ. I know no Scripture that tends there unto, besides those I have already answe∣red or some such it may be like them, but their error and misunderstanding of the Scripture lies in this, that they take and expound those places of Scripture that intend and set forth the happinesse of the Saints for ever, to be in∣tended and meant of a great conversion of the
naturall Jewes to be brought into the land of Canaan againe before the coming of Christ to Judgement which opinion turnes them from the truth, and hereby the Saints are deprived of many sweet promises that are made unto them for their comfort here in this life in the expectation of that glory and happinesse there∣in set forth, and promised unto them then which a greater wrong cannot be done to the people of God. Quest. You said the Scriptures are plentifull in expressing the happines of the Saints for ever upon this earth, I pray you give me those places of Scriptures, and set down the severall texts, that we may examine them and rejoyce in the expecta∣tion of them and so I shall conclude for this time and cease from demanding any more questions of you. Answ. I shall willingly do it according to my abi ity, but yet it is not possible for me to find out all those sweet promises contained in the Scriptures yet as many as I can call to mind for the present I will set down, that hereafter we may read them and take comfort in them, and live by faith in the hope and expectation of them, and the Lord inlighten our under∣standings in the knowledge of his truth, and give us hearts to obey the truth made knowne
unto us, that God may be glorified by us, through Jesus Christ, by the assistance of the Holy Ghost to whom be all praise, glory, and honour, for ever Amen. The places of Scripture are these following, But for your better understanding of them, I pray you consider the words of the Holy Ghost by Saint Peter, in the 3 of the Acts verse 21. in these words, speaking there of Jesus Christ whom the heaven must receive untill the times of restitution of alll things which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy pro∣phets since the world began, so that you may observe hence that this restitution or restaura∣tion must not be til the second coming of Christ and then it shall be and it is that which all the Prophets have spoken of, and if these places of Scripture here following do not intend this great restitution, then let them who are con∣trary minded show us where it is spoken of in the Scriptures, if they will needs have us to understand these Scriptures to intend the great conversion of the naturall Jewes, now in the latter end of the world, and before the coming of Christ to Judgement; a doctrine never inten∣ded or meant by the Holy Ghost for this re∣stitution is not to be till the second coming of Christ, Act, 3, 19.20, 21. And so I may now leave
you to the reading of the Scriptures here fol∣lowing, the Lord give us wisdome to under∣stand them aright, and to find and feele the comfort of them, for they belong to all Abra∣hams spirituall seed, as well Gentiles as Jewes, and not to the naturall Jew, except he be also a Jew inward. Rom. 2.28.29. Gen. 13 Chapter 14, 15, 16. verses and Chap∣ter 15.8. and Chap. 17.8. and Chap. 26.3.4. and Chap. 28.4.13.14. 2 Chron. 16.30.31, 32, 33. and Chapter 17.9.11, 12, 13, 14.27. Psalm 8. compared with Heb. 2. Psalm 14.7. and Psalm 15.1. and Psal. 37.9.10, 11.29. Psal. 45.6.16. Psalm 48. Psalm 87.3. and Psal. 89.3.4.15, 16.17. &c. Psal. 96.9, 10, 11, 12.13. Psal. 98. Psal. 132.11, 12. &c. Esay 11. compared with Romanes the 8.19.20. Esay 25.6, 7, 8, 9. Esay 27.13. and Esay 55.12.13. and Chapter 60.14.15. &c. Esay 61.4 5, 6, 7. and Esay 62.1.2, 3, 4.5, 7, 8. and chap. 65.9.10.14, 15. &c. Esa. 66.5.7, 8. and so to the end of the Chapter. Ieremy 3.16, 17, 18. and Chapter 23.5 6.7, 8. and Ieremy 30.9, 10. and Chap. 31.35.36. and Chap. 33.15, 16, 17, to the end of the chapter, Ie∣remy 46.27, 28. Ezekiel 28.24.25.26. Ezek. 34.11, 12.13, 14, 15, 16.23, 24. to the 'end of the Chapter.
Chapter. Ezek. 36. read the whole chapter, and also the 37 chapter. Ezek 9.25. to the end of the chapter. Daniel 2.44 45. and chapter 7.14.27. and chapter 12.1, 2, 3.13. Hosea 2.14. to the end of the chapter. Joel 3.1, 3.12.16, 17, 18.20.21. Amos 9.11. to the end of the chapter. Haggai 2.6 7 8 9. Zechariah 6.12, 13. and chapter 12.8. and chapter 14.4. read to the end of the chapter. Matthew 5.5. Acts 2.19, 20, 21. Rom. 8, 9.20. and 1 Cor. 2.9. and 2 Thes. 1.7.8. and 2 Pet. 3.13. Hebrewes. 4.9. reade the whole Chapter Re∣velation 3.12.21. and Chapter 5.10. and chapter 7.15 16 17. and chap. 11.15, 16, 17, 18. and chapter 21. but read the whole chapter, and also the 22. chapter. The Prophet Esay is wonderfull excellent in expressing the happinesse of the Saints for ever and therefore to these former places set down, I also adde these places following, Esay 32.15 16 17 18 19. and chapter 33.15, 16, 17.20 21.22.24. and chapter 35. read the whole chapter, and Esay the 45.17, 18, 19. Esay 49.9, 10.11, 12, 13.
CChristian Reader it may be thought that I have not beene so large in this last matter concerning the happinesse of the Saints in glory for ever with Christ their Lord and King upon this earth as the matter required, and therefore for thy more full satisfaction in the same J referre thee to a book called the land of promise and the cove∣nant thereof printed 1641 for John Wright the younger in the old Baily, wherein this thing is fully manifested it being the subject matter of the whole book and proved by many places of Scripture, for indeed the Scriptures are very plentifull in this thing, it being that which God chiefly intended from all eternity it being the rest of God, wherein he alwayes took delight and pleasure, the setting up of the Kingdome of his Sonne Christ, and his dwelling with the Sons of men his Saints for e∣vermore, even the full perfection of all his works which he entended from everlasting. Revel. 11.15. And the seventh Angel sounded, and there were great voices in heaven, saying, the kingdoms of this world are become the king∣domes of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reigne for ever and ever. Revel. 21.3. Behold the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God.
Revellation 22.3, 4, 5. verses, And there shall be no more curse, but the throne of God and of the Lambe shall be in it, and his servants shall serve him, and they shall see his face, and his name shall be in their forheads. And there shall be no night there, and they need no candle, neither light of the Sunne, for the Lord God giveth them light, and they shall reign for ever and ever. Christian reader, for thy further information in this point, J referre thee also to two other bookes th one called the holy rest of God printed for John Wright the younger, in the old Bailie 1641. the other called the two olive trees, or the Lords two annointed ones, &c. being an exposition of the 11 Chapter of the Revellation printed by Matthew Simmons 1645. in these two books this point is largely set forth against the millenaries of these times, thus desiring thy furtherance in the truth, I commend thee to the grace of God. J A. FINIS.
