B183 E603_11 99863893 116109
Extraordinary NEWES FROM The Court of Spain: DECLARING The late Solemnities that were per∣form'd in the highest way of magnificence, at the Reception of the Young Queen, the Emperors Daughter; AS ALSO, Of Hamet Aga Mustafera, the Great Turks Ambassador; together with the sub∣stance of his Ambassie, and the Originalls of his Credentiall Letters: Some Passages also of the English Ambassa∣dors in that Court. Sent in a large Letter to a Person of quality in this King∣dom from MADRID. LONDON, Printed for Richard Lowndes, at the signe of the Unicorn on Lud-gate Hill. 1650.
Laus Deo. Madrid, Iune 1. 1650. Noble Sir, YOurs of the twentieth pass'd came safely to hand, and with more speed then ordinary: I send you a thousand thanks for the variety of newes you please to impart, unto me therein, whereby I have oblig'd the best of our Nation in this Countrey, for we may be said to have liv'd here in clouds of ignorance, touching your doings in England, till your Letter gave us some light. To correspond with you in the like kind, I returne you what this Court affords most remarkable, and of those things whereof I have been an ocular witnesse; the oldest men living here say, they never saw such gal∣lantries and pomp as have been lately here at the en∣trance of the young Queen, who by speciall dispensa∣tion was permitted to be married to this King, notwith∣standing that her Mother (the Empresse) was his sister by whole blood, and should have been Queen of Eng∣land, if the Devill had not broken the match; I meane
the Infanta Donna Maria, who is going upon her 16. and he 46. both of a faire Austrian complexion: Out of these late solemnities and pomp, you may infer what a prudent and well govern'd Nation this is; for though this Kings Sword be so long, that it reacheth every where, and is perpetually out of the Scabbard, al∣though he have actuall warres with the whole power of France, and in Italie, although he have two of his owne Kingdomes in Spaine her selfe lately revolted quite from him, I mean Catalonia and Portugall, and that they bait him on both sides by daily incursions, yet here in the Court there's no appearance of any war at all, but there is as much bravery, freedome, securi∣ty and pleasure, as if this King had no enemy at all; one can scarce see a thing call'd a man in buff all the Towne over: Here are at this time at least half a score Ambassadors, and among others the grand Seignior seems to stoop to this King at last, and seek his friend∣ship, the substance of whose Embassie I send you here∣with, together with the stately entrance of the young Queen: but for your better understanding, I will deduce her journey from the beginning. After that the Royall Spouse, the Imperiall Infan∣ta Donna Maria de Austria, had departed from the City of Vienna, in a most splendid equipage, being accom∣panied with the King of Hungary, and a great number of Attendants, she came to Trent, where there being magnificent preparations made for her beforehand, and many triumphall new Gates and Theaters erected purposely to honor her she rested some time: Thence she advanc'd her journey to Brescia, where she was in∣troduced and welcom'd by the Republike of Venice in mighty great state, and entertain'd all the while an S. Marks charge, the expence of the hospitality, amoun∣ting
to seventy thousand Duckets. From Brescia she re∣mov'd to the City of Milan, where, with the King of Hungary her brother, and but thirty of her servants, she went in privately and unknowne, by reason of a great glut of raine which still increas'd; but when the weather grew faire, and the heavens began to smile again, she made a ve∣ry solemn entry, being attended by two thousand five hundred persons at least: The Venetian State discharged her expences all the while for two hundred miles space, there being five and twenty Waggons that were laden with all sorts of provisions, and six hundred Cuirassiers in compleat armor, with four hundred Horsemen besides, that attended her all along; she bestowed upon the Lord Capello (Generall to the Venetians) a huge gold chain im∣boss'd with rich Diamonds, estimated at four thousand Crownes, and she gave forty gold chaines more amongst other Officers. Moreover, Generall Capello in the name of His Imperiall Majesty was created by the King of Hungary, Knight of the Romane Empire; she bestowed also on the Venetian Magistrates foure and twenty rich vests of cloth of silver, together with huge gilt Cups, Basons and Ewers; she gave also a great Christall Beaker full of gold, and frosted about with curious workmanship, to the Towne for a lasting monument: she her selfe was presented also by the Archbishop with two Crucifixes of Jasper, and other precious stones, with divers Relikes of Saints, and rare Medaills: There were Tiltings and Horse-fights, with artificiall fire-works appointed, where∣upon the King of Hungary her brother, taking his leave very tenderly of her, and with wonderfull affection, retur∣ned back to Germany againe: A little after the Aposto∣licall Nuncio presented her with the Holy Rose, and ma∣ny rare Relikes besides. From thence she directed her course to Finall, the people breaking out into a thousand
good wishes for the prosperity of her voyage, and her is∣sue, all the way she went: But the Genowayes Ambassa∣dor was not well intreated by the people, in regard he came late, and without any present, for which he was pub∣likely jeer'd at and revil'd, considering how infinitely that Republic is beholden to the King of Spain, and that she hath her well-being by him: Nor did the Queen her self look upon him with any grace. From thence she set for∣ward for Papia, where she was brought in by the Bishop with a mighty deal of reverence, under a stately canopy, in a rich chaire of State, accompanied by Augustus Duke of Tursis, by Sannettino Doria, by the Duke of Anello; by Marquis Spinola, and other Generalls, in a most magnifi∣cent equipage, and conducted to the palace of Don Diego Alvardi. The next morning betimes she was saluted by the Cardinal Doncheus, and four Napolitan Ambassadors, the great pieces of Artillery thundring off ev'ry where: Then she imbark'd her self in a Fleet of gallies for Spain, and arriving with wondrous speed at Denia in the King∣dom of Valentia, she was welcom'd ashore, and enter∣tain'd with much splendor, and unutterable joy and ap∣plauses. But in the Court at Madrid 'tis incredible what endea∣vors were made, and inventions devis'd to congratulate her coming, in raising up triumphant arches with such art and wonderfull artifice, that the like were never beheld (as every one cryed out) by humane eyes since the crea∣tion. The King stir'd himself notably, with Donna Maria his daughter, a Princesse of about thirteen yeers of age, to receive this new glorious Queen at the Escurial, which is esteem'd the eighth wonder of the world, it be∣ing a royall Palace, an University of it self, and a Mona∣stery containing twelve great Quadrangles, where the great Constable of Castile, with all the Grandees, and a
numberlesse multitude of people attended her all along; and to do homage, or as it were pay their vowes unto her. Afterwards the nuptiall knot being tied at Navalcar∣na, four leagues distant from Madrid, the Royall Bride was accompanied with a gallant Retinue and Attendants, (glittering with gold and silver) all on horseback, with a select guard of young Noblemen Bachelors all along till she arriv'd at Court; all the ancient Grandees coming in the rear in a solemn 'stately equipage, surrounded with La∣quays and Pages clad in shining Liveries; they wore mas∣sie chains and gold hat-bands, being mounted, some upon Cordoua Ginets, others upon Napolitan Coursers, who curveted all the way, being as it were sensible of joy: The Queen her self had forty Laquays of all sorts, wearing new sorts of Mandillions, cover'd all over with gold lace that the watchet velvet underneath could hardly be seen: Her common Guard went in vestments of cloth of tissue with rare embroyderies, so that the Sun could not behold a more glorious spectacle: For, the Spaniard hath this quality, that although his ordinary habit be plain black, yet upon a Festivall, or occasion of any Triumph, there is no nation more gorgeous. All along the streets, from the Retiro (the new house of pleasure) unto the Palace, the Kings Court, which was a∣bove two miles, all the windowes on both sides of the streets, and all the balcones were hung either with rich Ar∣ras, Turky Tapestry, or bright colour'd Sattins and Taffa∣ta's, which wav'd up and down, to the pleasure of the Spe∣ctator: specially the Plate-street, or Silver-street, was so embellish'd with such various works of Argentry, vessells of massie gold, with such crosses and crucifixes of preci∣ous stones, that ev'ry shop seem'd to be a Constellation, which made the Turkish Ambassador, who was there pre∣sent all the while, being transported with a kind of asto∣nishment
and admiration, to burst out into interjections of wonder, and say, that in the whole course of his life, he never saw such Majesty, and opulence, such curiosities and magnificence. In the corners of the streets there stood eight pyramides, four great, and foure small, some round, some quadrangular, some triangular; their tops very sharp and spiring up, which were supported by triumphant ar∣ches, whereof four represented the four parts of the world, in ev'ry one wherof the King of Spain hath som Territo∣ries, which no Monarch yet that ever was on earth could say, the workmanship of those pyramides, and triumphall arches with divers sorts of theaters besides, amounted, by a computation that was made, to above 64000. duckets, which was all at the cost of the Townesmen; who by a kind of loyall emulation, did strive who should expresse his affections most to his King: The Poets, and wits of the Court had many new ingenious fancies and devices up and downe, in landskips and imagery inventions, with new motto's appliable to the occasion. In the middle of the high street was a vast Globe, as it were pendent in the air, wheeling about with a continuall rotation, which repre∣sented the Universe. There were also erected four curious fountains, out of which issued as the Queen pass'd by such fragrant odoriferous waters that did perfume the air round about for the time: there were sundry sorts of dancers also that caper'd up and down the streets with bells, and knac∣kers, with sundry sorts of Antiques: before the royall Pa∣lace there were divers Theaters, where there were new Co∣medies acted by women, (who were deck'd like Angells) as well as men. On both sides of the young Queen were two huge Lions, and two Eagles, garding and conducting her all along; and there were such musicall voices in ev'ry corner of the streets, that one would think the Angels had descended, and with such ravishing instruments, that one
would have thought Amphion or Orpheus to have been there. The King came to the upper part of the stairs to re∣ceive his Queen, accompanied with the Infanta his daugh∣ter, who went on the Queens left hand: the whole Town was all night long as bright as if it had been noon-day, by the luminaries which were up and down, and rare in∣ventions of fire-works, with new sorts of squibs, that kept such a noise in the air, as if Jove had been darting his thunderbolds all the while. There was a brave eloquent Oration made before the King, the close whereof was, that his Catholique Majesty might have friendship with Ger∣many, Concord with France, reverence with Italy, felicity out of Afia, piety in Africk, and commiseration towards A∣merica. Their nuptiall joys were advantag'd by the presence of the Turkish Ambassador, which then resided in the Ca∣tholique Court, and had receiv'd audience a little before, which I shall with faith and punctuality deliver you here∣with as followeth. Hamet Aga Mustafera embark'd for Spain at Naples, & arrivnig at Valentia, he was receiv'd and entertain'd by the Count of Oropeta; thence he was accompanied to O∣donio three leagues distant from Madrid; where to refresh himself after his journey, he bath'd himself three times af∣ter the Turkish manner: He is a man of a shrew'd penetra∣ting judgment, one who hath studied men, and who under∣stands the Spanish tongue, though the Italian better. Being brought to Madrid, he was admitted the next day following to his audience at Court, which was per∣form'd with that solemnity and magnificence, as the Ma∣jesty & grandeur of so great a Potentate, whose person he did represent required. Being attended with a numerous gallant train, he was brought to the royall Palace, where through fourteen severall rooms sumptuously garnish'd, he
was brought to the Kings presence, which room was em∣bellish'd with such gemms, and sparkling precious stones, with other shining objects, that might upon a suddain da∣zle any beholders eyes. His Catholique Majesty was sea∣ted in a high eminent Throne, where Charles the Roman Emperor in former Ages was said to be crown'd, he was incircled round about with his Grandees, with the princi∣pall Officers of his Crown; and at the foot of the Throne stood his Secretaries, with others of his eight Councells; and the Judges were there in their robes, in a grave decent posture: The Ambassador bowing himselfe three times, kneel'd on the third stair of the Throne, & pronounc'd his Oration; wherein he first condol'd the decease of his former Queen, the daughter to France; then he congratulated with expressions of a world of good wishes, his second Marriage with the Imperiall Infanta; and lastly he desir'd secret Au∣dience for the rest of his Embassiie: After that he receded downwards, and presented his Credentiall Letters, (his Commission having been exhibited many daies before) the Letters were originally in Latin as followeth verbatim. Aly Solyman, DOminus Ottomannicae Familiae, Imperator ac Dominus Dominorum, & Principis Orbis Terrarum, Defensor Legis per Prophetam nostrum Mahometem latae, & nobis de∣claratae, &c. Gloriosissimo omnium Christianorum Principum, Arbitro & Pacificatori Regum Christianorum potentisisimo, & omnibus Virtutibus absolutissimo, Philippo Regi. Sit foelix vitae exitus, & factâ inter nos pace, salus: Laus splendoris omnium vestrarum virtutum huc usa{que} advolavit: Domine, & etiamsi Leges quas profitemar diversae sint, tamen
impedimento esse non valuerunt, quin gloriosum vestrum propo∣situm non cognoverim, magni{que} judicaverim. Absit, ut hosti∣bus vestris, qui in magno numero sunt, adjutor factus sim, quippe quorum actionibus me nunquam non subduxi, & expe∣ditionibus & exercitibus eorum quos in procinctu habent, re∣moram injeci, ut vos victorias vobis dignas reportare potueri∣tis. Ex mea parte omnia peracturus sum, quae Bassa meus Camerarius & amicus, vobiscum transiget, cui plenam fidem adhibebitis. Subsign'd, Dominus Mundi. English'd thus: Aly Solyman, LOrd of the Ottoman Family, Emperor and Lord of Lords, and of the Princes of the earthly world, De∣fender of the Law instituted by our Prophet Mahomet, and declar'd unto us, &c. To the most glorious of all the Christian Princes, the most mighty Arbiter, and Pacifier of all Christian Princes, and most absolute in all vertues, King Philip. May the end of your life be happy, and peace being made between us, health attend you: The glory of the splendor of all your vertues hath flown hither: My Lord, And though the Lawes we professe be different, yet they were not able to be an impediment, but that I knew, and much esteem'd your glorious purpose: Far be it from me, that I should be an assistant to your enemies, who are ma∣ny in number; for I have withdrawn my self from their expeditions, and the Armies which they have now afoot, and whereunto I have put a stop, that you might carry
away those victories that are worthy of you. For my part I shall perform all things that my Bassa, Chamberlain and friend shall transact with you, to whom you shall give full faith. Subsign'd, The Lord of the World. In his private instructions he propos'd these things fol∣lowing: First, the great Emperor will deliver to his royall Catholike Majesty the Holy Sepulcher, and other sacred places in Jerusalem. Secondly, he is willing that a free ex∣ercise of commerce may flourish in all maritine ports, and that Pyrats be not tolerated hereafter any where. Thirdly, he is willing that Don John of Austria, whose election may be free to some Kingdome, may take to wife the Sultana, who may imbrace the Catholike Religion. Fourthly, that the use of slaves be quite taken off for the future on both fides, and those that are now in quality of Captifs may be freely releas'd, and restor'd without ransome. Now there is intelligence certainly sent, that the Sultana, who is the grand Turks sister, and some five years since was taken by the Malteses, is converted to the Catholike Faith. To these advertisements, I shall adde the presents which the Turkish Ambassador brought the King of Spain, and were tendred with much solemnity. First, there were four Lions with golden chains, and collars also emboss'd with pure gold, whereon were en∣graven the Armes of his royall Majesty. Secondly, there were twelve Cimiters with massie gold hilts, and scab∣bards tied to gold chains, and curiously ingraven on the hilts and chapes. Thirdly, there were four chests fill'd with Turky knifes, their hafts of massie gold, and embroyder'd with pearl of much value. Fourthly, there were twelve U∣nicorns horns, ev'ry one twelve yards long, inlaid with
gold, and engraven with his Catholique Majesties Arms. Fiftly, there were four and twenty Turky carpets interwo∣ven with gold and silk, on which were drawn those victo∣ries which his Catholike Majesty had obtain'd since he was King. Sixthly, a Coach of Chrystall and gold figur'd in form of a triremiary gallie, hung with sails of silk in a spe∣cious manner, wherein were drawn the triumphs and vic∣tories of his Majesty. Seventhly, two smaller chests were fill'd with feathers of high price. Eighthly, there was a great Christal box imbroyder'd with pearl, which contain'd forty fair Bezar stones. ev'ry one weighing fourteen oun∣ces. Ninthly, there was a coverlet for a bed, beautified with forty stars, whereon Caesars victories were describ'd. Last∣ly, six horses white and black, with so many turkish slaves. Touching the reality of this Embassie, and what the suc∣cesse will be, we yet suspend our judgment, for the trans∣actions of things are carried so privately, that they are kept from vulgar knowledge, as indeed all great affairs of State should be. Besides this Turkish Ambassador & divers others, there are here two English Ambassadors, one for the King of Scot∣land, as they term him here, and the other from the States of England: The first is the Lord Cottington, who was once your Lord high Treasurer of England, who hath about twelve in his company, yet hath he a fair Palace, two Coaches attending him, and diet for himself and his fami∣ly, all upon this Kings charge, but he grows daily more and more out of request, as all use to do in time when they live upon another mans charge. 'Tis true, that they were here at first very sensible of your late Kings death, and of the manner of it, and they resent it still as he was a King and Soveraign Prince, but as he was an hereticall King, as they term'd him here, they were rather glad of it, it being such a brand to the reformed Religion, and an advantage
to theirs; people do commonly use to deride an English∣man when they meet him, saying, what's become of your great Defender of the Faith? what's become of your Queen, the daughter of Henry the Great? had she been of the house of Austria she should not have been left so long unrevenged: Our Infanta Donna Maria had not been so bu∣sie, and you had prosper'd better by her, but you would have none of her, and see what's become of you; Now, who can blame our King to assist the Subjects of England, considering how often your Kings did adhere to the Hol∣landers, his revolted Subjects, against him? Your Parliaments Agent is but lately arriv'd, and he had all the respects and formalities that a Soveraign Minister of State could expect, he had two Audiences the three first daies he came, one publique, the other private, with Don Luis de Haro the Favorite, who swaies most; And though this Agent be of a complexion that the Spaniards do hate, for they paint Judas alwaies with red hair, yet there hath not been the least affront or indignity offer'd him yet. 'Tis thought generally here, that this Crown will make a league and confederate with your State, provided they engage with him to recover the Kingdome of Portu∣gall; for Spain hath been observ'd to prefer alwaies her own interest before any friendship. The news here is from Lisbon, that your Parliaments Fleet by hovering upon those seas, and half blocking up the mouth of the River, do much infest those coasts, and utterly destroy trading, so that King John is thought to be in a sad condition, and cannot tell what Saint to pray unto. The King of France his chiefest Confederate, and Protector in a manner, hath written lately peremptory letters unto him, that he should favor and adhere to Prince Rupert, who as 'tis bruited here, is upon selling away his Ships unto him. They give Porto Longone here to be as good as retaken
upon the Coasts of Italy, and they promise themselves great successes against the French this year, yet they com∣plain against the Hollander, that he hath broke the Capitu∣lations of peace in divers things. There was one attempting to translate your late Kings Book into Spanish, but he was surpriz'd, the copy sup∣press'd, and the Translator hardly escap'd the Inquisition, because it contains som passages offensive to the Church of Rome; and had it been publish'd, 'tis thought it had run the same fate as King James's Confessio Fidei did, which was publikely burnt by the Officer of the Inquisi∣tion in times pass'd. The English Roman Catholikes here are in great hopes, that if there be a league struck betwixt this King and your State, the Recusants in England and Ireland will be bet∣ter us'd. There is a fresh report that the young Queen is already with child, though som think that this report proceeds ra∣ther from hopes then truth; if it prove so, and that she be deliver'd of a male, I believe a treaty wil quickly be set on foot to match the young Infanta, who is like to be a goodly Lady; till then, she may haply prove a State Maid, before she be suffer'd to have a husband. This is all that the Spanish Court affords for the pre∣sent, at least 'tis all that I dare trust under seal; by the next you shall hear further from me, provided that you be pun∣ctuall in the continuance of this monethly correspon∣dence; so I pray God guard you, and guide you in all your affaires and purposes. Your true friend to love and serve you, T. B.
