B4149 E594_18 R206924 99866012 165558
A TRUE RELATION Of the Strange APPARITIONS Seen in the Air, on Monday 25, February, in and about the Town of Bolton in the Mores, in the County of Lancaster at mid-day, to the amazement of the Beholders. Being a LETTER sent from ELLIS BRADSHAW OF THE Same Town, to a Friend in London, WITH OBSERVATIONS Thereupon, what probably they may signifie, and what Use may be made thereof. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Brewster and Gregory Moule, and are to be sold at the three Bibles in the Poultry, un∣der Mildreds Church, 1650.
SIR, THere hath appeared to us such visible characters of the Infinite power here, of the mighty, miraculous, and clear Demonstration of the hand of God, which as visible signes of his invisible Power, and of his Will and Decree, he hath held forth to us perspicuously and apparantly in the open sight of all beholders, that did but lift up their eyes to be∣hold the same in the azure Skie, that the like hath not been seen in any Age, that is as yet recorded in any History that I have ever read or heard of, either here, or in any Kingdom: And though, it may be, that the same was visible as well with you, as in our horizon, yet be∣cause we know not how far it appeared, as it did unto us, I could do no less then write the Relation of such strange Apparitions, in regard the publishing thereof, if you think it convenient, might greatly tend to the glory of God, and the good of all those that desire to observe, and to consider the operations of his mighty hand, which he holdeth forth as a warning to us, of some great thing that he is about, and hath fully determined to bring to pass within a short time, even in this our Nation, if not in this our County, to whom this Ap∣parition was miraculously visible. However it appeared, or whether it appeared or no unto other people, for we cannot tell; and there∣fore if it be no news nor strange unto you, it may well excuse me for writing of it, that if it be news you might know it first, and so declare it first, if you think good, as I shall here relate it, and descant upon it, what it may possibly signifie, according to my ap∣prehension. The thing was thus, Yesterday being Munday, February 25. 1650. being our Market day at Bolton in the Mores in the County of Lan∣caster,
betwixt ten and twelve of the clock, and much of that time there appeared to us, yea to all in the Town, or in the way thither, that look so high, A white Circle, compassing directly from the glo∣rious Sun shining in his strength, (the Skie being clear, and not over∣spread with clouds, or mist, &c.) straight into the North, as it were of a levell height, with the height of the Sun, compassing round to the Sun again, as if it had been a wall, and the Sun a Postern in the side of it. And besides the true Sun, there appeared also a great way distant on either side the Sun, a bright place in the aforesaid Circle, not unlike in greatness to the true Sun, but not so bright nor for∣mable, but rather red and changeable, especially at its vanishing; like part of a bright Rainbow, or as we call them, Weather-Galls, though far brighter, and more clear and splendrous to all beholders when they were at brightest. There appeared also in the Northern parts of the same Circle, two other likewise, which like bright pla∣ces of the same colour, but not so bright and splendrous: All which four were set directly in the white Circle, like so many Postern Towers in the walls of a City, a great way distant each from other, There appeared likewise directly over our heads, two fair Rain∣bows in the clear Skie, the one tending with either end of it, to∣wards the two bright places, that were next to the Sun, though they did not reach them. And the other tending with both its ends, as directly pointing to the other two places, that were in the Nor∣thern parts of the white Circle, that shined also as hath been said; So that these two Rain-bows, that were directly over our heads, ten∣ded with their backs together, and their ends directly one from the other; the one Southwards, and the other Northwards; the one as inclining to embrace the Sun, and the other to embrace the North Pole. All these visible Apparitions continued a great while, some say two hours, but of the certain time I am not certain, for I saw them not at first: but I saw them vanish by degrees away, beginning in the North; for the North-side of the white Circle began to vanish first, and then the two bright places in the North of the Circle did also first vanish before the other, and so also did the North Rainbow, and then by degrees the other also, so that the nearer to the Sun, was the longer visible, not only of the Rain-bows, but of the bright places, and of the white Circle. From all which visible appearances, if I may not seem over-bold
and presumptuous, being but such a man: I shall desire to descant, and conclude thus far, as my own apprehensions, what these things mean, or at least, what use we had best to make of such strange visi∣ons and signs in the Heavens, as are so frequently seen in these days of ours in our own horizon, and by our own eyes. And first then, in my apprehension, These visible Apparitions are held forth to us, as admonitions of some great displeasure, and of wrath kindled, that must be executed in its time and season. And that especially against all such, who have laid aside their Co∣venant-Engagement, whereby they were united each to other, and joyntly bound in their places and callings, even to the Lord himself, to seek and indeavour a full Reformation both in Church and State, according to the word of God, and not to their own inventions, nor as might best serve for their own interests, nor the interests of others, either Civill or Ecclesiastick: For in so doing, we lay aside our Co∣venant and the Interest of God, who hath hitherto saved us from our common Adversaries. And therefore, it is observable, that these two Rainbows were not set in the Skie directly upwards in the usuall manner arch-wise, but they were both in appearance to us as laid aside, like two fallen arches, and that with the backs together, so that their four ends were at the furthest distance each from others that they possibly could be; Which may well signifie, that if such who have Covenanted shall desert each other, in regard of mutuall assistance, against the com∣mon Enemies of Reformation, they utterly cast down their support∣ing Arches, and lay aside their Covenants, so that in respect of the Ends of our Covenant-Engagement, they utterly frustrate their mu∣tuality, and set them directly at the furthest distance each from other that they possibly can. For our Covenant-Engagements were chiefly intended for the supportation, strengthening, and incouragement of one another, for else we had not needed any express Covenant, being already bound in duty unto God, and each to other, before we entred into such Engagements, even by the Law of God, which is the Law of Love, and obligeth deeply unto mutuality in all lawfull things. And I hope no man will say that ever any Rainbow was set in the Skie, but it something concerned Covenant-Engagement betwixt God and man, for there is no other end Recorded in Scripture; and therefore I dare conclude, that it being always set by the hand of God
by way of Memento both to himself and us; We ought to consider these visible mementos and admonitions, and bethink our selves ere it be too late, and not turn our backs each from others; for any self-respects, or private Interest, turning our ends, through self-ends, to their furthest distance from mutuality, in our common cause, to wit (a throughout Reformation.) but to draw if possible to a neerer distance in our publike ends; and that our Covenant-Engagement might not make us two; but unite us together according to its end, and make as one. That so it might be represented by the sign of the Covenant, to wit by one Rain-bow, and that also, set directly upwards as a supporting arch, and not so unnaturally by two parts or pieces of a Rain-bow, and those laid aside, as writhen about and wrested asunder each from the other, at the furthest distance that can be devised by the art of man: for just so we are, as, if time would per∣mit, I could shew at large; for there is division, and that most sad and lamentable, even amongst those who are not only brethren in name and profession, but in nature also, yea even truly spiritual, and Christian brethren, and that of the very chief and of the most emi∣nent in the Church of God, insomuch that it is to be feared, if they take not warning by these visible Characters, but remain stub∣born, and obstinate therein, it will end in blood, and that of one another; of which these are warnings to all that will observe. There is cause that those divisions of Ruben should cause sad thoughts of heart. One cals that perjury, and Covenant-breaking, which another count∣eth but the necessary keeping of their Solemn Covenant, in bringing Delinquents to condign punishment. One cals that murther, which another accounts a Judicial executi∣on of a grand murtherer. One counts it a breaking off the Parliament, which another ac∣counts but a necessary restraint from inslaving of the Kingdom, which is their (Lord) as some affirm. One proclaimeth a message as from the Lord of Host, which ano∣ther saith is a cleer inhibition of his express command, Numb. 35.16, 17, 18, 19. to wit, that the revenger of blood himself, shall slay the murtherer, when he meeteth him: see also, verse 20.21. and 30, 31, 32, 33. One seemeth zealous for pious Reformation; and another thinketh that he doth but fast for strife, and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness.
One cals that Tyranny, Oppression, Cruelty, Wrong, Persecution, &c. Which another thinks but a necessary loosing of the bands of wickedness, and an undoing of the heavy burthens, and freeing of the oppressed; yea a breaking of every yoke, as Isa. 58.6. Some are consulting with the Kings of the earth, and the Rulers thereof, against some men whom they think are plotting to insnare, and binde them to their own wils. Whereas others think, that such consultation is against the Lord, and against his anointed; saying, Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us; And that he that sitteth in Heaven doth but laugh at them, yea that the Lord himself, hath them in derision. Expecting confidently that yet ere long he will speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his displeasure, seeing he hath set his King upon his holy hill of Sion, according to Isa. 14.20, & to 28. Some advise the Kings and great men upon earth, to stand it out stifly, in the maintenance of their Cause, and not to stoop nor submit their Royal Power, and Royal Authority, to the wils of men; who plead for liberty from all tyrannical oppression, or bondage whatso∣ever, either Civil or Ecclesiastical; And that all might be forced, will they nill they, to such form of Government, as they themselves in conscience, shall think most just and agreeable to the Scriptures. But others advise them, to be so wise and learned, as to kiss the the Son lest he be angry, and they perish in his wrath; especially now, when it is a little kindled; yea that they should serve him with fear and rejoyce trembling, Least he break them with a Rod of Iron, and dash them in pieces like a Potters vessel, as Psal. 2. Some advise them to serve the Lord, and to Govern, and Rule over his Church and people, in the old manner and form of Govern∣ment. But others advise them to bring their glory and honor to the New Jerusalem, and to submit their Scepters to the Scepter of Christ, the Scepter of whose Kingdom, is a Scepter of Righteousness, and he the King of kings, and Lord of lords. One affirms that the oath of Allegiance bindes us chiefly to the de∣fence and maintenance of the persons of Kings, more then their au∣thority, and rather ought to destroy his authority, then not defend his person. And another saith, that his authority ought chiefly to be maintained, yea though directly against both his life and estate; and that we were tyed by our oath of Allegiance to his Just Authority, and not abstractively to his person only, as when acting contrary in a
destructive manner, to his Just Authority; And that our Allegiance is no further lawful, then relative to the Kingdom, whereunto even he himself was tyed in Allegiance. And again that Allegiance, if relative, bindes no further then ac∣cording to the Laws of relations, and that relations are contractive, and the root of all obligations; which whether natural or other∣wise, yet when one party shall seek the destruction of the other, the other may justly claime a recess, so far at lest as absolute preservation requires. One alledgeth our Protestation, that part of it especially which is for the defence of the Kings person, and for the power and priviledge of Parliament. But another alledgeth that the sentences are complex, and do take in with them, the Kings honor, and estate, the defence of the power and priviledges of Parliament, the lawful Rights and Liberties of the Subjects, as well as the person of the King. So that if the person of the King be engaged against the Priviledges of Parliament, and Liberties of the Subjects, yea or the Parliament themselves plead priviledges, against the lawfull rights, and liberties of the Subjects, the protestation cannot be obligatory, unto inconsistences. The lawful rights and liberties of the subjects, being the great end both of the King and Parliament, which they ought to seek, and therefore must prostrate both King and Parliament, they having not so much as their being, muchless priviledges against the lawful rights and liberties of the subjects; So that by the protestation, the greater being (of duty) to be always preferred before the less; If either the person, or the King, or the priviledges of Parliament, stand as a Lyon to devour and destroy the Rights and Liberties of the Subjects; we are bound to know neither King nor Parliament, but rather the people, who are the root of them both, so that it were better they both should perish, then the whole body and bulk of the people. Again one saith, that our Covenant bindes us to our old form of Government, by Kings, Lords and Commons; and that by Kings Hereditarily, whether they be wise or foolish, so that we must have no other, but such, fool or tyrant, or what ever he proves that shall be heir to the crown. But another thinks that if we be so bound by our vow and Co∣venant or Allegiance either; we have therein done as rashly and un∣lawfully, as those that bound themselves with an oath, neither to
eat nor drink, till they had kill Paul. And therefore such an unlaw∣full vow, is better broken then kept, seeing it can never be proved from Scripture ground; but that though Kingly Government in it self be lawful, yet to oblige a Nation, to Hereditary Government, be they wise, or foolish, can never be proved to be either wise, or lawful in the sight of God, nor any rationall man, if men once may chuse and have power in their hands, through the providence of God, But ought to shake of such necessary bondage, when they can get power, else they are guilty even of self-destruction, through their own counsels. And thus our Covenant-Engagment, is parted into two, like the two Rain-bows, and is wrested, and turned for every mans ends; so that the true ends, are removed quite to the greatest distance that possibly can be one from another, and will end in blood, unless we repent and reconcile these things, and study the things that may make for peace, and for love and concord, as we ought to do: Which the Lord grant that we may do in time, ere it be to late; So he pray∣eth who is your loving friend and brother in the Lord, Tuesday this 26. of Feb. 1649. Ellis Bradshaw. FINIS.
