C1196 99896998 136909
THE CASE OF William Lenthall Esq Humblly Submitted to the Consideration of the Honourable House of Commons. Setts Forth, THAT about the Time of Sr. John Cutler's Decease, he was indebted to him, about 12000 l. Principal and intrest to that Time, for securing of which his Estate in Oxfordshire, and the Fees and Perquisits of his Office of Marshal of the Kings-Bench were Mortgaged. That about May 1697. Edmund Bolter Esq Executor to the said Sr. John Cutler made up an Accompts of 18001 l. for Principal, Interest, and Charges, and did prevail with the said Mr Lenthall to Sign the same upon Offers of great Abatements. That some time after, Mr. Bolter did promise and agree to take 15000 l. in full Dis∣charge of the said Debt; and that one Mr. Symond Fowkes, did promise Mr. Lenthall he would remove the said Mortgage, and pay Mr. Bolter the 15000 l. and pay Mr. Len∣thall 400 l.per Ann. or proportionably, for Subsistance, till the same could be done, for which Mr: Lenthall was to allow him 1000 l. and in order thereto paid Mr. Len∣thall several small Summs, and took Notes under his Hand for the repayment of the same upon Demand; and never removed the said Mortgage. That Mr. Fowkes, under Pretence, and in case of Mortality, prevailed with Mr. Len∣thall to excecut some Deeds to him of his Estate and Office, without any Copy, or Counterpart thereof, which were agreed to be left in Trust in one Mr. Card the Coun∣cels Hands: And Mr. Fowkes helping him to some small Summs more, for Subsistance, prevailed with him to execute a Grant (together with the said Edmund Bolter Esq per∣suant to a late Act of Parliament) of the said Office, to one Mr. Gimbert (now Marshal) at 1400 l.per Ann. Rent, as Mr. Fowkes told Mr. Lenthall, which since proves to be but 1000 l.per Ann. Upon sealing of which Mr. Fowkes promised to pay him 500 l. the next Day, but did not. That Mr. Bolter hath been in possession of the Estate in Oxfordshire, about five Years, which was usually let for 700 l.per Ann. And the Office as long, which was never let under 1400 l. per Ann. which Mr. Lenthall well hoped would have Sunk the Debt to 12000 l. or less: But instead thereof Mr. Fowks, brought Mr, Lenthall another Accompt, about May last, of the Principal, Intrest, and Charges of his and Mr. Polters, with Interest upon Interest, amounting to 19794 l. 18 s. 5 d. which they would have him indebted to them, without having Respect to the 3000 l. which Mr. Bolter agreed to abate. And since that time, Mr. Lenthall is informed Mr. Bolter and Mr. Fowkes have Trans∣ferred, and Conveyed the Estate and Office, to the Right Honourable the Earle of Radnor, the Debt being now swelled up to above 20000 l. as they compute, without having regard to the yearly Rent Mr. Gimbert was obliged to pay for the said Office. That the Estate at Haseley and Latchford is esteemed to be worth upwards of 13000 l. having a House, &c. Built upon it which cost 4000 l. Sr. John Lenthall, his Grand∣father sold 1000 l.per.Ann. Land of Inhertance, when he purchased the said Office, for which the said William Lenthall hath been since bid, above 20000 l. So he hopes, if the Office be dissolved, he shall have a Compensation eqaivalent, (there having been no Mismanagement by him) being his Inheritance. Now, since the said Debt upon it, is so unreasonably swell'd up, and the Estate and Office so undervalued and lessened, and Mr. Lenthall having nothing to pay his other Debts which he hath contracted, nor to subsist on, but the said Estates and Office, which is his Inheritance, he humbly beggs the Consideration, Compassion, and Relief of this Honourable House of Commons: Without which he must Starve in a Prison; and humbly prays he may be heard by his Councel, at the Barr of this Honourable House, before the Bill do pass.
