C121 4302 99899407 153076
The Portraiture of the Renown∣ed Cleoreton and the vertuous Cloriana.
The Famous and Delectable HISTORY OF Cleocreton & Cloryana; Wherein is set forth The Noble and Heroick Actions of CLEOCRETON Prince of Hungary, His Wonderful and Warlike Atchievements in sundry Kingdoms. Herein is also declared, His constant love to the most beauti∣ful Princess CLORYANA, the onely Daughter of the Emperor of PERSIA. London, Printed by J. B. for Charls Tyus, at the three Bibles on London-Bridge.
TO HER Discerning and most Knowing Brother, Mr. E. C. I Do not question but you will accept of my Cloriana, though she be not set out in her full Lustre and Lan∣guage fiting her Vertues and your Entertainment; yet the onely thing I build on is, that these my poor endeavours are chiefly laid out for to pleasure you, and such as you shall think fit to present it as worthy by your commen∣dation: Who though they may very well ac∣count
your commendations partial, yet it is all my ambition at this time, to dedicate this, the Employment of my idle hours, to your kinde acceptance: which being grant∣ed, it will very much oblige, Your Sister and Servant, S. C.
The Famous and Delectable HISTORY OF Cleocreton & Cloriana. BEutiful Aurora had scarce shown herself to the eye of the World, before there appeared a wandring Vessel, destitute of her Pilot, and the waves to sing her too and sro: Prince Abyazer be∣ing come out of his melancholy ump, lift up his eyes and behel this Noble Ship, whose stern and eamers did speak her to be some triumphant Vessel, which the unmerciful waves had se∣vered from her company and so had cast her on the shore of Persia: And while he bent his steps that way, he heard the lamenting, as if it were of a woman; and his pitiful ears no sooner heard it, but he skipped into the ship, where he espied a Lady full of tears, though Maesty shoe thorow sorrow, and on her lap lay thei a of a wounder Knight; to whom she sadly said, Oh, hath all my care, love and dili∣gence brought forth this strange effect, would to the Gods I had never been so happy as to have brought thee forth, then should I never have been so miserable, as to have seen the
untimely death of so worthy a son. Abazer stood all this while unperceived by her: At the last, he stepped in, and when he had viewed the comely proportion of her wounded  with the rich and costly habit they both were in, and the noble niture of their ship, he interrupted the sorrow∣ful Lady, faring, Madam, Cursed be the Deies that hath robbed you of so rare a Jewel; but sometimes a skilful Physician is more necessary then tears, to the wounds that are so grievous, as these appear to be. She hearing his words, and turning her eyes on him, she said, Alas, Sir, I have no hope that Fortune should so readi∣ly turn her wheel about, since she hath so lately thrown me from the highest felicity, to the lowest and grievous torment. Then would she have continued her usual lamentations, but that Abyazer applied himself to the recovery of the Knigst: and lifting up his head, perceived same life, which gave the Lady further occasion to leave off her mourning, and with him, to use her utmost endeavour for the life of her Son; and calling of his trusty Dwarf Galtazet, who almost dead for grief to sée his Master in that plight, and heaing there was breath in him, came running to him with a soe∣raign water, wherewithal rubbing his temples, he began to groan: At which his afflicted Mother said, Dear childe, the danger of thy powerful Enemy is past, lift up thy drooping spirits, and give some comfort to thy doleful Mother. In the mean time Galtazet and Albyazer bound up his wounds, and laid him on his bed. He lifting up his languish∣ing eyes, and seeing his Mother, coming a little to himself, said, O how unhappy a monster am I, that could not with∣out being giulty of a Paracide, have not onely sacrificed my own life, but the blood of the Tyrant, to the Shrine of your merits and innocency. She receiving much comfort to hear her Son speak said▪ Son, thy love hath been enough manifested to thy
wronged Mother, but do not, my Son, call the King thy Father Tyrant, but rather pray to the Gods to unmask his eyes, and let him and all Hungary see, how he is de∣luded by that vilde wretch. By these words Albyazer perceived, he had not given that respect which was due to the Queen: Therefore he very re∣verently said, Madam, I am sorry my ignorance should cause me to give your Majestie no more respect, due to you: In re∣compence of which, make use of me as your humble ser∣vant, to avenge you of your Enemies, or lose my life. To which the Quéen said, Sir, it is much to finde a stranger so great a friend in adversity, but I beseech you tell us what Countrey we are in. And while he did satisfie the Quéen, the Lady Philopeet, whose abode was in the Emperor of Persia his Court, though it was not long but the by her beauty had so captivated the Noble heart of Albyazer, who by choice did owe her the whole service of his life; and she by her rigor almost bereaved him of his wits, and having newly given him some harsh replies, caused him desperately to run out of her presence, and thus in his pensive thoughts he walked to the Sea side, where he met with this adventure, by which he was a little diverted. In the mean time, the young Princess Cloryana, as her tender heart did move her to compassion, to hear Philopeet thus rigorose use her servant, she said, Madam, methinks you are too harsh with Prince Al∣byazer, certainly you cannot, but as well as others, see his rare endowments, which might make you in love with him as well as he is with you; Then why should you deal thus hardly with him▪ Well, well, said Philopeet, ding he young Princess so pretily so plead for a lover, we shall see Madam, one day, ow mercul you will be to your multitude of Lovers, that will lie at your feet, begging for a smile from your beautiful face. And indeed the Lady did not call her so without good cause, for so far as her tender years had shone of her, she was in∣comparably beauteous, her great wit and pleasing dispositi∣on, did distract the eyes and hearts of all to honor her▪  such was her pretty contest at that time with Philopeet,
as when she could not get the better of her, she called her maid tht attended on her, and said, Go  and see out my poor Cozen , and bid him come and see what success have gained for him. Philopeet would not consent to it: For, said she▪ Madam▪ I might accuse you of partiality, for you Cosins do wink at one anoters faul, but not to deny vvhat you have said of him. VVell, sad, Cloryana, I will engage for him, that he shall not move you again. So sweet Cloryana her command bore sway at that time: and her maid went and enqued for Albazer, and she was▪ iformed, that he went to the Sea side. Iulia going that way, came to the place where he was and he ring his dis∣course with the Queen of Hungaria, did not stay to deiver her message▪ but came and told Cloryana, that he was in a ship, and hat e Queen of Hungary was with him. Cloryana went haily, and told Philopeet, that she néed not trouble her self at his importuning: For, sid she, m Cousin is entertained with no less then a Queen in her ship. This she said in mirth: but Philopeet said, Good Madam, torment me not, but tell me, what Queen it is you mean. Oh, come, come, said Cloryana, I will now shew you what a fine dissembler you are. So they both went and told the Em∣peror, and he with his Emperess and the Ladies, went to the Seaside, for the more honoring of the Queen of Hungary, who by this time had received b Galtazet skill, the Prince Cleocreton out of his sound, which the inconvenience of his much speaking had caused. When the Emperor entred with the Ladies, who seeing the Queen, which before they had ne∣ver done; but her majestick demeanor did merit respect of all that saw her, the Emperor and Empress sted the Quéen, and told her, that the condition her Son was in, required, a more commodious lodging, and  ted her to the Palace, where she got her sick Son dged: nd giving the Emperor many thank, whose noble inclinatons to sptality, was much admired of all that had occasion to know or stand in need of him: He very courteously desired her to ay in Per∣sia, till her fortunes would smile more upon er▪ the descrip∣ton of which we will omit, and onely at this time discourse of her better days. She being Daughter to the King of Tunis, and alwayes enclined to verue▪ which added to her excellent beauty▪ caused the King of Hungary to be enamored with her, onely▪
by fam: and his Father required her in marriage of the King of Tunis, for his Son, who was of a Noble, brave spi∣rit: But this Lady was laid claim oo by the Midian Prince, but Hungarie proved too invinsible, through the great love his rich Subjects, and store of valiant Souldies, that h overcame the Midian Arm, and gained himself a vertuous wife; for her Father the King of Tuis, gave her to him of the Rial Princes that woner by valour. The ved lit∣tle more then a year ver happily, and then h had by his Queen a fair, goodly childe wich was this young Cleocre∣ton, who in his ery childehood was so noby icled, o e∣ther with his Princely education, and s vertuously ws he eddued, that he bcame the wonder of his ag, nd th glory of men, his wisdom and Pricly bhaviour, with hi beau∣tiful oramts of his body, and ibleness in an exse, especially in Warlike plits that he performed such Won∣ders as is past belief, which you shall afterwards under∣stand But now reurn we to the Lady Cloryana, who by her prett devises, did cause Philopeet to recant her rigid pro∣ceedings to her Srvant Albyzer: who coming into the roo where they were, and he espying Iulia, said, Was not you at the shore, a little before the Emperor came? She lookee on her Lad, as though she asked her what to sa. Iul, said Clorana▪ ell my Cosn what I bae you. She making hr address to the Prince, as se very well knew how to do; for she had a very goo wit, and was a Noble mans daugher of Persia; she telling him, he ighed and said, I, dear Cosin, you have much power with my rigid Lady, I pray is it to my advantage? Plope seeing his sadess, said, My Lord, you ere  to make all mery about you, and now you are come as pensive as any. I Madam, said he, you see how you by your rigor, can metamorphise me, and it is in your power to make me as I was wont. And so indeed she di ever after and he did entiely esteem his Cosin Clorana, for proring it for him. So taking Philopet by the hand, he said to Cloryana, M dear Prin∣cess; take er to ou, for thrie better by you then any, till  go and visit the Prince Cleon▪ No sooner as he gone, but the Queen of Hungaria came
to wait on Cloryana, and with this complement, The Gods keep you, Madam, in that cheerful frame to which I see you inclined: In my youth, I was as pleasant as any, and before I am old, the Heavens are pleased to cause my mirth to turn to sadness, and makes me scarce sociable to my nearest relations. Truth Madam, replied Cloryana, your sorrows, be they of what nature they will, they are so sweetly mixt with patience, as your presence doth adde as much life, as if your Majestie had all the reason in the World of mirth; and I am extremely obliged to you, for your ho∣norable company. 'Tis a great oversight of Fortune, said Philopeet, Ma∣dam, that she should over-shadow so splendent a Beauty as yours, with the least discontent. O, Madam, replyed the Queen, your Chamber is so absolute an encloisture of Divine beauty, as it may well become the sole discourse of all your Visitants. Indeed Madam, said Cloryana, when any place is adorn∣ed with yours, then may it be called the best furnished room in the world, and so by consequence this is? In this and the like discourse way the Ladies in, when the Em∣press Treveana entred, which turned it into more serious dis∣course. All this while the Prince Cleocreton having Albyazers company, whose noble demeanor did beget great estéem of the oung Prince; who entertained him with as pleasant dis∣course as his sickness and affliction would afford, while the Emperess was with her noble Guest, desiring to be acquaint∣ed with her misfortune: But she unwilling to be the re∣porter of it her self, said to the Empress, Madam, pardon me because I do not give your Majestie an account of what you desire; for in my discourse. I must detract from my Lord and Husband, whose follies I am unwilling to de∣vulge my self; but, if it please you, my Sons Dwarf I shall call, who hath been a witness of all our hard hap. But then, said the Empress, we will have the Emperor to be present.
So in the mean time, they went to receive the noble En∣tertainment of a dinner, the Empress being placed in a Couch covered with purple velvet, embroidered with gold, with cushions and footstools of the same the Quéen of Hun∣gary with her in the same Couch, and all the other Princely Train being placed, they died in Prince Cleocretons cham∣ber, by the Emperors command: the Emperor being in a robe of gold and hair coloured flowers mingled, the Quéen of Hungary was in black, for she thought that most befitted her condition: the young Prince Cloryana, rather adding a lustre to her Apparel, then any thing addig to her surpas∣sing Beauty, her gown was of a blush coloured Satia, co∣vered with silver twist, made in the fashion of Grashoppers flying, her head was subtilly attired, with her lovely brown hair curling naturally, which colour did more seem an orna∣ment to her beauty, then any thing in the world: behinde of her head was a Chaplet, and bordered with Diamonds and Rubies, richly enclosing her hair, which was wrapped toge∣ther with pearl, wherein stuck a plume of Pink and White Feathers: her full black eyes so much resembling the Graces, that every wink darkned the World, and every look peirced not onely the eyes, but the hearts of the beholders, and little Cupid once getting acquainted, presently turned Thief, and punished himself with throws infinite: her lips was cer∣tainly the pattern, that Dame Nature when she had made them, she saw them so exquisite, that she would have coun∣terfeited them, by making the Rubies and Coral, but failed in her expectation, for they excelled both in colour and swéet∣ness, which all the rich perfumes in the World could not compare: all the fabrick of her beautiful body was com∣posed without fault, save it was too little, an that was en∣creasing: The Lady Philopeet was very fair, whose hair was of a perfect yellow, and fair gray eyes, she was in a gown of White Satin, and her breast-lace spread full of such rare flowers as the Spring could afford: but it was onely her beauty that did make Abyazer forget that she was mortal, at least the Shrine that he did adore: and it was no little pleasure to her to know, what great power she had over him, for he would even behold her, as if he were an image, with∣out motion: But the two younger Princes could not yet tell what love was, though they must needs have a good liking of one another, sometimes, though sick, yet Prince Cleocreton would steal a look on lovely Cloryana, and she would do the
like for him, but this was by course, that these two did ad∣mire one another, for all the World did the like. But when the Princely train had ended ther ell ordered dinner, the Empress streightway desired to have her curiosi∣ty satisfied: To that purpose, the Quéen commanded Galta∣zet to what she had promised: and so absenting her self, the rest were Auditors, hile he began, and addressing him∣self to the Empress, said, MAdam, I suppose your Majestie hath heard the life of my Master and Mistress, the King and Queen, till their misfortune fell ut: Her Majestie having born the King of Hungary two Sons, the one two years before the other, Prince Cleocreton being the first, and Prince Fortus the next: Thus the King and Queen, with these two pretty Sons, lived in peace and love, without any disturbance, and the Realm was in quiet a great while: At the last, Fortune weary with her own Constancy, there chanced to be in Hungary an Earl of great wealth, who had one onely Daughter, whose name was Meaga; the King loved the company of this good Earl of Drooma, for he was a man of excellent parts, and without him the King would take no enterprize in hand, nor no sport, but the Earl was present with him: So that not onely he was fre∣quent at the Court, but also his Lady and Daughter ma∣ny times came to visit the Queen. But in time, the love that the King bore to the Father, was not comparable to that he had to the Daughter: But first it fell out, that the Ambitious Lady Meaga did consture the Kings familiarity, with her Father, to be, because the King was taken with her beauty; and then thought she, if it be not, I wish it were so: And from these thoughts, she fell to practice; for when the King came to Droomars house, which was near the Court, she would trim her self in glorious apparel, and adde Art to that Beauty she had, and declares her un∣lawful love to an old Aunt of hers; whose bewitching
skill could not onely cause love, but also procure hate, and so wrought her Devilish Art on our good King; for by powders for the purpose, she did infuse it in his drink, by the hand of her maid, whom she caused to carry the Kings cup, till she had procured the good will of the King; and many times would she come to the Kings Per∣son, contrary to the custom of Ladies: Now so their Art prevaild on the King, and against our gracious Queen, that sometimes at the first he would say to the Queen, Madam, if you mark it, the Earl of Drooma hath a pretty Daughter; and the poor innocent Queen never suspected any thing, but because her Lord commended her, would often send for her, and sometimes praise her to the King: But Oh! how soon is Innocency betrayed? at the last the King would not onely insensibly praise her, but would curb the Queen extremely; and tell Meaga, that he must needs enjoy her love: And saying that often to her, at the last he desired her to answer him; Then she said, My Lord, you need not, except one of them were better: But he not well apprehending her, said, I am sure, whatsoever my wife is, I know Lady Meaga is without comparison beau∣tiful. She seeing that her plot took so well applauding of her Aunts wisdom, as she termed it: But Meaga had a young Servant, whom she had promised marriage, whose name was Sir Melker: but she slighted him, and would scarce afford him any of her company, she was so taken up with her great Captive: As she called him to her Aunt, who by this time grew almost mad for love, or rather lust; and courting her to yield to his desire, she did say, Truly, my Leige, I can grant nothing of that nature to the Emperor of the while World, who cannot be my husband. Therefore, continued she, your Queen is the onely and sole obstable of your desires, who by her loving speeches, hath deluded your Majestie this many years; she hath a Paramor that you know not of; Doth not young Cleocreton resemble the Lord Presi∣dent?
But, said she, while should I discover this concerning my lawful Queen? but my great love to you, my Lord, doth make me go beyond my duty; for I cannot endure that you should be called that, which your poorest Subjects hate. Now the Kings passion broke into a flame, and being always resolute in any enterprize, therefore he would be satisfied, though it were both against the Laws of the Gods and men: Thus he sucked up the bitter poyson, that the old Witch, and the young Devil had prepared for him, and after wayed down with the sweet cup of Meaga's su∣gared words: And so cunning was she, as when she said any thing against the Queen, we would even seem sorrow∣ful to declare what she knew. But the King being three days from the Court, every one began to wonder at the Kings intimacy with the Earl of Drooma: Now the Lord President, whose name was Cabulus, came to the Palace, with other Lords and Ladies of the City, to enquire how the Queen was in health; for it was told them, that she was sick; and indeed it was meerly through the unkinde∣ness she conceived at the Kings stay from her. But the King in his wrath against his good Queen, and bewitched with love to this wicked Meaga, came home, and found matter enough for his jealousie; for asking the servants who was with the Queen? they answered, the Lord President: But he dissembling the matter, came to the Queen; who seeing her Lord, rose up (though not in health) and bowed to him. He seeing her indisposition of body, never attributidg the cause from himself, but all his thought ruminating on what Meaga had told him, was rather subject to believe, that she was breeding a childe, and streight concluded it was begot by the President: Thus was his minde bent to evil against his innocent Queen; for falsly smiling, he said, Madam, you are but a breeding me another Son: Thus a while the King lived in languishment, so long as he was from Meaga.
In the mean time, Sir Melcar, Meaga's rejected Ser∣vant, out of anger and despite to her, went and married a Cosin, worthier indeed then she, whose name was Thrispne: And Meaga's maid being troubled in conscience that she should be guilty of Meaga's wickedness, went from her, and lived with this Lady Thrispne whom Melcar marred; and telling her Lady and Master of all the designs and plots of Meaga, did not likewise spair to devulge them abroad; and thus came we to know. At which re∣port the Queen fell sick: But the wicked Meaga (the King continuing long from her) fearing that her base love would come to nought, was by her old Aunt, the hatcher of mischief, promised a powerful effect: And it proved, thus, The Queen being better in health, the King commanded a ship to be finely trimed, wherein he did intend to take pleasure on the Sea, with the Lord President and Cleocre∣ton, onely a woman or two of the Queens: But before they went, Meaga had procured instruments of mischief like her self; for the King examining his Servants and Do∣mesticks concerning the jealousie he had of his Queen, though such things were far from any of their heads, for they and all others, knew her modest life: Therefore said the King (when all he said was to no purpose) in a fury, You are all of a conspiracy, and one day will cut me short, by that wicked woman my wives instigatin: But I solemnly sware, said he, that if you will not confess that the Queen and the President are too kinde, I will have you all hanged by the morning light. Then there started up a wicked fellow, and said, My Leige, your suspicion is not without good cause; but I and my fellows will swear to be faithful in what occasion your Maje∣stie shall command. Then some of them consented to what he said through fear, and others in hopes to be inriched, and the rest slunk away unseen, that were more ho∣nest.
Well, the King hearing this, and knowing of Meaga's Villains that she had prepared for the business, therefore he went even then into the ship with Cabulus, and the Queen with Cleocreton; but they had forgot young For∣tus, of whom you shall afterwards hear: But the King did not forget to cause the Rascally rude Rogues to follow them in another ship. So when the Royal ship had now lanced into the deep, with the other close by it, the King began to say, What Cabulus thinks thou, shall I have another Son, my wife seems to threaten me: At which the Queen smiled innocently, and said, It may be so my Lord, sooner then I know of, but the Queen meant another way. Then said the President, I wish your Majestie had many such Sons as these two you have. I, said the King, so would I, but not of your getting, as this is; and with that, he thrust Cleo∣creton from him. The Queen and Lord Cabulus stood amazed, to hear these words from the King. Nay, said he, Do not Cabulus and thee, wicked woman, study for ex∣cuses, for I will bring witness enough of it: So calling to the other ship, the ministers of Cruelty came, and mon∣sterously swore, That the ueen with Cabulus, had de∣filed the Kings bed: whereat the King drew forth his sword, and smote the President on the shoulder, not suf∣fering him or the Queen to speak; but the President ward∣ing off the blows, would not strike at the King. And one of the Rogues going to the deplorable Queen (who teared her very hair, and was miserably weeping) abused her with his Devillish Tongue; whereat Cleocreton drawing his sword, and his Princely heart not suffering him to endure his Mothers injuries, stroke the fellow on the face, that he fell backwards over board into the Sea, there to feed fishes; and the Prince seeing more enter, valiently cut some of their legs off, and others he cleft their heads, till he had killed nine or ten of them; one of them escaped, and told the King; who seeing the fel∣lows
lie dead, and having slain the President, went to Cleocreton, and gave him two or three grievous blows, say∣ing, Take thou that thou valiant Bastard. And for you (point∣ing at the Queen) said he, for thy childe within thee, I will not lay my hands on thee. Well (said she) my Lord, I hope the Gods will look on my innocency and affliction. But the King went forth in a rage, and commanded the dead men to be thrown out, and left none but my self and the Queens woman with the wounded Prince, whom we laid on his Mothers lap, thinking he had been slain: Our sails being up, and the winds high, and out Pilot dead, our ship sailed fast away, and so was cast on the Persian shore. This (most Illustri∣ous Empress) is the whole and true story of my Queens Tragedy. When the Princely company had heard the sum of Galta∣zets, Discourse, they could scarce any of them refrain from weeping. The Emperor going to the Quéen, said, Madam, if the heart blood of me and my Subjects will redeem your vertuous self, und your Son, it shall be done; and in the mean time, abide with us, and call this your home, till your own be made more comfortable. The sweet Lady having returned humble thanks to the Emperor, he taking her and Cleocreon by the hand, said to the Em∣press, Madam, take this vertuous Queen to thy custody, and you Cosin Albyazer, take the Prince into your Charge, and render to them respect according to persons of tei mr and quality. Which done, the Empress and Albyazer ansered, Your Majesties command hall be obeyd, to the umost of our povver. Then the Emperor e the Queen, to her chamber, and Albyazer conducted loryana and Phiopeet to thirs: and so retured to Cleocreton, and said, Now Noble Prince, you are in my charge. I am ve∣ry happy, replyed Cleocreton, to have such a Guardian. Come said Albyazer mrrily) my Lord, vve  never in love? No replyed the Prince, there hath no such fancy ever entred m brain: but if you be so, I will not condemn
the passion; although I must needs confess, I think its a folly in men, to engage their senses in such an unnecessary trouble: And though it be an usual thing amongst men, that thing they call love, yet the Ceremonies of any thing should never make me the more affected with it. Well, Prince Cleocreton, I shall one day, said he, see you taken in the height of this Unnecessary Trouble, as you call it. Then said Albyazer, For my share, I am intrapped by the gins and snares of a powerful Beauty, as I could wish I had always remained as free, as you profels your self. But, said Cleocreton, I pray Sir, what may that Beauty be, that hath dominion over such a brave spirit as yours? I hope you may discover your disease, it is not infections. Sir, replyed Albyazer, Your own eyes shall be Judges, no other then the Lady Philopeet, whose beauty you know, and whose perfections are scarce to be parallel'd: This Lady is Neece to the King of Corinth, her Father dy∣ing two years ago, and he being a great Companion with the Emperor my Uncle; so these two dearly loving one another, and the Lady her Mother losing her life, by giving of breath to Philopeet, her Father left the Ward∣ship of her to the Emperor of Persia; though it did a lit∣tle stomack the King of Corinth her Uncle, who had no childe: But no sooner did I see the Lady, but streight I had an invincible love for her: But though so fair, yet so rigorous is she, as the truth is, I am very unhappy. She so much resembleth the Diamond, that though the most beautiful, yet the hardest of any stone: At the first she en∣tertained me very sweetly for a friend, but in the quality of a servant, even as I have told you. Cleocreton could not but smile, to see with what a concerned look and action he did declare his love, and thought himself blessed to be free from such a distraction, as disturbed the hearts of the bravest men But while they were talking of love, there came to the
Emperors Palace a Knight, with a Paper in his hand, and delired to deliver it to the Emperor: therefore it was presented to Albyazer, as was the custom, and if the business was of great weight, then he carried it to the Emperor: if of little value, then he dispatched if himself. But finding it to be thus, Creeon King of Corinth, To the Emperor of Persia wishing health, and also requiring our Neece Philopeet, as it is right and due that we should have her in Ward, she being our Heir next in blood: But if this be denied, we have sent ten of our Knights to defend by right what we demand; and by their swords to maintain the quarrel against ten others, equal in Armour and Weapons; and then who wins, thee or I shall have the Lady in Ward: Be honourable, abuse not my Knights by inequality of number, or treachery, for fear of a further Vengeance lighting on the Kingdom of Persia. Farewell. Albyazer being déeply concerned in the business, and car∣rying it to the Emperor, he presently calling of Counsel de∣termined rather to fight it out, then to give up the pledge of his deceased friend. Thou Albyazer went out to his defi∣ance to the Enemy: where he espied their brave Captain, whose name was the Lord Muxorb, Nephew to the Queen of Corinth, he was armed in White, with spots of Orange, shaped in hearts flaming: he was on a white Stéed, and his Horse was traped in the some colour with his Armour: for a Device in his Shield, he bare a Heart pierced thorow, with the beams of a Conquering eye, the words were, Too hot to hold: his brave Plume spreading it self on his well shaped shoulders. When Albyazer had viewed the Cham∣pions, with their brave Captain, and seeing them all very well accoutered, he said to Muxorb, Sir, the Emperor of Persia doth not fear the proud threats of the Corinthian King, neither will he give up the Lady, who is the
pledge of his deceased Friend her Father, but he will with∣out delay send as many in number, and soon shew his right by his Knights valour. Well, replyed Muxorb, I wish their valour may be great, that we may have the more honor in conquering them. And in the mean time the Emperor was providing equals for them, Albyazer went and armed himself in a fine new Armour, blew as the Heavens, and spnged with Stars, his Devise vvas Sun, in the motto vvas, It hurts the sight, Tough to see it is delight. And vvhile the Knights vvas arming themselves, came Al∣byazers Father with his fair Daughter, and seeing his Son going to fight, would needs go with him, but by the tears of the Lady Calecy, and the Emperor his Brother, he was diswaded from his enterprize, for the Prince Matignirene of Gnickrib, was a valiant Souldier, but novv he rather sub∣mitted to age, and entreaties of his friends: But Cleocreton could not by any means obtain leave to go, and be one of the Knights, for the Emperor nor his Mother vvould by no means venture him, by reason of his youth: But he being resolute, and being spurred on vvith desire of honor, took occasion to slip out of the vvay, and causing Galtazet to make ready his Horse and Armour, he made himself ready for to go: for he had got Albyazer to let his Squire to go in the room of his ovva, therefore Cleocreton commanded him as soon as he came into the lists, to go avvay. But before Al∣byazar vvould go out, he vvould ask leave of his Lady Phi∣lopeet, and being in haste, he caused his Squire to give Phi∣lopeet this short farevvel. MAdam, as your Beautiful Self gives life to me, so I being armed with your Command, shall be va∣liant, and give death to my Enemies, who doth proud∣ly pretend to take you from your humble Servant, Albyazer.
This being delivered, Philopeet now understood the bot∣tom of her own heart more then ever, and saw that she could not be happy without Albyazer; whereupon she writ this short return, Prince Albyazer, you have my leave to gain Honour, but not hurt; therefore to the Gods I commend you: And that you may return Victor, is the chief desire of yours, Philopeet. He joyfully received it, and then took a general farewel of them all, and of his dear Sister the Lady Calsey, who prized him as her life: He went accompanied with all their prayers, for his safe and honorable return. Then the Emperor, the Prince Magnirene, and all the Ladies, being placed at the windows on ich cushions (the place of battel being very nigh the same) as they were just going to their blows, the Vmpers being set, and the Trumpets sounding, Cleocreton came in, and his Squire went out: so none could be offended, though they all took notice of his sprightly behaviour, and some could have wished they had kept the other. Then fell the Cham∣pions to break their spears with great fury▪ and then draw∣ing their swords, fell to the fiercest Battel that ever eye be∣held: but there was none in more rage, then was Albyazer, for he alwas fetchd new courage from the swéet face of his Philopeet: And coming to the Corthy Muxorb, whose deli∣cate shape, and Knightly demeanour, winned attendance and admiration of all the Ladies: but Albyazer lent him such a stroke on the head, as he cut the clask of his Helmet, and left to the view of the spectators, all the treasure of his golden hair: but he was not accustomed to borrow such coyn, and not to pay largely, he gave Albyazer such a coun∣terpose on the shoulder, as he made his head touch the crooper of his Horse: But the great reason that made Muxorb lay on such puisant strokes was, when his Helmet was off, he took occasion to look to the windows where the Ladies were, for one might very well sée the Beauty of them all; but it was Calseys beauty that conquered Muxorb: and he taking her to be Philopeet, for he never saw her, but knew that Ab∣byazer was her servant, and as a Rival did he treat him:
But Cleocreton coming from amidst his slain foes, and séeing his friend in Extremit, he stepping in, set Albyazer free, who else had béen Prisoner to the King of Corinths Champions, who by that means thought to get some noble Prisoner, and so have gotten Philopeet for a Ransome: but Cleocreton strongly engaged Muxorb, to the bravest onset that ever eye beheld. At last Cleocreton (being referred to compleat the Wonders he had begun) got Muxorb to such an advantage, as he must either dye or be his Prisoner: Now, said leo∣creton, What wilt thou do? He being hugely grieved at his disgrace, even before the Lady to whom he had seceetly vow∣ed his heart: but he thought, since he was vanquished both within and without, it was better to yield the day to them both, and so he might however gain something by the bar∣gain, said, My Lord, since I am brought to this pass, I must yield: whatsoever you be, I cannot be overcome by a braver Conqueror then your self. So the fight being done, there was three slain on the Emperors side, and two sore wounded: but of the King of Corinths side there was but four left alive, and they all van∣quished: But they would take none Prisoner but the gallant Muxorb, and let the other go to report their own hard hap. Then Albyazer desirous of nothing more, then to know the hardy Knight that relieved him, came to Cleocreton: and Muxorb said, Thou Son of Wonders, whose stature is but youth, yet whose valour doth arise to rule the World; that hath not onely given the pastport to the most of the Enemies, but hath conquered that Valiant Knight, meaning Muxorb. But (continued Albyazer) let us be so happy, as to know whom ye are. Cleocreton taking off his Helmet, bowed to them both. Muxorb ignorant who he was, did with vvonder gaze on him: but Albyazer asto∣nished to see him ran and imbraced him, saying, I had the least thoughts on Prince Cleocreton. Muxorb then remem∣bred that he had heard many reports of him. Then they all vvould make an Eternal league of friend∣ship Cleocreton, Albyazer, and their Princely Captive Muxorb: So going into the Palace, they presented their gallant Prisoner. Then said the Emperor to him, My Lord, assure your self, as your fame is spread abroad
for your Noble deeds, so shall you lose nothing of your honor and respect here, onely give your oath not to depart hence without leave from my self. Muxorb did so: But they were all amazed when they saw Cleocreton in Armour, which was of a pleasant gréen, resembling the time of the year, which was Spring, with many pretty flowers; and in the midst of his Sheild was broken Spears, with slain men, and others led like Captives in chains, with this inscription, Born to Conquer. But as he was born indeed to conquer, so was he conquer∣ed, and became a captive to the beauty of Cloriana: for she being amongst the other Ladies, and her beauty surpassing them all, therefore he very earnestly beholding herface, saw so much of Maiesty and Sweetness in her, that he did admire that any should adore anything else. But it was a strange alteration that was in him; for even a little before, seeing Albyazer with as much devotion greet his beloved Philo∣peet, thought, they are well that are free: No sooner did he think so, but he looking on Clor ana, and they encountring one another with their eyes, she suddenly turning her eyes from him, with a dart like lightning, did those glances of her beauty strike Cleocreton to the very heart: for his too too much gazing at her, did cause all her face to look like Vermillion, as well as her cheeks, to see him give such an assault to her incomparable face: but he recovered himself without being taken notice of; for they were all imployed, Albyazer with beholding Philopeet, and Muxorb was no less taken with Caleys beauty, whom now he knew was not Phi∣lopeet, but Albyazers sister: for she did discover it her self, with going to her brother so prettily, saying to his Squire, take off your Masters Armor, and let me know if my bro∣ther hath any hurt: the which Muxorb well noting, said to himself, Let het be what she will, yet she onely shall rule me, my life and all I have all be at her Service: Then Galtazet disarming his Master, and found no wound about his body, but an old wound that was open: but sooner cured then that of his minde, which though it was not visible, yet it for∣mented him more a thousand times, then any ever did of his body. Then they all returned whom to their lodgings, but poor Cleocreton was in the sadest case of them all; for he was
sick, and knew not his disease: but getting all alone, said to himself, What Cleocreton is the matter? doth this victory dis∣please thee? or wast thou not enough honored by con∣quering Muxorb? Ah, but my heart is about some other game; it is no Victory that troubles me, my very reason is lost: I know there is not one thing that I did very earn∣estly bestow my sight upon, but onely on the Princess Cloryana; but that is a thing that all do, as well as I. and when he had named Cloryana, his very heart did beat and pant strangely. Then would he say, This, tis was a ve∣ry strange sight, that could cause all this disquiet. But I that was so high against Lovers, must not now become one my self; It is but surely some distemper that over-chargeth my body, and so puts my heart out of frame; for it is not love, I do but affect Cloryana, as all must needs do that behold her. But why should the Idea of this Amiable Princess, present it self thus before me? I have seen her before, but never did her sight thus set my heart on fire: O Cleocreton! must thou needs err by example! Is it not enough to consider, how many dangers there still accompany this Passion, but thou wilt run headlong unto them thy self. But now now he began to cr, It is. Love, it is Love! for no sickness can go further then the body, but this insensibly touches my very soul: But take courage my heart; for though I am fallen into a snare, yet she that hath catched me, is not in the degree of compa∣rison; for surely my Princess is the Paragon of the whole World. But O, how ignorant am I! will such a Goddess as she, suffer a poor exiled Prince, as I am, to love her. Yet (said he) she must do it, how can she help it; for all the powers in the world is not able to root it out of me, nor am I my self indeed. But will she love thee Cleocre∣ton, who art born of an unnatural Father, and of a dis∣consolate Mother? But why not, for she is born, and must love; and she cannot affect any, that ever would
more adore her; or hazard life or any thing, so willingly as Cleocreton for Cloryana. Thus you see the Conqueror was bravely vanquished: but yet his case was not so desperate as he thought, for it he was unquiet on the one side, she was not serene on the other: For at that very instant the Gods ordered it so, that this was a day of Cupids sports▪ for in the same manner was she switten: and though she was young, yet knew she that he heart was conquered, as well as was Cleocretons, but she did resolve not to bear it all her self, for she very se∣cretly imparted it to her beloved Iulia that she was not one∣ly in love, but sick of love and she néeded not to counterfeither self sick, for her Cosin Calsey perceiving her indisposition, ay∣ing, what is the matter with you? She said, I desire to be in bad. So they left her to her bad, and told the Emperess her tender Mother: who went presently to her Daughter, and taking her by the hand, and féeing it very hot, she said, Childe, what shall I do for thee? Nothing, Madam (said she) but let me have a little sleep. So the Empress drew the curtain, and caused her maids to attend very quietly by her, and commanded that one of them should tell her when she awaked. But her sleeping was an excuse to be alone: So causing them all to go forth but Julia, she said, Dear Julia, I would gladly discover my self to thee, but I am afraid thou wilt oppose me, and think to bring me to my reason, but that medicine is past taking; for I have tryed all arguments with my self, and therefore nothing of ap∣plication will do that thou knowest. But Iulia finding whereabouts her Lady was, said, Madam, your will shall be my Law, and if my service in any thing will profit you, you may assure your self it shall be imployed according to my duty. Then caused she Iulia to come neer her for she was afraid that the very stone wals should perceive her fally: then said she, O Julia, this Princely stranger hath by one sight so bewitched me, as I cannot enjoy my self in any serenity in the World: But what hopes is there that I shall be better, when he is an exiled Prince, and onely cometh to my Father for protection? And nothing, dear Julia, I
finde, in the Universe, can bring me content, hut Cleo∣creton, who I fear hath no affection at all for me. Now tell me, didst thou ever behold a more accomplished per∣son then this young Prince? Julia well perceiving what ground this growing passion had gained of her Lady, thought that nothing would do but compliance: and therefore said, Madam, how is it possible but he should have a great affection to you; for I think I did see you both, when your hearts were smitten with love, and I'll sware he did gaze upon your beauty so much, as I am very much mistaken if he have not a most passionate love for you. But, Ma∣dam, if you would have the credit of the cause, chear up your Spirits, and to morrow let me attire you to all the advantage that may be, and you, shall presently perceive whether it be soor no. Well Julia (said she) thou wouldst make me believe strange things, but I am not so credulous; for I have often heard, that Lovers have much difficulty, and much dan∣ger, and shall I think to be happy at the first? For if Cleocreton did love Cloriana, that were not all; for then my Father how incensed would he be: But if that were all my distress, I should bear it well enough, but it is the want of love, that will, I fear, be the cause of my com∣plaints. Well Madam (said she) then I hope you need not complain; for there must needs be a simpathy in na∣ture between two that are so incomparable you are. But this Discourse was broken off by the coming in of the Emperor and all the Ladies, to visit Cloryana: for one of her maids being asked of the Empress concerning her: an∣swered, that Cloryana was awake; and no sooner knew the Emperor, but needs must he see his chief and onely darling. So coming in, Iulia went to the door, and seeing the Empe∣ror, went and told Cloryana, who was in far better temper then she was. So he placing himself on the bed side, and all the Ladies on seats, he said to her, what is thy Melady, my Cloryana. She smiling said, A little sleep hath cured me, my Lord. Then said the Empress, Childe, if thou be well, I
would have thee rise. And so they departing the room, clory∣ana got up, and very pleasantly said, come Iulta, lets see thy charms now, that thou wilt arm me withal, to take a heart Prisoner. So cloryana was very gloriously apparalled, in a Gown of green and silver, which best suited with the season, and she affected to be attired the most like a shepherdess, with her head adorned in flowers of divers colours, and intermix∣ed with Diamonds, and having her garment clasped down before with Diamonds und Rubies, the sleeves being open, hung loose, and were as long as the rest of her gown, and over her lovely hair, hung a vail of white, spreading over her shoulders, her fair alablaster neck shewing it self thorow it, with her rich and costly bracelets, and chains of pearls. In the mean time was cleocreton discovering himself to Galta∣zet, and he was very sorroy for his dear Masters disquiet, and promised him all the aid and assistance that he could make him. My Galtazet, said Cleocreton, what shall I do to disco∣ver my love to her, that is the cause of it. Well, my Lord, said Galtazet, if you will for this once be coun∣selled by your servant, do but write your Princely chal∣lenge to the Lady, and I will dye, or bring you an an∣swer. cleocreton was glad to hear him say so, for he knew that his notable wit, would bring forth any enterprize that he took in hand: So he went and writ a Letter to Clo∣ryana. So we will leave him to his writing, and take notice what news the Queen hath received from Hungary. A mes∣senger having brought her a packet of Letters, and a pretty sum of gold, from the good Lady the Presidents wife, whose name was Queama: Who when she had received the sad tidings of her husbands death, and of the strange banish∣ment of the Queen, having at that time in her custody young Prince Fortus, conveyed him secretly to her Countrey house, whose weak soul was so transported, without measure, that the Lady could scarce keep him from being discovered: but he had a great love to Queama, for she was his nurse, and had a son of his age, and very like him: so the Lady sent a∣way her son to a brothers of hers, and by that means was Fortus preserved in the room, and under the name of the Pre∣sidents
son, whose name was Steafea. So this vertuous Widow, though her Husband lost his life for the Queen, yet she still retained her old love towards her: And hearing that her Maiesty was in Persia, went and acquainted the Queens friends thereof, and so amongst them, they sent her a sum of moneys, and also to let her know, that she was their law∣ful Queen, and they her lawful Subiects, and that they would venture their lives for her: and also, that the King they thought, would be soon weary of his proud, insulting Concubine, who did not onely strive to distress the Quéens friends, but also to govern the King, and all the Kingdom. The Queen hearing this news, presently acquanted her good friends the Emperor and Emperess vvih it, for it vvas no small Ioy to her, to hear she had such good Subiects. But the Prince Fortus writ to his brother Prince Cleocreton, That if he would gain honor, then must he come where it was to be had; desiring him to come to Hungary, and see if either by whiles or force, they could rout the wick∣ed Meaga out. Which news was not very pleasant to the Queen: for she dreaded to part with her other Son also, but at the last she consented that he should go within two moneths: but so did not sweet Cloryana for she lost all her hopes, if her servant went away, before there was some discovery of their love. But for all this news, Cleocreton continued to adore her Shrine, above all the Kingdoms of the World: and when he had writ his Letter he gave it to Galtazet, which contain∣ed these: Most Incomparable Princess, LEt the Bleeding Wounds of that Heart, which you have peirced by the beams of your matchless Beauty, plead together with those irresistable Charms, and do not quash the small hopes of your humble Servant; who though but new begun in the School of Cupid, yet is so Eternally yours, as it is in the power of your answer, either to give life or death to your sworn Admirer, Cleocreton.
Galtazet quickly met with Iulia, and began to court her, and extreamly praised her beauty: She vvas very tractable, because she had a desire to found him cunningly concerning his Master, as well as he her to get the Letter carried to her Lady: And thus he began, Sweet Julia, I wish that your Lady were the young Queen of Hungary. How should that be? said she. If your Princess, said he, would marry my Prince, then it might be. Truly, said she, your Prince is a very gallant person. And truly, said he, your Lady is a very gallant Princess. They would do well together, said she, but it may be your Master hath no such minde. If you Lady, said he, had but as good an inclination to him, as he hath to her, then were all right. Iulia smited, and said, How know you that? Well enough, said Galtazet, for he is in a very great pssion for her, even at this time, and here is a testimony of the truth of it: then he gave her the Letter, and earnestly desired her to car∣ry it to the Princess. She was something nice, but when she heard Galtazets oathes and prodestations, of his Masters being the Princess Cloryana's servant, she took it: And they enoyning each other to secresie, she carried it to her Lady, and said, Madam, I bring you such news as my self did never ex∣pect so soon. The Lady said, with a blush, VVhat Julia, hast thou betrayed me? Good Madam (said she) be not so suspicious; for I protest, I would not do any thing contrary to your directions for a World. Cloryana hearing her say so, and knowing her truth, said, Come good Julia, let me understand what thou knowest. Ma∣dam (said she) I being in a walk of the Garden, Galta∣zet came to me, and said that he should be very much en∣gaged to me, if I would deliver this Letter to your own hands. Cloryana opened it, and reading it, said, Oh! sure∣ly Julia this is a delusion; but if this be true as he pre∣tendes, I will ever love Cleocreton, whatsoever follow. It is good to be resolute Madam, said Iulia. Then Clorya∣na took pen and ink, and writ him this answer.
My Lord, THere is so much danger and deceit in the Passion you speak of, that it is not good for us to believe all pre∣tended affection: But if it be so, that I have conquered the brave Conqueror, then I may well boast of my Con∣quest, and say, It is more then the deserts of Cloryana. Cleocreton received this answer with unspeakable joy: and whilest he was wishing to see his Honored Lady, the Lord Muxorb had very much priviledge to sée and court his Lady Calsey; for there was not any that withstood their af∣fections amongst all her friends, and many of them, even in his presence, would plead for him. The Lady did admire his handsome proportion, and courtly demeanor, but yet he had something to do before he could get the coy Lady to ac∣cept of his affection: But at the last, with his frequent and passionate discourse and protestations of affection, she was never so pleasant, as when he was with her, and threw off all her Admirers, onely for his sake, and a constanter Lady then she the World could not afford. But now the King of Tunis had intalligence concerning his Sister the Quéen of Hungary: And being very much trou∣bled, sent a Messenger to her with a Letter, wherein were these words: Dear Sister, I am sorrowful for your base enclined Husband, and I desire you to come to me; and I sware by the Gods immortal, that I will not leave any alive in his Kingdom, before he shall abuse our Family with his gross enormi∣ties: Commend me to the Emperor of Persia, Farewel.
The Queen called Cleocreton, and they determined to send this answer: Renowned Brother, I Give you many thanks for your kindeness, and your proffer; but if you have any love for your Sister, do not raise a War against my Lord and Husband: If you think good to threaten do, for it may be that may work upon him; proceed no further, if you prize the welfare of your sister: By your leave, I would stay here, till I hear further what your counsel or threatning will do, and I will in the mean time send my two Sons Cleocreton and Fortus to you. Farewel. Now there was to be a general Feast and Banquet at the Emperors Palace, for the Lords and Ladies of the Court; for it was the Emperors Birth-day, and every one appear∣ed in their sundry costly Apparel. And when the were all placed, every Lover feasted more on their Ladies beauty, then any entertainment that could be imagined. Cleocreton gladly, but wifely, beholding Clo∣ryana, for it was death to him he thougth, to be discovered: but Cloryana could by no means hide her blushing for though she dissembled her self, and looked at any thing else, yet still she must sometimes steal a sight of her Cleocreton, who did the same for her: but she sitting next Calsey, and they two having a little discourse, Cloryana had a great deal of love to∣wards her: for she was of so true a disposition, that in any thing, that possibly she could, she would favour her friend: and all people did honor her, but especial Muxorb, whose eyes did closely follow her looks. Calsey seeing Cloryana very of∣ten to blush, and knowing well what Love meant, did ima∣gine her to be affected with some that was present: and find∣ing Cleocreton stealing his looks on her, and viewing him, and seeing his great worth and noble presence, thought, why may it not be that with him my Cosin Cloryana is in love. And taking her by the hand, said, Cosin, methinks Prince Cleocreton is a very Noble, fine Person. Cloryana,
blushing more then before, said to Calsey, I Cosin, it is pity he should be crossed in his Fortunes so much, for he hath a very vertuous Mother. Calsey could not but saule to see Cloryana's hand shake, and tremble, as she spake, but let her alone for that time, and thought to get it out some other way. But when they had ended their entertainment, the Em∣peror desired they should dance, and having as: excellent mu∣sick as the World could afford, he went himself to the Queen of Hungary to take her out: She would fain have refused it, but that she knew it would affront the Emperors kindeness, but she very gallantly performed her part: the Emperor took also the fair Empress, and she very spritely, and most becomingly danced, Cleocreton took Cloryana through course, and she did so nimbly and delicately dance one while in the French mode, and another while in the Persian fashion; and Prince Cleocreton was not to seek: for indeed they were so rarely matched, as these two did shade away all the atten∣dance of the company: there was none that could in the least come near her, but onely a Noble Lady of the Court, whose name was Trandia, whom the Lord Muxorb, after he had taken Calsey, he led her out, and they did both admirably well, though Cloryana carried the day of her. But now it was time for every one to go to their rest. But Cleocreton had warned Galtazet to court Iulia by any means to get entrance into her Ladies Chamber, for that was the privatest place they could méet in. So Iulia said, as soon as she could speak with her Lady, Good Madam, grant me one request, and that is, that you would let Prince Cleo∣creton come and speak with you to night. Nay Julia, I must not give him that liberty. For we two to be alone with him, I shall not endure it, and company thou knowest is dangerous, and besides, my Cosin Calsey must be with me to night. Why Madam (said she) are you so far from satisfying one, whom you have confessed often to me; that you loved above all the World. And for the Lady Calsey, let her be with you, onely discover your self to her beforehand, and for her fidelity, you need not fear: If you deny this Madam, I may justly say that you dis∣sembled, under the Rose be it spoken. Well Julia, thou
art a strange Wench, and thy confidence thou canst well justifie, because thou knowest I love Clocreton: therefore go thy ways, for thou hast over perswaded me, and let him come, while I go and tell my dear Calsey. So they parting, Cloryana went to Calsey, and taking her by the hand, said, Dear Cosin, thou shalt lie with me: So they took ther leave of all the company, and went to their cham∣ber, which Jula had trimmed finery up, and put the Princess new Furniture into it, which was of green Damask, and imbroidered with gold and with many other pretty things had she adorned it, and likewise with a perfume that the Princess Cloryana had learned of her Mother the Empress, that all the Ladie, of Persia had not the like. So the two Ladies sitting them down, Calsey said, Dear Princess, I pray you tell me one thing. Any thing, sweet Cosin, said Cloryana. Onely, said Calsey, what it was that moved you so much to blush, when you and I sate toget er? O, said Cloryana, have you taeme: Pray tellme, what it is that males your colour come so fast, when the Lord Muxorb courteth you? Is it so indeed with you Cosin? said Calsey. Tis so, said Cloryana: and blushing said, My Lord Cleocreton truly did make me do what you speak: and dear Cosin, I am resolved to tell thee all, for he will be here presently. But, said she, dear Calsey, for thy life do not so much as tell thy Muxorb. Well, dear Cosin, dost thou suspect me? I should never be at peace with my self, if I should give Princess Cloryana occasion to call me Truse∣breaker. Cloryana imbraced her, and said, I fear thee not, dear Cosin. The Ladies waited but a while, before Cleocreton came, but he was surprized when he saw Calsey, and thought to have turned back: but Calsey said, Come Prince Cleocreton, for I wll do you no harm. He then knowing that he must go in, went, and with a very low congee, kist the hand of Cloryana, and saluted Calsey with this complement. I suppose you need not think it strange, to see men unde take any thing for one sight of the Lady they adore: for I must needs confess, that the beauty of the Divine Cloryana, hath got so conquering a power over my very soul, as I that always condemed love, am now happy if I can but confess my error to the Princess of my life: and with that he looked on Cloryana, and being over∣come with love, and afraid to displease her, said no more. Then said Calsey, Truly, my Lord, if I have any power with my Cosin, I will imploy it to this purpose, that she may requite
your sincere love with as true affection. But Cloryana turn∣ing the Discourse, said, Sir, If it please you, I will desire my Cosin to tell us the life and fortunes of the Lady that danced so admirable well. he replied, Madam, your commands are as Restoratives, to quiken the drowsiest parts to become obe∣dient to you, and so questionless me your Servant. Then Calsey willing to oblige Cloryana; began thus, directing her dscource to the Princess. Madam, I Need not describe the beauty of the Lady Trandia, for you know it: But as concerning her birth, it was hard by my Fathers Castle of Gnigrib, her Fathers name was Sal∣liman, a Gentleman of very good account; he was an Italian born, and being a very great Traveller, at the last seeing a Lady in Persia, a Noblemans Daughter, whom he long courted; and at the last, when her Fa∣ther was dead, she being the onely heir, and left great possessions, she married Sir Salliman, and he by her had the Lady Trandia; who being very young, was sent from them into Italy, to a Nobleman that was her Fathers Kinsman, and there was she bred up; and she being courted by many of the Italian Gentry, she liked none of them, till a young Knight that was a stranger in those parts, at the first sight of Trandia, fell desperately in love with her; but the Lord Panim, in whose House Trandia was, did not at all like the match: Yet Sir Trulious had got the Ladies heart, but yet she seemed to banish him as well as Lord Panim, but for all that, se∣cretly married him: And soon after, her Father sent for her home; and as the Lady was going, Sir Trulious met her, and riding close by her Coach, they being in serious discourse, heard the trampling of a horse, Trulious look∣ing behind him, he espied a Guyoxy Knight, whom Lord Panim would have had Trandia to have married, his name was Castore; for he hearing that she was on her journey,
and that Trulious was going with her, and having a mor∣tal despite against him, as the chief obstacle to his felici∣ty, therefore when he saw him ride close by Trandia, he drew his sword, and said, Come thou wanderer, and let us try our titles to the Lady. We need not, said Trulious, let her speak, and condem whom she pleases. He then attend∣ing her answer, she said, There hath none any right to Trandia but Truilous. Well, said Castore, since I must dye by your condemnation, Madam, my fall shall be with the blood of Trulious; and with that he gave him a very mortal wound on his side. Trulious at the receiving of this wound, was almost dead but yet recovering himself, he gave him another on the thigh, and after that, laid on strokes incredible for one so fore wounded; while poor Trandia crying, and threatning, and promising great things to Castore, to leave the fight; but all her tears and entreaties was to no purpose, for fight they did, till they both fell down to the ground. She running to Trulious, and finding that he did breath, caused him to be convey∣ed into her coach, and away they hasted to the next Town: But O Heavens, how grievously she lamented the sad fortune of her dear Trulious! who by his groans and sighs did give his summons to death, while she spent herself with dolorous and heavy complaints. At the last, while he was in her arms, he faintly said, Now my dear Trandia farewel, the Gods make thee more happy in thy second love, then thou hast been in thy first: And so lifting up his head to kiss her, and so breathed his last breath in her mouth: She seeing him dead, could not contain her sorrows, but bursted forth a weeping, and lamenting, and kising the dead body, she fell on her face, and said, I come my dear Trulious, and so fell into a swound; her two wo∣men using all their art and industry for her recovery, and filling the aire with their crys, and not suffering their Mi∣stress to depart, she came to her self just as they were en∣tring
into the next Town; and coming to a house, the very people in the streets did lament with her: But one of her maids laying reason before her, told her, That Trulious must dye, and that was the time, and the death, that the Gods had appointed for him; and also, said she, What would you do? his body must be buried, and you must go home to your Fathers. She always was her Counsellour before, and therefore she hearkned to her; and so causing the bo∣dy to be buried (after many entreaties) and cloathing her∣self and her Servants in mourning, she took her way to∣wards Persia: And having uttered many sad Complaints, she considered that it was the best way for her, not to dis∣cover herself to her friends, because it was not known to any in the place where she was going. So coming home to her Father, he and her Mother re∣joyced to see her, but wondring at her sadness, and her mourning apparel; she told them, That there was a friend of Lord Panims dead, and one whom she loved greatly: But she continued in her sad and pensive thoughts, which none knew but her servants, that would not betray her. But good Salliman was extreme sorrowful to see his daughters reserved temper: for all the invension he had, or that he and her mother could devise, would scarce cause a laugh from her: Then they resolving to try all ways with her, went abroad, and came to the Court, where they stayed a while: And one night (as she was in her usual lamenta∣tions) there appeared the spirit of her Trulious, and said unto her, O Trandia, leave thy weeping, for thereby thou tormentest my soul, and so vanished. She durst not mourn then, but striving as much as she could to comfort her∣self, at the last, with much ado, she became as pleasant as any Lady at the Court, and then her beauty appeared as bright as ever: And there was then with the Emperor, one of his chief Lords of his Counsel, that fell in love with her, and married her.
Now, sweet Madam, you have the relation of the life of the Lady Trandia. Cloryana gave Calsey many thanks; and smiling said, It seems there will nothing last on earth, for joy is soon qualified with sorrow, and that hath an end, as is seen by this Lady. Truly, said the Lady Calsey, if Lovers be but constant whilest they live, I think it is enough; for it is but a folly for one to spend their time in mourning, and unnecessary lamenting, when all will nor call a dead friend again. Cleocreton now awaking his thoughts to what they were saying; for all the while before, he was more contemplaing on the beauty of Cloryana, then giving any great héed to Calseys story, he said then to Cloryana, Madam, I am learly of Lady Calseys opinion; and I think, that if you would but yield to love me, I should think your constancy to me on earth, were satisfaction enough, and not to have any mourning for me when I were dead. And do you think, Sir, replyed Clo∣ryana, to have ful satisfaction here? Truly I think we shall ne∣ver have that, but in our graves; and if we cannot have that on earth, then may you be in some sort satisfied with my friend∣ship, without my love. I greatly esteem your friendship, Ma∣dam, replyed Cleocreton; but I can take no satisfaction in the World without your love; which is no hard thing for you to bestow, though it were the most precious thing in the World to me, and more valuable. then all the treasure in the World. Then said Cloryana, You speak, as though my love, being en∣joyed, were treasure and honor. Yes, Madam, surely it is Treasure, and Kingdoms, and Honor in the highest. Then, said she, It ought to be linked to Treasure, and Honor, and Kingdoms. Poor Cleocreton was daunted at this spéech, because he had not Kingdoms to endue her withal. Come, come, Cosin, said Calsey, you are very pevish to night; will you not con∣sent to no argument at all? you entertain your Guest well indeed. Then Calsey took Cloryana by the hand; and in a pleasant hu∣mour said, Come Madam, be not so coy to the Prince, because I came with you. And then giving Cleocreton her hand, she took a Lute that lay by her, and played them a Lesson very well, which very much delighted the Lovers; for Cleocreton having Cloryana by the hand, said, Sweet Prince, be more gracious to me, or else I am but a miserable Lover; and with tears in his eyes, he begged more kindeness of her, saying, Sweet Madam, what is your displeasure against me? Is your heart engaged to any other?
She fearing to give just occasion to him; said, You are too too hasty, my Lord, in desiring to be assured of my affection at the very first; besides, there is great Beauties at the King of Tunis his Court, and perhaps you will be as ready to for∣sae Cloryana, as you seem amorous on her now. Well, said Cleocreton, did I think really that you, Madam, did imagine me to be so basely inclined, then let me dye presenly, before I be more misrable. Then the Princess took his hand, and held it, saying, Live and hope, Cleocreton He kissing her hand, she went from him to Calsey, who was playing still, and said, Sweet Cosin, I pray thee let me have a song. She said, Good Madam, do not make me out run my self at this time, not onely to play ill, but to trouble your patience so much as to sing so too. Well, said Cloryana, We will see what Prince Cleocreton can gain of you. Your self, Madam, shall gain of me, as much as any Princess in the World. But Cleocreton being glad to obey his Lady in any thing, went to Calsey, and said, Come Madam, make me once in my life to hear your sweet voyce; but most of all to content the Princess. I, said she, since I must needs do it, thn let one word more come from the Princess, because she may well say else, I would not do it for her. Nay, said Clory∣ana, you would have me to entreat you, but now I will not. You shall have no Song then Madam. Then said Cloriana I pray the good Calsey, sing. Then she sung to the Lute as follow∣eth: A Lady in Persia there lived of late. Whose beauty excelled each one or other: To gain her love great Princes did wait, She that was alone born of her Mother: Great pride she did take, sometimes to torment Those that her vowed Servants would be, And often leaves them to Passions rent, But turn again shortly I hope you shall see. Nay in good faith Calsey, said Cloryana, leave thy Song. Scarce could Calsey hold for laughing, to hear her pretty humour. But Cleocreton was extremely satisfied, and laughed out right.
Calsey then laid by her Lute, and laughed with them, and said, I will make no more songs, if you laugh at me thus. In good truth, said the Princess, I thought it was of thy own making, it was so well penned. Nay, it was never penned, said she, for this is the first time I made Princess Cloryana the sub∣ject of my song; neither could I take in hand to do that, unless I could do it better, but I hope it will be no offence; fot it was onely done to make your Ladiship merry. No Cosin Calsey, those that would be offended at thy harm∣less conceits, they should not be liked of by me. Now it was time for the Ladies to go to bed, for fear that some or other should discover them. So Galtazet lighted his Master to bed, and the Ladies leapt into their glad bed, which was willing to receive them: And little discourse passed btwéen them, before time measured them the short all of sleep, which lasted till pretty far in the morning. Phi∣lopeet came and sate down by them, and told them, That they were good Housewives indeed, that lay so long a bed. Truly my Cosin Calsey, said Cloryana, kept me so long awake with her conceits, as I am glad to get a little sleep in the morning. Well, said Calsey, half awake, You do well to lay the blame on me that was fast asleep. But Cleocreton was not so apt to bury all his cares in sleep, for one while he remembred the Princess coldness, another while he tormented himself with the thoughts of the impossibility for him to enjoy Cloryana, because of his Fathers perverseness, and so he thought that he would clearly disin∣herit him of the Kingdom. These and the like fancies made Cleocreton to look pale for want of sleep. The next day, said Albyazer to him, and smiled, Methinks you have the wan look of a Lover, my Lord. Whereat he blushed, and fearing to be discovered, as it is the custom of Lovers to fear that sometimes which is most impossible. Come my Conquerer (said the incomparable Muxorb) be not ashamed to be like your friends. Well (said Cleocreton) when I am in love, I will tell you all. Truly, my Lord, (said Albyazer to Muxorb) if you had but heard how Prince Cleocreton reviled love, you would have had no patience. Well (said Muxorb) Sir, lets hear what you
can say against the Noble Passion of Love. Whatsoever I can say (replyed Cleocreton) I will not take in hand to hold up the agument against persons so much experienced as you be. Now the company was forced to break up, for Albyazer was to accompany his Father home to his Castle of Gnikrib; but the Empress did desire him to be content with his other Daugter at home, and let Clsey stay with Cloryana, which she did: And Albyazer was to return again to the Court, but no sooner was he had to Gnikrib, but he fell into a feaver, which continued a good space, to the great grief of Calsey, who loved him dearly, but most of all Philopeet, whose whole content of her life rested on his welfare: And all the La∣dies must be content to forfeit their company for a time, and their servans; fr Cleocretons time of departure came, and Muxorb had got leave of the Emperor to take his liberty, which he did intend to do, when Cleeoreton went; and the night before their departure, the two Lovers did steal to their Ladies chambers, to take their private-farewel. Cleocreton came to Cloryana's Chamber, and there they conferred on his departure which she would not by any suffer him to do. The next day therefore Cleocreton told her, that to obey her, he would make come excuse for a day longer: But, said he, Madam, shall I part from you without any assurance of your love? Truly (said Cloryana) I do not love to engage my self at all. Well Madam (said he) then you have no love for Cleocreton; How should he live and hope? She resolving to try his love to the utmost, the which she thought she could not be too sure of, presently answered  Those whom one loves, they will trust without bond or engagement. Yet (said he) they will give their word: But Madam, you are very witty to torment me; but if you resolve to be thus, then Cleocreton must either strive to cure his love, or dye; but the last is sooner done then the fist, which time can never remedy. Ad cast in his eyes on the ground, a perfect despair Possest him: But she seeing it, could no longer hide her tender affections, but went near him, and smiling said,
Prince Cleocreton, I will dissemble with you no longer, Cleocreton onely hath the heart of Cloryana, and had it before she knew his love. Then he revived with these sweet words of Cloryana, and taking her by the hand and kissing it, said, Then, Madam, if you do, I hope you will always do the same. I will, (said she) be constant, as long as you are so. Then Ma∣dam (said he) that shall be for ever: But there is one thing that I shall beg of you, which is, that you will not believe every appearance of my falshood. It seems you fear your self (said Cloryana.) No Madam (said he) but there may be many false stories go abroad; but when Cleocreton proves false, then the whole frame of Heaven and Earth shall be removed. Then he took a box and presented it to her, which had in it his own Portraiture exactly drawn; the case was a very rich col thing, all set and enamel'd with Diamonds: She resolved to requite before they parted. Muxorb and his Lady was likewise in a most serious Dis∣course; and he oft kissing her, said, Dear Madam, I will again and see thee, sweet Calsey. But when (said she) even when I can get loose from my Nation: And dear, give me one kiss, and that shall be all that I will give or re∣ceive from any, till I see you again. O (said she) they that are so circumspect in their promises, fail soonest. I prove false! no my dear, (said he) do but try me first, and then trust. The truth is, he was not really suspected by her, but a tender, dear love she had for him, and he as basely after∣wards requited her. Now while they wre all thus employed, there came news to the Emperor in the afternoon, that the young Knights and Lords of the City, did desire to shew their va∣lour, and so would have the Emprors and the Ladies to be spectators of their serue exercise: But the Emperor was busie in come serious Devetion, and could not attend them; but he remembred that Cleocreton was for his journey on the morrow, therefore he sent him word by Galtazet, that he desired his company one or two days more: And Galtazet knowing where his Master was, came and told him. Clo∣ryana
was very glad that she might enjoy her Princely ser∣vant a while longer: Whereat Cleocreton with a great deal of reverence, kill the hand of his Lady, and so had her good night. Now they both thought it very convenient, that he should discover his affections to the Quéen his Mother, for the better carrying on of their design: So in the morning, before the time of sport, Cleocreton went to the Quéens Chamber, and told her the message that the Emperor sent him; and he was naturally unwilling to discover the snare he was fallen into, and stood mute: yet thinking that he must not neglect that which would be any advantage to his love, and also that it was the pleasure of the Lady of his life; the Quéen taking notice of his earnest study, smiled, saying, Well, Cleocreton, Lovers use to muse; but thou art not one, how comest thou to be so strangly stupified? He hearing her speak so, thought it good to take occasion by her spéech, to discover himself, saying. In love Madam; if I were so, would you oppose it? I would (said she) if were it not a person of merit and quality. Nay, then I am right (said he) for I know there is none so worthy as she. Then she is too high for us Son (said the Queen. What Ma∣dam (said he) if I be loved again. Then so much the bet∣ter. But it seems (said the Queen) thou art in good earn∣est Cleocreton; but if it be so, tell me. Madam (said he) it is none but the Princes Cloryana; and certainly it must be confest, that she onely is the Paragon of the World, and sole Empress of Beauty. The Quéen sighed and said, Alas, what hope is there, though she do love thee, yet will not the Emperor match his onely Daughter to a Prince banished, not onely out of his Kingdom, but robbed of his right for ever. Well, fear not Madam (said he) but that in a short time I shall bring or send you good news from Hungary: But good Mother, I entreat you to let the Princes enjoy your company, for she doth greatly desire your favour. I, but (said the Queen) how can I be privy to all this, and not seem a deceiver to the Emperor, whose kindeness I shall abuse, by advancing my own designs, without his know∣edge.
Cleocreton hearing his Mothers words, fell down on his knées, and said, Deplorable is my condition; for I must ei∣ther have my sweet Cloryana, or dye: Nor shall all the Emperors in the World keep the sweet Cioryana from me; for she vouchsafeth to love me, by which I am ob∣liged to gain her with my dearest blood. The Quéen hearing her Sons passion, and knowing the power of love, she sought to reclaim him with perswasions; but séeing all her Rhetorick was to no purpose, but rather made him more violent, & she having a tender heart towards her son (for there was no vertue that she was not possessed of) she said, Since I must, Cleocreton, consent to thee, thou hast my free consent; and I shall be glad to have the esteem of so noble a Lady as Cloryana. Cleocreton humbly thanked his mother. And by this time the Lists began to be entred by the young Knights of the Court; the Emperor, with the Em∣press, and sweet Cloryana, by her was set Calsey, and on the other side was the Quéen of Hungary and Philopeet, and be∣hinde them was placed all the young Ladies of the Court, all placed on rich cushions, and they attended the sports of Tilting, and the Turnaments. Cleoereton appeared in gréen Armour, varnished and enamel'd with gréen and silver, and in it one might sée the cunningness of the Workman, in representing a clear Ri∣ver, and in it little Fishes, leaping and sporting, as though it were real; and on the banks was a Shepherdess of admi∣rable beauty, flying up to a Garden of divers pretty slow∣ers, that grew beside her on the gréen banke: His Motto was, Harm lieth near Delight. His Horse was of a light Bay, and all his Trappings and Furniture was of gréen and Silver, like the rest. But no sooner did Cloryana see him, but e looked on Calsey; and said, See Cosin, my Prince, how fine he is to day, and clad all in green. Yes Madam (said Calsey) you know it signifies hope. But (said Cloryana) where is Lord Muxorb? Yonder, said Calsey: And she looked and see him
in Armour of Ash colour and flowered with red, as it look∣ed more like silks then steel. The Motto was this, Beauty claims the Victory. Philopeet to her pleasure, beheld her recovered Albyazer in Armour, being of the same that he had before, for he came but even hen the Iusts began, and so was not so well pro∣vided: But suddenly the sports began, and breaking their Spears very nimbly, and some being tumbled off their Horses, drew their Swords, through anger to be disgraced, even before the eyes of their Laies, hoping thereby to re∣venge their injuries, and recover their lost glory, with their following valour; but the Emperor perceiving it, called and commanded, that they should put up their Swords, and said, Gentlemen, you shall shed no blood here, but stay, and I will send you the Pictures of all the Ladies of my Court that hath beauty, and break your Spears in the honor of your Ladies. And the Portraictures of the Ladies was first presented to Albyazer, who did very courteously give Cleocreton the choice, he taking Cloryana, and himself Philopeet, Muxorb took Calsey, and then according to their several qualities, the rest took their choice. Lord Cranor took Lady Vincy Lord Rophet took Lady Pleama, young Crispus took Oney, and all the rest took choice according to their interests and affection. But thus was it ordered, that he that conquered, the van∣quished should resign his Portraicture to him that conquer∣ed him. The Lady Pleama's beauty, as it was excellent, so her Servant defeded it valiantly, and carried the prize of thrée Pictures, doing homage to Pleama's beauty; but Cleocre∣ton disdained that any should bear the prize of beauty, though it was the more inferior prize; for he allowed none at all to any but the Pearless Princess Cloryana; therefore couching his Spear he ran with such violence, as he caused both horse and man on their knées, not onely to do homage to the beauty of Cloryana, but also to the horse feet of Cleocreton, and so he lost all. Now Cleocreton had got a great many Por∣traictures, and Albyazer and Muxorb had conquered all the rest; but onely Lord Craner, who did stoutly resist, for he
had met with his equal, and they did so long continue, till at the last his Enemy gave up his Portraictuee, he being constrained thereto; and so Lord Craner had got other three besides his own, but Cleocreton quickly dispatched him, and sent him grieving amongst the rest, not onely for their loss, but also their disgrace. Now all séemed vanquished but the three Conquerers, Prince Cleocreton, Prince Albyazer, and Lord Muxorb; but there came a Servant of the Lady Calseys into the List, and hearing that Muxorb did claim priviledge to her by her Picture, came and produced her Picture but Muxorb soon espying his Ladies Portraicture, the which the Emperor did not bestow, he straight may spurred on with indignation, and thirst of glory, ran at the valiant Haimerei, who did excel∣lently well defend his Ladies beauty against her beauty; but he that had the most love from the Beauty, gained the Beauty, and so away rid Muxorb with his Ladies Por∣traiture, and when he came they were all vanquished. But Muxorb thought, that though the honor of the day was great, yet that honor divided among thrée, was but little; so he proud of his last Conquest, thought to try his fortune with one of the Princes. So going to Albyazer, he said, Come, win my six prizes from me. He would not refuse it, but rather was as for∣ward as Muxorb: Then did they go together, and many offences and defences, blinde Fortune gave Muxorb the Victory, to the grief of Philopeet, that had no great esteem on Calsey: But for all that, she thought herself a little rescu∣ed, if one may call it so, to sée her Enemy fall by himself; for Fortune was Cleocretons friend alwas in the field of Mars, though in Venus Court she troad on the winged Ball, turning sometimes this way, and sometimes that way with him; but she would suffer no Vmpire in pis Throne at this time: For he coming to Muxorb. said, My Lord, since the other being overcome, then let me friendly try with you for the sole Prize of the day; but not for your Friendship, for that is a prize that I highly esteem. The Noble courage of this Victor, did always beget admirati∣on without envy, and esteem of his very Enemies, nay, which was most of all, the esteem of his friend the worthy Muxorb; who answered, Though my Lord, you were my Conquerer once, yet I will not yield without tryal, because
ye would get no Honor by that; and yet love hath such effects, as to cause them that are possessed with it, to imagine their snares to be laid by the hands of the most accomplished Beauties, therefore it shall not be said, that I will not venture all my strength, and the other prizes, for the Lady I account so: But if you do remain Victor, let me keep these two, that I may not lose her esteem. Content, said Cleocreton. With that they bravely advanced their Spears, and ran one upon another. Muxorb gave Cleocreton a round salute over his Helmet, and he nimbly paid him in his own coyn; then Muxorb resolved to try his utmost, and bending all his force, struck Cleocreton almost out of his saddle; but Cleo∣creton grew angry to be so long debating a thing, that all the World must néeds yield it to be his right; and also knowing, that it was not the custom of Conquerors, to be long in conquering, he presently gave Muxorb the foil; and then the imbraced each other, and he delivered to Cleocre∣ton all the Pictures, onely that of Calsey. And being almost loaded with the number of them, the Emperor séeing it, said, In earnest, Prince Cleocreton, you will carry all the Ho∣nor away from my Persian Knights. If it be dishonor to your Majesties Knights (said Cleocreton) yet doth the Honor rest to you still in the Princess Cloryana, whose Beauty hath made me invincible. Then the Emperor espying Cloryana's Pourtraicture a∣mong them, and the highest of them all, said, Truly Daugh∣ter I did not intend yours for one; but since it is so, take your Coronet from your head, and therewith Crown the Conqueror. She with a modest bsush, obeyed her Fa∣ther, and Crowned the Temples of her beloved Cleocreton: which did certainly presage, that she alone must set the Crown of Persia on his head. He most humbly kist the Princess hand, and reverently bowed to them all, and so went from her; the Quéen his Mother well noting with what willingness she gave, and he received; But infinite praise and acclamati∣on did all the Persian people throw continually on Cleocre∣tons noble valour in any enterprize. But the worthy Cleocreton thought no honor, like the last that the Emperor conferred on him, to cause Cloryana to
Crown him; whose beautions self he preferred before all the Kingdoms and Crowns in the World. Philopeet was highly dispreased, that her beauty would be foiled by Cloryana, and Casey likewise, for it was insuffera∣to her, she always having the greatest conceit of her own, above others. But for Cloryana, she was satisfied, that she onely should have the prize of Beauty from all the World. The Ladies did clearly see Calseys discontent. Whereupon said Cloryana, Cosin Calsey, thou art also troubled that Cleocreton should conquer thy Muxorb. But poor Lady, she seemed as if she was not at all troubled, and said, Truly Cosin, if he had ven∣tured any thing else but my beauty, pardon me, if I wished his honor above all the Princes on earth; but since he went about so unprofitable a thing, as my beauty, I cannot grieve at all; for in my conceit, that was the onely thing that made him be vanquished. But, dear Madam, if I were proud of my beauty, then have I mat∣ter enough, in being seated next you, that have the choice name of beauty in the World. Well Calsey (said Clo∣ryana) thou canst flatter fairly; but I know it is thy love that makes the erre, and have more esteem of poor Clory∣ana then she deserves. But now the great care of our two Lovers, is, to take their secret farewel of one another: They had some discourse that they did not expect, for the Emperor would needs take the pleasure of a walk in the evenin. So they all went but the solitary Queen of Hungary: The Emperor led his fair Empress, and after her went her most incomparable Daugh∣ter, led by Prince Cleocreton, and after them Albyazer with Philopeet, and then went the other Lovers, Muxorb and Calsey. The Emperor and Empress was applauding Cleo∣cretons worth and Princely demeanor, and all the rest in their several discourses: Cleocreton and his sweet Princess was altogether taken up with the sad discourse of his depar∣ture from Persia, O (said he) how should I do, my Di∣vine Princess, if some great match should be offered the Emperor your Father for you, and I far distant, and not at Persia to dispute with him. Well, my Cleocreton (said
she) all the Parents in the World shall never cause Clo∣ryana to violate her love to Cleocreton. Then she took out her picture, which she begged of the Empress her Mother for the same purpose; that as she was to remember him by his Pourtraiure, so he might do the same for her by her Picture: And she did it very cunningly, because of the Lovers that stood next them; and conveying it i to the hand by which he sed her, she sid, Take this▪ and forget no Cloryana. It was of an inestible value, onely pu in a cover of Chrystal, but the Picture it self was held between four Angels that were framed; and though little, yt o curiously they held the four corners of it in their hands, and having rich Diamonds and Enamels to set their feet on, and their eads were enclosed with enameld and transpa∣rent Diamonds, as it was thought to be one of the best pieces in the World, being newly drawn by an exact work∣man, that the Emperor employed a great while, in taking his one, and his Emperess, and Cloriana's Pictures. Cleocreton would have veiwed it well, it cast such a rare shew, but he kne Philopeet was behinde, who would know any thing, and of a penetrating wit and would sometimes suspect things that never were thought on, therefore Cleo∣creton onely kist it, and so putting it up, said, If I should be false to my incomparable Princess, certainly my abject soul should not be worthy to breathe in the ayre. Be you but constant, my Princess (said she) and then Cloryana with her Loyalty shall deserve thy dearest affection. Albyazer was busie in begging pardon for his defending Phi∣lopeets beauty no better, saing, for the future he would prove himself more valiant. Muxorb and Calsey was pleasantly jesting and talking of several passages, they were both of a more deearful disposition, then were those that went be∣fore them. Thus were they all severally entertained, tll the Em∣peror led them to a fair little Revolet, whereon there stood the finest Water-works that ever was invented: on both sides the water, stood two Lyons, which with their great shoulders held up the works, and in the midst of the wa∣ter stood two other, one on one side, and another on ano∣ther, who ith their hollow breasts and limbs received the water, and so conveyed it to the works above, and those
works furnished all the Palace ith waer: Then they went up a pair of stairs, that was fastned between the two Lyons: On the one side one might perceive how prettily the water came murmuring, and making pretty musick at the trning of the pipes; and then in another place, over the open shoulders of the Lyons, there stood a stone Cistern, wherein was Diana and her Nymphs washing their alabaster limbs; and always at the turn of the water, one might see the Nymphs wash and bathe the delicate body of their La∣dy; and also a little way off them, was Actaeon turned to a Stag, and his own Dogs barking at him, and abusing their Master with their unkinde teeth, tearing him apieces. No having seen all, the Emperor went towards the Palace, and his privy train followed him; but to their great amazement▪ they saw two great fierce Lyons, vvho having slain their Keepers, and broke their hains, came towards the Empe∣ror with open mouth: Which Cleocreton perceiving, drew his sword and engaged one of the Lyons in so sore a fight, as made the Beast send out such crys, as made the ground shake: The other run away, and streight finding Cloryana sitting ansteeping, the Beast went and laid down his head on her knees: She excéedingly trembling for fear, the Em∣press crying and lamenting, the Lady Calsey would néeds go an pertake of her danger; but Muxorb holding her in his arms, would not suffer. Cleocreton having slew the o∣ther Lyon, turned towards them; but seeing the Lyon lie so quietly on Cloryana's kne, and conceiving the great danger his Princess was in, he made incredible haste to her, and said, Madam, hold him as fast as you can. She did so; and then Cleocreton catched he Lyon by the Beard, and would have slain him; but the Emperor would not suffer him, but commanded the people that were gathered together with pikes and swords, to carry the Beast to his hold again. But the City of Sisuion was all on an uprore; for they seeing the furious Beasts run from their dens, and hearing that the Emperor was walked that ay, it made them like people mad, to save their Gracious and Sovereign Prince from their rage. Then as soon as the Lyon was catched, the Emperor high∣ed to his Palace; and all the way as they ent, they could not but excéedingly praise the great valour of the young Prince Cleocreton; and he leading his swéet Cloryana, she lifted up her eyes to Heaven, and praised the Gods for the
deliverance of her Noble Cleocreton. Now they all bring come out of their great dangers, they all heartily praised the Gods: And the Emporor told the Quéen, that her Son hd slain one of the fiercest Lyons that ever he saw in his life For surely (said he) At the time that he was born, the Gods did all conspire, how to make one as invincble as themselves, and so it lighted on Prince Cleocreton to resume the shape of Mars himself. This was their discourse an the time of supper; which be¦ing ended, they all betook themselves to their rest, being weary with their exercise that day. And in the morning Cieo∣creton went to his Mothers bed side, and a while they dis∣coursed of the matters belonging to the business of Hungary; and at the last parted, the Quéen wéeping heavily to part with her other Son also. Then he went to the Emperor, and humbly biding farewel to his Maestie and the Empress, who was very sorry to lose the company of so brave a Prince, the Emperor gave him a very fair Iewel, and he reverend∣ly gave him thanks, and departed, having both their good wishes and prayers for his safety. Then last of all, going to his Lady Cloryana's Chamber, and softly knocking, Julia came to the door; and seeing the Prince look like one going to take a journey, she softly said unto the Princess, Madam, here is Prince leocreton come to have a sight of you, before he go. She hearing the name of her Prince, straight awaked, and said, Where is he? Just here, Madam, said he. Come, Cleocreton, said she, for all your haste, I will tell you my dream, I thought I was with you, and my Father told me I must go with an Ambassador to a Foreign Countrey: And me-thought I refused, but my Father plucked me from you, and would needs deliver me into the hands of an Ambassador, but there straight came to him a Lady of great beauty, and took my Father by the arm, and said it must not be so; whereat I waked, and heard you. Cleocreton thought her dream Ominous; and sighing said, I hope, Madam, your dram will not prove true, surely the Gods will have more pity on Cleocreton. Then he kissed her, which before he did never presume to do; and ith tears said, My dear Princess, I shall not a great while behold the face of my adored aint. She now insensibly touched with grief to part with him, and also to see his grief, her eyes gushing out tears, which
distilled down her vermillion Chéeks, like an April showre on a fair Sky-light, carelesly exposed to the weather, she said, The Gods make but Cleocreton as fortunate for ever, as he hath been at Persia. Calsey by this time was gotten up, for they both lay toge∣ther, and she and Muxorb was a little high in their terms; for there was something that she took unkindely, and reproving him sharply, at the law they were good friends: And then he kissing her a thousand times, said, Well, it shall not be long ere I see thee again, dear Calsey. Then he left her hardly sen∣sible of her loss, but afterwards, poor Lady, comes her sorrow. Now Cleocreton often going back to his Cloryana, but at law they must part: Then shedding a showre of tears, which even moved the heart of Julia to wéep also, in came Calsey: then Cleocreton taking her by the hand, said, Good Madam, be careful of my Princess, and saluting her, went to have an∣other kiss of Cloryana, but went immediately forth, for fear that he should have béen forced to have returned again. So they departed, and Albyazer rode a little way with them, and then parted from them. Now Cleocreton and Muxorb went together some miles, till they took shipping, then parted they. Cleocreton sailed very sadly towards Hungary, and Muxorb as full of mith, went towards Corinth. In few days Cleocreton got to the coast of Hungary; and horsing himself, having no company but onely Galtazet and a Squire, for he desired to go very privately, and to that end changed his name, which was Garnes, for so was the litle Brother of Cloryana called, and she greatly loving him, told Cleocreton, that if ever he had occasion to hide his name, that he should call himself Gar∣nes. Now Cleocreton came to the house of the good Lady Queamas, who reioced to sée the Prince, and to hear of the welfare of the Quéen his Mother. Young Fortus, whose name was Strata, was a hunting: Then Cleocreton com∣manded Galtazet to go tell his Brother, that he was there. Then Galtazet went and found Strata, and rid by, to sée whe∣ther the young Prince would know him or no; but no soon∣er vvas Galtazet hastned by, but Strata turned his horse, and galoped after him, saying, What, Galtazet, is it thee. Then he bovved, and told him, that his Brother Cleocreton vvas at his house, and that his Mother the Quéen vvas vvell,
and that she had sent him a pretty Ievvel, vvhich he gave him: Then Strata hasted away, and left the sport to the rest of his Companions; and alighting and seeing his Brother, they embraced each other, and with glad hearts asked one another of all the passages that they knew; which Cleocreton did also, but omitting that of his love to Cloryana. Then Strata told Cleocreton, that Meaga had banished the love of almost all the Kings Subjects by her oppression, and that she had born the King thrée Sons, and was grown so se∣cure in her wickedness, that she thought never to be re∣moved; and that there was gathered together a head of Re∣bels, and their chief was one Crenopher, and the next to him was Meaga's Father, the Earl of Drooma; who foretelling her, that great misery would befal her, if she did not resign her place to the lawful Quéen of Hungary; she she insolently re∣plied, Keep your doting Prophesie, for them that will give you thanks for it; I will make you know, that I am you Soveraign. So she being touched to the quick, would not spare her own Father, but caused the King to take his Estate from him, but took her Wicked Mother and Slut to her. And thus was the Court of Hungary furnished with rare guests, while in the mean time the poor Earl being troubled in his Consci∣ence for his Daughters sin, and having no maintenance, turned utter foe to the King, and his own Houshold, and was amongst the Rebels. Cleocreton bearing his Fathers distress, through his Sub∣jects hate, that before was of an accounted the most Loyal: therefore he would go (as nature bound him) and cool the heat of the Rebels: But Strata said, Brother, why should we fight against our friends, and for the wicked Mega. I (said Garnes) but where is our natural affections, if we do not relieve our Father in his distress; and for her, let her puniwment be by some other: And brother, fear not, But the Gods will look on the afflictions of our vertuous Mother. With this resolution the vertuous Prince went in amongst his Fathers Enemies, and first observing which was the Quéens friends, they fell on the other like Lightning, and, made such a great breach upon them with their two sword so that all them that were left, with great admiration, callee them gods, that were come in the persons men, to revengd their Treason. But their natural Prince Cleocreton, did not delight to shed the blood of his Fathers Subjects, and therefore said, with a high voyce, Friends, what are your rea∣sons
to abuse your selves thus, in rebelling against your Su∣preme Lord. One of the head of them, which was Crenopon, said, Our oppressions are great, by reason of the wicked Har∣lot; our hate extends not to our King, but against her. Well, said Cleocreton, persist not in your practices, but come and I will beg your pardom. They then thought it was the best course so do, and shout∣ed in token of agréeing to what he said. Then he going near the King, kneeling down, said, Your Majesties Subjects craves pardon for their past faults. The King would not let say any more, but took him up, and presently gave them par∣don, for he himself was a witness what wonders they per∣formed, and by inspiration had respect for them, though be knew them not. Therefore he said, Let me know the men that have saved my life. Whereupon Cleocreton and Fortis took off their Helmets, and kneeled down to their Father: The King then knew full well, that they were his two Sons, and was grieved in his thoughts that he had treated them so fair, and shewn them so much kindeness, for he déemed them no better then Bastards; yet he said, Come, Bastard Sons must have portions, though not Kingdoms. Well, my Lord said Cleocreton) I would to the Gods you had lived as vertuous a life as the Queen our Mother, then had not your Majestie harboured so base a Concubine, and thrown forth your lawful and vertuous Wife: But know, that though she is not in Hungary, yet doth she in health live in Persia, and wishes you health, my Lord, notwithstanding all your harshness to her: And I adde this, that your Majestie shall well see, that the King of Tunis will prove his Sister worthy and vertuous, and then you will be glad to take the Vengeance of your Harlot with patience. The King in anger rose, and called to the Guard to clap them up. But they said, Not so, my Lord they that saved your life, will not Juffer their own to be taken away; and so making their way with their swords, they broke thorow the midst of them: And when they were got from the throng of their Enemies, they looked behinde them, hearing and séeing Meaga commanding the Souldiers to pursue them, but none would obey her; for they feared the valour of the two young Princes. Then they went and lodged at Lady Queama's house, and in the morning took their farewel of the good Lady, who was almost become a natural Mother to Fortus, and shed a world
of tears to part from him. Then they took their journey to vvards Tunis, and vvhen they vvere almost at the City and Palace of the King, they savv a great multitude of men, and tents, and they vvere ready to give battel to one another. Cleoceton enquired vvho they vvere, and they told him, it vvas the Midian King, vvho upon an old grudge, had sought nevv occasion, and so had brought on a ar upon the King of Tunis. Cleocreton stood, and seeing the Battel to be hot, and that on a uddn Tunis vvas put to the vvorst, then they rushed in upon the Midians, and put nevv courage into the hearts of the other party; for their General being dead, Cleocreton bravery performed that Office for tem, and so valiant vvere they both, as the very sight of them, did daunt the Midims, but their stout General kept them from turning their backs. Cleocreton séeing that, quickly engaged him∣self in fight vvith him, vvhose name vvas Basus; he thought to hve dispatched Cleocreton, because of his slender body and youth but the contrary fell out; for Cleocreton vvith his horse, crosing in upon Basus, and epying his hare neck, he gave such a stroke upon it; as Basus fell dovvn dead; the Souldiers séeing their General dead, put their greatest strength to their heels, for losing their General, they lost all hears, and the other scorned to pursue; but the Souldiers did vvith shouts appiand their nevv General: And the King seeig them ride in the front of the Army, that had vvon him that almost lost Victory, came to them, and said, Gentlemen, I shall think my self greatly honored, if you wll come and appoint your own reward, that hath so recovered my lost ho∣nor. Cleocreton and Fortus took of their Helmets, and Cleocre∣ton kneeling said Gracious Lord and Vncle, we claim more right to your esteem by relation, then valour. The King sée∣ing something of his Sisters face in both of them, ran and imbraced them, aying, What! my Nephews Cleocrton and Fortus. Then the King took them by the hands, and led them to his Quéen, and said, I am richer then I thought for these are the two Sons of my Sister of Hungary. Which, said the Quéen? and sluted them: There vvas set in her chamber vvith her, her dear Daughter Marsea, and her Neere the Lady Freesa, vvho vvs Daughter to the King of Calchese, of excellent beauty, vvherevvith young Fortus vvas took, at the vry first sight of this yong Lady, vvhose stature, though lovv, yet she was very taking, and of an admirable vvt, but
her Cosin Princess Mrsea, vvas of a passonate temper, and though she vvas fair enough, yet vvnted she that dis∣créet behaviour that young Freesa hd; for she vvas apt to be taken vvith every object, nd sometimes she vvould, be∣yond the bounds of mdesty, betray it vvith a certain wan∣ton grosing of her great grey ees, that no sooner did her Ad∣mirers approach her vvith any shevv of Affection, but they streight took surfit of her common compliance, for there is nothing so svveet, as to conquer the Enemy that seems in∣vincible: but of that temper vvas not the Lady Freesa, for she had so swéet a commanding presence, that all must néeds love her, though they durst not approach her. Now when the King had entertained his Nephews a while amongst the Ladies, he retired with them, to discourse of matters of State, and excused himself that he did not so spéedily perform his promise to the Quéen of Hungary, their mother, but his own Wars at home was matter enough of excuse for him; yet he then presently sent an Ambassadour to the King of Hungary. But now Cleocreton did also dis∣patch Leters to Persia, to his beloved Cloryana, and the Quéen his Mother, and after a good space they received them; the Quée opening hers, before she red it, she called Clorya∣na and delivered her one: Who with joy opened it, and found it thus, My most adored Princess, I Am sory that I had not an opportunity sooner, to let know that Cleocreton, though at Tunis, yet is he as Faithful, as if he were in Persia; and that there is nothing in the World would more comfort him, then to know from your self, that Cloryana is so too; without which there is no life for your onely devoted Servant, Cleocreton. Cloryana was excéeding joyful to hear from her beloved Cleocreton and reading it of ten over, she shewed it to her Cosin Calsey, who also ha long expected to have the like from her Muxorb: but all in vain she waited, which did greatly daunt her, ut she woul not shew her grief to any but her
Maid Treena, and to her she opened the secrets of her heart; for she knew her fidenty, and Treena had cometimes béen a Witness of his pretended love. Cloryana by the same Messenger, returned this An∣swer: Prince Cleocreton, YOur Faithfulness doth very much delight me, and know, that Cloryana shall never by inconstancy, me∣rit your discontent; And as you would be esteemed by me, so continue still to love your alone, Cloryana. This being enclosed within the Quéens Letter to Cleo∣creton, did the Messenger return with all spéed to wards unis, whiles the Ambassadour arrived at Hungary, with his Let∣ters to the King, who was turned strangely effeminate, by be∣ing ruled, and over ruled by the Wicked Meaga: yet he had some remorse of his vertuous Wife, when he considered the words of his Son Cleocreton, and was very much troubled with his own guilt and faults, vvhich appeared fresh before him; and thereupon he became very much disturbed in his minde: But Meaga seeing the King so pensive, and that he shunned her company, she then fearing that his Conscience should move him to remove her, she then fetching up all her Devilish Rhetorick: What! (said she) how comes my Lord so heavy and sad? Doth the words of one man affright you, that commands so many? Hath any one more wis∣dom or judgement to order your own affairs, then your self? Then chear up your self, my dear Lord, and let us enjoy one another in peace and tranquility of minde; for assure your self, if yout enemies know you indisposed toward your own occasions, they will take advantage by it to overcome you: Do but take the counsel of your servant Meaga, and you shall well perceive that no streights shall be troubles or perplexities to us. This was enough to quiet the troubles of the blinded King at that time, having yet the vail of deceit and inchantment cast up∣on
his better judgement and discretion. But novv the Am∣bassadour came and required audience, and delivered his Letters to the King; vvho sitting vvith his Council com∣manded to have them read aloud as follovveth: The King of Tunis, to the King of Hungary. VVIshing health, if one so much declining from Honor or Nobleness, can digest the counsel that is determined for thy good; which is, to fetch our Sister your lawful Wife home to Hungary, and by a kinde ac∣knowledgement of thy penitency for thy passed injuries: But if this be denied, then look for no mercy at our hands, but all the cruelty that can be commited, by and without delay: I will overrun Hungary with such a War, as shall by too late repentance, shew to the world thy shame and folly, in throwing out a vertuous and honorable wife, without any cause of mislike, but onely thy bruitish lust to a base Harlot at home. If thou wilt not consent to this, then shall Cleocreton thy lawful Heir to thy Crown, be quickly invested in thy throne and Kingdom, which is now filled with oppression and ignominous Criminal Of∣fences, committed by thy own self, which should be all the example of good to thy Subjects. Now if our milde conditions be granted, then shall thy faults be buried in Oblivion, and Hungary shall have Tunis for a Friend and a Defender. Farewel. Then the Ambassadour expecting an Answer from the King, who very well knew, that he was greatly favoured to have such reasonable conditions of Peace, he stayed the Ambassa∣dour some days with honorable entertainment; whiles in the mean time the King, whose time or Enchantment was finish∣ed, conferred with his Lords and Councel is formerly: But Mega now fears the worst, and her old Aunt knowing all things, saw her practices at an end, burst for very grief; but
Meaga had not lost all hopes yet, but built them all on the Kings love▪ which she thought would be eternal: There∣fore she went to the place of Council, as full of confidence as ever but the King now did not behold her with such eyes as before, for he could serce brook her impudence, nor was there and else that had the least love for her; therefore when they before her face, had tld the King of all her treacherous acti∣ons then he fully convinced of them all, commanded to have her out: But before they could lay hands on her, she said a-aloud, What, will the Kings Majestie trust Traytors also? tru∣ly, my Lord, I would have them all hanged, that seeks to oppose your wise determinations: If them pratling fellows had been your truely begotten Sons, would they stirred up such commotions as these against their Father? but they are all in a conspiracy to have the life of the King. The Council even amazed to hear her impudency, said, Will your Majestie suer this? Then the King commanded to have her carried to Prison, where she remained cursing Gods and men, Heaven and earth, till furter order was taken for her: But the poor Quéen of Hungary little thought how effectually her stars were working▪ for her, onely she wondred that she should hear of any thing of peace in Hungary, but nothing from Cleocreton; and also the Princess, expects nes with the Quéens from her dear Cleocreton, who was also impatient for to hear from them, because he had writ. But you are to understand, that Mersea his Cosin, as it was her custom to fall in love with every one▪ so did she not spare Cleocreton, who indeed was lovely in ever ones eye, but did entertain boundless affection for him at the first sight, not considering there nearness in blood: Now she following the vent of her fooish affections, and by all her cunning could not allure i, whereat she wondring te cause, she woul often discourse of love, and sometimes would she pretend to he his Confident and would say, Cosin, I think you are in love with some beauty or oter: if you will tell me, I will be as faithful as any body in the World. But he having a nota∣ble penetrating, profound wit, thorow all her masks of de∣ceit, could perceve the intent of her speeches; and theefore would not disclose any thing at all. But she did imagine that the reat Beauty of Cloryana had taken him from all others, therefore to be assured of this, she made use of a fellow who
had formerly lived in Persia, and caused him by a maid of hers, whose Sweetheart he was, to get himself acquainted with Galtazet, and to get by any whiles his Letters to carry to Pr∣sia; and indeed so cunning was he, that he gt Galtaets good opinion: Whereupon he told his Master, saying, Sir, since you have lost your other Messenger you may make use of this fellow, to convey your Letters. Cleocreton neither fearing nor suspeing any thing, did give this man the Letter to the Queen, and  it was one for Cloryana. But no sooner had he got the Letter, but he carried it to his Mistress, and she to Marsea: But O how did she applad her one invention, for so strangely euiling Cleocreton; and then she found in it a familiar and lovely sweet Letter from him to Cloryana; she presently took paper, and counterfeited this Letter, as fol∣loweth; Madam. I Am sorry that I cannot have that love for you as for∣merly, but if it be so, it will better please the Emperor your Father, and so please, Cleocreton. Now she did not alter the Queens Letter; for there was news of Hungary in it, but enclosed her Letter in e room of the other, and sent him away: but also bad him tell it up and down Persia, that Cleocreton was to be married to her∣self. Now she did verily think, that this would for ever break friendship▪ but though it could not, yet it wrought harm and discontent enough, for when the Messenger came and gave te Letter to the Queen▪ and she giving the other unto Cloryana: O Heaven, how in vain was all con∣solation when she read it to her self: She presently went and shewed it to the Quéen, who wondred that her Son should so strangely violate his vows and prodestations. Then they heard the report of the marriage between Marsea and Cleo∣ton; the Queen was extremely dissatifed within her self, but she put the fairest shew outward, for the more comforting of Cloryana, who did so hainously take the falshood of Cleocre∣ton, that often would she steal from Calsey and the Quéen, and get her self in her Cloet, and weep and lament her hard and wretch Fortune, to love Cleocreton, or ever to see him.
And one day amongst the rest, she did so, and her Cosin Calsy dd follow and listen, and heard her say, O false and Perjured Cleocreton! Whom dost thou torment? is it not Cloryana? that always rendred thee chiefest in her thoughts; and her, who did not seek the first, although she did love thee, before she knew thy love. But O, for∣sworn Wretch! How canst thou look on the Pourtraicture of thy Cloryana, whom thou hast thus abused with thy falshood▪ But then would she say, O Cloyana, Why dost thou so? Whom dost thou condemn and rail against? Is it not thy Cleocreoon, whom thou hast vowed thy onely stay and comfort of thy life? And surely it must needs be thy own fault, that makes wise Cleocreton refuse thee: Can he erre? No, he cannot; blame thy self, O foolish Cloryana: For was it possible that he should continue to love thee, that deserves rather to live in love with the Gods, and not the childish Cloryana? And it may be Cleocreton is not inconstant, O fool then, would he de∣clare it himself. Then did she betake herself to revenge it on her fair eyes, and with an incessant grief, she did not spare to torment her self. But Calsey hearing her extreme sorrow, and weighing her own case by hers▪ could have wisht to have born her com∣pany▪ but having a stronger heart, and knowing her Cosins weak temper, she knock'd. Cloryana rose ver hastily, and rubbing her eyes, came to the door, thinking it had been Ju∣lia, but found it to be her dear Calsey, whose eyes was also red with tears; yet she would not confess what was the truth, but told Cloryana, that she did greatly bemoan her con∣dition. And seeing the true Pourtraicture of Cleocreton, she took i up, and looking on it, said to Cloryana, Certainly Ma∣dam, he is not inconstant, but rather some deceit is in it, or some tryal it is, to e how you will take his inconstancy. O Calsey (said Cloryana) thou wouldst fain put a fair gloss upon it; but do but view his own Letter? It may it is not his own hand (said Calsey.) O yes, there is no hope but Cleocreton is false. Calsey opening the Box of Diamonds where the Picture
was, and in the bottom was a Christa Glass, which she ifted up, and found these verses, and gave them to Clory∣ana, for she did never see them before, and she read them as followeth: Cleo wounded was a late, And Clory did not shew her hate, For so much firmness shall be found, In his love that had the wound, That if she threaten him with jealousie, His wound will open fresh, and causeless die; Then Queen of Beauty take no pride, To wound and kill a heart beside. Truly, Cosin (said Calsey) methinks these very verses doth testifie his faithfulness, and doth also request you not by jealousie to wound and kill him; have more con∣fidence then in his vertues. Well, Calsey (said Cloryana) thou pleadest well for him: But what can I say less then I do. But while she pleaded for Cleocreton, her heart was fil∣led with her own passions; and though she did bear it out with incredible ptiece, yet the time was come, that yield she must, and yield e did to sorrow, for the inconstancy of her Muxorb; and her sorrow caused such inward grief to ap∣proach her, that she would not open her minde to any, but onely to her maid Treean: and to her would she say, O Treean, what harm have I done to the incomparable Muxorb, that he after all his high expressions of love, should in absence forget his poor Calsey, that would refuse all the Kingdoms of the World for him? The Maid being of a good nature, and pitying her Lady, always pleaded, Why Madam, he wll return again I am per∣swaded: But her sickness encreased, and grew very sore, and she still kept it secret, with extraordinary torment. At the last came her Brother Albyazer, and required the cause of her sadness: Which out of her great love to Albyazer, for there was an intire affection between them, she satisfied him.
Thn did she tell him the inconstancy of Muxorb, and with a thousand expressions of love to him, that was false and treacherous to her. But said Albyaer, I will finde him out my dear Sister, and do thou but write to the perfidious Mux∣orb, and I will make him know, what are the qualities that a Gentleman ought to have. O, do not (said she) dear Brother, abuse him, for he is noble in all things except this Well, said Albyazer, droop not, but comfort thy self, and thou shalt see what I will d So with perswasions, she did recover her former chearful frame of spirit, which did greatly please her Cosin Cloryana, who was a great deal more constant to affict herself, with her wronging por Cleocreton, who every hour expected an answer of his Lettes, and of one indeed he had, but Cloryana would not stoop to write to him, yet the Queen did twitch him up, though in dark expressions, but yet such as would smart to the quick. And whies the base Messenger returned, there came to the Persian Court an Ambassador from Calydon, from the Emperor, to require Cloryana in marriage with his young Son Frederick: For the Emperor of Calydon was well in years, for he had ived with a wife a great while, and had no issue by her; then she dyed, and he married another young Lady, by whom he had his Son Frederick, and he before he died, would have his Son settled and married; and thought no match more fit then the Emperor of Persia's daughter, his good friend: His mind he did declare to his Son, but he be∣ing already engaged to a young Lady, though beautiful, yet far his inferior, therefore Frederick would have perswaded his Father from the business; but the old Emperor not knowing his Sons Reasons, but thought it was through childishness, therefore he followed his own will with eager∣ness, and with many entreaties, he greeted the Emperor of Persia for his Daughter. The Emperor of Persia was very glad of the profer; but said the Emperess, I cannot part with Cloryana yet, she is too young. Then said the Emperor, We cannot deny the Em∣peror of Calydon, our good Friend; and again, there is no match fitter for the advancing of our Daughter, and some strange fancy would possess the Emperor, if his kindeness be retorted with a refusal▪ Then the Emperess consented to all those powerful arguments, but so did not the
Quéen of Hungary, for with silence she heartily wished the contrary. Then the Emperor sent for Cloryana, to see what she would say to the business, who was with Philopeet and Calsey, and Albyazer, who were very much talking of inconstancy, yet they did not all know how much Cloryana was concerned in the discous, though poor Calseys condition was known, and much bmeaned, whom Albyazer protsted in some case to revenge; and therefore he begged leave of Philopeet to go to Corinth secretly, and there meet with Muxorb. Thus were they all employed, Cloryana and Calsey, Albyazer and Philopeet, when he Emperor suddenly surprized Cloryana with a Messenger; and she leaving the Lovrs to themselves, Calseys greatest care was to get alone. But when Cloryana came, the Queen of Hungary absenting herself, the Empe∣ror smiling said, What Cloryana, hast thou a minde to be mar∣ried? the Emperor of Calydon, hath sent to require you for his Son: and your Mother and I am well contented with it, and we look that you do obey our will, and not in the least cross our intentions, under pain of our dis∣pleasure. The sweet Princess was never brought to such a straight as ow; for he was fully reolved to be constant to her Cleo∣creton, though he was not so to her, whereupon she one while did shew the colour of the Rose, that climbing up to her face, was grown proud to have so high an honor, but then again received a check for his prde, b being overshadowed with pale fer, for te beautiful Princess was afraid to displease her Fter with an overrong deial: Therefore very re∣verently said, My Lord, sure my youh will plead gainst me, and my want of discretion, to become so grave a onditi∣on, that I am altogether ignorant of. Come (said the Epror, ) Cloryana, I am not young Frederick that am courting thee, but thy Father commanding thou needst not fear but I will provide for thee bette he tou hike. Sh seeng her Father both con∣fident and eolute▪ an hougt that hoever, a prolonging of time wold brig for something ore concerning Cleo∣creton, therefre sid She humbly▪ I hope your Majestie will not dispose of me any way, till you have enquirrd
of the Gods. I am glad Daughter (said the Emperor) that you are so Religious, it shall be done as you say: for it was the custom of the Countrey. Therefore the Em∣peror detained the Calydon Ambassador till he cent to Del∣phos, to enquire at the Oracle of Apollo. Then Cloryana, however glad that she had gotten a little respet for her un∣desired marriage, went to the Queen of Hungaries Cham∣ber, where she sighed out her discontent to the good Queen, and said, O Madam, how shall we do to put by this great suit? for first I will know Cleocretons cause, and the certain∣ty of his inconstancy; then all the Emperors in the World shall not dishonor the name of Cloryana with the stain of Ingratitude and Inconstancy; and if be he false, then am not I in a condition to marry, but dye. The Queen could not chuse but weep, to hear the sweet Lover, how she pratled out her own Vertues, and to think that any thing should proceed from her so derogating from her own disposition; as that Cleocreton should so strangely neglect the Pearless Princess Cloryana. But while the Queen and the Princess was thus blaming innocent Cleocreton, Albyazer was craving leave of Philo∣peet, that he might leave her some space: For, sato he, Ma∣dam, the grief of my poor Sister, doth concern me, next to the harm of your self. So Philopeet knowing the fidelity of Albyazer, she consented to it; whereupon he pretended some affair that he had in hand, and so got the Emperor also tolet him go. But no sooner was he gone, but his Cosin, whom he merrily gave her in charge, whose name was Prcuhoun, and he entertaining asecret affection for Philopeet, took oc∣casion one day, by Albyazers absence, to courther, and fair, Now Madam, if I were so highly honored as to have the love of so rare a person as your self, I should not leave you as my Cosin doth, I should sooner dye then do it. She were a strict Mistress indeed (said Philopeet) that would not give her friend leave to go about his earn∣est occasions, O Madam (replied he) I should make all business wait on so Accomplished a Lady as you are. These and many other things he said, to make known his love to her. The which she very well perceived, and to a∣void the same, she did shun his company: Sometimes she
would tell him, that he was a trusty friend to his Cosin in his absence, rather to condemn, then to speek for him: But her shuning of him wet wose for Cloryans, for she would often frequent her company, which did affect the poor Prin∣cess the more; for Lovers istessed seeks rather to be alone, then to have such company as they will nt impart their se∣crets to: For Cloryana did not look upon Philopeet for a Con∣fident, for she was jealous that she ould tell her Mother what she know; for the Empress was very familiar with Philopeet But Cloryana was hugely civil to her, for her  temper not such, as she would rather give her self the trouble of ariding Philopeets company, then distake her in the least. Now Cleocreton had received his Mothers sharp Letter, which stung him to the hat and he became so pensive as passed, but was often crossed with the extravagant love of Marsea. And one time it chanced, that the King of Tunis her Father did go a hunting of a Stag in his own fores, with the Princes of the Court, and the Queen and the La∣dies went also to the sport; but all Merea's care was, ra∣ther to follow Clocreton then the Stag: And so it was, that the Stag went into the most remote place in the Forrest, and all o them losing the fiht of the Beal but Cleocreton, who very nimbly followed him and Marsea followed Cleocreton as fast as he did the Stag shall pursuing the beast closel with his good Dogs, he ended the life of the sport at that time: And he féeing the Beast dead, and being eary, thought to rest himself under one of the large gréen trées; but looking be∣hinde him, he see his Cosin Mersea, who said, What now, Cosin, have you stollen our sport from us; but it is a small thing to steal a Stag, for you can take hearts. Why, Madam, said he, sometimes a Stag is called a Hart, but you are welcome to have any thing that I have stollen; take it, for dead Harts will do me no good, but a living heart. She ould have said more, but that the King her Father came towards him; and he merrily said, What Nephew, will you not be content with our sport, but you must have my Daughter too? Then said Cleocreton also, smiling, I fear, my Lord, I shall get but little honor by this hunting; for your Majestie charges me with your Daughter, and she saith, I have stollen the Beast And so they rid towards the rest of the company; whiles young Fortus was at the other end of the
Wood, riding with Freesa, and he took hold of an opportuni∣ties to tell her of his Love: Madam (said i, e) there is a great difference between the chase of Beauty, and this in the Forrest; for If any do but take the Beast, we are all con∣tented, and though he were too flight for us all, we should but make little matter of it: But I know by sad experience, that both my eyes and heart have followed the chase of your Beauty, ever since I had the happiness to see you first, and am never weary; and I know, that if any one should get that which I so long have thirsted after, they should have my blood with it; and I do not at all weigh the venturing of my life for you, if you would but give me some encouragement. Then said Lady Freesa, That was well put in, my Lord, it seems you must have encouragement, or else you can fol∣low that chase no longer, but I fear I have given you some occasion to think me light, which makes you so confident in your discourse. Truly, Madam (said Fortus) I think your Admirers shall never boast of overmuch favour, I am sure I have little enough; yet you cannot chuse but look on me sometimes; for I have often made it my business to make my self yo sole object, as much as I could, but your heart is harder then the very Adamant, that may not be soft∣ned or fashioned: Though there is none more sweetly ci∣vil then your self. But dear Princess of my life, either be more gratious, or else it is the ready way to kil your most faithful servant. But by this time their secrecy was arrested, by the coming of the King and the rest of the Noble Hunters. Now there was a report spread abroad, that there was a man seemed in∣vincible in Hungary, that stood for the defence of Meaga, and many noble Knights was foiled and slain by him, and in short every one became afraid and distressed because of him. Then Cleocreton told his Nucle that he must needs go and try his aour with him. The King consented though unillingly, yet would he not part with Forrus, who was wholly devoted to the beauty of young Freesa. Then Cleocreton took his iourney; but the night before he went, the Mersea was much
moved at his sudden departing, but she thought she would have answer of her love; and therefore having provided a Letter for that purpose, and being in a high Territ, she saw Cleocre∣ton walking all alone under where she was, with other La∣dies, taking their pleasure: Then she hastily put her hand in her pocket, and thinking to throw it down to him, in the room of her Love-letter, she threw down the intercepted Letter of Cleocreton to Cloryana, and in it was wrapped a copy of her counterfeit Letter she sent. But D, what disturbance it breed in poor Cleocreton, when he saw his own Letter that he sent to Cloryana, and another base Letter, that seemed as a Copy of some other; but pondring more seriously upon it, he plainly perceived the drift of Mersea, and also saw it fall from her; whereupon he id clearly conclude, that she by craft had intercepted his Letter, and sent that strange im∣ide ne in its room. Then was he almost mad to think that Cloryana should so strangely account of him, as to think him treacherous. O! (said he well might my Mother so sharply reprove my basenss to the Princess! O pardon me, my dear Cloryana, and condemn thy too much credulity, and do not set∣tle revenge on thy innocent Cleocreton. But then he was also much troubled, to think that he could not go speedily to Persia, but must first go to Hungary to fight with the enchant∣ed Friend of Meaga's fancy: But as he went along, he said to himself, If I should dye by the sword of this Gyant, then must Cleocreton never be accounted of otherwise then a Tray∣tor wih the Divine Cloryana: But ah false Treachery. And then again said he, Must Cleocreton be abased at the valour of one man when he hath slain so many? And what may Clo∣ryana say? she may justly banish me from her as a Cowr, unworthy of her love. Come (said he, to his good Squire, and Galtazet) lets now see what this Monster will do with Cleo∣creton. So they went to the place of battel, and Cleocreton arm∣ed himself with Armour more for strength then magnificence, and went to the proud Knight that defended the right of a Harlot to the Crown of Hungary; but Cleocreton left this charge with Galtaet, that the Letters which he by chance got from Merea, should, if he dyed, be carried to Cloryana, to avouch his great constancy to ber, and the great desire he had to have her remembrance, though dead. And so we will leave him to the mercy of Fortune, and the power of his good Angel to bring him again to his sweet
Cloryana, who was always in the condemnation of her blame∣less Lover, and never did she blame him, but  e accused her self for her own forwardness and want of love; and poor Calsey was ready always to simpathize with her Cozen, and many times would they walk into the shady Groves, and on the trees would they engrave the names of Cleocreton and Muxorb; and the greatest comfort of Cloryana was, the Picture of Cleocreton, which she would view; and as love is never better pleased then when his Servants do follow the usual tracks that their griefs and wrongs do provoke them too, so Fortune when she is wear with frowning on them, she is pleased to smile; but Cloryana had felt the worst of her ings and torment that any rejected or jealous Lover could feel. But now the Messenger came from Delphos with the Ora∣cle of Apollo, and the Emperor caused one of his Holy Priests to read it to him: There was none by, but the Em∣press and the Quéen of Hungary, and it contained there words, written in golden Letters, on a parchmen Roll, Boast not on Calydons prouder love, For in his suit he shall be strangely forc't, Even to retreat, and so thy patience move, And thou shalt against him raise a mighty Host: But he that shall once more crown thy careful head With recovering thy lost victories, To him thy Pearless Daughter shall be wed: From Metamorphosed Maid, shall all your glories rise, But let the blossom ripe Afflictions now is done Of the vertuous Mother, though still they hold the Son. The Emperor being of a fiery temper, and seeing that the Gods did foretl the breaking of the match, he was much in∣censed, and said, I will see whether these Prophesies shall be true or no; and in his wrath he dispatched away the Ambassa∣dor, and bad him to tell his Master the Emperor of Calydon, that he should think himself happy to match with him, and said he, Onely let him send your Lord Frederick to Persia, and here to marry my Daughter Cloryana, and I wish them a hap∣py lfe, and eschew to sit on both our Throns in Peace. Clo∣ryana did not know the Oracle, but poor Lady, her grief was
extreme, to hear that the Calydon Ambassador was return∣ed with a grant from the Emperor her Father: And mourn∣ing sadly at the news, she went from place to place to finde comfort, but all was in vain, till the Quéen of Hungary, per∣ceiving her in ordinate passions, told her all the words of the Oracle, which did comfort her a litile, though not wholly compose her disquiet soul. And one day she and Calsey walking forth into the Plain, towards the Water-works, they espied two Maids, which though they well knew the way, yet they asked the Ladies which was the way to the Queen of Hungaries Lodging? Cloryana overburthened with sorrow, was not so apprehen∣sive as at other times, but Calsey she did verily think she knew the face of the for most Maid, who was very beautiful, though not in to high a garv, yet she did resemble Majestie in her countenance; and Gloryana eing more attentive on her sor∣rows, she quickly told them the way; but the young Maid said, Madam, if you please, we will wait upon you to the Palace, and so we shall go right. Cloryana could not chuse but smile for all her grief, to hear the Maid speak as she thought, bold∣lier then ordinarily Countrey Wenches do to great Ladies; but Calsey took Cloryana by the arm, and whispered to her and said, Madam, do not you know these Maids? No truly Calsey (said she) dost thou know them? I Madam, said Cal∣sey, my memory never failed me, so much as yours doth at this time. Come, said Cloryana, tell me who they are. Nay; said Calsey, that I will not, but if you will grant me one favour, I will some way satisfie you. Any way, said Cloryana, if thou wilt tell me; for she was very curious to know it, which caused her to be more pleasant then she had been since she re∣ceived Cleocretons Letter. Then (said Calsey) Let me see Prince Cleocretons Picture. Cloryana said, Now, dear Calsey, do not play upon my mis∣fortunes. Calsey said aloud, What Cosin, will you not let me see Prince Celocretons Picture? one of the young Maids behinde them laughed, to hear their contention about such a small request: Cloryana hearing them laugh, turned her about, and looked on the pretty maid, as she call'd her, and sudden∣ly a vermillion die for a while presumed to salute the Ladies face all over, as well as her cheeks, but she knew not well for wha; Then taking the box out of her pocket, she gave it to Calsey, who took out the Picture, and said, Madam, this is the young Maids name that is writ here, and this is her face.
Cloryana at that looked again upon the maid, and knew cer∣tainly that it was Cleocreton, but would not at all take no∣tice of it; but as soon as they entred, the Princess command∣ed them that were at the gates, to convey the maids to the Queen of Hungaries Lodging, and when they had obeyed her, she and the other Lady wen to their own Chamber, and there they consulted with what contrivance to carry on the business: Cloryana's opinion was, to be very nice; but said Calsey, Madam, I would have you know the reason of the Letter, before you set any countenance at all of it. But be∣fore they could determine any thing, came the Queen of Hun∣gary into the room, and said to Cloryana, smiling, Madam, Did you not see two Maids come in? for they said that you came in with them. I, (said Cloryana, assuming a very grave look) we did so Madam. The Queen took her by the hand, and led her to her own chamber, where Cleocreton and Galtazet was set as man∣nerly s could be, and when the Queen went in, they both did reverence her with a low courtesie: Then the Queen said to Cleocreton, Sweetheart, Pray tell me out the story of the Gyant in Hungary. The Princess set her down on a chair by the Queen, and Cleocreton began and said, I told you Madam, that he hed slain many brave Knights, and at the last Cleocreton came to him into Hungary. Then he would have said further, but Cloryana's stomack was come down, and she said, Nay, pray, my Lord, say I. The Quéen was almost split with laughing, to hear the Princess: Then said Cleocreton, Truly Madam, my story was onely de∣signed to see whether you would take occasion to know your poor Servant. In earnest, my Lord, (said she) I have the least reason in the World to be civil to you. Then the Queen and Galtazet left them; and the Prince kneeling down said, Divine Princess, do but vouchsafe to hear me, and then condemn me as you finde occasion; and then he took out the Letters out of his Pocket, and said, The very truth is, Madam, your displeasure I know, though I am not guilty of the cause; for it was clearly my Cosin Mersea that outwitted me, and caused a Mes∣senger to profer his service to me; and she entercepted my Lecter to you, and sent one of her one devising, the copy
of which I have, which is the true cause of my thus dis∣guishing my self, to clear me of those impeachments you might justly lay upon me for my falshood, if I had writ the Letter: But Madam, if you will not believe me, then I must bring more proof; and though I heard that you were required in marriage by the Emperor of Calydon, yet it did not so much trouble me, as if I had been false, though I must confess it was death to me to hear it on another account; for I did think that the Emperor of Persia would accept of it, because he was an Alley to the Persian Emperor; and likewise I thought that you might yield also, being so incensed against poor Cleocreton, that was as constant to Cloryana, as her own heart to her: Come my dear Princess, and tell me, Do you yet distrust me? if you do, then let me dye, for no longer would I live, then I am beloved of my dear Princess, and no longer can I be loved, then believed. At the last Cloryana spake, for she was very busie in ob∣serving how earnestly, and how sincerely he confessed the truth, and sweet Lady, se was for from distrusting her dear Cleocreton; for he expecting her answer: She said, My Lord, if I had not been moved at this strange Letter of yours, as I did verily think it was, then might all that know our love say, either that Cloryana was mad or sensless not to take notice of such an affront, offered to a person that did not onely confess her love to you, but also pro∣mised to be faithful, so long as you were so O Madam (said he) but your being convinced, is the thing that I onely aim at; and without which, I shall never enjoy my self again; but sooner give over to live, then live distrust∣ed of my onely life, Princess Cloryana. You have now said enough (said she) Cloryana cannot in the least distrust Cleocretons own words. But I must needs say, that your Cosin had some design upon you, or else she would ne∣ver have gone about to have wronged both you and me so basely. Well Madam (said he) I shall tell you that
another time, but now my chiefest care is, what we must do with your proud wooer. VVhy truly (said she) my Father hath promised me to the Emperor, but see the Ora∣cle of the Gods. And the she gave him a Copy of it, for se had learne it of te Quen. Madam (said Cleocreton) I shll be betrayed onely by this Oracle, for it doth make mention of a me∣tamorposed Maid, which is onely me: But how shall I bring glory to the Persians? therefore I fear it is some other Maid. Nay, my Cleocreton, it is you; for it also saith, that afflictions now is done of the vertuous Mother, yet hodeth still the Son: And who is more vertuous then your Mother? or who hath had more afflictions? and they still hold. I dear Princess (said he) and I look for more; this is one great one, that I must now leave you, the dear Lady of my content: But I shall shortly come, as we do accompany my Father, who doth intend to fetch my Mother, and then, dear Princess, we shall further see how the Gods will order our affairs for our good: But, O Heavens! how strange is our fate, Madam, that even the Gods themselves do expose me to the hazard of being betrayed; for the Oracle doth almost discover me: And though they do promise great things for us, yet I must not reside here. Now all Cloryana's perswasions could not prevail with him, but neds must he be gone▪ onely begging the Prin∣cess not to be so credluous any more; Which she promised, and then he took his farwel of the Princess and his Mother, and away the Maids went, as secretly as they came in; and when they had got clear of all the Doors and Porters, then Cleocreton found his Squire, and they went out of the Town, and so got their horses, and rode towards Hunga∣ry, which was a great way, and then they took shipping; and when they had continued a long time on the Seas, with boisterous mindes and contrary, at the last they arrived in Hungary. Now the Emperor of Calydon vvas in a great fury vvhen his Ambassador came, and brought him vvord from the Em∣peror
of Persia▪ that he would be glad to match with him, for his Son had told him in the Ambassadors absence, that he was already married to a fair Lady; therefore the wrath of the Father was great against young Frederick, but all could not recal what was past: But now the Emperors great care was, how to pacifie his good Friend his Majestie of Persia; but he delaying t a great while, which made the Emperor of Persia wonder the reason, and contented his Daughter the more. But at the last, the Emperor of Persia was impati∣ent at these demurs, therefore he sent an Ambassador, to know the cause of this affront; and if a sufficent reason was not given, and a speedy reurn with Frederick, the et them look to themselves, for he was not afraid to fight the great Em∣peror of Calydon; and to overcome him, that had ased im in such sort, and his Daughter Cloryana; who did onely wish and pray for the safely of her Cleocreton, who was now ready to come towards Persia: For the King of Hungary having commanded a Fast throughout his Dominions, to shew his great penitece for his past Follies, was ready, with the King of Tunis, and his two Sons▪ to fetch his vertuous Quéen home to Hungary. Now when they after a tedious travel both by Land and Sea, drew nigh to Persia, the King o Hungary staed a space beinde while the King of Tunis, with his two Ne∣phews, went to acquaint the Quéen with the good news. But O! how overjoyed was the good Quéen▪ to se her Bro∣ther, and her Son Fortus▪ that she had not séen so long time, but most of all, her great content was, to hear that her Lord and Husband was so nigh. Tn the Emperor of Persia, with ll the Ladies, accompanied the Queen to her second Marriage, and with a sumpuous Train was he conduct∣ed to the King her Husband: But to speak the truth, Clo∣ryana lookd most like the Brid, for her Beaut far sur∣passed any  the rest, and also her extraordinary gorgeous.  which the Emperor her Father greatly delighted to sée: And here was one could be judged te Bridegroom but Cleocreton, h was so exctly an acomphed Prince, thoug alas, it was not as it seemed, for the two Lovers must undergo great storms and tempess of Fortune, before they must enoy one another. But now the King of Hungary espying his constant Wife, coming to met him, who was d and given by the Emperor of Persia, and the King of Tunis, he was not ae to perform
the greetings and ceremonies due to the Emperor and La∣dies, but run and grasped his fair Queen in his arms, to express their great contentnent in each other, and their two Noble Sons: It was great pleasure to all that stood by, to se with what loving imbracements, the ing gréeted his good Wife, and his two Sons. Which done, he came to the Emperor of Persia, and ren∣dring him humble thanks fr bis great kindeness to his Queen; who did neer fail in his Noble disposition, but ve∣ry kindely carried them all back, and royally entertained them san days, with the rarest Iventions that Persia woul ffod, u none was more glad then sect Cloryana, that she might enjoy the company of Cleocreton, without fear to have him discovered to he the me amorphosed Maid; and he many times got privte entrance into Cloryana's Chamber. And they being both set, with her Companion Calsey, the Princess Cleocreton, to give her a true account of the passages that e gave her a  of, concerning the Gy∣ant of Hungary, and how he got into his Maids apparel. He then said; Most Gracious Princess, I Having left my charge with my Page, to shew you, if I dyed, my constant and real affections, I went to the Enchanted Knight, for I protest, if ever any fought with a Devil, I did: For all my strokes though grievous sore to a mortal man, yet he did not at all regard them, but shaked them off, as if it had been the blows of a Childe. But at the last, the Gods hating to favour altogether an unjust cause, gave me advantage of a better sword; for his brake upon my strong Armour, and he catched mine from me, but as he did tht, I gave him a thrust from me with my arm, and so he fell from his horse; and I got my own sword again, and so severed his great head from his wicked body. Then when I had slain him, in an instant there was such a darkness on the earth, as I could nei∣ther finde my Servants nor my way; so I sate me down for about the space of an hour, and then did the dark∣ness
go away, and the horrible thunder ceased. Then I got upon my horse, and never staid to search whether I had any wounds; and when I had travelled all the day, till night, I took up my lodging, and then Galtazet look∣ed, and found one on my shoulder, but not vey dange∣rous, for it did not hinder my travel next day. Then we took shipping, and in the space of eight days that we were on the Sea, I suffered little food to enter my weak body; for truly it was insufferable to Cleocreton, to be thought Profidious to Divine Cloryana: Then I spent my time in much sorrow, always condemning my inno∣cent self, as if I had been really false. Now when we got within three miles of Sheucity in Sisuan, there at the house of an ancient Gentlemans, where I was forced to stay two days, till they could provide me a Maids apparel; for Gal∣tazet went not, for fear of being known, and my man Melcer was not so well acquainted in any place, as to go to buy me such things as I stood in need of, but came to me again: So I bethought me of a thing, which was this, there was a young Maid in the house, which was the Gen∣tlemans Daughter, and she something resembled my self in the face; and all this while Melcer was going about his own ignorance, yet was so wise however, as to fear his own want of skill should have betrayed him, and finding them so carping, he like a good Simpleton, came back; now the truth is, my other Squire was slain amongst the Rascally rout: But the young Maid, I think, grew some∣thing enamored with me, for I could be in no place, but she would either have occasion that way, or else would she plainly tell me, she would come to me; for I put my self in mean attire, and therefore I was more suitable to her she thought; so she seeing that I was not a courting friend, she told me, If  could love her, then I should have all her Fatherr wealth I was nwilling to deny the poor simple Wench; therefore to bring off my business hand∣somely,
I said, Sweetheart, I would fain tell thee a secret: Now she was very willing to do any thing for me, espe∣cially to keep my secrets. Then said I, My self is also a young Maid, and I am now seeking a Sweetheart of mine, and I have travelled a great way, and have not found what I sought for, and I am sore weary of this habit yet I know not how to get any womans apparel for me and my maid; but if you will help me to such necessaries as we want, then I will give you the full worth in money, but let them be clathes that were never worn Well (said she) I durst have sworn you had been a young man; but for the love I bear thee still Sister, I will give thee a new gown that I never wore, it is not very fine, but it is good stuff; and I will also get your maid ap∣parel, and none of our house shall know it: Then she gave me what she said, and all things that you saw me and Galtazet in; but I gave her some gold, that she might not lose by the bargain. Then in the morning betimes we dressed our selves, and she conveyed us so, that we were not at all perceived; and the night before, I caused Melcer to carry our horses, and our cloathes when we were in bed, to a place in the City, where I commanded him to stay till I sent for him. So we both came to the place where you were walking; and Madam, this I did, because I would not be known to the Emperor to come onely to see the Queen my Mo∣ther, because by that means I might get sooner to Persia again; and I was not able to stay all this time from you sweet Cloryana: But, O Heavens! I shall never forget what an Extasie of joy I was in, when I saw you But I had almost forgot to tell you, what fell out on Seas, as I came to Persia; when we were gone a few leagues from the shoar, there we met with a famous Pi∣rat, and he thought to have a prize of us, and so he came near and grapled with our ship; now ours was no man of War, but onely a Merchants Vessel that I had hired
on purpose; therefore we were not very well provided for fight, but yet we did disdain to be their slaves: then I went to the Master of the ship, and bad him defend himself and his company as well as he could, for I my self was resolved to fight the Pirat: the Rovers seeing us make so small resistance, they came into our ship, and no sooner did I see him, but pretty well I engaged him, and fight we did a great while, before we had either of us any great advantage; but at the last Fortune gave me the Victory, and I wounded him sore, but he was not slain: And then I bestirred my self amongst the rest, which were but all mean fellows, in regard of this their Captain. And when we had caused them all to yield, the Merchant and I went to the Pirats Vessel, and in the mean time I left my Dwarf to the wounds of the Captain of the Pirats, who had the look of a brave man, and indeed was a ve∣ry Valiant person. But when I came into the other ship, there we saw a very beautiful Lady, onely with two Maids, and they were weeping. I went to the Lady, and humbly craved the cause of her discontent. She very courteously said, Sir, I am daugh∣ter to the Emperor of Germany, who having a young Prince in his Court, his sole favourite, whose name is Almacus, that same Captain which set on your ship: but this Almacus it seems, having a great love for me, and so bold was he, as that he did declare it to me: And the Emperor my Father hearing it, banished him; whereupon he out of his discontent, became a Pirat, and roving on the Sea, till on a time I going in a Vessel to take my pleasure; and he watching that opportu∣nity, came nigh my ship, and keeping, with his cunning, near us, till at the last he came with his other crew of sturdy fel-fellows, and took me by force, and these my two maids, into his ship, and they hoisted up their sails, and got from the sight of my followers, but yonder is the ship in sight again. Then she shewed me the ship, and I straight conveyed her to her
company, leaving the Captain to their mercy. And so I have told you all the passages, till I luckily espied your sweet face; and then truly I forgot all my dangers, and past afflictions, and sorrows. Calsey thought all the while, that he told the story, bow hap∣py was the cae of Cloryana. in comparson of hers; but yet was not she, for all the reason she had for it, past all her plea∣sant humors: For she laughing, said to Cleocreton, I wish with all my heart we had the maid here, that did you the courtesie, and which did also resemble you, my Lord. Well, to content thee Cosin (said Cloryana) I will have her to Court. Not while I em here (said Cleocreton) for as sure as can be she will know me, and discover my knave∣ry by her coming. But after their wirth, they began to talk of what for∣tune vvould do vvith their conditions: And then said Cleo∣creton, Well Madam, after I have carried my Mother to Hungary, what excuse can I ever have to see you? I conceive therefore, it were better if you would, dear Princess, consent to marry me, and then you may be kept, once got into Hungary, in spite of all the World. O no, (said she) my Cleocreton, it must not be so, lets rather wait the leisure of the Gods. So the poor Lover durst not press his Argument an fur∣ther, for fear of displeasing his adored Pricess, though he did se reason enough of his side▪ Then they breaking off discourse. Cleocreton took his leave of the Ladies, vvith a heart as full of grief, as so small a place could possibly con∣tain; and he even utterly despaired his thoughts, ever to en∣joy his dear Cloryana; for he thought it vvas in vain for him ever to move it to his Father, for him to require he Princess in marriage, because the Emperor vvas already ent on the Son of the Calydon Emperor: And in tse thoughts did he torment his restless srt: Oh (vvould he sy) into what adversities and streights am I plunged! Was it not enough for me, in my infancy, to be tossed with troubles of sun∣dry and grievous sorts? but now in my love to incom∣parable
Cloryana, must my soul be always oppressed with strange fears, of losing the Jewel that I hold my life by. Thus he bedevved his pillow vvith tears, and beating him∣self on the breast said, O you just Gods, why should you take uch pleasure in prolonging the life of men, to make them more mise∣rable? better were it that I had no life, then to want that which is my greatest comfort in the World: Is there no means to use, but that Cleocreton must be content with∣out Cloryana? O! never can I endure that; but I will resolve to dye, and then there will be an end of my tor∣ments, unhappy Cleocreton! It being dark, and he séeking for his sword, in his despair would have killed himself: But there appeared to him in a flame of Fire, the Goddest Venus, and with a Charming clear voyce, said; Cease thou young Lover, Leave thy mourning vain. Time will thy sugred Fate discover, For Sunshine follows rain. Cleocreton was not at all dismaid at the Viston, for he was almost desperate: And having none to comfort him but his own Love tormenting heart, when the Vision was gone, he said, Well, the Gods do not cease to promise fair things, no more then they cease to torment me. But if there be any hope, why should not I employ all my en∣deavours to procure me the Paragon of the world? Must I think to endure nothing? O foolish Cleocreton, be con∣tent to suffer what will come, rather then despair; for Cloryana loves thee: And is not that enough? So with these resolutions of patience, he then suffered the needful Messenger of sleep, which as slumbers, to hold him, till he himself had wholly arrested the senses of Cleocreton, and held him almost till bright Phoebus had run a part of his jour∣ney; for Cleocreton lay, till his Brother Fortus came softly unto his Chamber; and going to his bed side he see him a∣sleep, and looking on him a while, he perceived his eyes to
be red, and his cheeks wet with tears, and in his hand he had Cloryana's Picture: Then Fortus took i up, and viewing it very well, saw that it was the Pourtraicture of Cloryana; so he then imagined his grief, for he was well read in the Book of Love himself, and greatly pitied his Brother, but not to of cover what he knew, because Cleocreton did never self it him. So he went softly to the door, and then rusting in, Cleo∣creton awaked, and seeing the Picture, he hid it, and said, Who is there? Fortus said, It is I Brother; surely you have entertained some pleasant dream, you love your bed so well this morning. Now he said this, to try what he would say, Brother, you look as though you were possessed with melancholy Love. He answered, Nay, rather over slept my self Brother, said he. Well thought Fortus, I know more then you think I do. Then Cleocreton called for his Cloaths, and as though he would tura his inside outwards, he would wear black that day; now it was fine cloth, cut in many slashes and opens, shewing his pure linnen, and upon many of the opens was set claspes of Diamonds, nobly shewing their lustre on his arms and body, and giving the more occasion for his fair hair to shew its golden treasure. So he being ready, went out to the other Princely Company; for Persia was never so plentifully furnished with so Noble Guests as now. It being a pleasant morning, the Emperor would needs shew the King of Hungary his fine Garden, and curious marks. The Emperor, as it was his use, led his own dear Empress, the King of Hungary his Quéen, and Prince Cleo∣creton led his adored Cloryana, as it always fell out for his good Fortune so to do, and Fortus led Philopeet, and Peu∣houn led Calsey, who was her Cosin by the Mothers side: And thus being all accompanied, Cloryana did well perceive the distemper of her beloved Cleocreton, saying, My Lord, what doth move you so much to heat and cold, as often times appears in your face? O, Madam (said he) I am extremely troubled to think that now I must leave you again, and know not how in all the world to do; for I must not stay in Persia after my Father, and being once gone, what shall I do? O Heavens direct me! Why, (said she) I have more hopes, that the Gods will per∣form
what they have promised, and give us more com∣fort. But certainly Madam (said he) I admire that you should be so patient, for it is so insufferable to me, that I can scarce believe either Gods or men; for though I had a promise from the Goddess Venus, yet I know not how my afflictions should end; for without the enjoyment of my dear Lady, they are still greater. Well (said the Princess) if it be determined by my Father, that I must marry the Calydon Prince, then comfort thy self, my Cleocreton, and expect me in some strange habit; for false I will not be to Cleocreton, upon any account what∣sover. Oh (said Cleocreton, even ravished with joy to hear her Words) Madam, I am well recompenced, though I spend my hearts blood to win so rare a Princess. But Philopeet was not so pleased with her Gallant, whose head was so troubled to think of the cruelty of his Lady Freesa, that he scarce had the least thought of the Lady whom he led, entertaining her with little or no discourse; therefore she had no great estimation of his Courtly carriage. Thus they walked thorow all the spacious Gardens and Walks: Now in the midst of the highest Garden, was a clear Chrystal Fountain, walled in with Alabaster, by which they passed, and so went into a large gréen Arbour, richly covered, by reason it was Summer tune; and there they rested on rich Cushions, laid for the purpose in chairs; and on one side of the Arbor was a door, which was of double glas, so set, that one might perceive something within, though no eyes could discern what it was: And while they were busying their eyes on the glass, they were suddenly surprized with the most harmonious musick that ever ear was entertained wihal, which did greatly delight the com∣pany: And in the mean time while they did turn all tongnes and eyes into ears, for the better attention; there opned another door on the other side of the Arbor of it self, where the Emperor envited them all in, and there they had as care a Treatment, as did not onely she the magnificence and richness of the Emperor, but also his kindeness to his friends, and his rare devices and pleasant fancies on pur∣pose invented; for the better entertaining of his Noble guests: The Room ws hung with extraordinary precious hangings,
for indeed, Persa hath the praise of all Lands for fine works, and rich Furniture; and in the hangings was several soris, one of Venus and Adon, another of Hercules and his Club, both upon te Altar with his posoned shit, that his Wife Dmra sut him, in token of love, yet wrought hi death; and likewise ters was to life shone, all the Histories of the ancient Emperors and Kings of Persia; and on the roof was artificially drawn the Skis, wih the Clouds, and in the midst ws he Sun in his full Glory; and so rare was the de∣vise, that by the weights and wheis above, the Clouds were carried abut, and the Sun in its slow motion, as it ould almost deiude the beholders eyes with the thoughts of reali∣ty it self. When they had sufficiently viewed all there prety devises of the Emperor, they I sate down to a stately Banquet of rre Fruts, and excelent Wines. Now their eyes, ears and take being delighted, the King of Hungary said to the Em∣peror, Your Majestie hath the advantage of all the Nations of the th, for plenty and store of the best and choice thigs, both for nvensitions and materials; but most of all, your free and noble entertainments, which must needs make all people admire you, as worthy of so great and noble an Empire. Well (said the Emperor) was my Estate greater, the great∣er should be your Entertainment: I pray, let not your praise be so lavish, as to hinder you from tasting my fruits, which I dare commend. The King of unis having fed freely, had more leisure to talk: Your noble Entertainment, Great Empeor (said he) make all men, and especially we who have good experi∣ence, to be for ever obliged to become your Servants. You are all welcome good Friends (said the Emperor) more for your Company, then your Complements. The young Lovers were all much delited, except Cleo∣creton and Calsey, for one was tormented with the thoughts of his following mishap, and the other between hope and fear; and for Cloryana, she had the company of her constant Cleocreton, and so much joy in that, as e forgot an past dis∣content, and future evils: And Philopeet, she was so well perswaded of her Servnt costancy, that although she much desired to see him, e was e nt so much troubled, as it could appear to any: But while they were all thus Nobly bu∣sie
in their pastime, came in Prince Albyazer, unthought of, or unexpected, whose coming did adde more pleasure to al the company. The Emperor was extremely glad, and an the rest, but more especially Philopeet and Calsey, who were scarce able to contain their joy. But when Albyazer saluted his dear Sister, he could not chuse but sigh deeply, to think of her hard Fortune, to which she gave good attention, and did suspect the worst and truth of the business; for Albyazer could not meet with Muxorb, for his occasions fll out to be more near Persia then Corinth Then answered she very patient∣ly, Well Brother, let me suffer, but it is my desire, that it may be concealed, for it may be the Gods will order the return of my unconstant Muxorb. Her Brother pitied her condition, and admired her constant affection. Now the King of Hungary, and the King of Tunis, thought it time to depart the Persian Court, hiding farewel to the good Emperor and Empress: Now next to the sorrow be∣tween the Princess Cloryana and Prince Cleocreton, was the grievous parting betwixt the Queen of Hungary and Clorya∣na; for she did tenderly respect the Princess, and also con∣sidering the great love that her Son ad for her, and the cross Fortune that was like to fall ou betwixt them, and they promising to have eternal friendship for each other, though she should never have the happiness as to have so matchless a Daughter as the Princess Cloryana: And then the dolefullest parting of all was, between the two Lovers, poor Ceocreton was so overcome with sorrow, which wis∣dom and vertue made just, for the loss of so excellent and in∣comparable a Lady; but yet all his hopes was not dead, be∣cause he had a promise from the mouth of his dear Princess, that she would escape to him, if her Father did determine to marry her to the Calydon Prince: Then did the Lovers part, with sad hearts; but Cleocreton promised Cloryana to make his most abode in a Town well fortified and hard by the Sea side, that lay towards Persia; For whiles the King of Hun∣gary was at the Persian Court, news came to him, that the inhabitants of this Town, the name of which was Cebria, that they offered some strange affrot to the ships that passed into Hungary: Cleocreton perswaded his Father to bsiege this Town, which was a continual trouble to the traffick of Hungary, it bing a Haven. So the King of Hungary made Cleocreton his Son General of his Army, and so he
went towards this Town Cebria, and the King of Hungary and the King of Tunis hasted awa with the fair Quéen, and Prince Fortus who promsed to come to the aid of Cleo∣creton, with the greatest part of the Hungrians, so soon as he had conducted the Queen his Mother into Hungary, whose Voage though log, et at the last was accomplished to the no uall joy of all the Kingdom of Hungary▪ For when the ings came to their ears, that there graious Quéen was again come to her right, the made such rejoycings thorow all the Kingdom of Hungary, as was seldo  ever séen: The first entertinment they gave their Queen, was the Hart Meaga and her two Sons led to their eecution: The good Queen wol wilingly have had her spared, such was her sweet and piiful nature to her very Enemies▪ but the people oul serceet her go to the execution, for they woul have torn her apieces, but for the guard of Souldiers that kept them off▪ Now the Kng of Tunis seeing his dear Sister▪ to his sol desire, seated again with her huband in his Throne, and making some san abede with them, whiles there came news from Prince Clecreton to his Father, that it was the belt way for Fortus not to come so speedily to him for his aid, till he sent word, for his coming could not be any ad∣vantage; and that it was not the wisest course openly to make War aainst them, but rather by some stratigem to win the Tovvn, vvhich he vvould let them knovv. Fortus was not a little glad of it, for by that means he got time to go with the King of Tunis his Vncle, and so to sée his his fair Lady Fresa. So taking farewel of the King and Queen, they hasted towards Tunis, where they were ex∣pected with great earnestness of affection by the Queen, who longed to see the safe return of her Lord; and the Lady Freesa was not a little glad to sée her constant adirer Prince Fortus, who was xceeingly stisfied with the very sight of the litte prety Lady, and all his care and diligence was, to get more of her favour. In the mean while was Princess Cloryana sad eough, for the absence of her lover Cleocre∣ton, who was not slack to send Letters constantly to her else she would have resented▪ is absence more heavily; but for the pleasat humour of her Cosia alsey, who had cause enough of discontet, bu she began now to forget her Sevans un∣constancy, and though she was resolved to marry none but Muxob, yet s did she carry it, as not any in the Court was so pleasant as she.
But now Albyazer could stay no longer from the enjoying his Phylopeet, therefore he very earesly beseeched the Em∣peror to let the marriage be consummated with speed; to which the Emperor well contented, caused great preparation for the marriage, the old Earl of Gnickrb was sent for, with his Couness, and his other daughters. Then an things being ready, an the day come, the fair Bride was most sumptuousy adrned, and so was her more beautiful Bridal Nymph Cloyana; and then followed all the Train of Fair Ladies o the Temple, and thee Albyazer and Philopeet performed their Humane Rites, and so con∣ducted was the delicate Bride again to the Palace, where was acted Shews, and Feast▪ Triumphs, and Dances, acted in all the bravery that could be invented. Then did Alby∣azer enjoy that long wished, for day, and great joy and plea∣sure was it to the Earl of Gnickrick, his Lady and Children, to have their Brother so well provided for, especially Calsey, who had extraordinary love him▪ for he had great riches with Philopeet: And the Duke his Father began to build him a statele Castle, for the more commodions dwelling of his fair Daughter, the Castle was seated on a Rock, by a fair River, and it was but a little distance from te City of Sisuan, it was twelve moneths a building, and all the cuninest Artifices were employed about this Castle, which Albyazer called, The Fort of Beauty: And when it was finished, he carried his Lay to , and there lived. But now Cleocreton had got the advantage of the Cebraeans, and sent post to Hungar presently Fortus had the news sent him, hil he was couting his Lady: And one day being with the King in his private Chamber, for he always greatly delighted in his Nephew, and Fortus did greatly hope that the King would assis him in is dee match with the Lady Freesa, and so to that purpse he bent his discourse, and said, looking on the Panres in t Room, Sr, this Love is a very strange Passion▪ Nephew (said the King) you speak ve∣ry affectedly; I do verily think that my Cosin Freesa's Beauty hath smitten you. Truly, my Lord (said he) you have taken me now; but I beseech you aid me, for the truth is, dear ncle, I have always ever since I see the Lady, an inviolable affction for her; and though she may deserve to be the Empress of the whole World, yet I
must needs venture my blood with any that will challenge a right to her. I am a little sorry (said the King) that you should have so much difficulty in your love, and yet I again commend your noble inclination to Vertue, for my Neece is a very Vertuous Lady; but if it e in my power, I shall do any thing I can for you, though I know the King of Calcos will look high, but she being his younger Daughter, there may be some hopes for you Nephew. Fortus was so joyful to hear the King speech, as he thought that the greatest thing was the consent of their Friends, for the Lady was now pretty well satisfied with the love of Prince Fortus, and gave a return of hers to him. But Mer∣sea, she had not yet forgot her love to Cleocreton, though it was not usual for her to be so constant, yet seeing all her hopes was vain: and therefore as it is the nature of love, when it is rejected, either to work the death of the person that is afflicted, or else to turn to hate, that contrary evil, so it hapned with Mersea; for she invented all imaginary evils to work the harm of Cleocreton: And to that purpose, she bent her course, and knowing the love between him and Clorya∣na, and also hearing that the Emperor her Father had a de∣sign to marry her to the Calydon Emperors Son, she em∣ployed many about her strange practices, and in time e caused a great many papers and pamphlets to be strewed in Calydon, especially in the principal City, that the Court of Calydon might certainly know, what she desired: Her Pa∣pers was to this purpose, that the Calydon Emperor was abued by the Emperor of Persia, for his Daughter was al∣ready engaged to the Hungarian Prince Cleocreton: And this was done, even about the time when the Persian Am∣bassador was at the Callydon Court, and all the City was in strange thoughts about it, and it came to the ears of young Frederick, who straight made it a piece of his excus to his Father, who never staid to know the Author or certainty of it, but when the Ambassador was to go towards Persia, the Emperor of Calydon told him, That as for his Masters threats, he did not weigh them, for he thought, that he could himself, without any help, wage War with Persia, and that his Son should marry one who was free, and
not contracted, as they said his Daughter was, to the Prince of Hungary. The Ambassador was much amazed to hear the same; then taking his leave, with speed went towrs Persia: And when he arrived there, he told his Lord the words of the Calydon Emperor, which did so confound the senses of the Emperor, as he was well ih franick; but ithal, the Am∣bassador told the Emperor, s he had lerned in the Calydon Curt, that Frederick was married before the Embassage came to require Cloryana in marriage, and that he did be∣lieve that it was a pretence to excuse his  rashness, to proffer such a thing, before he knew the thoughts of his Son: But the Emperors fury was so great that de dispatch∣ed all his business of War in short time, and did intend to correct the Calydon Emperor for, his forwardness. But no came te sorrow of poor Cloryana, for the in∣censed Emperor would not hear his seet Daughters ex∣cuse, which indeed was but a poor one; for she was in the most deporable condition as ever poor Lady was in the Werld, for she ke not in the World how it came out nor could she endure the deadly frowns of her Father, but fell down in a sound: Her tender Mother thought she had been dead, whreupon she likewise fll upon her onely daugh∣ter, even struck almost dead for grief: The Emperor now seeing both his wife and onely cilde i that danger, it coold his fury, and augmented his discontent; then taking his Queen into his arms, with much abo revived her, while Calsey with her tears and prayers, bemoned Cloryana, who also recover dout of her sound; and as soon as the Empress perceived Cloryana to be alie she fell down at the Empe∣rors feet, and begged of him not to be so harsh to his one∣ly childe: He said he would forgie her, if she would give over her love to Cleocreton, whom he said he would kill, and cause to prish, if he came in his power: which wors still aggrevated the sorrow of the Fearless Cloryana, who va∣lued her dear Cleocreton above all he Empires or King∣doms o the Word; for nothing Would satifie her but the vvelare and enjoyment of her Cleocreton▪ vvho vvas at that time bravely conquering his Enemies, vvth his Bro∣ther Fortus, vvhose Army prevailed against the proud Ce∣baeians: But he little thought o nevv the rief of his beautiful Cloryana, vvho did so extremely torment herself
vvith the thoughts of Cleocretons safety, and her Fathers harshness, which was much moderated by the pudence and discretion of the Empress. Then the Emperors great care was, to get a Valiant Ge∣neral to lead his Army in the War, for he could not desire Albyazer to supply that place, because he was but ely married; yet for all that, Albyazer proffered his service to the Emperor, to the great discontent of Philopeet, yet Al∣byazer loved honor more then his own content. So he (being General) and a Cosin of the Empresses, whose name was Morisco, and Preuhoun, with many other young Lords and Knights of Persia, prepared for the War, and there was a mighty Army levied. Now it was so ordered, in the fight that was to be between Calydon and Persia, that the Army of the Emperor hasted, and on a sudden surprized the Cali∣dons; but they being a well ordered people, were quickly in arms, and they wanted neither puissance nor valour But at the last Cleocreton heard of the War of the Em∣peror against Calydon; for Cloryana was exceeding sick, and could not write herself, therefore she caused Calsey to express all the true affection that a Vertuous Lady could have to one whom she had vowed her love and life; and to let him also know how all things passed, and likewise that her health was much impaired, and left nothing unspoken that was necessary. But never was man in such a perplexity, as was poor Cleocreton, when he received this unexpected news; and also, that the Kingdom of Persia had infringad its self in a sore War with Calydon. Now for his share, he having by policy and valour, put the Cebaerians to the worst, he and all his company was going towards Hungary, but he was resolved not to go with them: Therefore when Fortus and they were all on the point of their journey, Cleocreton, whose sorrow was not to be parauel'd, secretly got away, with none but his Squire and Galtazet. Great searching was made up and down for him by his Brother Fortus, but all was in vain, for no intelligence was to be had of him, but they were all glad to go on their journey: And when they came into Hungary, every one in general did greatly applaud the valour of invincible Cleo∣creton, which made all to be more sensible of their loss, espe∣cially the good King and Queen; but the Quéen though she concealed it, yet she did suspect that he was gone to Cloryana, which did the more quiet her.
But now the King of Tunis was trying what he could do for Fortus; and he did greatly solcite the King of Calchos for his Daughter; and he was not by himself, for there was another young Prince. Son to the King of Hecate, would gradly have matched with Fresa, and had courted her long, but she had no liking of him; yet he was not so content, but did greatly entreat her Father for to favour his love, the King of Calcos had already referred it to his Daughter and so he could not call back his word. Then the King of Tunis sent for Fortus, who had the greatest share in the Ladies af∣fection, and she was resolved to have Fortus, before the Prince of Hecate; who hearing of Fortus his courg of Freesa, and being incensed against him, did send him a chal∣lenge from his Chamber, for he was then in the Court of Tunis. Fortus was not at all dismaid at it, but fearing that a secret Combate might prove dangerous to the Conqueror, as he hoped to be, therefore he privately told the King of Tunis, and shewed him his challenge, which was this: Assyrtus of Hecate, to Fortus of Hungary. VVIshing the valiant (though my Enemy) that I may have the more glory in Conquering thee: My just despite against thee is, That thou pretends a right to the Lady Freesa; which if thou dost, and darest stand to affirm, then meet me at such a place as shall be shewed thee, with thy Sword, there to receive thy smart reward for thy presumption, to claim a title to that which none shall enjoy but my self. Farewel till I meet thee, and then worse. The day and hour appointed being come, and the Com∣baters in the field, just then came the King himself, and with a seeming earnestness, as though he had not known of the Duel: Gentlemen (said he) how comes this I pray, let me in∣treat you not to spill so valiant blood for a Lady, who does not desire the hurt of them whom she least esteems. The Prince of Hecate grived to the very heart, that the King should in the least hinder his intended revenge against
Fortus: Therefore he not regarding what the King said, rid to For us and gve him a blow or two, but the King com∣manded to lay hld of ssyrtus, and so staye him. Then the King went igher him, and said, Sir, I beseech you be not so bent to spll your blood in my Kingdom, for I greatly honour your Father; and what account shall we make for you? I do not speak this▪ because I fear the courage of my Nephew, for I know his valour: But this I say, which must needs appear to be reason, that the Lady hersel shall chuse one of you, or deny you both, which you ought, if your affctions be correspondent to the honour of your births and mindes, both of you to be▪ contented with. Assyrtus could not deny what the King said yet he could scarce a sooer or anger; and  seeig him so ernest, was grieved that he did not fight it out, for his soul was as high and valiant as any, and none would venture more for love the he for his Lady Feesa. As soon as she heard of it, she was extremly troubled for fear of Forus. lest he sould have been slain; for now she plainly saw, that her heart was too deply engaged to him; to suffer his harm for her sak. But the Prince of  boiring in anger a∣gainst Fortus the King very gravey set him down in a fair room, and having with him Assyrtus, and calling Fortus, placed them on each side of him, saying, Come, my Lord Assyrtus, I pray let me be an Arbitrator between you, and let me engage you both to stand to the words of Freesa, for though you should fight one against another, yet he that is the Conquerer, is never the better, unless the Lady give her consent, you can neither of you enjoy her; and you may do that, without endangering your lives: Now let her give the judgement between you. Then said Assyrtus, Your Majestie cannot hde yur paria∣lity to your Cosin; for I suppose you know her aversi∣on to me, and it may be her love to him, and so you must needs know what will be my doom: But the nature of Love is, that if one cannot enjoy the thing loved, however he would hinder another from having that which
he cannot purchase himself. But (said the King) since men have reasonable souls, let them upon cooler blood, rather be penitent for breaking the Law of the Gods, by their rash and unruly passions, then to be rudely reso∣lute. Well (said he) I may be confined by your Laws to your pleasure, in your Kingdom: But I hope to meet with you my Lord Fortus (said he, scornfully smiling) if you dare but venture on me out of the Land of Tunis. Well, my Lord (said Fortus) fear not, but when we do meet, I shall stand to the hazard of it, and it may be Fortune may give him the Victory, that will not brag of his own valour, who hath (I speak it not out of vain glory) foed braver men then thy self, and no doubt. upon such an accoun as this, I shall not hide my head. Then they falling to high terms, the King parted the, and took his Nephew by the arm, and said, Surely I can in some measure command you, and so put him out of the room. But many days did not pass, before the King of Hecae, be∣ing sick to death, sent for his Son home, who with a sad heart parted from the Lady Frees, who was glad to endure his undesired company, because the King her Vncle com∣manded that he should have that priviledge, for he greatly  he hard Fortune and condition of Assyrtus, for he was indeed a gallant person, and much beloved of his Subjects: Fan would Mersea have iniced him, but he was other wys inclied. But now the affairs went but badly with the Persians; for they having met the army of Calydon, and bravey braging of the Victory that they should win, but when they came to try their strength, they found, that much eace had  idleness, and idleness had bred cowardness; for they were almost all ready to turn their strength into their heels, for all the brae example of Albyazer, and the many other stout Commanders, who was dishearnsed through the faint heart∣edness of their Souldiers. But there came into the aid of the Persians a strange Knight, whom none of them did know who was followed by none but one man, which séem∣ed to be his Squire: But never man did so he in himself, as he did, in the thickest of the Battel, his Friends blessed the time of his coming, and his Enemies dreadad the very
looks of him, and yet could not chuse but applaud his nimble and hardy strokes, and his Lon-like fury: But it did hard∣l turn the running resoluin of the Coarly Souldiers: which he perceivng, turned him quickly bout and said, This is not the way, my Friends, to gain Honor, but shame; therefore raise up your courage, Noble Persians, and let it not be told in Calydon, that you turned your backs upon your Enemies, for that will be the infamy of your names forever; but to stand in the defence of your King and Countrey, will not onely gain you great re∣wards, but also make your names dreadful to your Ene∣mies, and held in estimation of your friends. These words did so animate the towardly hearts of the Souldiers, as they al ith one consent fell pell-mel on the Calydons; now this valient Hro hd made such a slaughter amongst them, as thy might very well fall to their work with more hopes of profiting, when another had begun it. Then he left that wing of the Army, which he had so much weakned, as it could scarce lend any strength at all to the body of that great Host. Then he came to a place where there was a very great an terrible combate betwen six Knights, three against three, which was Albyazer, Lord Pruhoun, and Moriso of the Persian party: But Albyazer had not been idle, for he had slain a great number of the Calydons, and he and his two Companions had also foiled their Eemies, and the other two went to finde more fuel to adde to the fire of revenge, while Albayzer was sorey en∣gaged with a stout Calydon, who did distrss Albyazer, be∣ing almost wary; for he had stood many sore brunts of the fight, and had received wounds, that made him ready to yield to death to his fresh Adversary. Then came te unknon Victor and reieved Albyazer, and quickly gave th proud Caydon his passport; but Alby∣azer was not unmindeful of the courtesie that the strange Knight did him; and as unable as he was to stand on terms of Compleents, yet he took off his Heimet and said, Sir Knight, though I be a stranger to you, yet I shall not be happy, till I have acquaintance and friendship with, and from him that I owe my life. But he unilling to be known, though he knew Albyazer and said, My Lord Albyazer, I should think my self highly
honored, if I could do any thing worthy your esteem, or the worthy Empror, whose cause you al figh. And when he had said this, he galloped away, yet before he went, he ordered some to took to lbyazer, who was stricken with wonder at the deeds of the strange Knight, and also that he should know his name so well, yet Albyazer thought that he should know his voyce: Then he was resolved to seek out this Noble un∣known, and to that purpose he spoe to a kinsman of his, and wished him to follow the earth of that stout Knight that re∣lieed him; For, laid be, in all my life, I never saw man fight with so great courage, and so merciful to them that cryed for mercy at hs hand. His friend promising to finde him out if it were possible, and going to the field, he sa the finest sight that the World could shew; for the Emperor of Persia was come to the relief himself in person, of his faint and breath∣less Army: And the Emperor of Calydon was also amongst his good Souldiers, to encourage them; now so it was, that the Calydon Emperor▪ and the Emperor of Persia, was both of them in a strong fight, and ideed two braver Champions could not be on earth, and btter matched, but this was the sadness of the business, that they which were so great Friends, it now should be the pleasure of Fortune, to make them the greatest Enemies: But there came in a base slave▪ and see∣ing his Lord of Calydon so straitly match, he came behinde the Emperor of Persia, and gave him a sore blow on the shoulder, and present rode away, as did amaze the Empe∣ror that he now must yield, being wronged. But the strange Knight seeing it, made great baste to the aid of the Persian Emperor; and in the way as he ent, he met the coardly slav that did the same: Now he took him to be his on Cptain, for their Armor was alike, and the follow in this belief, said, Sir, I have done your commands for I have served the turn of the great Emperor of Persia, who else would have slain our Emperor. Then Cloreton (for i was he) in a great fury snt this abjct soul of the Calydon to the gates of Puo, tere to plead for the better usage of his teacherous Captain when he shoul come there, an ten went to the Emperors relief, who ws so much astonished at te blow, that he ell from his hose in a sound. Ceocreton thought he hd been dead, and his noble heart was much over-charged with grif, for the loss of so great nd wise a Moerch, and resolved to reenge his death, or lose his own life, and so he fel upon the Souldiers th would have arried the body of
the Emperor (though dead) to be one of their Captives, for the more honor of their Victory: But he sent them after the rest of their flvish souls. Now one of the servants of Cleocreton, who always followed his Master, seeing the Em∣peror of Persia ie on the ground, went to him and took off his Helmet, whereby his body was refreshed, and precent∣ly the Emperor revived, saying to the Servant that did him that favour, I pray thee good friend, what was he that fell on he men that came to take me Captive? It was my Master, said e, who I hope will also win the Battel for you: For the truth is, Noble Emperor, he hath fought with much vigor, and hath been without all belief, so stirring, as he hath made a ma∣acre amongst your Majesties Enemies; Mars himself could not have done more. The Emperor was so revived with hopes, at the speches of Cleocretons Squire, as he mount∣ed upon his horse to finde out his great Benefactor, who had no sooner stain the Souldiers that came to carry the Emperor away, but presently he went where the Emperor of Calydon was, in great and proud beas, how the Emperor of Persia was slain: But he still thought Cleocreton dreadsin, besides they would gradly have ordered the death of Albyazer, who as I have said, was nigh death; but also Morisco and Preu∣houn did Valtantly behave themselves, and they were very much troubled for fear that Albyazer had been slain, for they could not finde him but Cleocreton did make all, both Friends and Enemies stand astonished at his wonder. Then came unto him a couldier, and said, Though thou proud fool thinkest thy self unresistable, yet the weight of my arm, when thou hast felt it, then see how thou wilt crave mercy at my hands; but Monster thou shalt not have any request granted thee. Cleo∣creron could not chuse but smile, to her the arrogant ool: whereupon he said, How comest thou fellow, to have the con∣ceit that thou shalt conquer me. I dream yesternight, said he, that I was fighting with a Lyon, and ew it, and certainly thou art he whom I must say. Then Cleocreton gave him a ore wound of his arm that he bragged so on, and seing the cruel stroke go to his heart, he fell down and begged mercy of Cleo∣creton. He granted it, and said, Thou dost little deserve it. And there he lest the Fellow to repent of his other past fouies, because this had been so ear to him: Then Cleocreton came again where he has relieved Albyazer, and espied him not, but riding a little further he aw him wéeping, and said to him, My Lord, what is your discontent? O! (said Abyazer, when
e saw hi) thou worthy unknown Knight, my heart bleedeth or the death of my Vncle the Emperor, whom they say is not onely slain, but also his body is in the hands of the Calydon. ay (said Cleocreton) I have delived his body from the hands of his Enemies, and I have given command that the Physicians should attend him, and I hope he is alive, however; his Enemies shall taste of my ury. And then he galloped to a place where the Emperor was making an Oration to his Souldiers and withl he said, I fear not winning the day, if you would but take a conceit to dispatch yonder black Knight, who holds up their cowardly heads. Cleocreton  hearing the charge of the Emperor, and being even desperate with the consideration of the loss at  Emperor and also the likelihood of the overthrow of all the Valient Persinns, and not euery so, but by this means  the onely Star of his life, even Cloryana, be∣come a ate: All thee things considered, he resolved so dye , and  even thrust himself among his Enemies,  with a high voyce, Sirs, you have slain my Emperor, now  greedy stomachs with my blood also. They seeing the man whom they had the most marice for, they most busiely eset him round, and all of them having, one and the same resolution, fell on him: He thinking now that his last Tragedy was a playing, said to himself, Now Cloryana, thy aid at this time, or else thy sweet self must la∣ment the death of thy constant Cleocreton. Then he with a Lyen like fury fell upon them, and one after another, he ewed them like endble, till there was not a man of  left of twelve, but three who cryed for mercy, and had it granted them. Then he made hasle to see what was be∣come of the Battel, and he soon perceived their great dis∣order, then ging in adleading them, they fell to work as fresh as though they were but new begun and Cleocreton made them way with his sword and slew so infinite a num∣ber, as it is almost ; and at the last he eed their Emperor, and with the thought of a full revenge, he i spis of all the Guard of his erson, came to him▪ and said, Come thou most ignoble person, take thy farewel of thy owardly crew, who have most ignominously and trea∣chrously slain my Emperor. With that he gave him a sore wound upon his thigh, whereupon he commanded to take up his body, while he
corrected the rest of them, and then he did well perform his promice, for he corrected their souls from their bodies. Now the Emperor of Calydon was even at the back of Cleocreton, and was an ey witness of his Noble and unparallel'd acti∣ons, and was greatly actonished at them. But now there was not a Persian that would ight any more▪ they had so much humlity from the poor conquered Caldyons, who had lest all vaour and heart with their Emperor, who was Captie. Now the Empress of Calydon came into the field to seek her Lord, and against all honor, she took to her feet, and ran from her attendance, and when she came a∣mongst all the dead bodies, to search for the Emperor, she found him not, but heard that his body was in the Persans hands. She then came to Cleocreton, and fell down at his feet, and shed a World of tears, beeeching him to give her the body of her husband Cleocreton pitying greatly, that such a gallant Lady as she should be in so great extreity, he went to the Emperor of Persia, and led the Calydon Em∣press by the arm, and kneeled down to him, saying, My Lord, I beseech you to let this great and sorrowful Lady have the body of her husband the Emperor of Calydon. Then the Emperor of Persia said, Nobe Conquerer, to thee must all be subject, and why dost thou therefore as any thing of me? do as thou thinkest good with all the Captives, they are all thy own; and for you, Noble Lady, I do not onely desire that that Valiant Heroe may have his own will in all, but if he thine good, let your Kingdom be restored in peace, except so much as he shall desire himself; and for my share, you shall become Tributaries to me, and Calydon shall be to my seed for ever: And for the body of your Husband, my Physicians hopes to bring him to health. The Empress with joy and wonder said, Most mighty Em∣peror, it is a small thing for us to be your servants for ever, for whilest I live, I shall always admire your cle∣mency, and it shall be left upon record in Calydon for eternity. Cleocreton culd not but wonder at the exceeding civili∣ty of the Emperor, who had been so abused by tem; and for his part, he required nothing at all, ut consented to
the words of the Emperor,. So the Emperor▪ of Calydon was returned to his Kingdom, and his Empire to his Son Frederick, who was sick of a Feavor with his young Wife. Then the Emperor of Persia, and all his Souidiers, return∣ed with all their glory wone by the Noble Cleocreton, but the Emperor must needs know who this Conquerer was, and coming to him said, Sweet Sir, let it be no offence to you, to shew me the face and name of the Preserver of us all. He intending not to be known for all this, and being at a non-plus, said, Great Emperor, all my deserts are nothing worth, but if I must have a reward, let it be this, that I may go away unknown, and when I am gone, this Noble Lord (pointing to one, whom to his great astonish meet e he had found in the Batte, on the Persians side, whoe name was Muxorb) shall declare my name. The Emperor was more discontented at the reward that Cleocreton begged then it e had asked his Crown from his head. Then Cleocreton spake in the ear of Muxorb, and said, I am Cleocreton your humble ser∣vant, a constant lover of Divine Cloryana, though you, contrary to your Noble disposition, are become as in∣constant to your Lady. I beseech you, my Lord (said Muxorb) do not term me so▪ for never did man more passionately admire any thing, then I do the Vertuous Lady Calsey▪ Make haste then (said Cleocreton) and let her know it; and tell my Princess, though my accursed fate, doth hinder me from visiting her, yet my very heart loatheth any thing that doth not resound the name of Cloryana. When he had spoken that word, he very reverently bow∣ed his head to the Emperor, and to all the Nobles, and quick∣ly spurred his horss, and galloped away, leaving een tears in the ees of the Emperor, and all his Noble Company, for the loss of so valiant a Souldier; but their tears did not stop their mouthes, for they breathed his fame with so universal a praise, as if the God Mars had in Person helped their Army to the Victory. Then was the Emperor im∣patient to know of Muxorb, what his name was that they were so much obliged to Eteries his name and praises. Then said Muxorb, It is none but the invincible Cleocreton. O Heavens! (said the Emperor) a man reserved by the Gods, to do wonders in the World. But O, poor Cleocreton (said he)
thou hadst good reason to flie away from the face of thy Tyrant friend: But certainly Sirs, the Vertues of this Prince are as great as his Valour, that the could venture his life against all the Army of Calydon in my cause, when I did protest my despite against him, which should by its effects cause his destruction: But now I will witness, that the very name of Prince Cleocreton▪ shall be held in such estimation with us, as indeed there is none so fit to world the Scepter of Persia as himself, nor none so fit a hus∣band for my Cloryana. There was no a man that did not heartily applaud the words of the Emperor. But O, sweet Cloryana, how igno∣rant art thou what good things thy Star is doing for thee. The Emperor then did send his Servants into all coasts und quarters, to seek Noble Cleocreton. Their message to him was, intreaties sco the Emperor, to come and ex∣cept of his Daughter in Marriage; and they did obey his  ith all chear fulness and speed. Now the Emperor was welcnted home, with all the ima∣ginable shews of ioy that could be, y all the Lords and Souldiers, according to their several interests, but all d continually applaud the great valour of Cleocreton, which was great pleasure to Cloyana; but much more pleasure and content was it to her, when the Emperor went leading Muxorb by the hand, and sa, Daughter Cloryana shall al∣ways bless the time when the Gods by accident, sent the Noble Cleotreton to Persia▪ for he hath not onely saved the life of thy Father, but also the whole Realm of Persia; therefore it is my will, that thou retain all the affection for him, as thou wouldst do to the man thou must espouse. Now, my Lord, deliver your Message, said the Emperor to Muxorb, ho as soon as he came into the roo, and espied the face of his adored Calsey he went, een wrapt up with ioy, and took her in his arms, and a thou∣sand times kissing her, said, If there be any mercy left in thee, pardon thy Muxorb, dear Calsey, and let not his former offences, cause any distruist for the future. She was with all her ou joyful to see and hear her dear Muxorb, when she did utterly giue over all thoughts of his
return; but she would not shew her exceeding content that she took in his presence, for tear he should be but the second time come to deiude her. O far was it from his thoughts ever to prove trecherous to her again▪ and he made it appear, that it was the wear business of his coming to Persia, even to marry his Calsey, for he went and humbly entreated the Em∣peror to give his consent to the match, and that His Majestie would be pleased to entreat for him to the Duke her Fa∣ther. The Emperor did like it very well, and promised his aid in any thing that might content Muxorb; Onely (said e) my Lord, I pray stay till we finde Cleocreton, and then let her and my Daughter, as they have been Companions in their Virginity, so let them be both married toge∣ther. He was not well content with he last Proposition of the Emperor, yet séemed satisfied. Cloryana was excéedingly satisfied at Muxorbs news, she onely wanted the presence of her beloved Cleocreton, whom she hoped erelong to sée; and in the mean time, she rejoyced with Calsey, for the return of Lord Muxorb, who was very impatient till he enjoyed his Calfey; but she would by no means consent to be married privately, as he would have had her, and for all Cloryana's perswasions, whom Muxorb requested to court for him, but all was to no purpose. But now the Queen of Hungary was much troubled, that she could hear nothing of her Son Cleocreton. Therefore she sent a Messenger see retly to Persia, to Cloryana, to know if she knew, any thing of him, who returned answer, that she nor none of them knew where he was then, but catel he won the Emperor of Persia the day against the Calydons, and that the Emperor had sent into all parts to seek him, that he might bestow loryana upon him. This news did please the Queen if she had bt known where he was. Poor Lady, she was without both er , Cleotreton and Fortus who was strongly engaged in War with him  was now King of Hte for  word to the King of , that e mu defind his Nephew, or have his Neede taken from him by fee. The King of Tunis was very orry for the rashness of the month yet he did not spae to  the Messenger, that he would  the cause  his Nephew▪ And to be made rea∣dy a great Army, and went against the King of , and the King of Calchos promised supply to the King of Tu
if need required, but the King of Tunis did pretty handsomely hold Hecate to it. And when they were in the heat of the fight, came in a Knight in black Armour, be was falsly told, that the Hecateans were the Tunians, and the first man he fought with was Prince Fortus, who was very much encouraged to fight, for it stood upon the point of winning or losing his La∣dy, and he thought he had better lose his life; But he was never in all his life so matched as now, for the black Knight, as they called him, did give such sore wounds to Fortus, and Fortus to him, as it was doubtful whether they did not both lose their lives, and all people was confirmed n that opinion, when they saw them both fall to the earth, but the black Knight being the nimbier, got up, and being pitiful to the other, that had so well defended himself, and likewise thought to recover himself, that he might get the more honorable advantage, and so taking off his Helment, he gave him the advantage of the open air: But, O Gods, how strangely the black Knight was surprized, when he saw the face of young Fortus, whom he thought he had fought for, and found that he was the onely man that he did then fight against: He then did not onely pull off his Helmet, but called the Physicians to him, and lay bemoaning him saying to himself▪ O Cowrdly Cleocreton! Was there none for thee to work thy Discontent upon, but thy onely▪ Brother? What will thy Father and Friends call thee? unworthy Creature that thou art▪ But O Heavens, what hard for∣une hast thou had, monsterous Cleocreton, that thou should escape all. Why didst thou not dye, before thou flew thy Brother? Whose Funeral must now be solem∣nized instead of his Marriage. Now Fortus his Squire was at the back of Cleocreton, when he thus condemned himself; and hearing him call his Master Brother, he therefore went and told Fortus, who was then prety well recovered: But when his Master heard it, he was insensible troubled, that he should fight with him; but he was also pleased, that there was a possibility that he should finde his Brother, therefore he mounted on his horse, and rid to the place where his man directed him; and when he came, he found Cleocreton on the ground, For∣us alighted, and said, Good Brother, I am sorry to see you
in this plight▪ and my self the cause of it; but pardon the ignorance of your Servant Fortus. He then  up his head, and séeing his Brother in health, ran and imbraced him, saying, Truly Brother I did intend never to lift sword more, if I had slain you. But (said Fortus) I would gladly know, what is the reason of your strange hiding your self from your Friend. I shall tell you that Brother (said he) another time; let us now see what order the Battel is in. Then they went and found proud Hecates Forces prevail∣ing greatly against the Tunians; but supply came, for the King of Calcos▪ with a great multitude, came in to the aid of the King of Tunis, which made the sout Hecateans to tremble; for when they saw the Army of Calchos to come in, they thought it was time for them to yeld to the greater num∣ber: But when the King of Hecate saw the wavering heads of his new detracted Souldies, he with an angry look came amongst them, and said, What now, will you yield your selves to death, your wives into captivity, your children to be slaves, your Countrey to strangers? and lastly▪ have you no regard to your King▪ but after all your expressi∣ons of love and ly ay to him, yield his neck under the feet of his Enemies? Quit your selves like men, my friends, and look for your good service to receive great rewards. Now his Army hearing their Prince blaming their Co∣warrdize, they with shame that they should want heart, when they were always called the  people. And truly they did follow the example of their King, and did begin another rare onset  the Tunians. Then came Assyrus to Forus, and with a intent either to in his Lady, or else dye▪ and not live to see the destruction of his Land; Fortus received him with a great deal of courage and strength, and s they fell to their work Assyrtus more desperat then wise, but Fortus had well his wits about him, and th great, cre∣tion he ordered his ows, while Assyrtus laid on strokes any where like a Lyon. In the mean time Cleocreton and the King of Tunis fell upon the rest like hai stones and thunder; but in the fight there was a great cry, and the King of Tunis rde to sée wht the matter was, but it wa a sad ight to sée, for there was
a Lady all in tears, tearing her very hair from her head, and wringing her fair hands, and making a pitiful lamentation: The King of Tunis was much grieved at the sight, but much more when he perceived it to be the air Daughter of the King of Calchos, Lady Freesa's sister, whose name was Phi∣lereta, who as laenting the deth of her Father, the King of Calchos, who Assyrtus had slain before he went to fiht with Fortus, who had now dispatched him; and then he came where the mourning Lady, and both hi and the King of Tunis was extremely toubled at this sad accident that was fallen out, and greatly pitying the sad condition of Lady Philereta, whose ominous dream was come to pass; for she dreamt, that she sa her Father lie bleeding upon the ground and he said to her wih a doleful voyce, Come Phi∣lereta, go with me; whereupon she could no ay be con∣tented, till she came to sée her dear Father, whom she found dead, as she feared. The King her Vncle did very isely and tenderly perswade her to be contet; but she would take no perswasion, but kept on her fruitless mournings: Then they carried her into a fair lodging, and was re∣solved to see her better ere they took their ourney for Tnis; for no there was none that made any resistance, for Cleo∣creton had slain an infinite number of them: And while they were consulng about the aairs of the Hecaetians, the ing not knowing Cleoreton, Fortus asked whether he would be disownd or no, then Cleocreton, without answer∣ing, went to the ing his Vncle▪ and when the king did perceive it was him, he imbraced him, and said, Sweet Nephew, was it you who was so assaultng our Enemies, my joy would have been greater, if my poor Brother and Neece wre not in so deplorable a condition. Now while the King was thus talking, one of the Maids of Philereta came crying out most laentably▪ she ig aske, what was the matter: she said, Alas, my Lord, our Lady sent us out from her, and when we returned to her, she ad slain her self with a little dagger which she had in her hand, and when we went to her she was dead. But alas, alas (continued she) it is the death of young Lord Cloxin, that lay slai besides the King, that is the cause of this bloody Tragedy. They were all extremely amazed at this heavy news.
Then the King of Tuns cased a  to be pr∣pared▪ ll in lk and the p the ing, ad Phileea, and Lord  in t, for it was a large  was the bies of these dead frieds coed into Calchos▪ and there they were buried, and stately Monuments raised up∣on their Tombs. Then went the King of Tuns, with his to Nephews to tak possession therof, Forus was the man that must have the Kingdom, and he entred peacealy ito Hecate▪ she inhabitants received him very well, and would néeds Crown him King of Hecate: Now Fortus had the possessi∣on of two Kingdoms, for he took possession of Calchos, in the name of her that was now Queen Freesa. Now tey let Fortus to rule is new conquered King∣dom, whie the rest went with many of the inhabitants of Calchos, to fetch hme there new Quéen; who poor Lady, could scarce accord o any oy at all: For when she heard that her Father and Sister was dead, all her oy for their winning the Victory, was conveted into mourning▪ he which she and the Queen of Tuns d second with a ∣igned adness for a time, for the loss of her Brother and Nce: But as all ings th, and must ave a d, o had the orrow of Lady Freesa, who when sh consider∣ed, that she saw not her beloved Fortus, she then was in great fear, that she had lost her chiefest Iewel, that she pried aboe all Friends here upon earth▪ but when she was onviced by the mouth of her Vncle who advertised▪ her, that her Servant was not oely alie, but also the King of Hecate, and had caused he principal Lords of Calchos to come and salute her Quéen. She then, after a little space was ver, took her our∣ney toards her Kingdom: whe she de near the ame, came King Fortus to meet Queen Freesa▪ and with him as all the princpal Lords, Earls, Barons, and Gentlemen of Calchos and Hecate: But the bravest sight of all was▪ that after them came all the fairest Ladies of them two Kingdoms to velcome their Queen: Then met the to Lovers, and though they were both ealted since they see oe another, yet vvere their hears one and the cae that they were in Tunis. They solemnized the great marriage at Calchos, which
was as joyful a day as ever that people saw; and they manifested their great satisfaction, by their Foasting, Re∣velling, Banquetting▪ Turnaments, and all things that could delight their prudent King, and Marriage, and their beautiful and vit Queen. When the Crovvn vvas set on her head, e took it off again, and vvith her ovvn ands Crowned the head of King Fortus; whom we vvill leave to the enjoyment of his beloved Quéen, in the possession o vvhom he vvas both inriched and blessed. Novv Cleocreton, of vvhom my pen hath been too too treacherous, for giving account of his thoughts and acti∣ons; vvho had great pleasure to see his Brother esta∣blished in his Throne: But his great and soul torment∣ing accusation of his own unvvorthiners, that had pro∣voked the Gods, by their unstable and variable tor∣ments, to afflict their ovvn Works. Then Cleocreton in a great , took his leave of the King, and posted in all haste (he vvell knevv not vhier) but his thoughts and heart prompe him to dravv highier to the plae vvhere the onely She aboed, by vvhom all his sorrovvs and griefs must have an end. Novv they vvere quite changed from joy to sorrovv in Persia, for the bad nevvs the Messenger brought them, vvhich vvas, That the Ship vvherein Cleocreton vvas, it vvas svvallovved up by the Waves of angry Neptune: but Cloryana could not believe this report, for it was Hel to her to hear it: Then she did send Messengers the second time, and wished them, Not to look to the highest of men for her Cleocreton, but to men in mean habit as well, for she did beleive that he was not joyful no more then she: And indeed somtimes the worthiest of men do rest in mean habits, especially when it may be a means, to bring their hopes to their desired Haven, by following the fruits of love. But before the Gods ordered the great happines of Cleocreton, they thought to pull down his greatest Ene¦mies, one of which was Lady Merca; who seeing all her practices could not intire never a match suitable to her,
nor so much as any below her; and she seeing the good and gentle smiles of Fortune fail upon every one but her self, she grew so desperate, that she did intend to follow her own Fates with as envious punishment; but first she confessed all her practices against innocent Cleocreton: And then she one day caused her Maid, that she had ma-many times employed for an instrument of malice to go out with her, and they both went near the Sea side, and to the top of a Rock she climbed, and from thence she received her deaths kiss, at the botom of the Sea: Her Maid was not willing to see her underneath▪ but she be∣came the carrier of this monstrous news to the good King of Tunis, which streight broke his heart, and so he resign∣ed his Kingdom to the Issue of his Sister the Queen: of Hungary; which fell to the share of Cleocreton, who was in great distress, for his hopes was all gone concerning his dear Cloryana; for he heard nothing from her, but onely of her mirth and health. Then he was willing to expire, and getting the habit of a Pilgrim, went to the Court of Persia, and there he two days behed the great beauty of Cloryana; which did so revive his spirits, as he did wish that it were possible for him in that habit to speak to her, as well as he could see her. Now one day it fell out, that the Emperor, and all the Ladies of the Court, was at the sport of fishing at the Lible River; and Cleocreton going on the other side, e saw his Divine and Beautiful Lady, who instead of sport∣ing with others, she wept to her Cosin Calsey, and be∣moaned the loss of Cleocreton. At the last, the Pilgrim being on the other side, threw in a fishing book, and did wave it a little up and down the water; but there was a sturdy fellow, one of the Lords attendance, who seeing that the Pilgrim troubled the waters, presently went to him, and said▪ Thou bold Caitiff, how darest thou put thy leau∣ing-staff in the Brook, when the Emperor is taking his pleasure. But the Pilgrim gave no heed to what he said, but kept on his posture: The fellow began to be angry, and laid his hand on his sword, sayin,
Surely thou shalt be taught some manners, if thou didst bring none hither. And having said so, he presently struck the Pilgrim on the breast, with the pummel of his sword. The Pil∣grim bring grieved at the Impudence of the Fellow, be drew out his sword from under his gown, and gave him a sore remembrance: The fellow almost mad to see the courage of the Pilgrim, and therefore with all his might be aimed at the head of the Pilgrim, who had one of his féet in the water, and the other on the grass, which was just over against the Emperor. Then the Pilgrim could not well wave the stroke, and therefore the weapon of the other, cleft his Helmet in two pieces, which fell down, and shewed his golden hair to the beholders; who were all struck with astonishment, when they well perceived it was none but Noble Cleo∣creton. The Emperor was even rapt up in any and command∣ed his Lords to take away the fellow, whom he had given many sore wounds too. Then the people swarmed about Cleocreton, and sweet Cloryana had all the content that a person so long from her love could have. When he came over the River, the Emperor imbraced him, and said, Welcome a thousand times, valiant Cleocreton. But when he came to Cloryana, O Gods, none knows the joys of them hoth, but such that have been debarred from the thing they most esteem: when they enjoy it again, then surely there is nothing but the extremily of that Passion must fall out. Now the next day following, must be the day when there two Lovers must of neessity roap the fruits of their long deserved love and constancy: Then was the beauti∣ful Cloryana conducted by the Emperor and Empress, and all the Nobles in Persia, both Lords and Ladies, whose beauties did but stll adde more lustre and perfection, to the incomparable Beauty of Heavenly Cloryana; whose eyes rather invited the Gods to be her guests, then her Fathes mortal Subjects. Then followed the other Bride, which was Lady Cal∣sey; but Cloryana first paid her Rites to the God Hyman.
The Emperor took her by the hand, and gave her to the Invincible Cleocreton, saying, Now behold your King, my Friends and Subjects, who is the Emperor of all the Land of Persia, Hun∣gary, and Tunis; respect him as your lawful Prince, and worthy of all Renown; and as one that is able to defend your Rites, and Lives, and Liberties, from all foreign assaults. Which said, the people almost caused the Earth to shake, by the reason of their joy, shouts, and praices, and acclamations, in, and to the glory of Cleocreton and Clo∣ryana. And then came the turn of Muxorb and Calsey, whose joy was no less then the others. And thus they both enjoyed their Ladies; and in short time, the Emperor yielded all his Regal Power and Riches to his Son Cleocreton; and the King of Hungary did the same, enforced by the common Adversary death, and left Cleocreton in the height of pleasure and content, to enjoy his beautiful Empress Cloryana. FINIS.
The Renowned Cleocreton, Prince of Hungary.
