C2451A 99896597 134623
❧ His Majesties Message to both Houses of Parliament. Die Lunae 14. Febr. 1641. THough His Majestie is assured, that His having so suddenly passed these two Bills, being of so great importance, and so earnestly desired by both Houses, will serve to assure His Parliament, that He de∣sires nothing more then the satisfaction of His Kingdom; yet that He may further manifest to both Houses, how impatient He is till He finde out a full remedie to compose the present Distempers, He is plea∣sed to signifie: That His Majestie will by Proclamation require, That all Statutes made concerning Recusants, be with all Care, Diligence, and Severity put in execution. That His Majestie is resolved, That the seven Condemned Priests shall be immediately Banished (if His Parliament shall consent therunto:) And His Majestie will give present Order (if it shall be held fit by both Houses) that a Proclamation issue, to require all Romish Priests within twenty dayes to depart the Kingdom; and if any shall be Apprehended after that time, His Majestie assures both Houses, in the Word of a King, That He will grant no pardon to any such, without consent of His Parliament. And because His Majestie observes great and different Troubles to arise in the hearts of His People, concerning the Goverment and Liturgie of the Church, His Majestie is willing to declare, That He will refer that whole Consideration to the Wisdom of His Par∣liament, which He desires them to enter into speedily, that the present Distraction about the same may be composed: But desires not to be pressed to any single Act on His part, till the whole be so digested and setled by both Houses, that His Majestie may cleerly see what is fit to be left, as well as what is sit to be taken away. For Ireland (in behalf of which His Majesties heart bleeds) as His Majestie hath concurred with all Propositions made for that Service by His Parliament, so He is resolved to leave nothing undone for their Relief, which shall fall within His possible Power, nor will refuse to venter His owne Person in that War, if His Parliament shall think it convenient for the reduction of that miserable Kingdome. And lastly, His Majestie taking notice by severall Petitions of the great and generall de∣cay of Trade in this Kingdom, and more particularly of that of Clothing, and new Drape∣ries (concerning which He received lately at Greenwich a modest, but earnest Petition from the Clothiers of Suffolk) of which decay of Trade, His Majestie hath a very deep sence, both in respect of the extream want and poverty it hath brought, and must bring upon many thou∣sands of His loving Subjects, and of the influence it must have in a very short time upon the very subsistence of this Nation, Doth earnestly recommend the consideraton of that great and weighty Businesse to both Houses; Promising them, that He will most readily concur in any Resolution their Wisdoms shall finde out, which may conduce to so necessary a Work. ¶ Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majestie: And by the Assignes of John Bill.
