c4083a 45504429 171734
ARTICLES To be Enquired of, and Answered unto, BY THE Church-Wardens AND SIDE-MEN of every PARISH: IN The Triennial Visitation OF THE Right Reverend Father in GOD, THOMAS, Lord Bishop of St. DAVID. In the Fifth Year of his Consecration. LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Church-Yard. 1691.
THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE 'In Paradise the Tree Of Knowledge was the pride; By God's supreme decree, The man who eat, then died. But Heaven in mercy since Does him who tastes forgive; To know is no offence: Now, he who eats, shall live.' HENRY STEVENS of Vermont, FSA, &c 4 Trafalgar Square, London. 1882
The OATH to be Administred to the Church-Wardens of every Parish. YOU shall Swear truly and faithfully to exe∣cute the Office of a Church-Warden within your Parish, and shall diligently enquire and make true presentment of such things and persons as to your knowledge are presentable by the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm. So help you God and the Contents of this Book. The Ministers of the respective Parishes are required to give in a List of the Names of all such as they have Catechised and Prepared, and judge fit for Confirmation; and to present it to the Bishop, toge∣ther with the Persons to be Confirmed, before the beginning of that Holy Office.
TIT. I. Concerning Churches and Chappels, the Fabrick, Furniture and Ornaments thereof. I. Is your Parish-Church or Chappel in the Walls, Roof, Windows and Floor in good repair? are all things therein contain'd kept orderly and decently? when the Floor is opened for any Burial, is it in short time after well pav'd again? if not, by whose fault? II. Hath any part of the Church, Chappel or Stéeple faln, or béen pull'd down, and when? hath the Bells, Lead, Stone or any Materi∣als béen imbezled, sold or alienated? III. Is there a decent Font of Stone with a Cover? doth the Mi∣nister baptize publickly there? have you a decent Table for the Holy Communion, placed where it ought to be in the Chancel, with a decent Carpet and other Covering of white cloth to be spread thereon at the Celebration of the Lord's Supper? and have you a fair Chalice or Cup, with a Cover of Silver, and one or more Flagons? have they béen profan'd or put to any common use? IV. Have you a convenient Seat or Pew for Reading Divine Ser∣vice, a Pulpit with a comely Cloth or Cushion? are the Inhabitants of your Parish Welsh or English for the greatest part? have you accor∣dingly a large Bible of the last Translation, two Common-prayer-books published by Authority Anno Dom. 1662, and the Book of Ho∣milies, and these not only Welsh but English? have you the Books of Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, the 39 Articles of Religion, a printed Table of the prohibited Degrées of Marriage, a fair Sur∣plice and Hood? V. Have you a Parchment Book for Registring Christenings, Marriages and Burials? is the same kept in all regard, according to Law or ancient Custom? and is there a Transcript thereof sent yearly to the Bishop's Registry? VI. Have you also Paper-books for the Names and Licenses of all Strangers admitted to Preach in your Parish-Churches? for the Church-wardens Accounts, or such Moneys as are collected upon Briefs, &c? have you a Chest with Locks and Keys for the aforesaid Books and Furniture, and the Keys kept by the Minister and Church-wardens?
and have you a Bier and a decent Cloth for carrying the Dead to their Graves? and have you a Box in the Church to receive the Alms of charitable persons for the Poor? TIT. II. Concerning Church-Yard, Houses, Gleab-Land, Tythes, and Dues belonging to the Church. I. IS your Church Yard well fenced and decently kept from all en∣croachments and profanation? hath any Doors been made in it, or Trees cut down? and how long since? II. Is there, or have you heard of any House belonging to the Mi∣nister? is the House and Out-houses in good repair? have any of them béen pull'd down or defac'd without license? have any encroach'd upon the same, or remov'd or changed any of the ancient marks or bounds thereof? when, and by whom? III. Have you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Gleab-Lands, Gar∣dens, Orchards, Tenements and Cottages belonging to your Parso∣nage or Vicarage? have any Glead-Lands been changed or taken a∣way? have you a Note of such Pensions, Rates, Tythes, portions of Tythes, Composition or any yearly Profits (within or out of your Parish) as belong thereto? have any of the same béen with held from your Minister, and by whom, as you know or have heard? and is your Terrier said up in the Bishop's Registry? TIT. III. Concerning the Clergy or Ministers. I. IS your Minister in Holy Orders and duly qualified? is he licen∣sed by the Bishop? hath he béen legally inducted, and read the 39 Articles? and hath he according to Law declared his assent there∣to? is he known or suspected to have obtain'd his Orders or Benefice by any Simoniacal or undue practise? II. Hath your Minister any other Benefice or Cure? is he constant∣ly  in your Parish? and doth he reside in the Vicarage or Par∣sonage house? doth he preach and officiate every Lord's day? or is he often absent? and how long? and how is your Church serv'd in his absence? doth he provide for the Cure? and what allowance doth he make for the same? III. Doth your Parson, Vicar or Curate, in reading daily the Morn∣ing
and Evening Prayer, baptizing of Children, solemnizing Marriage, churching Women, celebrating the Lord's-Supper, visiting the Sick, and burying the Dead, tise the Forms prescribed in the Book of Com∣mon-Prayer, and observe all such Rites and Ceremonies as are there∣in appointed? doth he in performing all Divine Offices in your Church or Chappel wear the Surplice and other Habits suitable to his degrée, if he be a Graduate in either of the Vniversities? IV. Doth your Minister often admonish the people not to defer the Baptism of their Children, and that it is most convenient to Baptize them upon Sundays and other Holy-days when most number of peo∣ple méet together for the reasons mentioned in the Rubrick, and that without great cause and necessity none are to be Baptized in private Houses? and when need compells, doth your Minister doe his Office according to the form of private Baptism? and afterward if the Child lives, is it brought to Church with God-fathers and God-mothers? and doth he certifie the Baptism of the Child and receive it into the Congregation of Christ's flock? doth he observe the time appointed in the Rubrick for that Office, and doe all other things prescribed? V. Doth your Minister celebrate the Lord's-Supper so often that your Parishioners may communicate thrée times at least every year? doth he give solemn notice thereof by reading the Exhortation appoin∣ted for that purpose? doth he in publick and private Discourses en∣deavour to persuade his Parishioners to frequent Communions? doth he keep back them who through scandal or any notorious crimes ought not to be admitted? and doth he give the Bishop notice thereof? VI. Doth your Minister diligently examine and instruct the Youth of your Parish in the Church-Catechism? doth he present them so in∣structed and prepar'd to the Bishop to be confirm'd? doth he endea∣vour to reclaim and reduce all Papists and Separatists (if any be in the Parish) to the true Religion established in the Church of England? VII. Doth your Minister presume to Marry any persons in private Houses, or any under Age, without the consent of Parents of Guardi∣ans, or before Banns are published thrée Sundays or Holy-days in the Church in time of Divine Service, or at any other hours than be∣twéen right and twelve in the morning, unless he had license so to doe? doth he duly visit, comfort and pray with the Sick? doth he observe the directions as well as form of Prayer in preparing them for Death, in giving them the comfort of Absolution and the holy Eucharist, upon
the humble and hearty desire of the person visited? doth he give Chri∣stian burial to all who dye not unbaptized, excommunicated or laid violent hands upon themselves? VIII. Doth your Minister every Sunday declare to the people the days of Fasting and Abstinence, and the Holy-days in the wéek follow∣ing? is he carefull and exemplary in observing them? doth he every year twice reade the 39 Articles and Book of Canons, that the people may understand and continue stedfast in the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England? IX. Is your Minister sober, studious and peaceable, and of exem∣plary life? is he grave, modest and regular in his behaviour and ap∣parel? is he in any kind whatsoever disorderly or scandalous? is there any one in the Parish in holy Orders who hath laid aside his profession, or any unlicensed or itinerant Clerk, or any one under suspension or other censures of the Church for false doctrine or evil manners? if any such, how doth he behave and comply himself? TIT. IV. Concerning Parishioners. I. ARE there in your Parish known, or found to be common swear∣ers or blasphemers of God's name, Drunkards, Adulterers, Fornicators or Incestuous persons, or any that be noted to be profane persons, railers, unclean or filthy talkers, standerers, sowers of strife, faction and discord among their neighbours, or any Excommunicated persons? II. Doth every Parishioner repair to and in your Church or Chappel both in time of Divine Service and preaching the Word of God, behave themselves reverently knéeling at the Prayers and Sacrament, standing when the Creed and Gospel are read, saying audibly with the Minister the Confession, Lord's-prayer and the Créed, and making such answers as are appointed in the Book of Common-prayer? III. Are there any in your Parish who neglect the Baptism of their Children, or refuse to send them to be baptized at the Church, except in case of necessity? or do they send them to be baptized at other places or with any form but what is appointed? or are there any persons un∣baptiz'd in your Parish? IV. Are there any married Women, who after their delivery from Child-birth, neglect or refuse to be Church't and make their publick
Thanksgiving? Do any in your Parish live as Man and Wife who are within the degrées prohibited, or any that being lawfully married and not divorced by course of Law do not cohabit, or any that being law∣fully divorced have married again? Do any refuse to pay their East Offerings of Duties, or to pay their Rates for repair of the Church or any thing thereunto belonging? V. Are any last Wills of persons departed conceal'd or not proved? did any leave any Legacies to your Church or Chapel, or to the Poor, or any charitable and pious use which hath béen mis-spent or mis∣applied? VI. Have any Seats or Pews béen erected in your Church or Chap∣pel without leave from the Ordinary? is there any dispute or conten∣tion about them? hath there béen any disturbance, clamour or riot in the Church at any time upon that account? VII. Are there any in your Parish, who under pretence of Liberty of Conscience, wholly neglect all publick worship of God, neither going to Church, nor any other Assembly, or who do not assemble together according to the late Act for exempting Protestant Subjects, dissenting from the Church of England from the penalties of certain Laws. VIII. Have you any such Assembly of Dissenters in your Parish? have they certified the place of their meeting to the Bishop or such other as that Act appoints? do they meet with their doors lock'd, barr'd or bolted during the time of their meeting? have their Preachers subscribed the Articles of our Religion (except those excepted in the Act) and taken the Oaths and subscribed the Declaration therein required? IX. Are there any who profess themselves to be in the Communion of the Church of England who neglect resorting to their Parish-Church upon Sundays and other Holy-days, and omit receiving the holy Sacrament, being of years to receive it? TIT. V. Concerning Parish-Clerks and Sextons. I. HAve you a Parish-Clerk of at least One and twenty years of Age? is he of good fame and honest conversation, and ability for his Office in reading, singing and writing? is he chosen of your Minister? does he attend him in all the Divine Services of the Church? are his wages duly paid him? and who with-holdeth them?
II. Doth your Sexton perform his duty diligently, keeping the Church clean and decent, in tolling and ringing the Bells at the due and accustomed times for Morning and Evening Prayer, and all other occasions. TIT. VI. Concerning Schole-Masters, Scholes and Hospitals. I. WHat Schole-master private or publick have you in your Pa∣rish? is he licens'd by the Bishop? doth he teach his Scho∣lars the Church Catechism? doth he cause them to repair orderly to the Church or Chapel, and see that they behave themselves there qui∣etly and reverently all the time of Divine Service and Sermon? II. Hath any Hospital, Alms-house or Free-schole been founded in your Parish? is the Revenue and Vse ordered according to the Foun∣der's appointment and the law of the Land? III. What Legacies have any, living or dying in your Parish, given to the Church or Poor of your Pari re they setled and employ'd in their Revenue and Vse according to the VVill? IV. Do any in your Parish practise Physick, Surgery or Midwifery without license from the Ordinary? TIT. VII. Concerning Church-Wardens, &c. I. ARE the Church-wardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen by consent of the Minister and Parishioners, or one by the Minister and the other by the Parishioners? II. Have the former Church-wardens given up their Accounts to the Parish, and delivered up the money remaining in their hands to the succeeding Church-wardens, together with all other things be∣longing to the Church or Chappel? III. Do they provide against every Sacrament a sufficient quantity of fine white bread and good wine for the Communicants? do they cause all strangers that preach in your Church or Chappel to enter their names, with the name of the Bishop that licensed them in a Book for that purpose? do they take care that no persons stand idle, walk or talk together in the Church-yard during Divine Service, or that no disorder or indecency be there? FINIS.
