C5948 E121_47 R22632 99871804 124221
THE INTEREST OF ENGLAND HOW IT CONSISTS IN Vnity of the Protestant RELIGION. With Expedients moderate and effectuall to establish it by the extirpation of the papacy. By a Member of the House of Commons. Modi Entis sunt quinque, Ʋnum, verum, bonum, aliquid, Res. Magi. Enchir. Metap. Cap. 2. LONDON, Printed by E. Griffin, for Lawrence Blaicklocke, and are to be sold at his shop at the Suger-loafe in Fleete-streete next Temple-Bar. 1642.
To the Reader. ZEale to the service of my King and Coun∣try throngs these apprehensions to the pub∣licke, rough, and unpolisht, that they may be Timous. The novelty of the matter, and my knowne dulnesse, would have prejudg'd a bare motion, and buried it in the wombe: therefore rather then a subject so considerable should perish, un∣ballanc'd, J have exposed my sence (yet Dioge∣ticè, not dogmaticè, by way of inquisition not Doctrine) to bee at leasure pondered, and by it, my selfe censur'd. Troth tis, ability I pretend to none but this, to know, that J have little; A sufficiency perhaps not unseasonable: However innocent and faire endevours are not discountenanc't, but by igno∣rance, or humour, which as they traduce giddily, I despise; to such whose steddy judgements, first apprehend, then deliberate, lastly judge, I sub∣misly vayle, and from them J expect either
ripening of what is here, like my selfe, greene; or but a gentle reprehension thus; tis his error, and thats to bee a Man; I had not thus apologiz'd, but to usher in a modest opportunity to expresse, that in this wanton age when the Presse riots, this as lawfull issue is acknowledged by, William Constantine. E societ. Medii Templi, 8. Augusti 1642.
THE Interest of England, &c. THat misterious order the society of Iesuits di∣ligence not onely their Priestly office,The designe of the society of Jesuits. but upon emergents the embroylment of a State, To effect which, they are trained up in exact principles, as of Sophistry to am∣muse a disputant, so of Politicks to subvert Interests. Their supreme designe is to reduce the whole Christian Laity under one King and that of Spaine, the Spirituality under one Pope, as they are both under one God: the Spaniard cherishes this project with speciall countenance to that society, to pre∣serve which in constant growth, hee charges himselfe to erect and supply severallSt. Omers Va∣edoid, Leig Doway, Brussels, &c. Colledges, beyond the Seas, to enter∣taine the English, and hee stages instruments where there is the cheifest concourse, to insinuate and decoy thither our ripest wits: which instruments qualifyed with the quintessence of sleight, have so wrought upon the penury of some, upon the giddinesse of others, upon the ungroundednesse of the rest, up∣on all with flattery and faire promises, that they stoope mul∣titudes to their Lure. Now this bounty of their great Patron, these fugitives are obliged to gratify with the Ruine or at least distraction of their owne country; which (being assayd to be industrious, and dismist hither) they labour, and negotiate stoutly, by
close and undermining practices,Divide & im∣pera. Match. whereof it is their principall, to suggest Jelousies and foment misapprehensions betweene King and people. In which act, their subtilty it is, not to bee visible, nay they contrive those resolutions which seeme most opposite to be their Engines; for they are possest that they sinne not, nay that they merit, though they dissemble, slander, faine apparitions, miracles, &c. any thing to promote the cause; But Delus circuitu non tollitur. 11 Rep. 74.By these divisions Spaine (though it cost deepe,) acquires an admirable purchase, for while England struggles in selfe-plundring, its power is disunited, and so disabled to appre∣hend the advantage of the necessities, and uncompactednes of the Spanish Forces, whereby it is diverted from some exploits of bravery to relieve confederates, reinstate alliances, partake the Indies, &c. The Rebellion in Ireland how, &c. why fo∣mented by the Jesuits.Even now when this Kingdome more risely began to rowse and chase its owne interest, and was almost instated in con∣dition to propose overtures for the honour of the King and Nation, its providence and vigour is diverted by a rebellion in Ireland, blowne up (doubtlesse) by an influence from the aforesaid principle of the Iesuites, flattering the unstedy people to their owne confusion, by fond promises of supply and coun∣tenance; Not that they hop't to inforce conditions by that more cumbersome then powerfull war, but that England toyl∣ling to reduce its owne Rebells may exhaust it selfe, and not presse at this precious instant upon the interests of Spaine, that so fensing us off this busy yeare, hee may provide more firmly in the next to obviate our atcheivements. The Spaniard further to secure this principle, imprints and publishes to all Romanists a reputation of his Fast zeale to the Papacy; whereby he has acquir'd that boundlesse title of King, Ʋniversalis item perpetuus. Philo. de Vita M. lib. 3. Catholick; and in pursuance imployd that cruell spy the Inqui∣sition, by which as hee has invincibly intayld the slavery of ignorance upon his owne subiects, so he, worries out all exercise of the reformation in his dominions, which other Romish states are induced to connive at, some to tolerate; nay in most treaties he negotiats (as a seeming-prime article) the in∣demnity of Romanists, as their indulgent Patron; under which
vizard hee insinuates into the affections of some blind zelots (such as fadome not to the depth of interest) in all states, whose fond devotion hurries them upon all occasions, to second His as they would Gods cause. Section. 1. NOw (doubtlesse) there is no state wisdome that can more engrandize the royal Maiesty of this Kingdom then to mate and countermine the aforesaid principles of Spaine;The true inte∣rest of Eng∣land, is zeale to the Refor∣mation. Let Eng∣land purchase to it selfe a serious, fixt and constant reputati∣on of zeale to the reformed Church, such as Spaine has to the Papacy, and as it shall conduce to Gods glory in the purity of his worship, so shall it erect a puissance selfe-dependant in this Crowne, not inferior to that of France or Spaine: For this Kingdome being then unanimous in designe will be most powerfull of all protestants, and being admirably opportune for scituation, shall be courted and apply'd to with confidence by all parties of the Reformation as there grand protector, by whose trusty correspondency and Ʋnity of religious interest, it shall attaine some glorious influence and power in all states of Christendome. That blest Ʋnion of the two Crownes, with that of Jreland,—Divisos orbe Britannos virg. has enthron'd his royall Maiesty in dominions, glorious, inde∣pendant, close-ioynted, As free and resolute, as they are populous and rich; and opportunes him (in the trust and strength of his owne subjects) to become as the envy so the terror of his forraine adversaries; yet if in one bosome we foster two profes∣sions, that brave puissance will spend in selfe-wasting;Eras. Adag. idem. Penelopes telam texere, to doe and undoe. wee shall Militare cum Erasinide, exploit nothing, but our owne distractions; for what enterprise soever we undertake it thwarts the interest of one Religion, which so thwarted will retard, and stumble the expedition with as much slight, and zeale as the other presses onward; or be it by both Religions condis∣cended to, (hardly possible unlesse against the infidells) dif∣ference of opinion among the undertakers will dayly admini∣ster occasion of debate, which begets offence, that reluctancy
of spirit, and thence foreslowing, if not dissertion of the whole designe. Section 3. 1. Some meanes proposed to e∣stablish the Re∣formation, more perfect.TO prevent such mischiefe is to pursue our maxime; and to that end tis first requisite, that his Majesty be pleased to tran∣sact his close-counsels, and great affaires, with the advise of such persons whose relations are truly only English; such whose tendernesse in conscience to the purity of Christs Gospell, is most conspicuous and precise; for these as they are most averse to a reconcilement with the Church of Rome, so will they most diligence confusion to the designes of Iesuits; who (if it be fecible) will ferret into our State-counsells, (as to them most dangerous, and suspected) To effect which they are accom∣modated, as with that mighty Patron before rehearsed, so with a frolicke purse; against the assaults of which, there can be no engagement of such security as conscience in Religion, Ex Diametro, oppugnant. Section 4. 2. Colledges to entertaine con∣verts.NExt let some Colledge in either Ʋniversity bee indowed to intertaine such Priests as shall convert, over which by discreet providence, let such Divines be elected Governors, as are most zealous, conscientious, and profound; For the raw Priest being huddled into orders is at the instant manacled by three vowes, of poverty, chastity, and obedience, and this is the buttresse which supports the Papacy; for by these the silly priest is obliged to blind observance of what ever his superior shall injoyne, and likewise driven to abandon all other depen∣dance, but the Pope the publik father; From whose service he may not be diverted by ingagement to wife, or child; He must forsake alliances, desert promotions, solely he must hackny to support the reputation of his loose superiors; Being thus deprived of all other relations, if upon the illumination of Gods Spirit, he shall stagger in opinion, and begins to savour the true sence of his imposed drudgery; as hee shall bee pursued with all
violence ad ravim usque by his awfull Hierarkist (for that sly-chain without which the Papacy cannot subsist, is now link't in this Kingdome) so is there none of the reformed party to whom with confidence hee dares apply, for reliefe or Counsell; It being so sharply penall by our Lawes to have com∣merse with Priests; whereby every man endevours rather to betray then comfort and compose his distracted fancy: Now were there a Colledge as aforesaid, where (un-indangered) there hesitations might be setled, their soules consolated, their bodies cherish'd, and protected, many like the stray sheepe might have opportunity, to underceive themselves, and encourag∣ment to retire to the true fold, and prove rare instruments as to unmaske their owne seducements so to preserve others from the like sorceries; urge I need not, how mightily the repute of such (and I doubt not such) conversions would conduce to the advantage of the Reformation, and the disabusing many a darke soule, precious in the sight of God. Summa ratio est qua pro religione facit. Then tis requisite to fore-lay the number of Recusants,3 An apt Church-disci∣pline necessa∣ry to produce a Unity. to win such as are possest (if possible) to conformity, however to crop the increase; To worke upon the conscience is indeed spirituall, and totally to unsoule the error, requires an Expedi∣ent also that is spirituall, and so proportionable to the worke, that is an exact Church-discipline, a fence sutable to the Vine; A Discipline as apt, well accommodated, and as naturall to cherish knowledge, the drift of the Gospell, as the Romish dis∣cipline is to conceale and smother it: A Discipline adaequate, sifting, and close-rivited, to restraine libertinisme in life as well as in opinion, awfull to casuall each-hower extravagancies in sin or schisme, as well as such as are censurable and mulctuary; , overseeing, not coactè but libenter,1 Pet. 5.2. not lucri gratia but prompto animo, not for gaine but conscience, not Lording it over  cleris, all Christians, Gods heritage,Revel. 1.7. but as en∣samples to the Flock whereof they are Episcopi overseers.Acts 20.17. & 28. That there be not two separate Jurisdictions in one Kingdome Re∣gall and Papall, which ever clash and bandy, but that all may be equally, in the same sort subservient to the Crowne; such as may beget confidence in forraine parties, as of our utter abolition
of the Papacy, and its dependants, so of our fast adherence to the reformation. The Result of this I expect with all patience and humility, from the sage debate of such learned persons as shall be by authority thereto assigned, to whose wisdomes and moderation I com∣mend it Mercurio dextro with all good speed. Suffice it that the subiect of this discourse is the inquiry what furtherance to this Ʋnity may be attained by Lawes civill, exe∣cuted in the ordinary Courts of Justice. And tis true; should we trace the Spaniard in his vigorous Inquisition, wee may not be aspers'd with cruelty without reflection upon his owne practice; but for that the inhumanity of one justifyes not the same in others, and for that the tender conscience is rather to be mildly thawed, then inforc'd or vio∣lenc'd; for that, obedience that is uncordiall, savours not as a pleasing sacrifice; Lastly for that their error seemes neither malice or obstinacy,Iniquum non est praesumendum 4. Rep 72. Et stabilitur prae∣sumptum donec probetur in con∣trarium 5. Rep. 7.6 Rep. 73. but misapprehension and ignorance, as in charity we may presume; Therefore it seemes reasonable to reject such barbarismes, and to labour unity, by courses more civill, ingenuous, and gospellary, and in proces of time no lesse effectuall. That which to this effect, I shall with all humility propose, is the rough modell of a statute, abridg'd, and reasond as it fol∣lowes. First, it seemes not unworthy a debate whether it were not requisite to be enacted. 1. Clause. To repeale all former statutes so farre as they concerne Re∣cusants for Re∣cusancie. THat so much of all and every the Statutes now in force against Recusants, and all the penalties, forfeitures, disabilities, &c. imposed by them for the same, may be repealed. The Statutes in force intri∣cate & many.1. The Statutes against Recusants as they are26. H. 8. 3. many, so they are confus'd, voluminous, and intricate, for being enacted in severall ages according to the emergency of things and times, some are supposed, as now not so seasonable so to enterfere
with the rest,2 Ed. 6.20. 1 Eli. 1.2. 23 Eli. 1. 27 Eli. 2. 29 Eli. 6. 35. Eli. 1.2. 1 Ja. 4. 3 Ja. 4.5. 7 Ja. 7. 3 Ch. 2. which difficulty so scruples the unstudied Maje∣strate, that he growes tender in the execution of any, as wil∣ling rather to transgresse in non-fesance, then injustice; There∣fore to explaine the ambiguities, to satisfye the scrupulous, and to quicken such as are most materiall to an execution, it will be necessary to compendiate the now most usefull Clauses of all those Statutes into one.6. Rep. 42. Misera est servitus ubijus est vagum. 2. The nature of the Lawes in force seeme rather to intend the easing them of their revenew, then us of their religion; for paying29. Eli. 6. 3 Ja. 4. The true state and condition of Recusants under the Lawes in force. 2 parts of their annuall profits or twenty pound per mensem, the practice of their service is in a manner con∣tinued; Or indeed, it seemes to expose them to a necessity of absolute compliance to the loose pleasure of such informers to whom their forfeitures shall be assign'd, for if they shall sub∣mit they attaine by Court-slight (notwithstanding his Ma∣jesties best providence, to the contrary) a dispensation, or slender composition, if they expostulate, they shall then be with rigour harassed by the Lawes; Either they must servire scaenae contri∣bute to such what ever overtures the projectors shall propose, or they shall be legally liable to their spoyle and rapine; so that should such as have the Princes Eare at Court incline to policy more then to religion (which tis possible some future age may evidence) it might seeme State wisdome rather to increase by dispensation, then suppresse by execution the num∣ber of Recusants. Farther it has beene the wisdome of all States either totally and impartially to eradicate such parties as they suppose dangerous, or to allot them such conditions as they may tolle∣rably undergoe;Livy. lib. 5. The Privernates rebel'd, and being almost re-subdued to the vassalage of Rome, they addresse by their Embassadors for termes of peace; The Senate sternly aske them, what new peace they could expect, that had so insolently in∣frindg'd the old; 'Twas answered stoutly, we must now take such peace as you please to give; If it be moderate, you shall finde it faithfull; If too heavy it will be continued only till an opportunity to avoyd it; The bravery and strong sence of this expression induc'd that wise Senate to assigne them their owne demands; I instance this to insinuate, that if we admit recusants a sub∣sistence,
we urdge them not with such sufferances, as irritate and imbitter, perhaps make desperate; forTerent. in Phorm. Cum ad restem res rediit, when persons are expos'd to a continance of vexati∣on, subjected to be plunderd by such inferiours who designe their owne profit not their conversions, without peradventure they willVirg. Ae∣neid. lib. 5. maria omnia caelo—miscere, assay all diligences to worke themselves into a more tollerable condition; they will comply with all such malignant parties as shall foment distracti∣ons, and contrive an alteration of the establisht royall govern∣ment; such as are perditi homines, men of lost fortunes, or o∣thers that are exorbitant in their profession and feare to be reduc'd, such whoCicer. in Ca∣tel. Orat. prima. Honores quos quieta Republica desperent perturbata se consequi posse arbitrantur. These and the like, like Crobyli jugum wil unite in confusion their common interest: Though their heads likeIudge 15.4. Sampsons Foxes looke severall ways, yet they are hampered in the Tayles with firebrands and agree in this like hot incendiaries to set the whole Kingdome in combustion, that so either they may continue their swolne great∣nesse, shuffle into better fortunes, inforce a moderation in re∣ligion, or elce out of malice in revenge consume the whole body with themselves:Tacit. Not disadvan∣tageous to the King to re∣peale the statutes. Quid valuit homicida, &c. How little pris'd the murderer, to inflame the whole World, since hee saw his own ruin inevitably destin'd. As to that diminution which by repeale of these Statutes will incurdge to the Kings revenew, tis sencible, that as those receipts are inconsiderable, so were those forfeitures never to that end design'd; or were they; doubtlesse the King will con∣discend to desert such perquisites, as are evidenc'd prejudici∣all to the publike; Nor can his Crowne be impayr'd thereby, since as it is the duty, so is it the safety of the people legally to replenish his Exchequer, for if that be empty, how can his Majesty with a bare counsellRex ad tutelam legis corporumet bonorum est erectus. Fortes: de legib. Angl. cap. 13. Stanf. Pl. Ca. 99. Bract. lib. 2. protect, or provide against e∣mergencies wherewith he is intrusted;Concesso aliquo id concessu vi∣detur fine quo concessum con∣sistere non potest, Inst. Inflit. lib. 1. fo. 21. 11. Rep. 52. A trust to protect, &c. implies accommodations to performe the trust; and indeed without supplies must the luster of his Court grow dimme, which dishonour reflects not so much upon his person as the Nation, the Majesty of which is compendiously and gloriously represented in his royalties and State; suffice it; let the sub∣ject
be endeard, inspirited, and plentifull,Rex caput est & salus reipublicae & a capite bona valetudo transit ad omnes. 4. Rep. 124. and he cannot be so churlish to his owne interests, as not to endevour by all just meanes the gratification of his Prince, by whose vigilance he injoyes solace, by whose magnificence he acquires honour, for as jelousy of oppression moulds people lumplish, desperate. and stubborne, so indulgency engenders courage, generosity, and love. 3. Lastly, if Reason of State gives Recusants a subsistence upon some (though hard) termes, why then (they performing according to those termes) enact wee some other Lawes that charge their conscience,The penalty for the first re∣fusall of the Oath of allegi∣ance is a pre∣munire and close imprison∣ment. For the second Treason. 5. Eli. 1. 3. Jac. 4. Aut deprime aut ne preme. Tac. under so severe a penalty, &c. to which (if they have Religion such (though erronious) as they professe) they cannot cordially submit; or if through weak∣nesse they should submit against conscience, those Lawes which over-awed them seeme coadjuting instruments of their dam∣nation, for an outward and not cordiall conformity aggra∣vates the crime, as hypocrisy is more sinfull then mere ignorance, perhaps invincible. Either therefore admit we them no recidence within this Kingdome upon any termes of penalty (which seemes hard at this time to inforce for that equally with us by the Lawes in esse, they are now borne to the freedome of the Nation) or give such as are so borne and conscientiously possest, such reasonable conditions of subsistence, as their conscience bee not violenc'd, nor themselves hurryed in dispaire and fury to imbroyle the Kindome; which tendernesse as it may insinuate and win into their soules by that Gospellary way of gentle∣nesse and perswasion,Vid. Fol. ult. so it will conduce to continue the like piety, and pitty to the Protestants beyond the Seas; provided that we sufficiently fore cast to secure their allegiance to the Crowne; (of which see the last Clause) and disable them from a further growth; To which effect it seemes reasonable that wee enact.
2 Clause. To disable all such as are now under the age of ten yeares, to inherit or purchase, &c. unlesse they shall conforme at their age of twenty one.THat all persons now under the age of ten yeeres, who shall not within one yeare after they attaine to the age of one and twenty, repair and frequent the Church, and three times in the same yeere receive the holy Sacrament, and also take the Oath of Supremacy before the Minister and Church wardens of such Parish where they shall in∣habite openly in the Church, after Evening Prayers in some Lords Day, which taking the Minister and Church-war∣dens shall register in some Booke to be kept for the same purpose, or shall after such conformity, discontinue the Church, or refuse the said Oath being lawfully tendred, shall be held, reputed and adjudg'd Popish Recusants, and shall be disabled to take by discent or purchase in Fee, or Tayle, &c. to his owne use, or in trust for others, any Lands, Tenements or hereditaments, &c. in England or Wales; But all such Lands which such Recusant shall be so seis'd of or any other to his use or,Vid. a president for forfeitures in this sort, in the Statute of Mortmaine. 7 Ed. 1. &c. shall descend and come to such Recusants next heire, that shall be of the age of one and twenty and conformable as aforesaid; If such next heire shall not enter Bona fide within six moneths, after such non-conformity or refusall, That then his second heire that is of the age of one and twenty and con∣formable shall enter, and be thereof seised to his own use, in such estate as such recusant had, or enjoyed, &c. Jf such second heire shall not enter Bona fide, within a se∣cond six moneths, then shall it escheat or remaine to the Lord of the fee, or to him in remainder, as if such Recu∣sant were dead; Jf he shall neglect his entry six moneths then shall his estate be disposed of by the next Parliament to the publick use.
The like for Leases, Tearmes, Copyholds or other Inte∣rests that hee may become in the same condition as an Alienamee. Tis evident that some Clause to this sence maturely ripened,A moderate and effectuall expedient to extirpate the Papacy. being not possible to be evaded or dispens'd with will in one age unground all popish Families: Tis their store of Lands and thence of tenants, that makes them formidable to the state, of which being deprived, as it will discourage them to settle heere, so will it disable such as are setled to ingrosse dependants. Nor is it penall more then ordinary for that the now Lawes necessitate Recusants to breed their children under licenst23. Eli. 1. 1 Jac. 4. Schoole-masters, for that none elce ought to teach in private or in publike; If their education be beyond the Seas an3. Jac. 5. act in force disables them to inherite or take by gift, conveyance, or devise, or otherwise, untill they shall conforme; Now if wee shall enliven some quicker Statute for their education, me seemes as it is not altogether naturall to rend and force a child from the vigilance, and nurture of his proper parents, so will it not probably produce the effect, both by reason that it is obvious to a multitude of Evasions, and for that stomacke which will swell in the issue upon the Fathers re∣luction. Be it therefore at the Fathers perill, that his child be educa∣ted in the Doctrines of our Church, or if his conscience be so scrupulous, as to derive to his issue his owne errors, he has faire leasure during life to dispose of his Estate, and trans∣plant his of-spring into a forraine soyle, where the principles of his profession are not so destructive to that policy of go∣vernment. If notwithstanding this reasonable admonition, disherison shall accrue to his posterity, it may not be traduc'd injurious, since the private of all men must submit to the publike reason of State, c 39 H. 6. 39. Mirror. cap. 3. §.Jura publica ex privatis promiscuè decidi non debent. This Clause is onely to be avoyded by the defect of an ex∣pedient to scrutinye into the true sence of men; For experience dayly justifyes, that such whom wee suspect to be Recusants and lately so profest, glibly swallow those Oathes of Allegi∣ance
and supremacy, resort to Church, nay and communicate, whereby either that act of3. Iac. 4. Discovery becomes fruitlesse, or really they are what they now professe, Converts. Truth is, nor dispensation, nor dread, nor hope, nor malice can mould a con∣science though erronious, that is Religious, to Hypocrisie; but such as are loose or but formerly conscientious will scruple no assay, they have volaticum jusjurandum, and to provide a Test for the discovery of such,Non idem sunt Scriptura & Cricaeus. Eras. Adag. were to make a garment for the moone; Notwithstanding for more ranke conviction of such dissimulation (if it be such) it may be requisite to insert into the Oath of Supremacy, the first Clause of the Protestation; viz. To defend with life, power; and estate, the true Reformed Protestant Religion expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of England against all Popery and Popish innovations, &c. or rather to compose the severall Oathes that concerne religion into one, lesse equivocable, and more searching, as not only to maintaine the Protestant Religion, but to renounce the Romish. 3 Clause. To raise a pre∣sent supply of monies.THat all such as have not usually frequented Church the first yeare of this present Parliament, and have not taken in the same yeare the Holy Communion, or shall refuse the Oathes of Allegiance, Supremacy and Protesta∣tion, being tendered by the Commissioners, shall forfeit the— part of their last yeeres revenew in Lands or goods, to bee assest upon their estates as they lie in the severall Counties by the Commissioners nominated in the last Act of 400000. After the same sort as is exprest in the same Act, and to be returned accordingly, &c. This charge will probably be with alacrity disburst by reason of the ease that Recusants have from the penalty of former Sta∣tutes, and the rapine of Projectors; And this way of levying as it will be most speedy, so most certaine, for that those Commissi∣oners upon experience of the former taxes, are well acquain∣ted with those which they doubly charg'd in their severall Coun∣ties;
Nor can such a supply be unwelcome to the present neces∣sities of the Kingdome. 4 Clause. ALl Recusants not conforming as aforesaid shall for ever till they shall conforme, pay —to all Rates, Taxes,A constant charge to be im∣posed upon Recusants. Charges & Payments, incident to their severall Parishes, in proportion with the recidue of their Parishioners, as Church, Poore, Bridges, High-wayes, Composition, Goal-money, &c. This charge be it double or treble, &c. being assest by the nighbour-hood, and conducing to their easement, will be impos'd without possibility of evasion, as well on goods, as Lands; and will be effectuall to incline especially the inferiour sort to conformity, who I suppose are Papists, rather of custome, then reason; faith being grounded upon knowledge, which they abandon: Our Lawes in force scarce inflict any penalty on them, or such as is so inconsiderable as never levyed; but being physickt with some frequency by this potion, something proportionable to their severall abilities, twill assay whether the decease be heart-setled, or no deeper then the stomacke: if so, they'l soone vomit it. 5. Clause. THat no Recusant shall come where the Kings Majesty,To forbeare the Court. or any of his Royall issue shall be, unlesse he be comman∣ded by the Kings Majesty so to doe, his heires and succes∣sors, or by wrrant in writing under the hand of six of his Majesties Privy Counsell; and then and there onely so long to remaine, as may suffice to dispatch such present busines for which he is admitted, upon paine of 100. l. whereof the moity to the informer, the other moity to be disposed of by the next Parliament.
3. Iac. 5.This Clause seemes in force; onely doubtfull, whether such license inables the Recusant to make abode at Court, as his habitation; worthy to bee explained; Those other Clauses for their departure from the City, and confinement within five miles compasse,35. Eli. 2.3. la. 5. are usually deluded; while we suspect their contrivements, tis prudence to scatter them what wee may, from conventing. The assemblies of such being most probably in Townes or Cities, twere reasonable to authorise the chiefe Majestrates of such places to disperse them; and none to have residence there,11. Rep. 6. but such as have a licence from them upon assurance of quiet conversation, Abundans cautela non nocet. 6. Clause. To be disabled in publick fun∣ctions, and Offices.THat no Recusants shall give Vote, or proxey in the House of Peeres, nor shall practice the Common Law, as a Councellors Clarke, Atturny, or Sollicitor in the same, nor shall practice the Civill Law, as advocate, Proctor, nor Phisick, or the Trade of an Appothecary, nor shall be Iudge, Minister, Clarke, or Steward of or in any Court, nor keepe any Court, nor shall be Register, or Towne-clarke or other Minister, or Officer in any Court, nor shall beare any Of∣fice or charge, as Captaine, Leiutenant, or other Office in Campe, or Company of Souldiers, nor shall be Captaine, Master, Governour, or beare any Office or charge of or in any Ship, Castle, or Fortresse of the Kings Majesty, his heires, or successors, but be utterly disabled for the same; Nor that any Recusant or any having a wife being a Re∣cusant shall exercise any Office or charge in the Common∣wealth,. la. 5. 11. Rep. Chanc. de Oxfords case. wealth, but shall be utterly disabled to exercise the same by himselfe, or his deputy (except such husband shall bring up his children in the true Religion, &c.) nor shall such Recusants present to a Benefice or Grant an advow∣son, or Collate or nominate to any Free-schoole, Hos∣pitall, or Donative whatsoever; but that the Chancellor,
and Schollers of either the Vniversities respectively pre∣sent as formerly; Nor be Executor or Administrator, or Gardian in Chivalry, Socage or Nurture, or to have the wardship or custody of any infant, ideot or lunatick. This is the Act expresse; onely that of the Vote of Peores.3. Ia. 5. And surely such whose Religion biaces them to an interest di∣verse from the publike, are prudentially presumed,Recusants to give no proxies in the House of Peers. not wil∣ling to promote Counsels so destructive to their Interests. And the same ground seemes appliable to exclude their prox∣ies: For all that are Protestants in forme, are not alike zea∣lous in heart; Now since it is one maxime to manage all counsells by such as are precisest in the reformation, it suits not wisdome to arme such as are but lukewarme with more ac∣commodations, which they in all probability shall attaine, if Recusants be inabled to dispose their Proxies; by which engagement beneficiall Lawes may bee obstructed though His Majestie with His Commons shall diligence to en∣liven them. By priviledge of Parliament, their blood confers as much right to give Vote, as bestow proxyes; and that reason of state which disables them in the one, is of the same strength and not more injurious to disable them in the other; nor can it be more injury to a Peere,5. El. 1. 3. Iac. 4. then it has beene to the Commons who must receive, and pronounce the Oathes of allegiance and Supremacy in testimony of conformity, before they can give vote in Parliament, or fit as members, though never so suffi∣ciently elected: That which discharg'd the Temporall Lords of the Oath in the Act of 5o. was impliedly the great power which they then held in the House of Peeres, Explicite∣ly because the Queen was otherwise sufficiently assured of their faith and loyalty, Now faith wee have often found is not in∣tayl'd upon succession. Nor can prejudice insue unto the publike by paucity of votes since His Maiesty may please to inlarge the number by his Patents of persons fitly qualified;No prejudice by their exclu∣sion. yet of old that house was not so throngd when onely such were Peeres as were cald by writ,
our Ancestors being unacquainted with other titles then Comites & Barones. Created 10. Ed. 3 An. Domi. 1336 Casus prin∣cip. 8. Rep.Edward the black Prince was our first Duke and that of Cornwall;Created 6. Ri 2. An D. 1384. Robert de vere was our first marquisse and that of Dublin; andCreated 23. H. 6 An. D. 1444. Dominus de Bello monte was by Henry the sixt created our first Vicount: Now the first Baron we read of to be created by the Kings patents wasCreated 1. Ri. 2. An. D. 1387. Some Phisiti∣ans now in practice to be forborne. John Beuchamp of Holt, Baron of Kedermister. Something might be offer'd to tolerate some phisitians now in practice, lest in disabling them, we smart our selves; whose bodies perhaps are inurd to the nature of their prescriptions, having succesfully imploy'd their learn'd experience; But to continue them in succession appeares mischievous, by reason of those oft and faire opportunities which as they have abili∣ties, so doubtlesse they have wills to contrive to a by-use upon their patients in extremis. 7 Clause. Some Priests that shall have testimoniall not to abjure the Realm, and why?THat it shall not be lawfull to and for any Iesuite, Se∣minary Priest, or other such Priest, Deacon, Religi∣ous or Ecclesiasticall person whatsoever being borne with∣in this Realme or any other His Majesties Dominions, made, ordained or professed by any authority or juris∣diction derived, challenged, or pretended from the Sea of Rome, by or of what name, title or degree soever the same shall be called or knowne, to come into, be or re∣maine in any part of this Realme or any27. Eli. 1. other His Majesties Dominions; without the testimoniall licence, or approvement of the Iudges or any three of them, where∣of the Lord cheife Iustice shall be one, before had, and obtayned; And if any Priest, &c. having such licence as aforesaid, shall be seene abroad, without such knowne habit of his Order whereby he may be distinguisht, and avoyded, Or if any Iesuite, Priest, &c. unlicenc'd, shall come, be and remaine within the said Dominions, shall
be adjudged a Traytor, and shall suffer, lose and forfeit as in case of High-treason; And every person, which shall wittingly, and willinglie receive, releive, comfort, aide, or maintaine any such Iesuite, Priest, &c. that is not licenc'd as aforesaid,Vid. stat. de 5. El. 1. being at liberty, and out of hold, shall for such Offence be adjudg'd a felon without benefit of Clergy and suffer death, lose and forfeit as in case of one attainted of Felony. This exception implying admission of some Priests, though it be with qualifications, by such as are more curious, then deliberate, may be scandal'd; For vindication I shall apprehend this opportunity to represent my sence of the Romish Church, and so drive on those reasons that induce the intimation. A Digression Historically reasoning the degreeing usurpations of the Romish Prelacies. I Decry that Church as a grand Impostor, buttre'st by sophistry in Doctrine, and policy in Discipline, erronious in the one, and machivillian in the other; The source where∣of were those ministeriallCor. 12.28. 4 Eph. 11. Officers mentioned by the A∣postle to be Pastors and Teachers, who by degreeing insolence have approprated the titles Ex  frango sorte datus, sorte electus, ut unus sit in orbe terrarum clerus i. e. Ecclesia, quod Deus sibi illum populum veluti portionem quan∣dam a reliquis paratam selegisset. 1. Pet. 5.4. Appellatio Cleri aut ex errore aut prava affectione nata, &c. Calv. Insti. lib. 4. cap. 4. Sect. 9. Clergy as if all Gods people were not his lot, and the evocativus coetus qui veram Christi Religionem profitentur, a  voco. 1 Cor. 1.2. Church as if men not in orders were not of it, or that were not a Church which was inRom. 16.1. & 5. 2 Cor. 11.28. Priscillas house: Recommending ignorance to the uncleane (so they stile it) laity as the mother of devotion, thereby ingrossing knowledge as aMonopolium dicitur , cum unus solus universum emit, precium ad suū libitum statuens. 11. Rep. 68. monopoly to their owne profession, By which powerfull advantage as they impos'd what sufferance they
pleas'd upon the dull Laity who like then. 49.14. Asse of Issachar coucht to every burthen, so they usurpt dignities and reve∣newes under the maske of piety to support their owne pride, pompe, and avarice: For demonstration. That charge (which was by Christ committed with aMa. 18.17. Cal. Inst. lib. 4. cap. 4. Tr. Conf. Art. 30 Dic Ecclesiae, to the whole Church (whereof persons not in Orders are a part) and so executed upon the incestuous person, if wee referre the (yee) in the fifth Chapter in the fist to the Corinth. ver. 4. to the (All) in the first Chapter vers. 2) became by the lesse diverted diligence of the Ministry executed, and so in time appropriated to themselves. Church-assemblies were usually inActs 15.6. Act. 20.7. Cities, as most popu∣lous and civill, and to this service choyse men were elected from the vulgar to represent them, and for this use were El∣ders ordained byTitus 1.5. Titus in every City. for though all the ministry were1 Pet. 5.1. Elders, yet all that were1 Tim. 5.17. Elders were not of the ministry, but helpes in government; 1 Cor. 12.28. In such assemblies were persons most eminently grave elect∣ed to precede, to state questions, collect the sence, declare the sentence, &c. SoActs 1.15. Peter when 'twas lotted for Matthias;Acts 15.13. Iames at Hierusalem, andGal. 2.7. Paul the chiefe Apostle of the Gentiles. Where such person had the primacy of Order, not dignity or power.Mat. 23.8. Be not ye called Rabbi for one is your master even Christ, and all ye are brethren. Ful. Annot. Tit. 1. Sect. 2.In proces of time this president, or primus ordine being re∣verenc'd for his gravity, and especially apply'd to for his constant presence, and dispatch upon the negligence of his as∣sistance assumes a Soveraignty in jurisdiction, and usurps it with the stile Episcopus superintendent, by us sometimes Englisht1 Tim. 3.2. 1 Tit 7. Bishop, sometimesActs 20.28. 3. Rep. D. & cha. & Norwich. overseer, This Bishop for his more re∣pute associates a consistory, by the name of Chapter, or Pre∣bends quia praeberent auxilium Episcopo, who resenting it as matter more of toyle, then honour or profit, (which soly ac∣crued to the Bishop) are soone out-diligenc'd, and to this day they retain only (and that pro25 H. 8. 20 Magdeb. Cent: 11. c. 7. Quum vero luc Eváge∣lii in una civi∣tate accensa &c forma) his election, and confirm∣ation of his grants. From these Cities (where was the Cathedra of the Bishop) the Pagi or lesser Townes adjacent were illightned: and the de∣votion
of pious Christians there erecting and endowing Churches, those Churches were supply'd as Colonyes from the City, and acknowledg'd such City whence they had their light, the mother Church, and consulted with the officers ther∣of in controversies and causes Ecclesiasticall. This assistance the Bishop with his consistory or counsell condiscends to at first Ex charitate & aedificandi studio, from a holy desire to edifye, but continuance of such addresss swells the Bishop with ambition, and Imperii gratia, he substitutes all those villages which so resorted to him to be His Dioces, and this aboutA D. 325. three hundred years after the Passion, towed into a canon at theAen. Sil. Epi. 301. Nicen councell. The Bishop thus being sot'd above his Presbitery, an emulati∣on springs among the Bishops.Confirm. in concil. Costanti. Can. 2. As the same councell the whole Church is divided into foure precincts over which were appoin∣ted foure patriarkes Rme; Alxandria, Antioch, and Hieru∣salem; But for that Rome was theConcil. Calce. Can. 28. Emperiall and chiefe City, and endowed with amplest priviledges, it had allotted to it the primacy of order. Rome acquiest with this dignity till the yeare 606,A. D. 606. Buchol. when Phocas having slaine Mauritius the Emperor, his Master, by the assistance ofBonif. 3d. Onuph. Beda. Boniface the Roman Bishop gets the diademe, & gratifyes his confederate with the stile of Ʋniversall; which was re-confirmed by King Pipin to Pope Zachary, who upon complaint that Childerie King of France (solo regis titulo con∣tentus etiosam vitam degeret) raign'd laciviously; deposed him, and contributed to enthrone the Conspirator, that he might,Plat. Fr. Ann. Officiis precium rependere, countenance by power his selfe-In∣croachments. These Church-ambitions St.Bas Epist. 10: Bi. Vsher de Eccl. suc & statu cap. 1. Pag. 23. Basil stil'd  occi∣dentale supercilium, the western pride, with an odifastum illius Ecclesiae, and they occasioned theGerson part 4. serm. de pac. & Ʋnit. Grae. c. 6. Greeke Patriarks to desert Cmmunion with the Roman, inveying thus,Carlton. Iuris. cap 5. Magnitudi∣nem tuam scimus▪ &c. Thy hautinesse we know, thy avarice we cannot satisfy, thy usurpations we will no longer abide, Tecum vivito. And when Zozimus in the yeare 417, urg'd a Canon in the Nicen Councell for his supremacy, The wholeConc. Afri. Ca. 105. African Councell explode him for ambition, and
that forgery with an objurgation, Ne fumesum typhum saeculi in Ecclesiam Christi induceret, &c.Greg. reg. 166. 4. lib. 8. Ep 38. Gregory the Great, after Pope, brads the stile of Ʋniversall as scelestum nomen, no∣men singularitatis, and that hee that ownes it is the fore-run∣ner of Antichrist; Nay hee prophesies that the King of pride is at hand, and (which is most grievous) an host of Priests are prepared for him. Now though this mistery of iniquity,2 Thess. 4.7. that sits as God in gods Temple, began to worke in the age of the Apostles; yet he that then did let, did withhold till he was taken out of the way; probably, the power of the Romane Empire, which so awed the insolence of the Cl rgy, that it dared not so no∣toriously reveale it selfe; But about the yeare 100 whenRev. 20.7.8. Satan as 'twas prophesyed should be loos'd,Plat. Bery. Onup. Hadrian the third first presumes upon some notable advantage to exclude the imperiall authority its prerogative in the Creation and investiture of the Romish Bishop, and then broaches the do∣nation of Constantine, that had beene tund up about six hun∣dred yeares without vent, which occsioned a deluge of scisme in that chaire of pestilence, by mutuall murders, poy∣sonings, excommunications, &c. Nullum seculum indoctius, aut infaelicius, soBellar. de Rom. Pont. lib. 4. c. 11. Bellarmine; scelestum sui asperitate, & boni sterilitate ferreum, &c. SoTom. 10. A. 900. Baronius, In the space of 150 yeares, were fifty Popes, most of which came violent∣ly to their graves; At length by deepe sleights, in the ful∣nesse of time,A. D. 1076. Hildebrand by the name Gregory the seventh mounts the Popedome, when it seemes that Antichrist was full growne, and that was then the Ʋniversall sence of men: he (saithAvent. Ann. li. 7. Aventine) was the first that under the glosse of Religion, Antichristi imperii fundamentum jecit, layd the ground-worke of the Popes Empire; By him saithOnup. in vit. Greg. 7. Col. 27. Onuphri∣us their favorite, was that chaire endowed with Wealth, Pomp, & profanaditione, worldly jurisdiction: Res ante ea saecula inaudita.Hoc nefandum primus auspica∣tus est quod pr successres bùc us{que} ciuatur, &c Aet. An. Be. 1. 7. Now the instruments extraordinary that this Pope ma∣nag'd beyond his predecessors, were the establishing certaine Head-assertions, of which no dispute was to be tolerated, probant, & non probantur; These to be the touch-stone, to
assay whether a man be for or against them: and hee that without hesitation consents to these may have connivence in any other disgustment, he that doubts, is anathematis'd as an Heretick; some of those Decretals I shall release out ofOnup. in vit. Greg. 7. Col. 248. Onuphrius. That the Bishop of Rome onely is de jure Uni∣versall. That hee alone may for the necessity establish new Lawes. That he alone may depose Princes. That hee alone may absolve Subjects from their al∣legiance. That his sentence may not be retracted by any man, all mens by his. That the Church of Rome never did erre, nor can. That no Councill without him, can be generall. That an appeale lyes from all powers to the Apostolick Sea. That he alone can admit by indulgence, or exclude by excommunication whom he please from Heaven, &c. Then hee forbids Marriage and commands abstinence from meats, for so it was1 Tim. 4.1▪. prophesyed he should. By these principles that Sea is intitled to a Monarchy jure Divino over the whole World; nor is it improvident to build upon, and fortify what it hath thus founded; For these principles are become the very rules whereby they square out the Canons of Faith;Tertul. Caedem Scripturarum faciunt ad mate∣riam suam; Both Discipline and Doctrine they so fashion as it may best comply to this Interest; For having reduc'd men to a sufficiency of ignorance, commended, as the Mother of Devotion, they obtrude upon the silly people, what they please to be believed by an implicite Faith. 1. To this effect must Divine Service be officiated in a tongue unknowne, that the vulgar may the more admire at
what hee understands not, and apply with reverence to the Prelate for his information, which tiel quiel he must swallow as Divine. 2 All that are in orders must live single, and adhere there∣by and depend solely upon the Pope; Had they house, wife, or child their affections might more reflect upon their Patrons, which indulgence as it would distract them from a totall ser∣vice, so might it induce them to consent to some prejudices of the Romish Church, which in the present state they are they endevour mightily to advance, since under the Popes protection they secure themselves vast exemptions, and prero∣gatives above the temporalty; and by going Friers rther are discharg'd of the toyles, then debarr'd the solaces of this life, injoying the opportunities as of ease so of all sorts of Luxury at the charge of others; nor is it impossible but that their ripe fortune, or notoiu diligence may commend them gradatim, to the highest dignity. 3. Certaine meats must be prohibited at set times, to enure people to obedience, or occasion to purchase dispensations, But the reformation of this as also the chalice in the Sacra∣ment had beene granted in the Trent Councill, at the in∣stance of the Germans, but that it would have open'd a gap to demand an abrogation of all positive constitutions, by which only the Popes prerogative is preserved,Card. Pio de Carpi dis. con. Trid. pag, 460. for by those which are de jure Divino no profit doth arise, but that which is spirituall. 4. Confession must be injoyn'd with this inforcement, that if any sinne were pretermitted, the totall was ineffectuall; whereby there is a dayly discovery of the very thoughts of men, and present prevention if any thing be projected that's mischeivous to their cause, and this opportunity they aptly use to perswade their penitents, to ransome their sinnes by consecrating their goods unto the Church, as also to excite the multitude to sedition and tumult, with annexing such conditions to their absolution, as best conduce to the designes they aime at. 5. The Doctrine of merits must be inforced, that there may be a treasury in the Church full of their workes who
supererrogate, the dispensation whereof is committed to the Pope, who when he gives indulgences recompenses the debt of the sinner by assigning so much in value out of the treasury: and lest this treasure might be deficient, the Merits of Christ are added which are infinite;A.D. 1100. vib. 2. Hist. Con. Trent. lib. 1. The grant of these was first practised by Pope Ʋrban, to all such who made VVarre to regaine the holy Land, after, to such as maintained a Soul∣dier in those wars; In progresse of time the like indulgence was granted to such as rebel'd against their owne Princes if Excommunicate, or refractory to the Church of Rome; But by Leo decimus, and so since, it's granted to whosoever will give money, extending it to the dead; No sooner shall the mony be disburs'd, but the party pro quo is freed from the paines of purgatory; And who will be sparing of his reve∣new, to secure himselfe or friend of Heaven? Deus bone, quot hoe commentum de purgatorio misere afflixit; silly people are dar'd, and squeas'd by this figment as a Larke by a Hobby. So Lavatar.Lavat. Part. 1. cap. 16. Sir Ed. Sands his spec. Europ. Christionagra∣phy. U. {per}. tout. 6. By pretensed power of dispensation, they interpose in Princes marriages, and legitimate illegall issues▪ whereby it is as necessary for some princes to support this nfinite au∣thority of the Pope as to continue the honour of their birth, or title to their Crownes: They intermeddle also in all treaties, for if any Prince be involved in hard conditions, and falsly desires a freedome, The Popes Almighty power can dispense, and justifyes the unholinesse of the act by the holi∣nesse of his authority;Id. Pag. 43. By which the princes protestant are irreparably prejudic'd, and brought to a continuance of in∣certainty in their weightiest resolutions, there being a war∣rant dormant for all men to breake league, or oath with them; Their Church having long since declared Nulla fides cum haereticis. That leagues with them are more holy in their breaking, then their making. 7. VVhen the corruptions of the Clergy like the sonnes of Ely, made men abhorre the offering of the Lord,1 Sam. 2.17. and mis∣doubt the Doctrines of their Priests, whose practice gave themselves the lye, and when that which should be Veneranda raritate venerabilis, was prostitute for Tith, and Testament,
(the profitable jurisdiction whereof they had incroacht,A.D. 1200. Mr. Seld. Hist. Tyths. cap. 14. &. pag. 488. and became thereby as Judges of their owne titles so sharers with all executors) then began the naturall censure of the Church, excommunication, to be contemned: Those whose haire bristled, whose flesh trembled at the sentence which ejects them, Gods providence and the1 Cor. 5. company of all good men now disvalued it, apprehending none lesse holy, then those that most denounc'd it, and that in cause where their owne interest was ingag'd; The Clergy then to preserve their un∣naturall Courts, and credit in some warmth, sue for saecular fomentations, to force that with the Sword, which would not open to the Keys: and by such monstrous assistance, as fines, imprisonments, tortures, nay and death (for they had once power in the writ de2 H. 4. 15. Fitz. N. B. 269. d Br. Heresy 1. 10. H. 7. so. 17. Haeretico comburendo) they worry the body to conforme to their lavish pleasures, leaving the soule to fester and repine, to clense which was the drift of Christ by gentle admonition, meekenesse, &c. in Church-Discipline. 8. Now the prime Engine that keepes this politick Fabrick in continued motion, is the unfathom'd power of their Hie∣rarchie, wherby the inferior vowes canonicall obedience to his superior, and so upwards till it determine in the sence of one man, who designing any thing of import and interest disper∣ses it into the severall Diocesses, from thence it is diffus'd in∣to the severall parishes where the Church Chaplaine their a∣vowed Creature, Sermons, and by it poysons his dull audi∣tors, having that mighty advantage to discourse often in an attentive audience,Dani. in Ed. 2. 2 K. 24. and that without interruption or reply; such was that at Oxford by the Bishop of Hereford upon the Text my head akes, my head, by which he most undivinely concludes that an aking, and sick head of a Kingdome must of necessity be taken off, and that of Doctor Shaw at Pauls Crosse who out of the Text Bastard slips shall never prosper,Wise. 4. secon∣ded by Fryer Picket upon Woe to the Realme where a child is King, invey'd against the undoubted right of the fift Edward; These with some like confederate preachments so cosend the blind credulity of the people that the secondAn. reg. 20. 1327. An. reg 1. 1483. Edward was suf∣fer'd to be depos'd, and theAn. reg. 20. 1327. An. reg 1. 1483. fift a tender innocent murder'd in the Tower.
The power of this misterious Church-chaine was oft checkt at by our Princes, but never mated till our eight21 H. 8. 13. 1 Ed. 6. 12. Henry listning to his great counsell, first unscal'd the eyes of his darke subjects and inabled all to sarch ScripturesActs 17 11. whether the thing were so whereby the Clergy became copies, no farther then they a∣greed with the Originall, which was so evident (for I suppose the holy spirit more able then any man or counsell to dictate in expressions most easy to be apprehended) that the sence of every man convinc'd those aforesaid spurious and rebellious in∣ferences. Then he unhatcht the lincks of this Hierarchie from its dependance on the Pope, and affixt it more immediately to his Crowne with the stile of24 H. 8. 12. 25 H 8. 20 19. 35 H 8. 1. Supremum caput Ecclesiae an∣glicanae which was hisCarics case 5. Rep. de. Iure regis Eccl. Dan 26. H. 8. 1. 11. H. 4. 37. ancient right. Surely that sage Parla∣ment as it exprest deepe prudence to unward the Kingdome of a forraine servitude▪ so exprest it mighty confidence in their Prince to the scale of whose prerogative it added the waite which was formerly its ballance; An additament (being to the person) perhaps no lesse cumbersome to prerogative then quar∣reld at by the prelacy; For shall not the Prince by whol∣some and steddy providence, temper and qualify the headinesse and fiery suggestions of his Clergy? they (swolne aloft from an inferior ranke) are soone inflated with ambitions, and un∣der the false glosse of service to their master designe their own interest, and in the end his rifling; for could they by a higher power check the curb of Law, they would soone degree into their ancient separation and priviledges so mortall to monarchy, which the Hierarchy being nowPerfectum est cujus nihil est extra accipere. Arist. 2. cael. Tex. 23. Et appetitus ma∣teriae non estnisi motus ad formā. 1. Phys. Aris. imperfect cannot but as naturally Covet as it is to be ambitious; The attempt of which perhaps may expose even Majesty (quod avertet deus) to much sufferance, and burry the people, (impatient of Church-pride) to combustions; certaine it is, Variety of preferments tempts men to hanker after their injoyment, and distracts from that diligence of superintendency intended by the Gospell: wher∣by the people become libertines, and they likeActs 18.17. Gallio care∣lesse of those things. Thus those competencies which our An∣cestors by the name of Tiths dedicated to preserve knowledge in the Laity, are diverted to erect a greatnesse in the Clergy, and holy orders are undertaken as a beneficiall office, not of consci∣ence,
but to acquire honour and revenew: as if Religion were as Machiavill designes onlyMach. de Princip. fallere civitates,Tacit. 1. Ann. & regere vulgi animos; Sit alite dextro, blest be the age when each Church shall be reindowed with a full competence, that each incumbent may contentedly acquiesce  superintendere to oversee his single charge: that so some ministers might not be necessitated to hackny out their age in penury and scorne, while the rest per∣haps lesse worthy, not more Divine, deboyst and scandall their profession in the riot of superfluity and excesse: endevoring in the interrim to patch up their own deficiencies by ammu∣sing, & entertaining the gasing sences of their dull parish with perfumes, pictures, chantings, gorgeous and solemn services, &c. now heere, then there, now low, then aloft, now Priest, then people, then clark, then quire, by which sportive varieties some weake soules are possest that Gods Service is more sensuall then cordiall, or that their is a deepe mistery in the meere forme of worship, and industring to keepe conformity with the severall changes become disabled to settle and compose them∣selves to a steddinesse of devotion; stifling indeed the pith of true religion in the barke, which like a simple Infant is so strait∣ned in the prison of his garment, that it scarce has liberty to vent breath. Lo all this is to the high impayring of that which is indeed the miracle of Christianity: To observe the supposed sonne of aMark. 6.3. Carpenter,Isay 53.3. Mat 9.9. Mal. 4.18.21. Iohn 11.2. Mal. 26.7. A man of sorrowes, to inspire onely a few unknowing publicans, men in raggs, silly women, To waive the assistance of Kings and Princes (whom his diety might have stoopt) to neglect the slights of eloquenceCor. 2.4. 1 Cor. 1.17. &c. the intising speech of mans wisdome, the inchanting symphonies of Musick pomp or sumptuousnes, only with naked simplicity, innocence, meeknesse, temperance and humility, those celestiall graces1 Cor. 2.1. &c. ver. 4. in plaine evidence of the spirit, and of power to assault powers, principalities, ambitions, lusts, to force men from the riot of their appetites, levell their high thoughts with the Earth, and to reduce the disobedient onely with the spirit of gentlenesse, and admonition, or at most,Mal. 10.14. 1 Cor. 5.13. 1 Tim. 1.20. dissertion, by these low accomo∣dations to disperse his doctrines, argues in deed a Divinity in the author and a purity in the ordinance; Wheras to have sown his Religion and preserved it by the ayd of power, pompe, vio∣lence,
inquisitions, burnings, fines, imprisonments, &c. had e∣videnc'd nothing of a miracle, for by such politick principles Mahomet and the heathen have infus'd and fortifyed their Idolatries; It is the badge and Emblem of a Christian (not Pomp, not Pallaces, not Pictures, Altars, Fire, &c.) but humi∣lity and dvotion in the heart, which argument as it alone convinces all controversy in opinion, so does it orthodox Christianity to be Divine; Then does the Church of Christ most flourish when people are religious and good, not when the Clergy are aloft, and proud; perhaps of this Diana to much,Acts 19.28. By whose craft, &c. Observe we from the premises, as the novelty of the Romish Church, so the difficulty to reconcile it to us; Our Doctrines are affirmative and derived from all authority, such as neither the Romish-Church nor any considerable body of Christians ever disaffirm'd; Those positions which they adde, and we ex∣plode, they either father upon darke tradition, or squease obscurely from the Text; to what is demonstrated, or evi∣dently implyed by the Scripture, we subscribe; Their super∣fortations as we cannot pedigree their divine originall, so we justly suspect to be introduced by designe: and good cause; for their is scarce one doctrine wherein we vary, but it contributes (a capite ad calcem) as the sence of it at lest is now diverted, to uphold some or all the aforesaid lavish usurpations of their Clergy; Now were their Hierarchie, and those superiours level'd to their primitive humility (Learne of me, for I am hum∣ble and in heart lowly) and diligence (woe is me if J preach not) those after births would of themselves moulder off as uselesse and ungospellary.Mat. 20.26. Mat. 18.4. 1 Cor. 9.16. But tis so sensuall to tyrannise in a separate Dominion, to riot uncontrolably in excesse and sloth, that their selfe-conviction can no more probably be expected, then that Belzebub should cast out Divills,Mat. 9. 34. Mar. 3.22. and their devout lay-votarist is so awed by their authority, and so fifted by confession, that he dares not unhood his understand∣ing so much as to resent the mistery; Indeed they have beene so provident during their universall sway over Christendom, as to suffer few Ancient wrightings to be deriv'd unto poste∣rity to convince their grosse incrochments; Some Fathers,
they have father'd, others they have purg'd, the rest confoun∣ded, Books as well as persons, so that to argue by antiquity seemes to be an impar congressus, as to joyne issue where the power of one party has purloyn'd the evidence, nay has sate Iudge; The Scripture only we receive as an impartiall stand∣erd in its naked purity, which by its primitive dispersion, and Divine providence, is uncorrupted, though the Iesuits (be∣ing thereby too evidently convinc'd) begrudth us that and be∣spatter it, therein hellishly striking at the root of all Christi∣anitie. 2 Thess. 2.10.11.Now because men will not receive the truth that they may be saved, God sends them strong delusion that they believe a lye: and certainly the Inferior Priest by his rash vow of blind obedience is so muffled, that hee mostly appehends not the aforesaid misteries of the papacy; but simply in some sort of innocence is precipitated to uncouth enterprises; and the cre∣dit of his hot zeale and boldnesse beares up the reputation of the Romish cause; In which actions though I totally explode his presumption in the defiance of our Lawes, yet I pitty that the zeale (if it be so) of so much ingenuity should be misguided: and since he that professes with the truth but for∣mally, loosely, and not of conscience, is suppos'd in darker plight, then he that professes conscientiously opinions that are un∣true,Rom. 10.1.2. if not blasphemous, Therefore as Paul of Israel (my hearts desire and prayer to God is, that they may be saved, for they have the zeale of God, but not according to knowledge) so tis my charity, as not to force Romanists that are now possest from the means of truer knowledge, so not totally to disable them the practice of Christanity; It can be no attractive to our religion, to instate them in condition to be of none; ei∣ther permit we Recusants no subsistence in this Kingdome, or admit them to be no Atheists. Tis prophesyed that in the fulnesse of timeRev. 18.2. Babilon (thatRev. 17.9. City seated upon seaven hills, drunke with the blood ofRev. 17.6. saints, that has madeRev. 18.13. merchandise of the soules of men, and has inebria∣ted all Nations with the cups of hir fornication) must fall;2 Thess. 2.10. Him God will consume with the spirit of his mouth and destroy with the brightnesse of his comming; And certainly where
the Gospell is preached in its true purity, liberty, and power, that black darkenesse vanishes as a mist before the Sun; Pon∣der we in this Land, where it gaines settlement, i it be not either where there is but darke instruction, or where the pride, ignorance or loosenesse of a Minister scandals his pro∣fession; Adapt we our Church-Discipline, that it may ingage our Ministry to diligence more then interest, that people be so superintended, as to become neither sottish nor libertines, that there be a vigilant and handy-ae over sinne as well as schisme, the Romish Empire which covets darkenesse will be soone confounded, mauger the utmost endevour of hir in∣struments. In the interim some gentlelesse to such adversaries as are now possest in conscience, as it will argue confidence of our own cause, and brotherly longing for their fellowship, so may it insinuate and court them into a kindly approbation of our happinesse in the liberty of Divine knowledge; which know∣ledge will soone unvaile even to such as are ingenuous Priests the project of their imposed drudgery, To the lay-votarist, of confession and ignorance, which they cannot but resent with indignation, and improve to undeceave themselves, appre∣hending how their estates, strengths, and zeale are imployed implicitely as Dromedaryes to support the insolence, state and riot of their superior Clergy. Religionis suae abusus, quastus sacrificum est in causa, so Postellus: Nor can they be deterred by our present fractions, since both ours,Lib. 1. de orb. Concord. cap. 7. and the variance which is in most of the reformed Churches is nothing dange∣rous because not doctrinall; Tis onely in discipline charg'd to be overgrowne or introduct for politick designes, or in Cere∣monies which by some are thought indifferent, by others ab∣solutely unlawfull, by none essentiall to salvation; These doubtlesse the difference being interest not divinity, and con∣sisting in the garment not the body, time and ripe providence will temper to a reconcilement. But if some Priests according to the proposition may not be admitted upon the grounds of charity, and confidence; let it be argued upon the grounds of humane reason. The profession of a Romanist so necessitates him to the per∣sonall
imployment of his confessor, that unlesse we suppose him totallyNmo praeumi∣tur ss immeor aeeae▪ sautis. heathenish and unchristian, we may assure our selves that he commerses with his Priest; And well may the rigour of our Law inforce Priests to privacy and disguisement, but never to a totall abjuration; for absolutely to dissert their party, were to infrindge their vow of obedience, to renounce their orders, of which (some presume) they make conscience, or they would not subject themselves to so much sufferance: restraint rather quickens their inventions to evade, then flats their resolutions to adventure, since the difficulty of the acti∣on instiles it as to them, meritorious; Perhaps to that deboist∣nesse which in forraine parts among Priests is so notorious upon such relaxation would here display it selfe in its pro∣per colours, whereby the seduced people would be no longer cosend by their glosse of sanctity, and the loosenesse of our owne ministry, not so much discourage us, as if unparaleld. Gasp. Contar. De Rep. Ven.Now the sage Venetians fadoming that dependance which the whole Clergy have upon the Sea of Rome, forbid all Priests their Councells with a Fora y Preti by the voyce of common Cryers, but Iesuits they experience to be so slyly officious in State contrivements, that they banisht that order their Do∣minions upon paine of death; Nor is it memoris'd that any have violated that Law, for that neither conscience nor vow obliges them to so desperate a service since their Priestly office as it relates to God may be dispatcht by others; This ground onely is that which will disburthen us of Iesuits, and those superfluous swarmes of Priests which now cloy and pester us: permit we upon good testimonie and security of quiet con∣versation some few saeculars such as are borne free-English to injoy their birth-rights; Let their number be so straitned as they have no leasure from their function to be tampering in the State, let them be injoyn'd a difference in habit, whereby they may be distinguisht, and avoyded, As conscience would not Egge on the recidue to attempt hither with such perill (of unavoidable death if apprehēded) where they are not necessary in their calling, so much mischiefe might chance to be preven∣ted which they now project under the maske of Gallantry and disguise.
Nor can such a prudentiall act be instil'd a toleration of Idolatry, since we charge that Religion with so many present disabilities, &c. as are else-where exprest, as also with a drift in time ofƲid. Claus. 2. totall extirpation: Not to execute the utmost severity of punishment, is not an allowance to the crime; Of two evills upon which we are necessarily inforc'd, tis wisdome to chuse the least; as we rather suffer mischiefes, then an in∣conv; Therefore prohibit we not masse in the houses of Embassadours, nor punish we usury though the13. Eli, 8. Statute votes it to be forbidden by th Law of God, a sin, and detestable;4 Rep. 20. Multa conceduntur per obliquum, quae non conceduntur de directo. Thus I have expos'd my sence, vindicated I hope sufficient∣ly from favour to their cause, though perhaps not without pitty and some tendernesse to misguided zeale, and persons; All which I submit as ingeniously to better reason as is expected unto mine. 8. Clause. THat all persons that shall practice to absolve,Withdrawing from allegiance or Religion. perswade or withdraw any of the Subjects of the Kings Majesty, &c from their naturall obedience to His Majesty, his heires or successors, or to reconcile them to the Pope or Sea of Rome, or to move them or any of them to promise obe∣dience to any pretended authority of the Sea of Rome, or to any other Prince, state, or Potentate,Saying masse in open and known places. or shall openly say or cause masse or any other idolatrous service to be said in open and notorious places, whereby any Protestant may have liberty, and be permitted to enter, by the will and free consent of such person so saying, or causing it to be said, That then all such persons, their procurers, counsellors, ayders and maintainers, knowing and con∣senting to the same, shall be to all intents adjudged, &c. Ut ante.
3 Iac. 4.The former part of this clause is expresse in 3. Jac. 4. the latter may obviate a mischiefe which is too frequent, scandalous, and temptatious, at the perill of such as have best opportunity to avoyd it. 9 Clause. Delivery of the armes of a Re∣cusant.THat if any Popish Recusant shall not before the  day of  and so from time to time vo∣luntarily deliver up all his Armour, or Ammunition, &c. or shall knowingly keepe or detaine either to his owne use, or to the use of any other, any such Armour, Ammunition, &c. other then such quantity as he shall be allowed to re∣taine for the necessary defence of himselfe, his House, and family, such Recusant being thereof convicted upon reiw of two Iustices, or other testimony, shall abjure the Realm, if he shall returne he shall be adjudg'd a Traytor, &c 1 Iac. 4. 3 Ia. 4.Formerly such concealements have beene practis'd, that the Lawes injoyning Iustices to search become fruitlesse, or if up∣on diligent inquiry Armes, Ammunition, &c. were disco∣vered, the only penalty was removall, and the offendor be∣comes instructed how more closely to conceale a new supply; But a clause to this sence, imposing the delivery and retai∣ner upon the perill of the possssor, wherein if he proves faulty, he undergoes so deepe a censure, will doubtlesse be more effectu∣all to disarme them. 10. Clause. To discharge the estate of a Recusant of in∣cumbrances by Statutes, &c.THat it shall be lawfull for all Recusants seised of estates in Fee, or Tayle, to dispose of them by sale or other∣wise according to the due ceremonies of Law, acquitted of all former forfeitures, and penalties incurd by reason of any former statute, composition, or agreement meerly for Recusancy.
A Recusants Land is so incumbred and charged by severall Statutes in duties to the Crowne, that without some clause to this sence, few will adventure to purchase upon their Titles; And it seemes reasonable if we disable their issue to inherit, to inable them to sell for their best advantage; provided that if they transplant their families, their money be returned by way of exchange, and not transported. 11. Clause. THat all men whatsoever,An Oath of al∣legiance to the King, and fide∣lity to the Kingdom to be taken necessa∣rily by all. that doe or shall inhabite in the Kingdome of England, or Dominion of Wales, being of the age of one and twenty yeeres, shall within one yeare next ensuing or within one yeare next after they shall attaine to the age of one and twenty, become of sound mind, out of prison, or rturned into the Land, &c. take the Oath hereafter mentioned before the Minister and Church-wardens of every such Parish where they shall in∣habite, openly in the Church after Evening Service in some Lords Day, which taking, together with the name of the party, the Minister and Church-Wardens shall register in some booke to be kept for the same purpose, and for such their enty shall have  . And if any per∣son shall neglect or not tender himselfe to take the same Oath in manner and forme aforesaid, the said Minister and Church-Wardens shall certyfye the name of such per∣son to the next generall sessions, and he shall incurre being thereof convicted, the dangers, penalties, and forfeitures ordained and provided by the Statute of provision and premunire, made in the sixteenth yeare of the raigne of King Richard the second, &c. I suppose the Oath to this effect.
3 Iac. 4. An Oath of allegiance to be takn by all persons, &c.1. I, A. B. doe truly and sincerely acknowledge, testifye and declare in my conscience before God and the world, that our Soveraigne Lord King Charles is lawfull and rightfull King of this Realme, and of other His Majesties Dominions and Countries. 3 Ia. 4:2. And I sweare from my heart, that notwithstanding any declaration, or sentence of Excommunication or deprivati∣on made or granted, or to be made or granted by the Pope or his successors, or by any authority derived, or pretended to be derived from him or his Sea against the said King, his Heires or Successors, or any absolution of the ai Subjects from their obedience; I will beare faith and true allegiance to his Majesty, his Heires and Successors, and him and them will defend to the utmost of my power, against all con∣spiracies and attempts whatsoever which shall be made a∣gainst his, or their persons, their Crowne and Dignity, by colour of any such Sentence and Declaration, or other∣wise. 3. Iac. 4.3, And I will make known unto His Majesty, his Heires and Successors, all treasons, and trayterous conspiracies which I shall know or heare of to be against him or any of them. 1. Eli. 1.4. I doe also promise, and vow that to my power I shall assist and defend all jurisdictions, priviledges, preheminences and authorities, granted or belonging to His Majesty, His heires and successors, or united and annexed to the imperiall Crown of this Realme. Protestation.5. I shall also maintaine and defend as far as lawfully I may, the power and priviledges of Parliament, the lawfull rights and liberties of the Subject, and every person that takes this Oath in whatsoever he shall doe in the lawfull pursuance of the same. Protestation.6. And to my power, and as far as lawfully I may I will op∣pose, and by all good wayes and meanes indeavour to bring to condigne punishment all such as shal either by force practice, coonsels, plots, conspiracies, or otherwise, do any thing to the contrary of any thing in this present Oath contained. 2. Iac. 4.7. And these things I doe plainly and sincerely acknowledge and sware according to these expresse words by me spoken,
and according to the plaine sence and common understand∣ing of the said words, without any equivocation, or mentall evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever; and I doe, and will renounce all pardons, dispensations, or absolutions whatso∣ever to the contrary. 8. And I make this recognition and Oath heartily,3 Iac. 4. willingly and truly, upon the true faith of a Christian. So helpe me God. He that deliberatly, praecogitate, shall refuse such an Oath, ut videtur, has designes of Treason to the King, or State; He that maliciously, praecogitate, shall in∣frindge it, implies he is no Christian; As Divinity con∣founds the one, so Jus gentium, the Law of Nations, explodes the other. Rerum progressus ostendunt multa quae in initio non povidentur. 6. Rep. 40. The Drift. May Glory be to God in the liberty, purity, power of his worship; Honour to my King, in the might of his dominions; Prosperity to my Country, England, in the Unity of its Interest; And May some moderate Overture bee here hin∣ted as may contribute to stanch the gore of Ireland. Faxit Dem. FINIS. Errata. FOr reluction p. 15. l. 21. r. reluctancy; p. 16. in the margin for Cricaeus r. Liceus. p. 23. l. 11. for towed, r. towred. p. 24 l. 1. r. that for Forgery. id. l. 34. for inndita. r. inauditae. p. 25. l. 4. for release. r Rehearse. p. id. l. 30. for , r. . p 31. l. 20. for superfortation. r. supersaetations. ib. l. 34. inandita. ead inunditae.
