C6879 E1178_4 R208101 99867095 119385
A LEARNED And exceeding well-compiled Vindication of Liberty of RELIGION: Written by Junius Brutus in Latine, And Translated into English by N. Y. who desires, as much as in him is, to do good un∣to all men: Wherein these three following Propositions are undenyably proved, and all Objections to the contrary fully Answered. 1. That if Magistrate, in case of necessity, promise Hereticks Liberty of Religion; they are bound to performe their promise after that necessity ceaseth. 2 That Magistrates may with a safe Conscience grant He∣reticks Liberty of Religion, and oblige themselves by an Oath, or Bond of assurance, to provide for their safety and security. 3. That Magistrates ought to grant Hereticks Liberty of Religion, and to oblige themselves by an Oath, or Bond of assurance, to provide for their safety and security. Printed in the Year 1646.
To the Reader. I Have long since most earnestly desired (Christian Reader) that as there is a harmony and con∣sent in discords of Musick, so likewise there might be a sweet sympathy and har∣mony of Christian charity,
and civill friendship in the mindes of all men, notwith∣standing any discords of o∣pinions touching matters of Religion. And surely the best course that I can take to accomplish my desire, is to convince thy conscience that liberty of Religion is lawfull, and allowable; which I am fully perswaded this short Treatise that I translate is able to perform, if so be thou shalt resolve to reade it over with a minde free from prejudice and dis∣affection:
For I am sure that what of any moment can be spoken for, or objected a∣gainst liberty of Religion, that is here both strongly urged, and fully answered. I dare say that every ratio∣nall and equall judge will grant, that he never saw as yet any Tract, of the same length, concerning the same Subject, of like worth and estimation with this. VVouldest thou have strength of Argument, good method, neat compo∣sure,
perswasive cloquence: All these conspire and meet together here. If any ble∣mish seem to be in this both solid and beautifull stru∣cture, as it is set forth in an English dresse, I am the cause thereof, and not the Author. Be not offended (Gentle Reader) because thou seest the name of Ca∣tholiques and Heretiques at∣tributed to them in this Treatise, to whom it is usu∣ally given by the Papists, but rather be pleased to ob∣serve,
that liberty of Reli∣gion is here defended a∣gainst the adversaries there∣of, even upon their owne termes and conditions. For certainly no stronger proof can be brought for the law∣fulnesse and right of liberty in Religion, than to demon∣strate, that Papists, or other Sects may, and ought to grant it, although it be sup∣posed to be true in it selfe, which they conceite of themselves, and all other men, who differ from them
in religion. If thou ask me the question whether it will necessarily follow, that Pro∣testants ought as well as Pa∣pists to grant freedome of religion. I answer, yes un∣doubtedly. For Papists have some plea for them∣selves in the denyall there∣of, because they believe, though falsly, That the au∣thority of their Church is infallible, and therefore that she cannot erre in the judg∣ment of the spirits, in her in∣terpretation of the Scrip∣tures,
and in her determina∣tions of Controversies. But Protestants, who hold that the authority of the Church is fallible, that the greatest Assembly of Divines may erre, and oftentimes have erred in their judgement of the spirits, in their interpre∣tation of the Scriptures, and in their decisions of Con∣troversies; and therefore allow the common people to search the Scriptures, and to try the spirits by them as the only Iudge, or rather, to
speak properly, as the only Rule, cannot have any rea∣sonable pretence to deny it: unlesse they will now at length renounce their prin∣ciples, and destroy the grounds of their Reformati∣on and separation from the Church of Rome. But whe∣ther tends this discourse? to shew that a better Treatise, than this which I translate, could not be set forth, to prove that Protestant Ma∣gistrates are as much obli∣ged as Papists, if not more,
to grant a toleration of Re∣ligion to their Subjects. So that now (judicious Reader) thou mayst clearly perceive that notwithstanding those names of Catholiques and Heretiques thou meetst with in every Leafe and vein al∣most of this Tract, the argu∣ments of it, and the answers in it against objections, war as strongly and directly for us in this Kingdome against our Protestant adversaries, in the cause of toleration and liberty of Religion, as
it doth for any Sect of Chri∣stians, against any adversa∣ries whatsoever: and that when thou hast read it, there is not more promised in the Title page, then is made good in the Discourse thereof. Thus being mind∣full of my Authors brevity, and unwilling to offend thy patience, I rest, Thine in Christ. N. Y.
THE name of Catholicks and He∣reticks is attributed to them, in this Treatise, to whom it is wont to be given by the Church of Rome, that the Controversie may be ended, yet notwith∣standing without any prejudice, or hurt to the Cause it selfe: For when as they which dissent from the Church of Rome, desire a safe and sound civill peace may be allowed them, either it is to be pro∣ved, that they are not Hereticks; or that although they were, yet notwith∣standing the members of the Church of Rome ought to live peaceably with them. The former Controversie can∣not be determined, unlesse the one side,
overcome by the Arguments of the o∣ther, condescend to their opinion. Where∣fore it would be tedious to expect here an end thereof. But the latter may ea∣sily he decided, yea and ought to be, even whilst the former stands in debate, and of that only this Treatise takes upon it to discourse. Therefore the Author of this Treatise puts the case, as if they were such, which dissent from the Church of Rome, as they account them; but hee doth no more affirm it, then believe the truth thereof.
CHAP. I. Catholiques ought to grant them, whom they deem Hereticks, the liberty of Religion which they promise, even then, when they could suppresse them without any damage, or hurt to themselves. THat the Catholique Religion permits freedome of Religi∣on to be granted Hereticks, and provision to be made for their safety and security, even for the future, without any limitation of time, when they cannot be suppressed and destroyed with∣out detriment to the Church: both the writings of learned men, and practise it self doth testifie: From hence it followeth, the same Religion ought alwayes to grant, that afterwards free∣dome of Religion hath once been promised He∣retiques, it should not then be taken from them, when they may be subverted, and borne downe without any damage to the Church. For when Catholicks give assurance unto He∣reticks, that they will not oppresse, nor molest
them for Religions sake, they promise to do them no mischief then especially, when they shall have opportunity to do it: For why should they promise to abstain from doing that, which either they cannot do at all, or wch they cannot without much hurt and damage to themselves? Therefore whereas promises, and faithfull deal∣ing require, that what is spoken should be per∣formed; it must needs follow, that Catholiques, if they desire to avoid the crime of treachery and false dealing, ought even then to suffer and tole∣rate Heretiques, when they could overwhelm them without bringing any trouble unto them∣selves: And surely if conscience will suffer them to assure Heretiques that they shall enjoy liberty of Religion amongst them, without any limita∣tion of time, or expressely even for perpetuity; their conscience also will allow them, yea re∣quire them to make that liberty safe and secure to Heretiques constantly, although they might conveniently be supprest. Which that it may be made more clear and evident, we must ob∣serve the nature of Covenants, and bonds of assurance. When any one makes a bargain, and bond of assurance with another, he promiseth to do that, which otherwise he could without any losse to himself, yea perhaps even to his own profit, omit, and do the contrary. And he which desires security may be given him, requires an∣other to perform that to himself, which other∣wise he had liberty to leave undone, and per∣haps the intermission thereof might be more
beneficiall and pleasing to him. For covenants and agreements were devised, to the end pro∣vision might be made for the safety of our own interests and conveniences, even then when no externall force or damage can compell the other party, either to abstain from doing wrong, or to perform that benefit and good turn he promi∣seth: for truth and faithfulnesse in promises ought to prevail as much with us as compulsion. Wherefore whilest Catholiques give assurance unto Heretiques that they shall enjoy freedome of Religion for the time to come, and they like∣wise desire assurance of them: that they assure, and these desire to be assured of, is, that for the future they shall be secure from receiving any damage by the Catholiques, when it might be profitable to them to subvert and destroy Here∣tiques. But if Conscience doth not allow Ca∣tholiques to deal thus with Heretiques, also it will not permit them to make such Agreements as I have spoken of, at any time with Heretiques, much lesse to confirm them with the holy reve∣rence of an oath. From whence it will certainly follow, that all those Catholiques have greatly sinned, who ever made with Heritiques such Conventions: and that not only other Catho∣lique Doctors have erred, which approved of such Covenants when necessity prest them to it, but even the very Bishop of Rome himself, head of the Catholique Church, who doth not con∣demne those writings set forth by the Jesuites themselves, in which such Agreements are al∣lowed.
Furthermore it would follow from thence, that a necessity lieth upon Heretiques, if they would regard their own safety, of plot∣ting and endeavouring alwayes, where and when they can, to destroy Catholiques utterly, al∣though they would be contented for a while to live quietly amongst them: because they know that Catholiques, when they shall get a fit oc∣casion to oppresse and kill them, cannot only make use of it with a safe conscience, but also that they cannot but put it in execution with∣out violence to their conscience; and that by vertue of their Religion they are constrained to suppresse them, notwithstanding any promise whatsoever: because surely those promises, how∣soever confirmed with oaths, become then un∣lawfull and of none effect, when Heretiques may be quelled and subverted without prejudice and perill to the Church. Therefore unlesse Here∣tiques be resolved to betray their own lives and fortunes, they ought not to spare Catholiques, if they can overcome them: moreover, if there be any hopes to prevail by taking up of Arms, they ought to lay hold on them, and not to stay till in processe of time, and by some sudden change, they become altogether unequall in number and strength unto the Catholiques; but to set presently upon them, and run rather the hazard of a doubtfull war, than expect a cer∣tain destruction from them. But if these things seem strange and absurd to Catholiques, and they make such agreements without any scruple
of conscience, and have the consent of their Pa∣stors and Teachers to do so, in those Kingdoms, Provinces, and Common-wealths where they are not strong enough to contend with Here∣tiques: it is necessary altogether that conscience should permit them also to stand to those cove∣nants, when it is expedient and profitable for Catholiques to break them. And verily, if Ca∣liques make such like agreements at any time, that they may prevent the bringing of some discommodity and dammage to their Church: they are bound also afterwards to remit and let go that benefit, which they may hope to gain by the downfall of Heretiques; For it is just and requisite, that he which reaped formerly profit by conditions and compacts, should also after∣wards suffer some inconvenience and disprofit, which bargains and agreements may bring upon him: although there is indeed no inconvenience or discommodity herein, as shall be proved very largely in the following Chapter. There remains yet thus much to be said, That by the law of Nature thou oughtest not to do that to another man, which thou wouldest not have done to thy self: And on the contrary, we are enjoyned even by the Law of God and Christ, to deale with other men, as we would be dealt with our selves, Mat. 8. 7, 12. But who amongst the Catholiques would be willing and content∣ed, if Heretiques, in case of some urgent necessity, had granted them liberty in their dominions, That when that Necessity is taken away, they
should lay violent hands on them, and deprive them of their freedom? Might they not call that perfidious and treacherous dealing? and very justly. Why therefore do either they themselves deal so with other men, or hold it fit and lawfull to be done? I do not think indeed that the moderate sort of men amongst the Catholiques will say as much, which I will forthwith inti∣mate and declare: yet notwithstanding it is apparent that some are so transported with ha∣tred against Heretiques, that they seem to hold, no promise or oath at all is to be made good by Catholiques unto Heretiques; and the same speech to be applied against Heretiques, which Cicero spoke concerning theeves and plunderers, in his 3. Book of Offices, to wit, that it is no guile to keep back from them that price and ransome which a man promiseth to redeem his life, No, although he swore that he would bring it to them: And if a Catholique hath bound himself by oath to perform any thing to Heretiques, he may take up that saying of Euripides, I have sworn with my tongue, but I keep my mind free from the oath. For a Heretique is the common enemy of all mankinde, as much as a Robber, with whom no good man can have any fellow∣ship and commerce, and surely make o pro∣mise, nor oblige himself by oath unto him. Yea, a Heretique is worse than a Thief, because this man only kils mens bodies, but he destroyes their scules. If this be so, Heretiques had need take great heed, and beware that they do not
at any time believe any Catholiques promises, covenants, leagues, and oathes; but take them to be meer snares and ginnes, invented only to beguile and circumvent them. But furthermore, what a horrible thing is it, and unbeseeming a man, especially a Christian, to affirme, that any man may swear with his tongue, and reserve his minde free from the oath; that is, swear in words, that he will do such a thing, which hee hath not only no purpose to perform, but even judges it a wicked thing to be performed by him: What now will be esteemed holy, what inviolable, what sincere and undefiled, if it shall be lawfull to deceive with the reverend feare of an oath? And is there any Christian man to be found, who doth not stick to assert and avouch, that it is lawfull to take that holy and reverend name of God in vain, and to confirm therewith a lie, and a very ungodly matter? It is true in∣deed, that if a man shall promise any thing with an oath, which cannot be performed without the guilt of sin and impiety, that oath ought to be broken: but likewise it is as true, that we must never confirm that with an oath, in the ac∣complishment whereof we must needs commit wickednesse; and he ought to be very sorrowfull and penitent, who even through errour and want of judgement establisheth a wicked matter with an oath; so far is it from being lawfull for any man to make good such an oath, which under∣stands the haynousnesse thereof. For no man truly should engage himself, no not by a simple
promise, to perpetrate and effect a wicked mat∣ter, much lesse to ratifie an ungodly promise with an oath. Certainly that man, which wit∣tingly shall do so, is both a perjured person, and guilty also of a twofold impiety: First, because he promised an unrighteous thing knowingly; and then because he made no scruple to confirm an ungodly promise with a most holy thing, and abused the reverend name of God, to the end he might have a fit occasion to defraud and beguile others. No necessity can excuse him in this point. For a Christian man should rather die a thousand deaths, than condescend to such a sin∣full oath. Therefore that speech of Euripides is unjust, and proceeded from a heathenish impie∣ty; I swore with my tongue, I reserve my mind free from the oath: That of Cicero is as bad, That the ransom is not to be brought in to a thief, which thou shalt promise him with an oath to re∣deem thy life. Either thou must not swear at all, if thou hast no intent to perform thy oath, if thou thinkest it dishonesty to make it good, much more if thou thinkest it a sinfull thing to be done; or if thy conscience tell thee thou mayest lawfully swear, thy oath should be truly kept. For neither doth God suffer himself to be deluded, nor him to go scotfree, which taketh his name in vain. And observe I pray, how far the judgement of God himself, and pious men, differs from the opinion of Euripides and Cice∣ro. God had commanded the Israelites in times past, To destroy the Inhabitants of the Land of Num. 33. 52.
Canaan, and to make an universall slaughter of Deut. 7. 2, 3. them, not to make any covenant with them, nor to have any compassion on them, and that by Jos. 9. reason of the impious idolatry of those nations, and other most grievous crimes and enormities. The Gibeonites, which were a part of them that were born and bred in that land, went to Iosua and the rest of the people, faining them∣selves to be no inhabitants of that land, but to come from a far country; and prevailed by this wile with Josua and the rest of the Princes, to make a league with them in the name of all the People, and to establish it with an oath. What would they have said in this case, which hold it not lawfull for Leagues, Covenants, and Oaths to be kept with Heretiques, although heretiques shall use no craft to over-reach them, but shall transact all things openly and be∣fore the sunne, or rather in the sight of God? would they not have cryed out, that this wicked covenant was contrary to Gods expresse com∣mandement? and besides procured by deceit, and therefore voyd, of none effect, and utterly to be broken. That Josua indeed, and the Prin∣ces of the people swore, but as it were upon some certain condition, as if so be those things were true which the Gibeonites had spoken, that is, if they were not some Inhabitants of the land of Canaan: But seeing that is false, the People are not bound to observe their oath. But Josua and the Princes of the people were of a quite contrary mind, and the People after
their instruction, and lastly God himselfe de∣clared his judgement to the contrary: For, three dayes after, they perceived their fraud, and yet notwithstanding they spared them. And when as all the people murmured against the Princes, they made them answer, We have sworne unto them by the Lord God of Israel, and therefore we may not touch them, Jos. 9. 19. And moreover God himself approved and confirmed this oath, neither permittted it in processe of time to be violated. For when as a few ages after, Saul had killed some of them, God visited all the people of Israel with famine, neither could his wrath be appeased for this deed of Saul, before seven of his sonnes and nephewes were hanged. But if God would have the Israelites to perform that league and covenant which was made with the Gibeonites contrary to his own manifest in∣junction, and gotten besides by deceit; why should not those leagues and oaths be kept with Heretiques, which they purchased without any guile of theirs? when as they have no command from God either to punish or kill them, much lesse so cleare as that, which the Israelites re∣ceived to destroy the Canaanites, of which mat∣ter more shall be said in that which followes. But it is most unjust, for those men to be e∣steemed as bad as thieves and robbers, or even worse than them, and to be ranked amongst those men with whom no fellowship or society may be entertained, no promise made and kept: which know not themselves to be heretiques,
and would not be such if they knew it; but most strongly believe that they hold opinions con∣cerning matters of Religion, which are true, pious, and altogether agreeable to the word of God, neither do, nor purpose to do wrong to any man. For thieves know they invade other mens rights, and that they sinne against the law of nature which is engraven in their hearts, and are not ignorant they do that which is evill; and that which is of most force in this point, they disturb, violate, and destroy the peace and tran∣quility of other men: Therefore when as they offend against the laws of a commonwealth, the punishments thereof are justly inflicted on them, & they are punished by the Magistrate as break∣ers of that common peace, which God ordained him to preserve. But Heretiques, which live peaceably with other men, and desire to live so for the future, neither know that they sinne, nor that they commit any thing against the lawes of civill society. But if that reason were to be re∣garded, whereby it is alleadged, that they destroy mens soules, which they are utterly ignorant that they do, yea are fully perswaded that they do not: then it would prevaile as much against infidels, such as Jewes are, whom notwithstand∣ing Catholiques suffer to abide in their domini∣ons; and against Mahometans, whom they per∣mit to live in some parts of Polonia. But if thou repliest, that Infidels do not spread abroad their poyson amongst others, as the Heretiques do: That I may passe over with silence, that even
Infidels, if they can, will draw other men over to their opinions; and that they do not hinder it from comming to passe, but it happeneth ei∣ther by reason of Christians constancie, or the contempt and abject condition of Jewes and Mahometans in these countries, yet notwith∣standing with the same venemous conceits they infect their children. Who can have the heart to tolerate a Jew, or other infidel in his dominion, that would slay his children? yet the Catholiques do, although they destroy their childrens soules. It is evident therefore, that they which unwit∣tingly destroy mens soules, as Heretiques are thought to do, are not to be dealt withall in like measure with those, much lesse to be more grievously punished, which kill their bodies. If this argument were of force, all Harlots were to be destroyed: for what? do not they destroy mens soules, whilst they intice them to commit fornication? Doth not Saint Paul affirme, that Whoremongers shall not possesse the kingdome of God? And Iohn, that whoremongers shall have 1 Cor. 6. 9. Gal. 5. 19. Rev. 21. 8. & 22. 15. their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone? And yet Catholique Princes, and Common-wealths in Italy, Spain, and elswhere suffer them to live under their protection: and the Bishop of Rome doth not expell them thence; when as they offend also against civill honesty, and transgresse the lawes of chastity and modesty, which are ingrafted in the minds of all men, but especially of the female sexe by nature. Why therefore should Heretiques, who
neither break the lawes of nature, nor civill honesty, and do not so easily allure mens minds to imbrace their errours, as harlots do to a wanton love of themselves, be worse dealt withall, because they destroy mens soules? why should they be accounted such, with whom no fellowship may be admitted, no rules of justice, no friendship observed? seeing other∣wise they live honestly, injure no man, yea en∣deavour to deserve the good will of all men, and as much as in them lies, to live peaceably with all men. For, that I may cast the whole matter as it were into this short conclusion: Who∣soever observe the rules of civill society, neither disturb the peace and tranquility of other men, they cannot by any just authority be ejected out of a civill society, neither should they in any wise be denied peace and security. Wherefore, when as Heretiques are in every respect thus qualified and disposed, they should neither be banished from a civill communion, nor peace and quietnesse be denied them.
CHAP. II. Catholiques may with a safe Conscience allow Heretiques freedome of Religion, and give them Security for it. MAny are afraid, especially when no ne∣cessity compels them to it, to grant He∣retiques freedom of Religion, and to take order for their safety: because to do so, would be to shew a liking and approbation of heresie, and to give them authority to propagate and disperse abroad their pestilent and deadly Errors. And yet notwithstanding, the same men, without any scruple of conscience allow Jewes, and in some places Mahometans (as I have said before) liberty of Religion, and give them a bond of assurance for their safety: What, do they perhaps by this means approve of the Iewes and Maho∣metans errors, and of their blasphemies against Christ? To approve of; and not to suppresse by force; are two different things. Neither verily hast thou any cause to say, that the case of In∣fidels, of which sort Jewes and Mahometans are, is not the same with that of Heretiques: for that difference which is between them, is of no moment in this point, where the question only is, whether or no heretiques errors be approved of, by granting them liberty of Religion. For
in this matter the case of heathens and hereticks is one and the same: But as for that power they speak of, which may be given heretiques by granting them liberty, if they mean such a power by which Heresie may be approved of and judged good and honest; such a priviledge Catholiques can neither give Heretiques, nei∣ther do Heretiques desire them to do it, but it is a licence only of indempnity, and of being free from civill punishment, which even he may give which doth not only not allow of heresie, but also very much abhorres and disallowes it. So a civill indempnity & immunity is granted drunk∣en and covetous men; for who punisheth them for those vices? although both sorts sinne both grievously themselves, and do hurt by their ex∣ample, and much dammage redounds by both vices unto other men, and oftentimes unto the commonmealth. But who would say, that thou approvest of their vices, and givest them autho∣rity to commit those sinnes, which thou canst not; if thou shalt promise them in good earnest that thou wilt not punish them, if so be they do no wrong to other men. Many Princes do great wrong to their Subjects, and neverthelesse they are not liable to any civill punishment for it, and their liberty would be violated if thou shouldest punish them for it. And truly that happens in every Dominion, especially that which is Absolute, that the Magistrate should go unpunished for that injury which he commits against him, over whom he hath absolute au∣thority.
Now that liberty of Religion which is allowed heretiques, requires nothing else but that thou shouldst not hinder them by any force from attending their Religion, from exercising, professing, defending, and endeavouring to pro∣pagate it without any violence; nor that thou do any evill or hurt unto them for it, but referre the whole businesse to God, that he himselfe may punish them when he pleaseth: That thou leavest it to the Catholique Church, that it may as strongly as it can oppose them with spirituall weapons, in which it is prevalent, whether they be miracles, or reasons and arguments: more∣over, if thou so think fit, that she may correct them with censures meerly Ecclesiasticall; I say meerly ecclesiasticall, not civill, lest violent hands be laid upon their bodies or goods. When as Christians in the primitive times lived a∣mongst Jews and heathens, they truly did them no hurt, neither punished, or endeavoured to punish them with any civill punishment. Now they might bind themselves by oath and pro∣mise to do that, which they did really perform; yet neverthelesse no man shall have cause there∣by to say that they approved of the Iewes and Pagans wicked and blasphemous errors, or that they gave them such a licence to disseminate and promote their errors, which no Christian can with a good conscience. But if thou alleadgest that the Christians of that Age could not do otherwise, because they were not strong enough to deal with Infidels; but would have done o∣therwise,
if so be that they had been strong e∣nough to contend with them. What else shalt thou hereby affirme, but that those Primitive Christians were like serpents in the bosome of Infidels, who so long abstained from hurting them, as they had not power to do it, yet ready so soon as they should have a fit opportunity to afflict and represse them. By this means thou wilt make their charity, desire of peace, and pa∣tience towards Infidels, fained and counterfeit, which would forthwith break out into cruelty and war against them, when Christians should begin to put confidence in their own strength. Hereby Infidels will have very great cause given them to plot and contrive an universall slaughter of Christians; for because they must expect and look for a most certain destruction from them, notwithstanding any meeknesse and patience whatsoever which is outwardly pretended. Seeing these things are very absurd, and in∣deed ungodly to be uttered, and injurious to the piety of those holy men which professe Christ and suffer martyrdome for his sake: we must needs conclude, that the primitive Chri∣stians would certainly have tolerated Infidels, al∣though they might have been able to suppresse them. And moreover, That to tolerate Errors in other men, so far forth, as not to persecute and afflict them with Civil dammages and pu∣nishments, whom thou mightest quell by force; is not to approve of Errors, be they never so pe∣stilent and ungodly. Consequently also, it is law∣full
for Christians to grant them such a kind of freedom and indempnity, which nourish and de∣fend wicked Errors: for if it be lawfull for thee to make good such an indempnity and impunity unto those, which cherish and foment ungodly and destructive Errors; it will be lawfull also for thee to give them licence for it, that is, to promise them and give them good assurance that thou wilt as much as in thee lies, preserve them harmlesse, and that thou wilt not bring any damage or punishment upon them for here∣sies sake, or take order that they be so dealt withall: but rather on the contrary wilt hinder them which are under thy authority and domi∣nion, and to whom thou canst prescribe lawes, from doing them any mischief. For what thou mayest lawfully perform, that is, justly and without sinne; even that also thou mayest ob∣lige thy self to perform, and give another man security that thou wilt. But some object that of Paul, Be ye not un∣equally yoked together with unbelievers; For what fellowship hath righteousnesse with un∣righteousnesse? and what communion hath light with darknesse? and what concord hath Christ with Belial? or what part hath he that believeth, with an Infidel? and what agreement hath the temple of God with idols? But this speech doth not concern a civill peace or conjunction, as that is between members of the same common∣wealth, governed by the same lawes. Because both S. Paul himself, and all other Christians in
that Age, entertained such a peace and concord with Infidels, both Jews and Gentiles, amongst whom they lived. Moreover, the same Apostle elswhere commanded Christians to live in peace, Ro. 12. 18. Heb. 12. 14. 1 Cor. 5. 9. as much as in them lieth, with all men. And wrote expresly to the same Corinthians: I wrote unto you in an epistle, not to be mixed (that is, to have no familiarity) with fornicators; Yet not altogether with the fornicators of this world, (that is, Infidels) or with the covetous, or extor∣tioners, or with idolaters, for then must ye needs go out of the world, &c. There he evidently per∣mits Believers to have conversation with Infi∣dels and Idolators, to trade, yea even to eat with them, as appeares by the following words. And is not even now a civill peace admitted with the Iewes? Are not Lawes established for their security? Are not Leagues and other Con∣ventions made by Christian Princes and Com∣monwealths, and by the Kingdome it selfe of Polonia, with Mahometans? Therefore the words of S. Paul do not speak of a civill society and friendship, and other such like agreements; but of another more near and inward affinity, from which they may abstain, who entertain a civill friendship with one another, and take great delight in living peaceably together, and shew∣ing courtesie, and doing many good offices to one another, upon every occasion that is offered. Verily Christians ought to do thse friendly of∣fices unto all men, although more especially to them which are of the houshold of faith, As the Gal. 6. 10.
same Paul signifieth, who will not have them to be yoked with Infidels. Ohers bring another Argument. If he shall Mat. 18. 17. neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee a an heathen man, and a Publican. But this place doth not prove that at all, which they would have it: For Christ will have us deal with him that will not hear the Church, as the Jews were wont to deal with Heathens and Publicans. But the Jews did not expell Heathens and Publicans the common-wealth or city; they did not per∣secute them, they did them no shrewd turn, or inflict a civill punishment upon them: only they were not wont to have a familiar conver∣sation with them, and refused, although they were invited, to come unto their tables: never∣thelesse they had communication for buying and selling with them, and dealt with them in pub∣lique and private affaires? and if they came into their houses, they did not drive them out, and truly they did not keep them from their tables if so be they would needs eat together with them. Besides, Heretiques and Infidels are not spoken of in this place, but Believers only, which shall sinne against their brother, and will not acknowledge their fault, after they have been both privately, and publiquely admonished and rebuked by the Church for it. Their case is not the same, which belong not to the Church, of which sort are Heretiques, especially such as are borne of hereticall parents. Some object that also of S. John, If there com 2 Joh. 10, 11.
any unto you, and bring you not this doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him God speed; for he that biddeth him God speed, is partaker of his evill deeds. But first of all, it is one thing to receive a man into our house, and to bid him God speed; and another thing to drive him out of the ingdome or city, and to lay vio∣lent hands on his body and goods. That in those dayes, believers could do; this they could not; and therefore Iohn commands them not to do this, but that only. Moreover, mention is made there only of seducers, whom he cals Antichrists, which did not confesse that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, As appears by the foregoing words, and may be perceived by many places of the first Epistle. But there are not such Heretiques in these times, as deny that: so far is it from being true, that Heretiques of these times may be cast into the number of those Seducers, which endeavour contrary to the manifest truth, and the conscience of their mind, to lead others into such a damnable error. Lastly, in such a case only Iohn forbids us to receive them into our houses, or to bid them God speed, when as they come unto us to perswade and convert us to their Religion; not when they agitate civill or private matters, and desire commerce with us is members of the same Common-wealth. Many urge that also for an argument against liberty of Rligion, That God commanded in former times, false Prophets, and thse also that revolted to the worshipping of false gods,
to be killed. But first of all, it is one thing to be a Heretique, and another thing to be a false Pro∣phet, or to decline to the worship of false gods. They which now adayes are termed he∣retiques, worship none besides that true God, creator of heaven and earth, and Jesus Christ their Saviour; but only they hold different opi∣nions from the Catholiques concerning him, or about sacred matters, and such as pertain to the worship of that true God and Jesus Christ. Therefore they have not declined to the wor∣ship of false gods, so far is it from being just that they should be reckoned amongst false Pro∣phets, which perswade other men to such a hei∣nous crime: for those men only were to be ac∣counted false Prophets, which endeavoured to perswade, that they spake by inspiration of some deity, and that their sayings were to be esteemed oracles; which the Heretiques of this age in no wise do. But that, that law of God made against false prophets, and worshippers of false gods, is not intended against those, who otherwise held the Law of God was to be kept, but were in∣fected with some other error, that may suffici∣ently shew, because that in former times among the Jewes, who were affected with a vehement love and zeal toward the Law, Heretiques not∣withstanding were tolerated. And verily even in the time of Christ himselfe, and long before him, there were Sadduces, which denied that there were Angels and Spirits, and were stiffe opposers of the Resurrection of the dead, and
(as the Catholique Doctors report) rejected all the Prophets besides Moses. And although the greatest part both of the People and the Rulers believed them to erre exceedingly, ne∣verthelesse they were not expelled the city, nei∣ther exempted from being Magistrates, and bear∣ing any other civil office; yea they were not hindred from comming to the Temple or the Synagogues. Why therefore should it be thought fit that Heretiques in these times should be kil∣led, by vertue of that law made against false Prophets, and worshippers of false gods? It may be added for a further proofe, That they which in old time seduced the people from the true God, to the worship of false gods, or fell off of their own accord to it, could not but know that they did that which was against the expresse law of God; because the law of God enacted against that matter, was so cleare and manifest, that no man could be ignorant of the meaning thereof. But they which now a dayes passe for heretiques, know not, that they do, or believe any thing contrary to the Law, and other Oracles divine; and if they knew it, would a∣bandon all such opinions in Religion, Where∣fore those false Prophets, and Apostates also, were in far greater fault, than Heretiques of this Age are: and therefore it doth not forthwith hold true, that these men ought to suffer the same punishment which God commanded to be executed against them. And thus much also may be addtd, That in those dayes Prophecies were
frequent and in force almost continually among the people of Israel, by which evident testi∣monies were ever and anon published concern∣ing God and his will, so as no man could be ig∣norant what he ought to hold concerning God and his worship, unlesse he would purposely shut his eyes, and wink at noon-day. But now Prophecies are ceased; from whence it fol∣lowes, that we may more easily fall into error concerning the true worship of God. Last of all, all men know, that the civil lawes of Moses do not bind Christians; of which sort they are, which commanded a false Prophet, or an Apo∣state fallen to idolatry, to be destroyed. That truly these lawes, of which we now discourse, do not oblige us, may easily be gathered from thence, That in all the New Testament there is no such thing commanded, nor any where so much as lightly touched upon, that either A∣postates or Heretiques ought to be afflicted and brought to punishment by Christians. Rightly hath Hierom declared in some part of his wri∣tings; I have learned by the Apostles appoint∣ment, to avoyd a man that is an Heretick, not to commit him to be burnt. For in this manner Paul the Apostle adviseth Titus: A man which Tit. 3. 10. is an heretick, after the first and second admo∣nition, reject. And certainly he means such an heretique, who is condemned by his own con∣science that he resisteth the manifest truth which he acknowledgeth; as may be discerned by his following words. How then should Christians be
commanded to punish them, who were led into heresie by deceitfull arguments, which notwith∣standing they think invincible, and are affected with a simple ignorance of mind; or also being born of hereticall parents, sucked their error together with their mothers milk. But so far is it from being true, that Christians are comman∣ded to trouble others for Religions sake, that rather we are often warned it shall come to passe, that Christians shall be troubled and brought to slaughter by other men, because of their Religion. God in times past brought the Jews after such a manner into the land of Ca∣naan, that after they had slain the worshippers of false gods, they might possesse their country; promising them, if they should obey his law, peace, wealth, victory over their enemies, and moreover such strength and succours, that they might without any great difficulty suppresse Apostates, if any should chance to spring up a∣mongst them. But we have learned of Christ and his Apostles, that the condition of Christi∣ans shall be far otherwise: who were even Mat. 10. 16 themselves as sheep in the midst of wolves, and being grievously vexed and tormented, suffered a bloody death for the truths sake: And they declared that we also should be like sheep ap∣pointed to the slaughter; And affirmed, that all Rom. 8. 36 those which will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. For such is the nature of the 2 Tim. 3. 3. 12. Christian religion, that not many mighty men and of noble birth imbrace it; even as S. Paul
teacheth, God hath chosen the weak and base 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27. things of the world, and things which are despi∣sed, and things which are not. How then could God enjoyne Christians to kill Apostates, that is, those which should revolt from Chri∣stianity to a Jewish or heathenish religion, and go over from men of low degree to Nobles, from weak to mighty men, and to their kind of holy worship. But if so be they are not com∣manded to destroy them which altogether for∣sake the Christian religion, much lesse Hereticks, who notwithstanding acknowledge the majesty and religious worship of Christ, although they do not sufficiently understand it. Many also object that, If freedome of Reli∣gion be granted Heretiques, then heresies will grow and increase. Yea verily they will more increase, if thou strive to root them ou by force, especially if the minds of men be otherwise bent to religion, honesty and vertue. Thus much ex∣perience it self hath taught us in these ages. The Protestant religion then increased most in France, the Low-Countries, and England, when persecution was opposed against it. Rea∣son shewes as much: for they which endeavour to suppresse another mans religion by force, in so doing make their cause or religion to be sus∣pected, and certainly lessen the credit and esti∣mation of their own religion; but cause that to be well approved of, which they go about to ruine: for when they enter upon violent courses, they seem to demonstrate that they distrust their
cause, and despaire of victory, if the matter should be debated by argumentation, therefore being destitute of reasons, betake themselves to force, and fly to carnall weapons, because spi∣rituall are wanting, to bring mens minds under subjection: by which it comes to passe, that they purchase an opinion and report of cruelty to themselves, and inflame other mens minds with hatred. They on the contrary, which are troubled for Religion sake, easily get mens good will and affection. But whither mens favour and affection, thither also for the most part doth their faith incline. I will not alledge that now, That when the grievousnes of punishment a∣gainst offenders is exposed to the view, com∣mon people are not seldome moved to compas∣sion; most men not so much regarding and lay∣ing to heart the deed, which either they never saw, or do no longer see; as the terriblenesse of the punishment, which is subject to the sight. But what shall we think will come to passe, if they be deemed innocent, which suffer cruell punishments; if their life and manners be ap∣proved of; if nothing be accused in them, but meer error of judgement? What if that also happen, that the people observe some blemish in their course of life, which trouble them, which they do not see in them so afflicted by themselves? It is certain, that those which suf∣fer for Religion sake, how erroneous soever it be, do shew, that they esteem all things lesse than God, piety, and their own conscience and
salvation: which is only the part of good men, and such a are very great lovers of vertue, and fear God very much. It cannot happen other∣wise then, but that they should gain favour to themselves, and beliefe and authority to that Religion which they so stoutly maintain, For this is the genius and proper quality of vertue, to purchase undoubted credit to it self, and e∣specially in matters belonging to Religion: First, because (as I have said) mens favour fol∣low vertue; and belief of what is said, followes favour: And also, because vertue is otherwise of it self sincere and undefiled, hating deceit, guile, and lying. But who may not rather believe him, and assent to his doctrine, in whom he per∣ceives to be most candor and ingenuity? Fur∣thermore, it is no wayes credible, that God, who is so much delighted with vertue and piety, and so exceedingly rewards it, would deny the knowledge of true Religion to the better sort of men, and grant it to the worser. Last of all, The greater Vertue is not without just cause, thought to be the affection and proper quality even of the better Faith. Wherefore, as I have declared already, They, which by suffering any kind of cruelty and rigour for Religion sake, shew forth most evident testimonies of their own vertue; easily incline and draw over people which love vertue, to their own side: They, on the contrary, which exercise cruelty against them, lose the af∣fections of the people, and diminish the credit of their Religion, which animates and stirs them
up to so much cruelty against innocent and harmlesse men. That I may be silent, that those men themselves which are afflicted for Religion sake, by how much the more honest and vertu∣ous they be, are so much the more confirmed in their opinion, and the more vehemently in∣flamed with the love of their Religion, because they think their own adversaries judge it un∣controleable and invincible by strength of Ar∣guments. From hence may easily be perceived what answer is to be made them which say, that He∣retiques are enemies to the Catholique Church and Religion, wherefore they ought to be ex∣pelled the territories and limits of the Church, and Religion to be defended against them: That they are ravening Wolves, and therefore to be driven away from the Flock: That they give the sons of God poyson to drink, and so destroy their soules, and therefore ought not to be suf∣fered to have conversation with them: and that they sell, and put by force upon the weak and ignorant Infants of Christ (of which there must alwaies be a great number) that poyson, in stead of the saving drink of their soules. But be it so, that they be enemies to the Ca∣tholique Religion and Church; yet seeing they do not invade, nor intend to invade it with swords nor corporall weapons, they wage only a spirituall war with it: wherefore in like man∣ner they are not to be vanquished with carnall, but spirituall weapons, and to be driven either
from the Church, or brought into obedience thereof, by those weapons (I say) wherewith the Apostles of old subdued the enemies of truth, overthrew the strong holds of errors, and brought the world in subjection under Christ. 2 Cor. 10. 3, 4. For so saith Paul: For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh: for the wea∣pons of our warfare are not carnall, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds, casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth it self against the knowledge of God, and bringeth into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. But if thou wouldest drive Heretiques by carnall weapons out of the Church; thou wilt not destroy such enemies, but exasperate and provoke them, thou shalt not lessen, but increase their number; and though thou mightest at length utterly root them out by this means, yet thou shalt not hereby defend thy Religion, but pollute and defile it. Long since did Lactantius give a right answer to the Gentiles, who thought that those Reli∣gious exercises which they publikely perfor∣ed, were to be defended by violence: Religion is to be defended, quoth he, not by killing, but by dying; not by cruelty, but by patience. And a little after, If thou wouldst defend Religion with blood, with torments, with mischief, then it will not be defended, but defiled and corrupted; For nothing is so free and voluntary as Religion, and so onwards. Truly Christian Religion is not better known by urging and pressing the
truth, than by inculcating and exhorting men to charity, peace, meeknesse, gentlenesse, boun∣tifulnesse, and patience. It will have the pro∣fessors thereof to overcome their enemies, and not to be overcome by them, with these ver∣tues. It doth not so defend the truth of matters belonging to Religion, as that it would have them break the bonds of humane and civil so∣ciety for that purpose, which propagate and de∣fend it: but rather it more strictly obligeth them to observe those duties, and to make good the law of charity towards all men, and to love the bonds of peace. Therefore if thou shalt re∣solve to maintaine the Christian religion by force, if by mirchief, if by punishments; even by so doing thou wilt most of all offend against it. Let the same answer suffice them who stick not to affirme, that Heretiques are ravening wolves, and ought to be driven out of the flock. Let them be driven out indeed with the Crook of the Pastors of the Church, but not with a wooden or iron one, but with one which is spi∣ritual, and proper to the Ecclesiasticall function. Heretiques do not teare the sheep with their nailes, nor bite them with their teeth: but en∣deavour to hurt the flock with Reasons and Arguments, which in the judgement of Catho∣liques, are deceitfull: Let these therefore be re∣torted and beaten off with stronger reasons, and let the sheep be admonished to beware and take heed to themselves that they be not ensnared by them, as Christ did, and after him the Apostles.
By this means the flock of Christ will be suf∣ficiently armed against their violence; unlesse thou wouldest say, that the sheep were not sufficiently armed against the violence & incur∣sion of wolves, by Christ the great shepherd of of the sheep, and by his Apostles their most faithfull keepers, because that they neither used force themselves, nor advised others to do it. Moreover, if thou makest use of externall force, thou wilt not thereby root out those scruples and doubts, which Heretiques perhaps have sowed in the minds of believers, but wilt adde strength to them: Neither wilt thou hinder them from being wolves, but cause them to ab∣stain from professing and detecting themselves to be such, whilst they in the mean while cover∣ing themselves with sheep skins, may remain without any danger of punishment present a∣mongst the flock. But if thou usest Arguments only, and Ecclesiasticall censures, thou wilt drive the wolves from the flock; For if any shall be more wicked than others, who not∣withstanding whatsoever hath been said in con∣futation of their errors, will still be in love with them; when no feare of punishment hinders them, will shew themselves in publike, and after open censure and rebuke, will be excluded the ecclesiasticall sheepfold, neither shall have cause to charge any one as guilty of their dustruction, besides themselves and their own stubbornesse. Their blood will be upon their own heads, as the holy Scripture speaketh, Their destruction
shall not be imputed to their Pastors, because they admonished them, they armed them against errors, and endeavoured as much as in them lay to keep them in the path that leadeth to salva∣tion. Wherefore, as the Prophet saith, those wicked ones shall die in their iniquity, but the pastors have delivered their soule. Yet not∣withsttnding the Church will reap the benefit, for which also God suffers heresies sometimes to spring up among the faithfull, as Paul teach∣eth, that they which are approved, may be made manifest among them. Which benefit doth not follow, if hereticks be violently suppressed; for by such dealing, even the wicked, repressed by feare, will labour to carry the outward guize of believers, as much as honest men, so that there may appeare no difference between them: yea, a heretick, who shall dare to rise up against an armed religion, and to professe and defend heresie with the danger of his estate, or of life it self; will shew forth a greater proofe of vertue, than he which, guarded with power, opposeth a heresie, or at least defendeth a Reli∣gion which is attended with force and power: For neither can it then appear whether he per∣severe in his true opinion, or defends it for the goodnesse of his cause, or to confirm his own power, or for feare of another mans power. But on the contrary, he which dares oppose himself against a Religion which is armed with power, or revolt from it, and contemn all dan∣gers for Religion sake, doth demonstrate (as I
have said before) that he lightly esteems all things in comparison of God, piety, conscience, and eternall salvation. By this time, that also is evident enough, that the minds of believers, and of Christs little ones, may be so prepared and guarded by the care and diligence of their Pa∣stors, especially seeing there be so many, not only thousands, but even millions of them; that the poyson which heretiques administer unto such, cannot hurt them, although no violence be exer∣cised against heretiques. Neither verily may it be imagined, that Heretiques arguments are so plausible, that they may withdraw the more simple and ignorant sort of men from the saving truth, which are lovers of truth, and earnestly desire their own salvation; although the Truth, well expounded, and armed with strong argu∣ments, be opposed with those Reasons. For truth, especially heavenly and saving truth, is of such a nature, that it sinks more easily into a mind that is disposed to vertue, if it be hand∣somely propounded, and confirmed besides with solid arguments, than falshood and error: She hath a certain wonderfull clearnesse and bright∣nesse of her own, by which she dazles and over∣comes their minds, which do not purposely re∣fuse to take knowledge of her; neither is she more approved of by subtile, than by simple ca∣pacities, which are endued but with common¦sense and apprehension. I thank thee (saith Christ) O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, Mat. 11. 25. because thou hast hid these things from the wise
and prudent, and hast revealed them to babes: And S. Paul: God hath chosen the foolish things 1 Cor: 1. 27. of the world to confound the wise. Therefore as yet no cause appeares, why we should think that a remedy against the poyson of heresie, is placed in violence and arms: but rather it appeares that there is need of some other wholsome anti∣dote against the venome of Errors. Perhaps some man may still object, that to grant Heretiques liberty of Religion, must needs wound and trouble the conscience of Magi∣strates, because if liberty of Religion be per∣mitted them, the Commonwealth will be di∣vided into factions, and a way laid open for dis∣cord, tumults, and intestine garboiles and sediti∣ons: For the minds of the people are knit and united together by consent in Religion; but by difference and disagreement therein they are divided and distracted; neither can it other∣wise happen, but that they who are zealously affected to Religion, should rise up in arms a∣gainst them, at some time or other, whom they are fully perswaded do spread abroad ungodly and pestilent doctrine. Neither truly the Con∣science of Magistrates and Catholique Pastors doth permit them to quench the zeale and affe∣ction in the people to the Catholique religion, which they ought rather to cherish and increase. Therefore they cannot so bridle and represse the fury of the people which are inflamed with a deadly hatred against Heretiques, but that it will at some time or other break forth in violence
against Heretiques. Yet notwithstanding in the mean while it is the duty of the Magistrate to preserve safe and sound the publike peace, to hinder tumults, to take out of the way what∣soever may occasion them. If he doth other∣wise, he offends his own conscience, and doth not execute that office which God hath com∣mitted to his charge. Wherefore when as he ei∣ther cannot, or ought not to suppresse the people fervently affected to Religion, from rising up in violence against Heretiques; there remains one course only to be taken, which is, to expell He∣retiques, and to suffer and establish but one Re∣ligion in one Country, and that to be the Ca∣tholique religion. These sayings may seem to some man very plausible, yet if thou diligently observe, thou shalt find them to be such, which even experience it self doth very much confute: for so far is it from being true, that this is the way, and the only way, to free a Commonwealth from tumults and seditions, that none is more apt and commodious to raise them up; And it is a wonder to me that wise men have not yet learned so much, or rather would not learn by experience, which is said to be the school-mistris even of fooles. If ancient examples be not pow∣erfull enough to perswade thee, yet look upon those which are modern and of latter times, and almost subject to thy view: Behold France, oftentimes swimming with the blood of its own inhabitants, by reason of those wars which were raised for Religion, which could never be
ended till liberty of Religion was granted He∣retiques. Look upon the Low-Countries, and a war lasting so many yeares, which is both la∣mentable, and famous, for as many great over∣throwes of the Catholiques, as of Heretiques. Behold Germany, or rather the sepulchre of Ger∣many, which even to this day is miserably trou∣bled with a most cruell war. I shall think him blinde, who doth not see, that by opposing He∣retiques with force, tumults and wars are raised up, not quelled and prevented; But I shall be∣lieve him to be an iron-hearted man, who is not troubled and grieved for such tragicall and sad examples. It were truly to be wished, that there were but one Religion in a Kingdome, and that the true one; for neither is it a question, but that by this meanes the minds of men may be more united together in mutuall good will and affection: Yet thus much we deny, that by di∣versity of Religions the minds of the people are altogether so distracted and divided, that a civill concord and a mutuall good will between Inhabitants of the same city or kingdom, cannot stand together with that difference in Religion. Moreover, if they which beare rule in any Nati∣on or Kingdome, would but prevaile a little with their affections to tolerate Heretiques which are weak, they will knit rather and binde the minds of Heretiques in good will toward them∣selves; For that which they in justice do, that, Heretiques which are weaker in strength, will account a courtesie, and ascribe it to their gentle
disposition, bounty and benevolence. Wherefore they which deny that peace can remain in a Commonwealth, if there be diversity of Religi∣ons in it; They also must deny, that a weaker party, which is of a different Religion, may be tolerated by the stronger in a Kingdome: which whosoever shall affirm, they also shall excuse the Heathens, who in former Ages would not tolerate Christians that were weaker than them∣selves, because indeed they could not. As much is to be asserted and avouched concerning Anti∣ochus and other Kings, who in former times grievously afflicted the Jewes, over whom they had dominion, for Religion sake. But why should that be denied to be feasible, which ap∣pears to have been often done, as we see it now adayes to be under the Turk himself, who per∣mits Christians in severall parts of his domini∣ons, to exercise their own Religion. Why do so many endeavour, and some by writing books, others by word of mouth, to perswade the Ma∣gistrates not to grant a Toleration unto Here∣tiques, which are not so strong as themselves in power? But why do they feare lest that be granted, which cannot be? But perhaps they which think it cannot be admitted, judge of o∣ther men according to their own disposition, and are led either with an over-hot and prepo∣sterous zeale, or so enraged and transported with the wilfulnesse and unrulinesse of their own mind, and confidence of their own strength, that they think those which are not so power∣full
as themselves, may not be endured; whom I believe they would permit, if they were more powerfull. A civill peace therefore may (as I have said) consist even where there is difference of opinion in matters belonging to Religion. That is a known and a usuall proverb among the common people: Good men may differ in opinion even about the same matters, without any breach of friendship. To which sense that also tends, which is as common: A friend to the person, yet an enemy to the cause. Neither doth it lesse concern matters of Religion, than State-affaires. Moreover, if the nature of the matter be considered; disagreement in State-affaires is more hurtfull to a Civill peace and concord, than difference in opinions about a matter of Piety, which (if men would moderate and bridle their affections, especially those which are most powerfull) leaves the bond of concord safe and secure in a Commonwealth, even for because it doth not of it self concern Civil society. So in former ages, Roman Em∣perours which imbraced the Christian religion, enjoyed a quiet dominion, although they per∣mitted Pagans, which opposed it. But heathen∣nish Emperors, which tolerated Christians, had a far more peaceable reigne: Verily Christians were no hinderance to the continuance of peace in the Commonwealth, although they did boldly and ingeniously professe their Religion, and did much abhorre that Heathenish impiety which was then publikely exercised; and testified that
they had rather die a thousand deaths, than im∣brace and approve of it. Also some Christian Emperours tolerated Heretiques, such as the Pelagians were, and that at Rome too, without any disturbance of the publike peace. So also Germany remained quiet a long time, in diver∣sity of Religions, and had continued so even till this time, unlesse either some very rash or am∣bitious Counsels had at length prevailed. That the like is to be judged of the Low-Countries, they will easily perceive, who are not ignorant of the passages there. But as for that which some men plead, that the zeal of Catholike religion ought not to be quen∣ched, but even cherished and fomented: which sometimes doth so incense the people, that they are led thereby to invade, plunder, and demolish Heretiques churches, oratories, and houses. Verily they shew themselves to be unacquainted with the affairs of the world, and to be not only very little mindfull of Christ, but also of civil lawes: For is this a zeale beseeming Christians, to invade other mens properties by force? to ruinate and pull down other mens churches, by tumult, by sedition, without any command from the Magistrate, before any lawful judgment hath passed, and of their own accord and pleasure to ruine and destroy other men? Then Christ wanted zeale; then the Apostles wanted zeal; then all Christians which lived since them, wanted zeale, who never did, nor purposed to
do any such things: They suffered indeed many such things, but they never did the like to others. That is not the zeal of Religion, but the rage and fury of the people, often stirred up with hope of prey: Vnlesse perhaps thou mayest call it that, which Paul saith is not according to Rom. 10. 2 knowledge, and as S. Iames speaketh, is bitter: for this, as he sheweth, raiseth tumults, and Jam. 3. 14, 16. every evill work. That zeale which is joyned with wisdome and knowledge, is of another nature; for that wisdome doth not suffer zeale to grow to seditions and tumults, but it is most desirous of peace and quietnesse: whereof the same Apostle saith a little after, The wisdome that is from above is peaceable, gentle, and easie ver. 17. to be intreated, full of mercy and good fruits. Wherefore it is so far from being true, That, that Zeal which breaketh forth into tumults, rapines, burnings with fire, stripes and slaughters; is to be nourished and fomented by the Pastors of Christian people: That rather it is by all means possible to be suppressed, and brought within the bounds of modesty, meeknesse, and gentle∣nesse; lest they which should be the heralds and messengers of peace, become trumpets of sedition, and incensers of the publike calamity and ruine. So far also is it from being true, that the Magistrate ought to cherish this licentious∣nesse of the people, that he ought rather to re∣strain it upon all occasions, if so be he would provide for the good of Religion, which detest∣eth such sinfull deeds; and for the tranquility of
the Commonwealth; and also discharge that office which is committed to him by God, and satisfie his own conscience. For nothing is more destructive to a Commonwealth, than to suffer the liberty, reputation, goods, or life, even of a wicked man, to be obnoxious to the lust of a tumultuous people. Therefore although Here∣tiques were at length to be restrained by force, yet neverthelesse that were not to be executed by the tumult and sedition of the common peo∣ple, but in a setled and lawfull way of Judge∣ment by the Magistrate. Wise Magistrates and good Princes alwayes take order, that offenders be not exposed to the licenciousnesse of the people, which neither knows how to observe a just measure in punishment, neither is more cruell to evill and guilty, than good and inno∣cent men, and never makes a stand where it be∣gan, but oftentimes creepeth on farther. But if then Heretiques are not to be exposed to the zeal or fury of the common People, although they were at length to be punished: how much lesse ought that to be permitted, if they are not to be punished with Civil punishments. Thus much I thinke fit to say yet, before I leave this point or argument; that those which judge it not expedient to tollerate Heretiques, because they disturb the Peace of the Common∣wealth by their difference in religion, do use the same argument, which Infidels or Heretiques may easily retort upon them in their own do∣minions. Truly Haman used the like argument
in former times, that he might shew that the Jews were to be rooted out, charging them also with Treason, as that they contemned the Kings commands: which malicious accusation pro∣ceeded from no other ground, then because the Iews would not obey in any wise the Kings de∣crees in matters belonging to Religion: to which calumny they are alwayes obnoxious, which follow a different religion from that which the supreame Magistrate approves of, and defends by force. For so it is written in the Letters, which that Haman published in the name of the King: Haman declared unto us, that in all Na∣tions Hest. 13. 4 throughout the world there was scattered a certain People, that had Laws contrary to all Nations, and continually despised the Com∣mandements of Kings, so as the uniting of our Kingdomes cannot go forward. Seeing then we understand that this People alone is continually in opposition unto all men, differing in the strange manner of their Laws, and evill affected to our State, working all the mischief they can, that our Kingdome may not be firmly establish∣ed. Therefore have wee commanded that all they that are signified in writing unto you by Haman (who is ordained over the affairs, and is next unto us) shall all, with their wives and children be utterly destroyed by the sword of their enemies. Neither skils it any thing in this case, that these are Believers, those Infidels; these Catholiques, those Heretiques. For if diversity of religion disturbes the peace of the Common∣wealth,
the Catholique religion will as much trouble it in a Hereticall Common-wealth, espe∣cially allowing of the slaughter of Heretiques, as an Hereticall religion in a Catholique: Yea, a Hereticall religion which disallows of any slay∣ing, or prosecuting of Heretiques, will far lesse cause it, than the Catholique religion. And moreover every man thinks that he hath a right opinion and beliefe concerning religion; and a Catholique is as much a Heretique in the estima∣tion of a Heretique, as a Heretique is in the judg∣ment of a Catholique. Therefore if that reason be true, which I confute, an hereticall Magi∣strate cannot but think that his course to pre∣serve the peace of his Kingdome, must be to ba∣nish Catholiques out of the bounds thereof. But if Catholiques like not this, neither let them think it fit for themselves, to expell Heretiques their Common-wealths.
CHAP. III. Catholiques ought to grant Heretiques Liberty of Religion, and to provide for their Security. VVEE have shewed in the foregoing Chapter, that the liberty of Religion, which Heretiques desire, requires nothing else, but that they may receive no hurt, nor be affli∣cted with any punishment for Heresie: in one word, that a Civill peace may be accepted of with them. But now the first argument wee bring to prove that Catholiques ought to live peaceably with them, is, because they may do it with a safe conscience, as hath been hitherto shwne. But if Catholiques may with a safe conscience live peaceably with them, then they are bound to do so. For thus saith Saint Paul, Rom. 12. 18. Heb. 12. 14. If it be possible, as much as in you is, have peace with all men. And in another place: Follow peace with all men. But yet both nature and com∣mon reason besides declare, that any man ought to live peaceably with all those, with whom he may; especially with such as earnestly desire, and importunately ask it. But if Heathens also thought it good to purchase peace oftentimes even upon harsh and unjust termes, how much more are Christians bound to accept of a just
peace offered them by others, even of their own accord, or grant it them at their request? Bles∣sed are the Peacemakers, saith our Saviour, for they shall be called the children of God. Secondly, if Catholiques should deny Here∣tiques liberty or peace, and should hold it law∣full to punish them, and so should punish them for professing that religion which differs from the Cathoique, they would force them, as much as in them lyed to their own religion. But no man ought to be forced, or compelled by out∣ward violence to the Christian religion. First, because the disposition and nature of religion, especially spirituall, and perfect religion, such as is the Christian religion, is repugnant to com∣pulsion. Rightly saith Lactantius, Religion cannot be compelled: And again, nothing is so voluntary as Religion, which if the minde of him that sacrificeth dislike, then it is taken away, then it becomes none at all. And therefore Ter∣tullian saith, It is not the property of religion to force religion, which ought to be freely em∣braced, not by force. And then because by this meanes many are constrained to counterfeit and fain religion; for that violence cannot cause a man to think otherwise then he doth. An opi∣nion can neither be thurst into the minde by vi∣olence, nor extorted and wrested from it. That is all force can do, to cause a man to approve of that opinion in words, which he dislikes in his heart. But such a simulation and hypocrisie is abominable to God, and ought to be also to all
men; and it is hurtfull both to the Church, and to hypocrites themselves. To the Church, be∣cause those hypocrites are secret enemies, whom the Church fosters in her bosome as Serpents: For they cannot but hate that Church, by which they believe themselves to be most unjustly af∣flicted, and desire, and if they can, work the ru∣ine and destruction thereof. It is hurtfull to hy∣pocrites themselves, because it brings them to eternall destruction. Our Saviour saith of that evill servant, That the Lord shall appoint him his portion with the hypocrites, there shall be weep∣ing, and gnashing of teeth: And truly this pu∣nishment would befall them, although they should think that this simulation and dissimula∣tion were lawfull; but whosoever amongst them are more sincere and vertuous then others; in doing so wound their conscience most grie∣vously, and so sin most hainously against God, because they Professe that religion which they hate and abhor in their minde, and performe those religious exercises, which they condemne, and believe to be displeasing to God. But he sins most hainously, which violates his conscience. If he sins, and therefore is damned, who doth a thing which is otherwise lawfull in it selfe, with a doubting conscience, as Saint Paul teacheth, he sins far more hainously, and more justly is Rom 14. 23. condemned who doth any thing directly against his conscience, and the judgement of his own minde. Hence it is that Divines say (they are the words of a most famous man amongst the
Catholique doctors) that the conscience, though it be erroneous binds, so that it is never lawfull to do any thing against it, but it behoveth a man to lay it aside, and discharge himselfe of it by the prudent counsell of reason, and of wise men; or if he cannot do that, he is bound to o∣bey it, to wit, if his resolution, and the matter in hand may not be deferred. Wherefore they which force others to desert their own religion and embrace the Catholique against their con∣science, compell them, as much as in them is, to sin most grievously. But how may he be judged free from sinning greatly, who forceth other men to sin greatly. But some man may here object, (of which we spake also in the former Chapter) That God neverthelesse commanded them under the Law, to punish those with death, which should worship strange and false gods. Wherefore at least in such a case, God would have men to be forced to the true Religion, neither would have any regard to be had of that point, That Religi∣on ought to be free; and that many, by such means as force, may be driven to simulation, or compelled to do any thing against conscience. We might answer thus: That it is lawfull for God, who as he is Lord of all other things, so also of our consciences, and of whose will and pleasure the state and way of Religion depends; To swerve from the ordinary path and method of things, and to ordain many things, which it is not lawfull for us to ordain or effect. But
we will not now make use of this answer. Thus much first we affirm; That even Catholique Doctors both ancient and modern, have obser∣ved, and any one that will seriously bend his mind to it will easily see, that the Jewish religi∣on was carnall, and consisted most in externall matters; not spirituall and perfect, such as we have said the Christian to be: wherefore it is no wonder that God would force men in some respects by carnall punishments, to a carnall religion; and that the genius and proper quality of Religion, which is, that it be free and volun∣tary, did not shew forth it self in every point in that Religion. But the proper quality of a spi∣rituall and perfect Religion, is of another tem∣per, which requires most of all the Minde of man: wherefore God would not have it esta∣blished by externall force, nor by terror of Civil, but Eternal punishments: & a great deal rather would have it imprinted and ingrafted in the minds of men by the love of most holy promi∣ses. And in the next place it is to be noted, that the Jewish religion was both so ordained and setled from the beginning, and afterwards continued and administred; that it may justly be affirmed, that violence was no more offered to the consciences of the Jews, when they were deterred by threatning punishments from wor∣shipping strange gods, and from contempt of the Law, than it is to their consciences, who, if they be Inhabitants of any Kingdome, are de∣terred by threatning punishments from yielding
that honour which is due unto a King, to any besides their own King; or from the contempt and breach of those Lawes which are enacted and established by a lawfull power, and com∣mand no dishonest matter. For God appearing openly from the very beginning in the mountain Sinai, so shewed himself to be the only God, in the sight of all the people, and published his Law unto them, that no man could doubt but that he was both their only God, and so to be worshipped only as a God, and that the Law of Moses came from him. From whence it came to passe, that all the people, none making any opposition at all, made a covenant with God by Moses concerning that Law. And then after the Law was now established, God both promised that he would ever and anon raise up Prophets to the people of Israel from amongst themselves, by whom the Jewes might ask his advice, and find out his minde, not only concerning matters pertaining to Religion, but even such as belong to the Commonwealth, yea and such as concern houshold affairs: And really also performed it, and had still a great deal more performed it, if the people had remained constant in observing the Law. Besides other prophesies and fore∣warnings, God ordained an ordinary way of asking his counsel by the Priests Ephod, or Ʋrim and Thummim, as the holy Scripture cals it. And he moreover revealed secret and hidden matters to such as sought ut his will by lot, and shewed what they were to do: and as often as
the people followed Gods counsel, all things succeeded prosperously with them; so that the event it self declared, those answers came from God. Therefore the state of things was in a manner, as if God had been a certain King a∣mong the people of Israel, even in civil and earthly matters, dwelling in the Tabernacle as in a certain Kingly palace, and abiding in the Ark, and from thence informing the people of his will by the Priests, or other Prophets, as ser∣vants that were to wait near his person. He gave answers about undertaking and waging of war, about choosing of Captains and Commanders, and other such like matters: He very often shewed wonders, to declare that himself dwelt in the midst of that people. Wherefore things were then so ordered, as if some King contain∣ing himself within his own palace, neither suf∣fering himself to be seen of the common peo∣ple, were approached unto only by his Nobles, gave answers by them to the rest, and published statutes, and ruled the common-wealth accord∣ing to his own will and pleasure; and so would have a Kingly honour to be attributed to none besides himself, and would have his Lawes, com∣manding no dishonest thing (as I have said) e∣stablisht with a threatning of punishment, to be obeyed by all his subjects. By taking which course, he were to be thought to do no proper violence to mens consciences, or to force them to simulation, but to hinder and represse only the obstinacie and rebellion of his own subjects.
But the disposition of Religion is far otherwise now after that God would be sought to no longer upon earth, but in heaven, and took a∣way those manifest signes of his presence, nei∣ther doth uphold and preserve the Religion which he hath ordained after such a conspicu∣ous and open manner; doth not stir up Prophets, doth no longer give answers, but acts and orders all things more secretly, for so much the greater triall of mens faith: For as the case now is, men fall more easily into error, and violence is offered to the conscience, if thou shalt make any one quit his error by threatning of punishments, and force him to a truth which is not demonstrated by such clear testimonies: And from thence also follows this conclusion, That they are for∣ced to a simulation, which is hatefull to God, who being not convinced by arguments and reasons, are compelled by force to imbrace a Religion, how true soever it be: In which point truly they have hitherto so erred, who thought it meet for Heretiques to be suppressed by violence; that taking a middle course be∣tween a Legal severity, and a Christian gentle∣nesse, they obtained the end of neither of them: For God in former times would not have Apo∣states and worshippers of false gods, and con∣temners of his Law, to be spared, but command∣ed them to be slain without mercy; for he in∣tended not this punishment as a remedy against their error, but as a revengement against their unpardonable wickednesse and contumacie. But
those which hold it requisite for Heretiques to be violently dealt withall, because they plainly see that many of them do not sin through stub∣bornesse, but are led away by error, those they think fit to be spared; but upon such a conditi∣on, that they recall their error; although they see that they would never have recalled it, unlesse they had been driven to it by terror of punish∣ment, and therefore that they rather pretend the Catholique religion, than approve of it. Therefore they do not destroy those which have an evill opinion concerning God and matters belonging to Religion, but only hinder them from professing it outwardly, which the Law never intended. But whilst they punish those, or deprive tham even of life, which dare not for fear of conscience renounce their error, they neither perform the duty of Christian meeknes, nor obtain the end thereof, which is that erro∣neous persons may be brought into the way, and be restored. And that I may utter the whole matter in a word; by doing thus, they tolerate the worser sort, and destroy the better: for they are better and more vertuous, who, when they are not convinced of an error, will not renounce it, for fear of wounding their conscience, and of offending against God; than those which con∣demn in words against their conscience, an opi∣nion, though in it self erroneous, yet that which they believe to be true, and agreeable to the word of God. These things being thus declared, we will
adde yet some other arguments, by which we may shew, that Catholiques ought to live quiet∣ly with Heretiques, and not to suppresse them by force. I will not now make mention of those seditions, wars and tumults, which might easily proceed from denying Liberty of Religion to Heretiques, especially in a Nation that is accu∣stomed to liberty, that is unapt to suffer any yoke or servitude, much more that, than which none is more grievous, even that by which mens consciences are oppressed. We shewed the truth of this matter by most evident examples in the former Chapter, which without our informati∣on any man may see. Neither verily is it ne∣cessary that Heretiques themselves raise tumults, even though Heretiques be suppressed; A sparkle of discord may take hold on Catholiques them∣selves, partly by the obligations of kindred, and laws of frieneship and alliance, by which they are knit and allied to Heretiques; partly be∣cause examples shewed upon Heretiques, would in a short time creep further, For examples do not use to stop & cease where they first began, and so much the lesse those of which we treat, if any gain might accrue and rise to others by the oppression of Heretiques: what, shall we think that they will not find some specious pre∣tence, who covet other mens goods, to make those heretiques, or abettors and followers of heretiques, whose riches they greedily gape af∣ter; especially if they shall perceive them to be obnoxious, and to lie open to injury? But what
shall I say of the authority and dominion of the Clergie over the Politick State? The matter may easily be discerned by the history of those times, which were before the rise of heresies, How easily might a speech more free than ordi∣nary, uttered against the Ecclesiasticall State, be drawn into the crime of Heresie? and that which was spoken against the behaviour or actions of Clergie-men, be wrested to a contu∣mely and reproach of Religion it self? especially when thou shouldest have both thine Accusers and Judges out of the same state and order of men. Might not even this very thing it self af∣ford occasion to new motions and tumults? But let others look to this. We would in this place have that called to memory, which we spake of in the former chapter; That by de∣priving Heretiques of Liberty in Religion, he∣resies are not only not suppressed and rooted out, but even by how much the more honest the mindes of any people be, by so much the more they are increased: We adde now thus much: That by deniall thereof, Atheisme springs up in many mens hearts, which is worse than any kind of heresie whatsoever. For, Conscience is sup∣pressed and destroyed in those men, in whom there is not so great honesty, and so great vertue and power of conscience as there ought to be, when they are troubled for Religion; and so hypocrisie, and counterfeiting of that Religion unto which they are forced, is begotten in them, and so atheisme and profanesse, which hath no
savour at all of holines and religion, springs up. But as for those men in whom there is a greater honesty and integrity of minde, and a regard of conscience, and a feare of God; in those men the love of their Religion is inflamed and increa∣sed by persecution, as a fire is by casting oyle into it: and it layes hold on (as I may so say) with an open and light fire whatsoever comes nigh it, and oftentimes creeps on further, for those causes mentioned in the former chapter: concerning which point, Thuanus, a Catholique, wrote much (among other men) in the Preface which he set before his Histories. But if thou sayest, that a Spanish Inquisition is somewhere used, yet Heresies do not creep on farther there: I would have thee also to consider, whether A∣theisme doth not creep into the place of heresie? Truly not a few even of the Catholiques com∣plain of that matter, who are well acquainted with those countries: Although besides, many thousands were found to be in Spain and Por∣tugal, but a few years ago, of those, who either took unto themselves the name, or had it given them by the people, of Illuminated persons, and were accounted for heretiques. But what dost thou think many foster privily in their mind? Experience it self doth sufficiently declare, that in Spain and Portugal, the Jewish and Saraceni∣call religion could not for some ages be rooted out of mens minds by bringing in an Inquisition. But verily although there were not so great inconveniencies, as I have recorded, yet there
would be others, which ought to disswade Ca∣tholiques from holding it fitting for Heretiques to be punished. For even that one thing ought to prevaile with them, which we spake of in the former Chapter, that the safety of the Church, and of Religion doth no wayes require, that he∣retiques be set upon by violence, which also the Catholiques themselves sufficiently confirme, when they affirme that the Church is founded upon a Rock, so that it can neither by force, nor by guile be overthrowne, which Christ signified, when he said, The gates of hell shall not prevaile against it. Neither truly is it agreeable to rea∣son, that this stability, and immovable constan∣cy of the Church should consist in that, that she shall prevaile by Armes and civill power over her enemies: for because that then the contra∣ry rather appeared, when that so godly a build∣ing was brought from its first foundations to full perfection. The Catholiques themselves shew another kinde of supportance for it, that Spirit of truth which is alwayes present with the Church, which alwayes upholds it, and pre∣serves it safe from all ruine. But shall we think that that Spirit of truth, which in former Ages erected the holy building of the Church, maugre all the opposition of Satan, and the whole world, and brought it to such a greatnesse by impotent and unarmed men, and defended it against arm∣ed errour and impiety, is become now adayes so weak and feeble, that he can no longer main∣tain his own work without strength of Arms:
and that he stands in need of that power to de∣fend religion and the Church, which he before subdued, otherwise without its help, the Church must needs fall to ruine? But if the safety of the Church, and of the Catholique religion doth not require that Heretiques be overwhelmed by force, why doe the Catholiques hold it fit for them to be born down with violence? For who can think, especially that is a Christian, that use is to be made of violence, punishments and arms, without necessity? For it is the property of gentlenesse to spare, where thou mayest spare; especially where so many thousands of men were to be dragged and haul'd to punishment, so many soules to be destroyed. Furthermore, the hope of that great benefit which may proceeds from toleration of Heretiques, ought to incline the Catholiques to more gentle resolutions. For by such a toleration they would purchase the praise to themselves of meeknesse, equity, gen∣tlenesse, and moderation, and would gaine their good wils and affections, which being once gained, it is an easie matter to perswade them of the truth which is founded upon solid argu∣ments. Moreover, when Heretiques are so born withall, they have a time to recollect and amend themselves, and those errours which at the first view seemed plausible, after their paint and co∣lour is by little and little discovered; begin to lesse delight men, and at length decay: but truth it self is strengthened by delay: and being after a manner dash: against falshood and untruth, by
its own vertue and strength breaks it in pieces, and the brightnesse of it by this collision shines forth more clearly. Wherefore, when as in re∣spect hereof there is no necessity of troubling Heretiques, and of provoking them with the terriblenesse of punishments, but hence from le∣nity and gentlenesse there is hope of exceeding fruit and benefit belonging to the everlasting salvation of so many thousands, yea millions; What Christian man will be of so rigorous and cruell a disposition, that he can hold it fit to ex∣ercise cruelty, rather then patience and gentle∣nesse towards those men? Catholiques ought to be led and moved also in this point by the ex∣amples of God himself, whose children we pro∣fesse our selves to be; and of Christ the Saviour of the whole world, who was wont to use very great lenity and gentlenesse towards erroneous persons. God in former times declared in his Law, which in other matters was severe, That all the people of Israel, and strangers, which so∣journed amongst them should be forgiven if they committed any thing through ignorance; And truly, for this very reason, because they did it through ignorance or errour, not through pride, and stubbornnesse of heart. But what shall wee say of Christ, who came into the world for that purpose, That he might save sinners? Paul writes of himself, that Christ Iesus our Lord put him in his service, who was before a Blas∣phemer, and a Persecutor, and an Oppressour: but, saith he, I was received to mercy, because I
did it ignorantly, through unbeliefe. Behold, he obtained pardon for so great sins as blasphemy, persecution, reproaches and oppressions, where∣with he troubled and afflicted the godly, be∣cause he did those things ignorantly, through unbeliefe, and that at such a time, wherein the memory was yet fresh of those great miracles, and infinite in number, which were wrought by Christ; when those wonderfull deeds of the A∣postles were daily to be seen, when those faith∣full persons themselves, whom Paul with an outragious fury persecuted, were full of the ho∣ly Ghost, and at least many of them famous and renowned for their miracles. Neither did this bounty of Christ make a stand at Paul. For the Apostle himself sheweth in the words that fol∣low that place to Timothy, that Christ would shew an example in him of all long suffering, that others also from thence might have a strong be∣liefe of so great mercy of Christ towards them, If Christ did both beare with, in so great evi∣dence and clearnesse of the truth, a blasphemer, a persecutor, and contumelious person, and be∣stowed so great a favour upon him, as to com∣mit the most holy function of the Apostolicall office unto him, because whatsoever he did, hee did it ignorantly, through unbeliefe: Why doe the servants of Iesus Christ refuse to tolerate those, who at this time, wherein no man dares say the Christian religion is attended with so great splendour and renowne of miracles, may erre indeed, and perhaps blaspheme through ig∣norance,
yet for all that, persecute no man, give reproachfull words to no man, nor trouble any man for religions sake. But that it may yet ap∣peare more manifestly, by the example of Christ, that wee ought not to suppresse Here∣tiques by violence, and to haule them to punish∣ment; let us observe how he behaved himselfe towards Apostates. The Law, as we have sig∣nified before, commands an Apostate to be slain without mercy: Thine eye shall not pity him, neither stalt thou shew mercy, nor keep him secret, But thou shalt even kill him, thine hand shall be first upon him to put him to death. Will not they say here, that hold it fit for Heretiques to be pu∣nished, that this course is a great deal rather to be taken against those which revolt from Christ, and when they have been his disciples, will now no longer be of their company? Certainly, if Heretiques were to be slain, who notwith∣standing professe and honour the name of Christ, and are ready to suffer a most terrible and cruell death for his honour, although they do not rightly understand his doctrine: Much more shall they be worthy of this punishment, who altogether reject his doctrine, and do so forsake that faith which they had placed in him, that they will not professe his name any longer, and be conversant amongst his disciples. But what, did Christ teach us by his example, that we ought so to do? and did he not rather demon∣strate the contrary? We read in John, c. 6. v. 66. that after Christ had discoursed much concern∣ing
the eating of his own flesh, and drinking of his own blood; Many of his Disciples being of∣fended at this his speech, went back, and walked no more with him. But what saith Christ to these things? Did he lead them violently to punishment, or thought it fit they should? In no wise. Moreover he bespake those his twelve Disciples or Apostles after this manner: Will ye also go away? as if so be he had given them liberty to go away, if they would. Thou wilt say, that Christ had no magistrate, nor people at his beck and command, to bring them to punish∣ment: But he had that divine vertue and pow∣er dwelling in himself, by which he might be able to destroy them without any externall force. And to have done it in such a way, would not have been so liable and obnoxious to blame and reprehension; because a punishment in∣flicted upon them by a Divine vertue and pow∣er, ought to be accounted by them as a punish∣ment inflicted by God himself, and so to be ac∣knowledged most just. Moreover, if such a course had been taken in destroying them, the rest of the Disciples would have been stricken with so much the greater fear of daring to re∣volt from Christ, and his holy religion. Certain∣ly if those Catholiques, who hold it fit for He∣retiques to be persecuted and destroyed, could have destroyed them by their Anathema, as by a thunderbolt sent miraculously from God, they would in no wise have forborne to do it: And it were to be desired, not only by the Catho∣liques,
but even by the Heretiques themselves in some respect, that Catholiques might be able to do it; because from thence they would be ma∣nifestly convinced that the Catholique religion were true, and proceeded from God, and there∣fore would imbrace it presently, neither would suffer such a severe and powerfull thunderbolt to be darted forth upon them: and then no Ca∣tholique would fall into heresie. Why then did not Christ do so, who had so great power to effect it? Was it not therefore, because he judged it most averse and disagreeable to his most gentle and meek spirit, and to the religion which he published, and to the purpose and will of God, for performance whereof he was sent into the world? He came not, as elswhere he speaks of himself, to destroy mens lives, but to save them. Why therefore do not his servants and disciples the like, before whom he sets himself for an example to be imitated, who are or ought to be partakers of that Spirit, who pro∣fesse his most holy religion? They ought to call to memory that, which our Saviour himselfe once answered to his disciples, when the Sama∣ritans refused to entertain him: For when they asked him whether he would have them to com∣mand that fire come down from heaven and con∣sume them, even as Elias did? Jesus rebuked them and said, Ye know not of what spirit ye are, for the Son of man is not come to destroy mens lives, but to save them. That is, he would have his Disciples to be as mild and gentle as himself.
Before we leave this Argument, we would have Catholiques to consider, what men of great renown in former times amongst the Doctors of the Catholike Church, thought concerning this matter, and what gentlenesse they held fit to be used towards hereticks, whom they believed to be infected with most pestilent and blasphe∣mous errors. After this manner Augustine writes concerning the Manichees: Let them exercise cruelty against you, who know not what a labour it is to find out the Truth, and what a difficulty it is to avoyd Errors. Let them exer∣cise cruelty against you, who are ignorant what a rare and difficult thing it is to overcome carnall phantasies, by the serenity and cleernesse of a pious mind. Let them excrcise cruelty against you, who are ignorant, with how great difficulty the eye of the inward man is healed, that it may behold its own Sun. Let them exercise cruelty against you, who know not how great grones and sighs must be uttered, before we can attain to some small measure of the knowledge of God. Last of all, Let them exercise cruelty against you, who are deceived with no such Error, as they perceive you to be deceived with. But I for my part can∣not exercise any cruelty against you, whom I ought so to bear with now, as I did then with my self, and to deal with you in so great wisdome, at my neighbours dealt with me, when I being out∣ragious and blind, erred in your Sect. But of the Arrians, Salvian Bishop of the Massilian Church speaketh in this wise: Hereticks they
are, but unwittingly: in our esteem they be here∣ticks, not in their own; for they judge themselves to be so much Catholikes, that they brād & defame us our selves with the title of Hereticall impiety; therefore what they are to us, that we are to them. We are sure that they are injurious to the Divine generation, because they say that the Son is infe∣rior to the Father: They think us injurious to the Father, because we believe them to be equall. We are in the truth, but they presume that they are. It is we that honour God; but they hold this to be the honour of God, which they believe. They are undutifull, but they hold this to be the chiefest duty of religion. They are ungodly, but they think it to be true piety. They erre therefore, but with a good mind, not through hatred, but believe that they do honour and love the Lord according to his own will and desire: Although they have not a right faith, yet they account it to be a perfect love of God, to believe as they do. After what manner they shall be punished, in the day of Judgment, for this very error of false opinion, none can know besides the Judge. In the mean while God (as I believe) is patient toward them, because he sees that though they do not believe a∣right, yet they erre with a mind and affection to be of a godly opinion. Seeing then the case is thus, any man seeth that Catholiques, in the cause of Heretiques, ought to follow that counsel of Gamaliel, by which he sometimes disswaded the Rulers of the Jewes from giving their censure, that violent hands
should be laid upon the Apostles: of which matter we read in the Acts: for we read, that he thus bespake his companions in office: Refrain your selves from these men, and let them Act. 5. 38. alone, for if this Counsell, or, this Worke be of men, it will come to nought; but if it be of God, ye cannot destroy it, lest ye be found even fighters against God. That counsell also of the house∣holder is to be followed, who forbad his ser∣vants to pluck up the Tares, lest the Wheat also chance to be pluckt up with them, but to suffer them to grow till harvest. Let not the Wheat take authority unto it self, of plucking up the Tares by violence. For the Tares also, which take themselves to be the Wheat, will resume authority to themselves to pluck up the Wheat; and seeing the Tares grow up more plentifully then the Wheat in the world, which is a field rather fruitfull for Vice, then Vertue and Piety; the Tares will more likely enjoy this power, then the Wheat. But if there be such, who think they have no cause to be afraid, lest they be plucked up by the Tares, because of their multitude, and strength, established by the course of so many Ages, wherewith they may over∣come their adversaries in religion; they ought for that very thing to suspect themselves, and to be afraid lest they may chance to be of the number of the Tares, because they flourish and grow up so plentifully for so many ages together in such a barren field for vertue: and lest they may chance to stray from the narrow & straight
path of salvation, which few find ou. For thus saith our Saviour; Enter ye in at the straight gate, for it is the wide gate and broad way that leadeth to destruction, and many there are which go in thereat, because the gate is straight, and the way narrow that leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it. Yet furthermore, the uncertain courses of humane affairs should be considered; Who doth not see, that things of the highest de∣gree are oftentimes umbled down and brought low, and things of low degree get up by little and little unto the highest; That things of great strength, and confirmed by long continuance of time, are weakned; that weak things acquire strength? Neither is it to be wondred at, when even those things which we now admire for their greatnesse and strength, were formerly small and weak, and rising from small beginnings arrived to this greatnesse. Wherefore none of them who think it requisite to pluck up the Tares, can promise himself a perpetuall triumph over them; but every one ought to be afraid, lest what judgement he gives against them, the same also may be applied against himself. There∣fore there is no greater wisdome, than by the counsel of the housholder, to stay till the last harvest, when both without any danger of Error, and without damage to the Wheat, the Tares, by command of the housholder being se∣parated from the Wheat, shall be cast into the fire; when neither the name of Tares shall be given to the Wheat, nor the Tares take unto
themselves either the name of the Wheat, or deceive the reapers with the shew and resem∣blance thereof. So by this means the Tares will have no occasion by the deeds of the Wheat, to pluck up the Wheat by violence: If they should neverthelesse use violence, then at length the Wheat scattered by violence will spread abroad his seeds the farther, and come forth more abun∣dantly, the Tares being by little and little sup∣pressed, untill the harvest at last bring a totall destruction upon them. But some Catholique will alleadge; Suppose it be so, that Catholiques ought to live peace∣ably with Heretiques, Is there any necessity therefore that assurance be given them for their safety? We have hitherto both lived peaceably with them, and are ready to do so for the time to come; but we will not have any statute or privilege to be published, or extant for their li∣berty. It is neither necessary for them that it should be done, when as they enjoy peace without it, & may enjoy it for the time to come: Neither is it much for our honour. For what? may they not put confidence in our promise, and our vertue and goodnesse? May they not rely upon our friendship, or the obligations and bonds of consanguinity and kindred? This that is alleadged might perhaps be of some moment, if so be Heretiques did not heare both threatnings uttered abroad by no small number, nor no inferior sort of Catholiques, a∣gainst them, nor see Protestations hurtful to their
security, and perceive some mens endeavours tending to their overthrow, or to the limiting and straitning of their liberty. If moreover examples both ancient and modern, in other Countries, and also evident and manifold expe∣rience of this very Age did not force them to fear such like matters. Finally, if they had suf∣fered no injury for Religion sake; if they had not seen in this very Kingdome, their Temples, some burnt with fire, others pulled down, pri∣vate mens houses plundered also, some men slain, wounded, and violently dealt withall. Wherefore Heretiques do not in every point enjoy peace, neither can assuredly promise them∣selves that they shall enjoy it, unlesse Catholiques give them a bond of assurance to confirm it: Verily even for that very cause it may justly be denied that they do enjoy peace, because a pri∣viledge is denied them for it; for that is no peace, to which security is wanting: but there is no security, so long as Catholiques refuse to grant a priviledge and covenant unto Heretiques for their assurance in enjoying it, and whilest many either do, or threaten many things which are altogether against their peace and tranquility. From whence it is to be understood, that Here∣tiques do neither require a superfluous matter, whilest they desire their Liberty may be establi∣shed by a publique statute, and more fully con∣firmed by ordaining punishments against break∣ers of the peace, and a Court of judicature and justice for the equall triall of both parties. Nei∣ther
do they desire a thing which is dishono∣rable to the Catholiques, but that which is ho∣nest, and attended with a singular and exceeding great praise both of equity, moderation and humanity, and also of discretion and wisdome: For what dishonour is it for thee to oblige thy selfe by a publike promise, and a registred law, That thou wilt do that matter, which thou mayest not only honestly do, but also art bound in equity to do? But that this matter of which we now discourse, is of such a nature, hath been already sufficiently demonstrated. But if so be the fear of Heretiques were even superfluous, would it not be a mans duty in way of courtesie and charity to hinder and take away all occasion of that vain, indeed, yet great fear of so many thousands; and truly in such a matter, which neither ought to be troublesome and grievous unto thee, if thou hast a desire to live peaceably with them, neither cost thee any labour or price. Why do not Catholiques grant them that, at their request, which they may freely grant? By this means they will take away all occasion of suspition and distrust, which are two great plagues and obstructions to friendship, and the common-wealth; And will oblige all Here∣tiques both to themselves, and to their country, in which they see that they may live safely and securely, and which they apprehend to be no step-dame, which would expell them, but a mother. By this means they also will ingage them, That if in any country their power waxe
great, to give again to Catholiques assurance that they shall receive no harm, & to take good order for their security; for which they are by no law bound to provide, if Catholiques will not take order for their security: For he which refuseth to give another man assurance of peace, and reserves a power unto himself of oppres∣sing him, when he shall find a fit opportunity to do it, leaves him in like manner the same privi∣ledge against himself; and amongst whom there are no lawes and priviledges of Peace, the pri∣viledges and rights of War remaine common to both parties. But there is no safety in War: We all pray to thee (O GOD) for Pease. FINIS.
