C6911 669.f.11[128] 99869555 162780
The Cryes OF Westminster. Or a Whole Pack of Parliametary Knavery opened, and set to sale. Come Customers, come: Pray see what you lack, Her's Parliament Wares of all sorts in my Pack. WHo buyes any Parliament Priviledges? My new Priviledges. 'Twill teach you many pretty things, And raise you above Gods or Kings. These are the Cryes of Westminster, That are heard both far and neer. But a while I pray stand by, And you shall hear another cry. Who buyes the Parliaments Declaration against the King: New, new, new. 'Twill surely unblinde your eyes, That you may read a hundred lyes Thus goe the Cryes, &c. Buy a new Ordinance to repair Churches: A new Ordinance, new, new, new. The Achans now restore the Wedge, To salve their Saintships Sacriledge. Thus goe the cryes, &c. Buy a new Ordinance of the Commons, against Sage-players. New-lye printed, and new-lye come forth. Saints now alone must Act for Riches, The Plott out-smells old Atkins breches. Thus goe the Cryes, &c. Buy a new Order of Parliament, That none shall make any more Adresses to the King, or receive any Message from him, upon pain of High-treason, Imprisonment, death, or plun∣dering: But when these shall swing in a string, true Subjects will obey their King. Challonner, Mildmay, Martin, Veine, Are fitting of their crowns to reigne. These are the Cryes, &c. Buy a new Plott, found out by Sir Iohn Wray, to blow up the Thames, or the City to betray, 'tis as true as all the rest, before nere known by man nor beast. Twill keep you still in Jealousies and Fears, And sets you all together by the Ears. Thus goe the cryes, &c. Buy the Four Bills sent by the Parliament, from Selden and my Lady Kent; after long De∣bate of this blessed Parliament; Who buyes the Four Bills here. Great CHARLES he will not betray his Trust unto such as they; his Ho∣nors still intire, his Conscience try'd nine times ith' Fire, the Devill give all his foes their hire and raise them toward heaven above a halter nyer. Let all the People say, Amen. For we shall ne're have Peace till then. Thus goe the cryes, &c. Who byes any Bishops Houses, or their goods, Books, houshold-stuffe or hoods, here are good pasture grouds, corn, hay and grasse in all our Rouds, if it be not all good, the De∣vill confound's. Amen. May all the Trees to gibbits turn, Or firing make, to hang or burn, Thus goe the cryes, &c. Have you any old Arrears for the Army, ile give you tickets for em; have you any Subsidies, Poll-money, Loanes or Contributions, have you any Plate, Horse, or Armes, old bodkins or Thimbles or wedding Rings, have ye any; Have you any more Irish Adventures for sale of lands, or a trick for one meal a week. City Loans have you any; or Assessments for the Scotts; have you any Five and Twenty Parts, weekly or monthly Assessments for Essex, Fair∣fax, Manchesters, the Scots or Irish Army, Free-Quarter have you any. Have you any of his Majesties Revenue to sell, Old Sequestrations or Plunder; have you any more Exizes, or For∣tification-money, or Fynes for Delinquents Compositions, &c. or a new Ordinance for 400000l. the moneth. This is our Liberty for to pay The Saints that now King Charles betray, Thus goe the cryes of Westminster, That are heard both far and neer, But a wile I pray stand by, And you will hear another cry
The Second Part, To the same Tune. MY New Articles of Faith, who buyes the Parliaments new Faith? You may see by their WORKS, they are worse then Jews or Turks; let their faith be what it will, their Religion is to Kill. Thus goe the cryes, &c. Who buyes any Parliament jugglings of the newest fashion, Hocus Pocus never shew'd more to cheat the Nation, here is a trick, by Martins ring, shall suddenly depose a King; Tom shews you a pritty trick also, and at New-market and St. Albanes tells us what he means to doe; Trusty Thomas, thus keeps his Promise with his King; grace for∣sake him, devill take him, may all such false Knaves swing. Thus goe the Cryes, &c. Who buyes the Army's Proposalls; custo∣mers pray draw neer, the Devill in his pack had nere such geere; Here's Cromwells ma∣master-peece, 'twill blinde your eyes, & fill your head with Fifteen hundred Lies. Thus goe the cryes, &c. Her's a fine Order, was the like ever seen, shall murder all that Love their King or their Queen, a knot of such Trayterous Regicides were surely never seen, as Chal∣loner, Mildmay, Martyn and Veine, all Parlia∣ment Kings, that over us reigne: They are all glutted with their fellow subjects blood, and yet pretend their good, but pray let it be understood, for all Burleys blood, before Ienkins shall die, a hundred thousand in the City of London will try, to make Martyn, and all such Roagues to fly. These be the cryes of London Towne, Some goe up Street, some goes downe, But a while I pray stand by, And you will hear another cry. A new Ordinance pray come and buy, to establish the Presbytery; what Religion next, put's me beyond my text? if this wont please you, see another, pray Sir try, for I have a hundred more, here in my Pack, for you to buy. These be the cryes, &c. Who buyes a new Order, to new dip the Kings ships, and to their eternall fames, give them all new names; the Parliaments Ships forsooth; the Royall Soveraigne must be the Royall Traytor, the Prince, the Parlia∣ment Pinck, and the whole Fleet the Parlia∣ments Navie; O brave pyrats, whether are ye bound, let crosse windes tosse you, whilst you all are dround. Thus to the world they make it known, Crown, Scepter, ships & ALL's their own. These be the cryes, &c. VVho buyes a new Petition from Tanton, that the Devill brought the last great winde, and the Traytors now vant on. New, new, new, but as false as God is true; and so ye juggling Devells all, Adue. Thus goe the cryes, &c. An Execration to all that bate King CHARLES. May God forsake ye, may the Devill take ye, May the pox eat up your bones, con∣sume your rotten Members; may the palsie shake your hands and heads, and bloody visions hant your beds; all Egypts plagues and ten times more wait on you all at ei∣ther doore; May all your wives turn arrant jades, and you live upon their trades; may the gowt be in your toes, and no end be to to your woes, may no Surgeon hear your mones; and all your joys be sighs & groans, may the running of the Reines, or the Quinsie ceaze your braines; May the tooth∣ach, and the feaver, to plague you still doe their endeavor; May the Strangullion be your best friend, and nere forsake you till your end; May you be the peoples scorne, and curse the houre that you were borne; May Bedlam or Bridewell be all the house you have to dwell; May your childrens chil∣dren begge from door to door, and all their kindred, may they still be poor; May a guil∣ty Conscience still affright ye, and no earth∣ly joyes delight ye; May you have aches in your rotten bones, and gravell in your kid∣neys and your stones; May your Daughters all turne Whores, and their Fathers keep the doores, May they never sleep in quiet, and fear poyson in their diet; May they never sorrow lack, and so the pedler shute his pack. Onely when they dye (cause they were never true) when that their souls de∣depart, Devill claime thy due. Printed in a Hollow-tree, for the good of the State.
