E244 E127_48 99871487 156230
The Effect of all LETTERS Read in the House of PARLIAMENT. From the 14. to the 23. of November from all places of the Kingdome. VIZ. Surrey. Shropshire Berkshire Yorke Sussex. Holland Cornwall. Middlesex Leicester Ireland Sea Worcester Wales. Novemb. 23. London, Printed for JOHN CAVE. 1642.
The effect of all Letters read in the House from the 14. of November to the 22. 1. Surrey. ON Munday the 14. of November there was a Letter read from King∣stone, setting forth that his Majesty was carryed over to Kingston by one Anthony Browne a Courtier, by whose meanes his Majesties Army plundered all the Town as well Malignants as others, and that the Church was made a Stable or Oxe-stall, and a place of filth, where all the Kings Army emptied their filthy panches, as also the filth of 500. Irish and Welch wo∣men running after the Army, which are more cruell to those which lye on their mercy then any forraigne Enemy what∣soever.
Shropshire. A Letter was read from Shrewesbury, intimating that the Kings Mint and Printing Presse, are still at Shrewesbury. The High Sheriffe of that County and the Maior of Shrewesbury have Commissi∣on from the King to open all Letters be∣fore they be either caried out or brought into that County. Berkshire. A Letter from Colonell Venne, that he hath taken 4. or 5. of the Kings Carriages as they passed by Windsore, full of clothes and atmes. Yorke. A Letter from Captaine Hotham, Sir Hugh Cholmley, and Sir J. Gill is joyned with the Lord Fairefax in the besieging of Yorke, further declaring, that Captain Hotham escaped pistolling very narrowly at Leeds, by a Drummer, and by Gods great providence his Pistoll would not not suddenly go off. The Lord and Sir William Savill proffereth to give 10000
pound to be admitted into the Parlia∣ment house, but will not be accepted of, for that they have been the onely Ring∣leaders of this disturbance in that County of Yorke. Sussex. A Letter from Captaine Chitworth at Chichester, that the Bishop of the Citie invited him to dinner, where in discourse the Bishop told him that his Majesty had a Proclamation to proclaime a Traytor for the seeking to oppose his Commission of Array, yet neverthelesse if he will leave off, and assist his Maiesty, hee will give him a free pardon and employ him in his service: The Captaine replyed, that what he had done, is not the half part of what he intends to doe, for he hoped to have some Eorces in the City under his command, and then he will sift all those that are Malignants against the Parlia∣ment, and bisarme them all, not leaving them a weapon to hurt a dog withal.
Holland. There was a Letter from the States of Holland, intimating that the French King hath a great Army neer Colen, wher∣of his Generall hath discharged 10000. of them, hoping to have them transpor∣ted for England, but the States have ut∣terly refused, that they should either passe through their Country, or take any ship∣ping there for England. Cornwall. A Letter from Cornwall, setting forth the number of the Cavaleers there, which is neere upon 10000. who intendeth forthwith to advance their forces toward His Majesty at Salisbury. Middlesex. A Letter from the Parson of Chersey, setting forth what company of Horse & Foot are come there, being upon 1000. and no great spoil as yet they have done, saving to their poultrey and such like. Leicester. Another from the Maior of Leicester, wherin his Maiesty hath commanded him
to pay the monis that have bin raised in that Towne upon the Bill of Subsedies to Mr. Hastings, and if he shall refuse the payment thereof, that then to be appre∣hended, and brough to his Majesty, and be punished for his contempt. Ireland. A Letter from the Councell at Dublin wherin is set downe that Oneal is dan∣gerously wounded at the last Fight at Feelers, and that the Souldiers dyeth in abundance, as though some infection or other sicknesse were amongst them. Sea. A Letter from the Vice-admiral Batten wherein he declareth, that he hath taken a Ship and a Bak full of horse comming out of Flanders, and have brought them to Portsmouth, where they now remaine till order from the Parliament. Worcester. A letter from Worcester declaring that Colonell Sands is dead, as also a
plot which was ltely discovered by Mr. Stanhop, concerning the blowing vp of the Goale and the prisoners that have bin taken by the Parliaments forces to be on such a time in the garden and assoone as the Goale is opened to make their escapes and this hath bin practised by some of the Cheife of the inhabitants there. Wales. There was this day a letter which was intercepted at Basingstoke, entitled To the high and Mighty Prince Charles K of England &c. dated from Anglesey the 16 of November from Marquis of Hartford, wherein he writeth that he did wait on his Majesty with all conveniency, at Sa∣lisbury within 10. dayes with his Horse and foot, which is neere 8000. Welch Souldiers. FINIS.
