E2788 R212871 99899988 135501
The AGREEMENT of the House of Lords, during this Session, with the Concurrence of the House of Commons, to this present Eleventh of February, in the Great Affair of these Nations. WHereas the Late King James the Second, by the Assistance of divers Evil Counsellors, Judges and Ministers, imployed by him, did en∣deavour to Subvert and Extirpate the Protestant Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, By Assuming and Exercising a Power of Dispensing and Suspending of Laws, and the Execution of Laws, without Consent of Parliament. By Committing and Prosecuting divers worthy Prelates, for Humbly Petitioning to be Excus'd from Concurring to the said Assum'd Power. By Issuing a Commission under the Great Seal, for Erecting a Court called, a Court of Commissioners for Ecclesiastical Causes. By Levying Mony for, and to the Use of the Crown, by Pretence of Prerogative, for other time, and in other manner than the same was Granted by Parliament. By Raising and Keeping a Standing Army within this Kingdom, in time of Peace, without Consent of Parliament. By Causing several Good Subjects, being Protestants, to be Disarm'd. By Violating the Freedom of Election of Members to serve in Parliament. By Causing Informations to be brought, and prosecuted in the Court of Kings-Bench, for Matters and Causes Cognizable only in Parliament, and by divers other Arbitrary and Illegal Courses. And whereas of late Years Partial, Corrupt, and Unqualified Persons have been Re∣turn'd, and Served on Juries in Tryals, particularly divers Jurors in Tryals for High Treasons, which were not Freeholders. And Excessive Bail hath been Required of Persons Committed in Criminal Causes, to Exclude the Benefit of the Laws made for the Liberty of the Subjects. And Excessive Fines have been Imposed. And Illegal and Cruel Punishments Inflicted. And several Grants and Promises made of Fines and Forfeitures, before any Con∣viction or Punishment against the Persons upon whom the same were to be Levyed. All which were utterly and directly contrary to the known Laws and Statutes, and Freedom of this Realm. And whereas the said Late King James the Second, having Abdicated the Govern∣ment, and the Throne being thereby Vacant. His Highness the Prince of Orange (whom it hath pleased Almighty God to make the Glorious Instrument of Delivering this Kingdom from Popery and Arbitrary Power) did, by the Advice of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and divers Prin∣ciple Persons of the Commons, Cause Letters to be Written to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, being Protestants: And other Letters to the several Counties, Uni∣versities, Cities, Boroughs, and Cinque Ports, for the Choosing of such Persons to Represent them as were of Right to be sent to Parliament, to Meet and Sit at West∣minster, upon the Two and Twentieth Day of January, in this Year, 1688. in order to such an Establishment, as that their Religion, Laws, and Liberties might not again be in Danger to be Subverted. Upon which Letters, Elections having been accordingly made: And thereupon the said and the Commons so Elected, being now Assembled in a Full and Free Representative of this Nation, taking into their Serious Consideration the best means for attaining the Ends aforesaid; Do in the first place, as their Ancestors in like case have usually done, for the Vindicating and Assisting their Antient Rights and Liberties, Unanimously Declare, That the Pretended Power of Dispensing or Suspending of Laws, or the Execution of Laws by Regal Authority, without Consent of Parliament, is Illegal. That the Commission for Electing the late Court of Commissioners for Ecclesiastical
Causes, and all other Commissions and Courts of like Nature, are Illegal and Pernitious. That Levying of Mony for or to the Use of the Crown by Pretence of Prerogative, without Grant of Parliament, or for longer time, or in other manner than the same is, or shall be Granted, is Illegal. That it is the Right of the Subjects to Petition the King, and all Commitments and Prosecutions for such Petitioning, are Illegal. That the Raising or Keeping of a Standing Army within the Kingdom, in time of Peace, unless it be by Consent of Parliament, is against Law. That the Subjects, which are Protestants, may Provide and Keep Arms for their Common Defence. That Election of Members of Parliament ought to be Free. That the Freedom of Speech and Debates, or Proceedings in Parliament, ought not to be Questioned or Permitted in any Court, or place, out of Parliament. The Excessive Bail ought not to be Required, nor Excessive Fines Imposed, nor Cruel or Unusual Punishments Inflicted. That Jurors ought to be duly Impannelled and Returned; and Jurors, which pass upon Men in Tryal for High Treason, ought to be Freeholders. That all Grants and Promises of Fines and Forfeitures of particular Persons, before Conviction, are Illegal and Void. And for Redress of all Grievances, and for the Amending, Strengthning, and Pre∣serving of the Laws, Parliaments ought to be held frequently, and suffer'd to Sit. And they claim Demand, and insist upon all and singular the Premises, as they are Undoubted Rights and Liberties: And that no Declaration, Judgments, Doings, or Proceedings, to the Prejudice of the People, in any of the said Premises, or in any∣wise to be drawn hereafter into Consequence of Example. To which Demand, or their Rights, they are particularly Invited by the Decla∣ration of his Highness the Prince of Orange, as being the only Means for obtaining a full Redress and Remedy therein. Having therefore an intire Conference, that his Highness the Prince of Orange, will Perfect the Deliverance so far advanced by him; and will still Preserve them upon the Violation of their Rights, which they have here Asserted, and from all other At∣tempts upon their Religion, Laws and Liberties. The said  and Commons Assembled at Westminster, Do Resolve, That the Prince and Princess of Orange, and be Declar'd King and Queen of Eng∣land, France and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging, to hold the Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdoms and Dominions to them during their Lives, and the Life of the Survivor of them: And that the Administration of the Government be only in, and Executed by the said Prince of Orange, in the Names of the said Prince and Princess during their Joynt Lives: And after their Deceases, the said Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdoms and Dominions, to be to the Heirs of the Body of the said Princess: And for Default of such Issue, to the Princess Anne of Denmark, and the Heirs of her Body: And for Default of such Issue, to the Heirs of the Body of the said Prince of Orange. And they do pray the said Prince and Princess of Orange, to accept the same accordingly. And that the Oaths hereafter mentioned be taken by all Persons of whom the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy might be required by Law, instead of them: And that the said Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy may be Abrogated. I A. B. do sincerely Promise and Swear, That I will be Faithful, and bear True Allegiance to Their Majesties King William, and Queen Mary. So help me God. I A. B. do Swear, That I do, from my Heart, Abhor and Detest, as Impious and Heretical, this Damnable Doctrin and Position, That Princes Excommunicated or Depriv'd by the Pope, or any Authority of the See of Rome, may be Depos'd or Murder'd by the Subjects, or any other whatsoever: And I do Declare, that no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate, hath, or ought to have, any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Preheminence, or Authority Ecclesia∣stical or Spiritual, within this Realm. So help me God. FINIS.
