E325AB R229809 99899372 153189
THE SCHOOL OF COMPLEMENTS
PEARLS OF ELOQUENCE, OR, THE SCHOOL OF COMPLEMENTS: WHEREIN Ladies, Gentlewomen, and Schollars, may accommodate their Courtly Practice with Gentile Cere∣monies, Complemental, amorous, and high expressions of speak∣ing, or writing of Letters. By W. Elder, Gent. Eloquentiae symphonia mulcet, & favorem obtinet. Praeclara accurate agenda. London, Printed for T. Lock, and are to be sold by Hen∣ry Eversden, at the Grey-Hound in St. Pauls Church-yard, MDCLVI.
PEARLS OF ELOQUENCE: OR, THE SCHOOL OF COMPLEMENTS: WHEREIN Ladies, Gentlewomen, and chollars, may accommodate their Courtly practise with Gentile Cere∣monies, Complemental, amo∣rous, and high expressions of speaking or wri∣ting of Letters. BY VV. Elder, Gent. Eloquentiae symphonia mulcet, & favorem obtinet. Praeclara accurate agenda. ondon; Printed for T. L. and are to be sold at any Booksellers shop. MDCLV.
The Author to the Ladies and Gentlewomen OF England. IF Custome did not force a Complement of Dedication; yet this Book would desire to insinuate into the affection of Ladies, and Gentlewomen; since it can arrive at no greater perfection of happiness than your favour, which is most earnestly desired. And in requitall of this your favour, it shall be alwaies rea∣dy to furnish you with the best expressions of choice and omplementall language; for though by nature and custome ou ca deliver your mindes in a smooth and gracefull man∣er; yet from hence, without study, or premeditation, you may command necessary ceremonies. Let therefore this one nstance, in stead of more which might be inserted, perswade our intelligible generous dispositions, to receive this Book ow exactly perfected, as your devoted Servant, and to ho∣our it with your favour, which I shall esteem as an exl∣ation to the supremest sublunary felicite, and the ightes errestiall happiness.
The EPISTLE To the READER. Reader, HAving penn'd this small Treatise; called, The School of Complements; it cannot seem st ange to thee, for to view this small Epistle before such a labyrinth of new matter, wherein at the first sight (without such a Clue of thred to direct thee by) I might very wel suppose that thou shouldest not only be amazd but transported, (if not lost with wonder) so unexpect dly in these angry times to meet with such Novellaes from the school or the Ceurt, but recollect thy mind, and then smile upon my charity, which hath endeavoured the more to enlighten thy Genius, and shew my selfe to thee in consideation of our late losses, which these sullen dislaureating t ms have occa∣sioned, by bereaving us of so many excellent Poets, as namely our Sands, Davener, Quarles, &c. And lest the Garland of the Muses should altogether wither, I could not but presen thee again with this spig, or rather more aptly composed I∣liad of choicest Recreations to imploy thy wit and behaviou entreating thee with wshed hands, and without a prejudi∣cate opinion to receive it; so farwel.
Pearls of ELOQUENCE, OR, The School of Comple∣ments. SIR, Your conceptions are so strong that hey climb over my thoughts. Sir, You honor me so far that I ima∣gine my self to be some other than I am or have been, which can be no∣thing else but your obliged servant. Sir, I do repute my selfe happy to be valued by a per∣son who is able to give a true of imate of me. Sir, your infallible judgment doth amaze vulge wits, since in you alone are found all those felicities and perfections that can be sought or upon earth▪ Sir, Your deserts draw admiration from your very enemies. Madam, the force of your beauty hath over-powr'd the weakness of my fancie, since thee exquesite perfecti∣ons of your vertues are charactered in my heart. Sir, If you proceed to be so profuse of your treasre  Mines of Gold will not maintain your prodigall e∣pences.
Good sir, give me leave to fear least some sinister storms of Fortune, stiflle the early bloomings of my fe∣licities. Sir, The toyish conceits of your youth, are unfit for the testy cogitations of my age. Sir, There is a confused Chaos of contrary conceits that whirls in my brains; and I am lost in such an end∣less Labyrinth, that neither choice, nor chance can draw me out or. Give me leave, sir, to gain that from your experi∣ence, that otherwise, all the treasures of the earth can not purchase. Sir, Should you continue to be thus excessive in your actions, the whole world would take notice of you as the mirrour of an immoderate life. Be not so inconstant in your affections, lest in the conclusion you prove like the Marigold, to open at the sunshine of prosperity, and to shut at the least appea∣rance of the clouds of adversity. Leave me sir, whilest I learn to despise such Gna∣thoes, and beat of such flattering Curs with the whip of my defiance. Theseus, fair one, did never more triumph at his de∣liverance from the perillous Labyrinth, then I from the pernitious bondage of such cruel beauty. Fortune and Fate, place thee in the places of their earthly felicities. So rarely accumplisht, that it was hard to know, whether vertue or beauty held supremacy in so rare a structure. Sir, Being incensed by your singular commendati∣ons, I am perswaded to her only to commit the chie∣fest treasures of my life and fortunes. Pardon my rudeness, fair creature, since neither fate nor fortune delighteth, nor careth for them that are dastards.
Sir, I wil rather put my reputation to the adventure then refuse to act any thing you shall command me. Sir, I have ever reflected on you, as an extraordina∣ry person, and have ever passionately remain'd yours. Sir, I am so taken with you, that I am even sick at the relation of your indisposition. Sir, I shall not be backward in the expression of your merits, since they do so exact an acknowledgment of all. Sir, You shall never be able to accuse this Tenent as erroneous, since I have never falsified my selfe to you; but have ever thought my selfe perfectly happy to be reputed yours. Be careful, fair one, lest (being led Captive by secu∣rity) your mind float in the surging Seas of idle con∣ceits, whilest the Gles of voluptuous pleasures, or the stifling storms of unbridled fancy, with raging blasts mae a shipwrack of your beauty. Sir, I wil endeavour hereafter to encounter your graces and courtesies with an unwearied constancie in the wayes of vertue. Sir, I will endeavour to contervail much pain  princely liberty. Sir, The Trumpet of your royall fame hath moved us (who are but subjects of your generous liberality) with all humility to entertain such noble and heroick favour cast upon us poor creatures, most unorty of the least of such benefits. Madam, There i no object can allure my wavering eys as Your Venus like beauty. Madam, The force of your beauty hath overpowred the weakness of my fancie, since the exquisite perfecti∣ons of your vertues are charactered in my breast. Madam, Were you as wise as Mnerva, or as gorge¦ous as Iuno; yet the accounts of your beauty being cast
up, the gains of his affection might be put in the eye of your lover. Coy one, what happiness insued the chastity of Pene∣lope, nay rather what miseries pursued not the vertues of a Lucretia? How wretched are they then that deale with Venus or Diana, that can so easily transform men into beasts? Blame me nol, fair one, though my fixed fancies once abused turn into a fury. By those smiles of your beauty, your creature that before was plunged into a perplexity, is now placed in the height of earthly felicities. Mistris, Pardon my rudeness for troubling thus rash∣ly your musing meditations. Certainly, Madam, if the gods (as Poets say) made beauty, they skipt beyond their skill, since they fra¦med it of greater force than they themselves were able to resist. Fair one, let the showers of your mercy mitigate the fires of my fancie. Cruel one, if love be only remedied by love, if fan∣cy by mutuall affection, give me leave at least to ap∣peal to your grace and favour, and at the bar of your beauty, suffer your servant to lift up his hands in an expectation of mercy, though his life, by your rigour, be sentenced to death. Fairest, It is impossible to perswade me to break the league I made with my fancies. Sir, I am a mortall foe to affection, and now to vow my service to Venus, is impossible, since I have already addicted my selfe to Diana. Sir, Whosoever readeth the records of the faithless protestations of men, their perjured Promises, and feigned loves, cannot but view a poor Ariadne abused, a Media mockt, and a Dido deceived. Fir one, Your vertue and beauty by a stronger
power than that of fate or fortune is deeply inshrine in my heart. Be pleased at last (fait beauty) to accept me for your slave and servant, and to admit me into your favour, and that I may freely injoy the sight of your sweete face, and feed my fancie in the contemplation of your Perfections. Fairest, If my deed desire merit no more from you then I have no other choice but to desperately, or live miserably. Madam, There is a civil assault within me, by which I feel a certain restraint of my own liberty and affe∣ctions. It is impossible, fairest of women, for any one to view your features, and not be fettered with the power of your vertuous qualities. Mistris, I feel such an alienation of my senses, such a metamorphosis of my minde, that it is impossible for me to become any other than a servile slave to fancy. How can I fear to enter into a parley with Cupid? fairest Creature, since there is such hopes left of victo∣ry by the happy presage of your auspitious smiles at the beginning of our loves conflict. Si, If I may continue to share in your favours there shall not any under the Canopy of Heaven be more proud of their fortunes than my selfe, who really am your affectionate servant. Sir, It is for the good of the world that you enjoy your igorous health, since you are ordained for the service of Kings, and conduct of people. Sir, I will reserve to speak of vertue; till your great works come to light. Sir, That which others call vertue in the naturall habitude of your worthy person. Suppose not I use the Court language, when I as∣sure you I am more then any man living, sir, your mos humble servant.
Sir, When I forgot to to confess my selfe yours, you may justly suppose I suffer a perpetuall silence, sinc whil'st I have tongue, I protest my selfe to be your af¦ectionate srvant. Sir, I wil make use of all occasions, to testifie how passionately I am yours. Sir, There is no other thing remaining for me, but only the glory of humiltie and obedience. I should shew my selfe insnsible of rarities, were I not amazed with the curioity of your beauty. Sir, Your Herocall qualities shine forth in you, as bright as day. Madam, They that do undervalue the comeliness of your person, dare rob Nature, and bereave Lillies of their beautie, as the christall of his clearness. Sir, The vertues of our fore-fathers are to be estee∣med as vices in comparison of yours. Extremities are in other things reproveable, in this laudable, since they force me to confess my selfe yours. Sir, you are never so excellent a Poet as when you speak of me, since you have art to invent new fables. Sir, Those fine words and quaint discourses, with which your Ladies are delighted, issue from their mouthes, as a pure and innocent breath perfum'd with kisses. Sir, You go through all Employments with as good fortune, as noble resolutions; neither can there be any thing above your spirit: since all things stoop to do you honour. Who can distil sleep into the eyes of Lovers, whose ears break forth with the morning lght? Love, art thou but a vain name, and no essential thing, that hast thus left thy professed servant, when he
hath most need of thy reviving presence; what is Mu∣sick to me, but a doleful voice, accompanied with the various discord of my sighes? O Love! Wilt thou now at last offer me Physick, which art my only poyson? wilt thou do me service which long since hast brought me into eternall slave∣rie? How long shall my languishing sickness wait upon the triumphs of my passions? At last, O fair one, cast the eyes of thy resplen∣dent presence on thy abject creature, that by the brightness of those raies, his baseness may be turned into a most high, and (through any perfections) a most happy preferment; for being thus disconsolate, by the frowns of thy rigour, how soon maist thou raze down that Temple, which at first was built by the refulgent smiles of thy beauty? From whence can these necessities proceed, that love hath laid upon me, most incomparable Lady? are they by your commandment? or is it by a power from your excellencie, that Cupid hath such a com∣mand over mortall? of a certain it is from you, whose fair aspect, accompanied with so imperious a Majesty, vanquished me by him, so far to resign the happiness of my former liberty, as that I must now confess my self to be your slave, if you think me unworthy of the name of your prisoner. Cruel one, how long can I make an ostentation of my felicity, when the conclusion, even the last Scene of my Tragedy, with horror presents it self to thin eyes? Can death and dissimulation meete at th instant when I leave the world, and my dying prote¦stations with thee: that for thee alone I forsook th earth, to be more kindly used there, where I shal certainli be eased of these sorrows? if there be: Leander, a Piramus, or a society of abused Lovers.
If thou art fair, is it to present thee too cruell? If thou canst command affections, wilt thou therefore captivate them? To be beautiful and yet terrible, are things incompetible, things that imply contradicti∣on; yet even against the Laws of Nature thou destroy∣est Nature, and where thou maist raise the structures to thy perpetual honors, thou ruin'st them. Most certain t is, fair Creature, thy love may make me sacrifice my life at thy Feete, and I may punish that body which hath so unjustly wounded my once free and serene mind: But alas, wherein canst thou glory? Not in thy beauty, for that will vaile it selfe at so black an act: Not in my ruines, for they will pur∣sue thee with some direfull revenge. Blush then thou faire one, since to be coy is to be cruell; to be cruell is to alter the property of what thou art, beautifull. Fairest, be no longer so great an enemy to my de∣sires, as to imprison them in silence. I cannot express the least disobedience to your commands, but rather hope my past displeasures may deserve pity, if not my future services a reward. Ponder my merits in the balance of your mercy, that the unworthiness of my deserts, by the fair suf∣ferance of your goodness, may procure your gracious repects in my behalf. It is a sin to suspect such vertue which glories to arm t self against all deceits. Fair one, you have a wit which delights not to judg it self, and a beauty that glories to condemn others; reconcile your beauty to your wit, that the use of the one may restrain the abuse of the other, whilest we your servants live to admire your perfections, and you your self survive to perfect your vertues. Faire one, what unremovable suitor eclipses your affection from shining on your devoted, and most constant servant.
Perfections of my desires, with one determinate an∣swer, bless me with happiness, or silence my long con∣tinued suit. That my desires to enjoy you are more than to live, proceeds from the effects of my affection, the efficient cause being your excessive beauty. Madam, The eyes of a ravished Lover, cannot but have vertues aid so ready in himself, as alwaies to be∣waile the loss of a vertuous constancie in other, since such a loss, by his own affections, is ever placed in the very face of his memory. By the memory of our fore-past affections, by the oathes of our yet continued love; by whatsoever is vertuous, credit me. Can you (Sir) weare a Mars's heart in a Cupids body since the eyes of all spectators, judge you fiter for the pleasures of the Court, than the Tents of War? In him (it seems) Nature was not mistaken, since whatsoever was in mankind, was in him to the utter∣most. Sir, It is a degree above humanity, and therefore requires the admiration of your friends, that your wit should so far out-go your age. It is not strange (O thou cruellest of women) tht those eyes of thine should strike him with terrour, who stands unmoved with the sight of the most horrible countenance of death? Sir, I am most infinitely bound to you, for this so rare and noble a courtesie. It is you (and none but you) which I am bound to love: and therefore, though I am presented with  likeness of your beauty, yet likeness of another cannot make the same essence of your person, much less ca dissolve your commandments of my seevice. The very Image of your countenance, and outward expressions of your behaviour, are sutable to the ver∣tuous
resolutions of your minde. Fairest, Grant me this happiness, to have my poor affections raised to the honour of waiting upon your commands. Violence of love leads me into this discourse, in which I am not so unfortunate, as ful of desires to be more happy. Armies of objections rise up against my accepted opinion. Sir, Though I were to pass through all the splen∣dors of the World, and frame them all to blazon forth your worth, my pen could never teach you. Sir, Nature in you hath laid deep foundations, in respect of your qualities, both of minde and body, in both which she hath made no promise of any medio∣crity, by the distribution of which rare perfections she hath rendred you lovely to the world, and fit f r the service of the greatest monarchs. Sir, Your imagination (which you speak in such high terms) cannot but move me to believe great im∣probilities. Sir, How happy should I think my self, were the Characters of your vertues imprinted in my Brest, by a more continued acquaintance? Sir, No imaginary jealousies shall deliver me from mine inclination to that goodness, to which I have alwaies had an extraordinary propension, by your royall example. Sir, I have an interest in your prosperity, so far that I wil complain of fortune, so you have an occa∣sion to commend her. Worthy Sir, You know your self too wel, to suspect me of flattery. Vertue and Eloquence are bestowed upon you, to make you be amongst men as immortall. Sir, I could not have the ambition to suppose that
there could be any room left for you to entertain a woman of so many imperfections as my self. The contemplation of your vertues amazeth m. Sir, I finde in you whatsoever may give a reputati∣on to the Courts of Princes. Sir, I am reserved for your sake, that nothing might be wanting to your glorie. Sir, You are the man, whom the necessities of the State require. Opportunities would wax old, should I neglect this present to serve you. All spirits would prove favourable unto you, since you have convinced them by your merits. Your generous disposition hath permitted me a lon∣ger audience than your affairs could wel permit. Worthie Sir, reflect upon your creature with the bright beams of your generous disposition. I cannot allot more moderate limits to my ambi∣tion, or wish my selfe a greater happiness than to do your service. Your Heroickacts succeeding Historians shal crown with Lawrels. Sir, for your sake I wil undergo the infelicities of cruel fortune. Sir, there is no happiness on earth, but is included in your self, or in what concerns you. Sir, your goodness doth beeave me of a voice to express your vertues. You cannot blame me though I hate ingratitude since even beasts are capable of acknowledgement. Sir, If you withdraw from me your presence, you overthrow all the honor you have hitherto acquired for me. Sir, I shall fall sick for want of a capacity to digest your favours. Sir, whatsoever you undertake, permit nothng to
your spirit which may wound your reputation. Sir, Of all men I dare free you from this crime of violating the chastity of Language. Sir, I owe too much honor to the memory of our fore-past acquaintance, to displease you. Sir, for your sake, at the same time, I both enjoy pleasure, and endure pain. Sir, I must beg of you hereafter, to have a greater care of my modesty, since you enforce, either to lose it, or not believe you. Sir, The whole Court is sensible of suffering your name to fall to the ground. Sir, I am so far from hiding my own defects, that I acknowledge there is none so imperfect as my selfe, neither can any man arrive to perfection, except hee be adorned with those abilities whereof I am utterly ignorant. Sir, I have neither power nor ability left me, but on∣ly to express I am yours. Sir, You have anticipated me of all Rhetorick, ei∣ther of being complementall, or returning you com∣mendations for your worthy favours. Sir, instead of requitall of those vows you offer me, I am put to a stand what to answer. Mistris, I desire to pass my life in the pleasing dreams of your perfections. Your Courtly voice is like an Oracle, either to ap∣prove or condemn me. Sir, I am none of those who slight the benefits are showred upon them. Sir, I cannot light upon that accent, wherewith I might authorize my own follies. All my thoughts are your reall inspirations. I have no servile dependencie, but upon your con∣ceptions, I move by your directions. In matters of Eloquence you seek out singularities, hitherto unknown.
From the first minute of my acquaintance, I made hast, as I shall ever, to acknowledge my self your most humble servant. Sir, I entertain these passions, to the end that you may appease them. Madam, If you still persevere to dote thus on your beauty, the time wil come when your face will scare you more than a Judge doth a felon. Sir, I have quitted all complacency, and there is no means shall make me silent. Fairest, There is no part of the World so remote, whither my curiosity in your search shall not carry me. Lady, The morall of my affection is to instruct you to make use of your youth, and to gather Nose-gayes before the Roses wither: For be confident, when you have no further attractions than an eloquent tongue, no man wil seek for them in the furrows of your face; and you shall only be left to bewaile the ruines of your beauty. Sir, suffer your self to be convinced by reason, since you cannot resist the same, but to your disadvantage. Sir, you must excuse me, since I know not in what manner to suffer so wounding a displeasure. Sir, All the water in the sea can never purifie me from this offence. Lady, You have no more beauty than wil serve to excuse you from being extreamly ugly. Sir, If you grant me this favour, you shall elevate me to a more Soveraigne Fortune than the state of Kings. Sir, It were as great a crime to be ignorant of the di∣versions that attend you, as not to be acquainted with the great affluence of noble company, daily repairing to visit you. Mistris, In my most solitary walkes it shall be my
ambition to presume only to revolve you in my most secret cogitations. Sir, In you alone I must commend the commence∣ments of all vertue. In all shapes, and under the most dreadful aspects that can appear, I am yours. To return you complements for such excellent fa∣vours, were to undervalue their worth, since my lan∣guage is too poor, and unable to lend me wherewith to pay you. I fear I shal be indebted to you all my life, for the favours I have received of you. It is the height of my desires to be passionately, as I am, your most faithful servant. My passions cannot so far transport me, but that I shall remain as I have ever been, yours. Sir, I intend not to commence any real war against you, for I acknowledge my colour to be artificial, which I am ready to lay down at your pleasure. Fair Creature; Painters and stage-players are not guilty of those Murthers which the dart of your eyes do most cruelly commit. I am not so curious as to condemn the whole mul¦titude, which have lost themselves in the admiration of your vertues. I wil dilate my self no further in my Expressions, lest I dishonour your goodness with my undervaluing praises. Sir, Mine eloquence wil come too late, since there is no precept in all humane wisdome, which hath not presented it self to your view. Sir, The consolation I have next to the assurance I have of my innocencie, is the liberty I enjoy to pro∣fess my self yours. The principall object of my intentions, hath ever been the glory of your name.
Sir, I do profess my self yours, with all those pro∣testations, which are able to make truth appear in vio∣lable. Sir, I prostrate all my presumption at your feet, and shall dispaire of being happy, if not reputed yours. Sir, I can no longer conceale my thoughts, since you have an interest both in me and them. I never gave you visit, which culed me not of some passion. How often with your Golden Eloquence, have you taken me out of my self? You alone can conduct me to the highest pitch of accidentall perfection. The beams of your eminent vertues have discove∣red to me mine own perfections. In stead of all those high expressions you have be∣stowed upon me, I must onlie answer you, That I am your humble servant. Sir, There can be no acknowledgement that I can make, can be answerable to the obligations I owe to your honour. Sir, You mistake my disposition, if you suppose I affect praises with the like intemperance, as I do per∣fumes. Sir, Should I forfeite such occasions, my friend∣ship would never appeare but remain as a Re∣cluse. Sir, The world would end, and Nature prove im∣perfect, if there were no such men to maintain her honors. Continue to express your self what you are, that your vertue may be its own recorder. Fairest, My thoughts are not so often here, as where you are. Time which prescribes limits to all things, pre∣serve
your beauty to the worlds end. The Physicians have not so far exhausted me, but that there are some drops of blood left, to bestow in part of your honors service. Madam, Put on those rayes of your beauty, that it may bud again with the next Roses. I confess I was more astonished, then to finde such an equipage of sorrow about you. Sir, You are adorned with all excellent qualities that Art and Nature can bestow, for the commanding of men. Sir, There is not one part of your body, whereof a∣nother is not master. Sir, It is not in my power to dispose of one single hair since I am all yours. Madam, you draw the eyes of all to admire you, since you are as a faire prospect, adorned with all pleasures to allure the beholders. You are the Cabinet, in which nature hath lock't all her miracles. Though I receive injuries from you, it shal be my hu∣mility not to take notice of them. Sir, I would visit those parts of the world which ava∣rice it self hath not yet found out, rather than lose your society. Sir, It is impossible for me to conceale my sensibi∣lities. Sir, What violence soever I offer to my anger, I can no longer contain it. Sir, You do so heap your favours on me, that you wil not so much as suffer me to seem miserable. Sir, Your innocent actions carry their warrant with them. Sir, You do not so much express your wit, as your Tyranny, in inflicting such torments on me. Sir, be not confident, lest he whom you have so of∣ten
injured, do at last grow weary of his sufferings. You are the man with whom alone I desire to pass the most pleasant hours of my life. Sir, If you pretend excuses for so poore a trifle, know I am no longer your affectionate servant Sir, I, shall hold my eloquence as pernicious as the perfections of a Courtezan, should it prove any cause of your quarrels. You usurp a more absolute authority over wits than is lawful or reasonable. You smell too much of your Musk, and Amber, to express your self serious in the weight of affairs. Sir, My conceptions are popular, and to be intel∣ligible among women. Your conceits are too far fetched, and they trans∣cend the subject on which you bestow them. Fairest, let me ravish a kiss from your hand. Sir, My affections spring not from the diseases and distempers of my soul, since my inclinations to serve you, have their originall from immortall reason. Mistris, You have a power to infuse love and fideli∣ty into the hearts of Barbarians. You cannot bestow favours amiss on him who harh searcht the secrets of nature, and the depth of Philosophy, that he might not appear to be grate∣ful. Sir, you must give me leave to admire your judge∣ment, which appears to be far more excellent than your Fortunes. Sir, Let me not seem to incurre a crime, since I am forced to extol your generous liberality. Sir, You vary your shape, and change your per∣fumes, according to the diversity of the seasons. Let it please you out of your nobleness, to  me to be your graces most obedient and faithfull e¦vant.
Sir, You have all those excellent qualities that are necessarie in a Prince. Sir, I measure the necessities and fatalities of this world by your contentments or discomforts. Sir, In this exigence of my fortune, I am forc'd to admire your vertues, since you stil set so high a value on your creature, who is lost to all men but to your self. Sir, Your goodness is as unlimitable, as the desire I have to serve you. Sir, in you are comprehended all the riches that Nature bestows on her most glorious creatures. Sir, I speak this seriously with my best sence; you may reduce me to any form. All, who have either eies or spirits, must place them on so deserving an object. Fairest, Cast one glance of pittie on me, lest you deprive me of all conceits of mercy, with the terrible aspect of your eyes, which are to me the Ambassa∣dors of life and death. Sir, You are the embleme of terrour, and your furi∣ous looks are able to consume a woman. Lift not me so high with your favours, lest you do but fit me for a precipice, and I behold my descent with a greater terrour. Fairest, Let not your heavenly beautie, seated in its royal Majesty, draw forth the sword of disdain, to the ruine of your creature. Fairest Creature, Since I am the pattern of all ill fortunes, by the force of your affection free me from all the miseries that oppress me. You hit my inclinations, since to recompence such vertues, were a work most worthie of all generous spirits. Sir, Your refusall to the title of eloquent, proves your modesty to be most unjust, since your tongue
long since did beareave you of all excuses. Sir, I dare not enter the lists with you, in respect of your elegancies of speech, for when I would become most perswasive in my language, I appear most barba∣rous in my expressions. All your Rhetoricall arguments are but like blue flowers amongst the corn; which though they may seem pleasant to the eye, prove most unwholsome to the bodie. Sir, I shal alwaies acknowledge the artificiall language to be like Gentlewomen adorned with Ru∣bies and Diamonds, which glister upon her garments whilest she her selfe want, the eyes of her bodie and of her minde. Fair one, Can I prevent the powers of the plannets or resist the force of the stars? you may then conclude I can then repell these affections. I am yours, sir, and wil be yours in despight of fates and fortunes. Madam, Your excellent qualities, and exquisite vertues have so assaulted the Fort of my Fancie, that I must of necessitie resign my self up to you, as a tro∣phie of your victories. Mistris, since Cupid doth so fitlie favour the cau∣ses of his Clients, let us not slip so happy an opportu∣nitie. Madam, If the wishes of a poor mortall may be, heard above, I question not but heaven with felici∣ties wil crown your royall deserts. Madam, Though I have not hitherto by dutifull services made manifest the loyaltie of my heart, yet since I first framed in my fancie, as in a mirrour the shape of your surpassing beauty, with all humili∣ty I have cast my self and fortunes at your Royall feet.
Fairest, There is none upon earth doth with a more loving duty reverence your person and vertues, than I do: Madam, in consideration of my poore fortunes, let my affection appear so much the more excusable, since I so far esteem of your divine beauty and exquisite vertue, as I would think my selfe most unworthy, though I were Prince of the World, to possess your heavenly perfection, in respect of any of my own na∣tive honours. Sir, I have learnt to know, that it is the Religion of lovers to sweare and forswear. Madam, The parching heat of summer makes the cool shapes more pleasant; and the frowns of Lovers make their smiles more delightful and cheerful. Mistris, I must never hope so entirely to love, as with my affections to require your loyalty. Sir, She which builds her fancie upon fading sub∣jects, ties her honour to the unconstant wheel of for∣tune. Fairest, As a pledge of my protestation, you shall have both my heart and hand to be yours in dust and ashes. Sir, You have a heart as large as the sea, which con∣tains in it a capacity of all ornaments that use to dig∣nifie Princes. Strive not (sir) to bereave me of the reputation of my honor, lest those that shall succeed me hereafter, read my insamy upon my Tomb. Madam, The beams of your Sun-like beauty, with their lively lustre, and sparkling flames, dazle the eys of your amazed lovers. Madam, In the shady darkness of this Arbour, you seem like a heaven enameled with an infinite number of stars. Having disposed so many affections to do your ser∣vice,
fear not, fairest, your servant must of necessity visit you. Faire one, Whilest mortalls enjoy your heavenly beauty, the lustre of your resplendent eyes, shall as the day light serve them for the dispatch of their af∣fairs. Sir, I cannot be insensible of your miseries, since the web of our destinies hath passed us both through the like misfortunes. Sir, I am reall, and use not to entertain any friends with dreams and illusions. Sir, This your inhumane usage of your creature, shal never seem strange to me, since the most fervent af∣fections of the world, often times degenerate into the vehementest enmities. Sir, We equally share of one anothers discontents, and dissolve our hearts together, as one would melt one peece of Wax into another. Fairest, Those eminent qualities, which nature, as a Dowry, hath bestowed upon you, like flowers spread themselves forth by the rayes of your bright beauty, causing those courtships, services, and admirations which so sweetly adorn you. Mistris, Ladies of honour to express the sincerity of their affections, have breathed forth their lives on the Tombs of their deceased Lovers. Madam, If I am consumed by the fires of Cupid, blame me not, since your eyes kindled the flames of my affections. Madam, exercise not the extremity of your rigour up∣on him that suffers such miseries, under the false title and quality of an offender. Know, faire Creature, that such a bright day may at last enlighten my innocencie, when revengeful lo∣vers shall search into my ashes, to find out truth there buried.
Sir, These glorious progressions of your vertue will at last mount you to the highest pith of admira∣tion. Madam, shut not up these eyes from the light of your beautie, lest they be perpetuallie opened to tears. Madam, It is impossible you should ever draw to you a reputation of honour, signed with the effusion of my blood. Madam, There are those will deplore my ashes, and strew some silly flowers on the place impressed with the prints of your punishments. Fair one, When my soul shall be seperated from my body, it shall every where wait on your purified spirit, as the shadow of it. Madam, If you should please to condemn me to darkness, by the eclipsing of the divine light of your beautie, yet I despair not, but that at last from the sphere of your splendors, due to my merits, you will vouchsafe the rayes of your clemencie, to enlighten the duskie nights of my miseries and misfortunes. Fair one, Though death may seperate our lives, yet love shall unte our ashes, and we shall preserve the immortalitie of our affections, by the immortality of our souls. Madam, Seated thus on your faire pavilion, you appear like resplendent day, in the attires of a Ma∣jesty, absolutely royall. Madam, Your goodly nature, well proportioned bo∣dy, the bright colour of your face, the lively port and grave carriage of your person, all these speak you to be a real branch, sprung from some royall stem. Fair one, Your haire negligently disshevel'd. and careless attire, grace forth your beautie, which shines in the midst of so many obstacles, as the Sun in a win∣ter day. Faire Creature, Cast not those eyes down, neither
colour your face with those modest blushes, since it would appear most admirable, that your Vertues should finde Fetters in a place where they expect Crowns. Sir, I desire to end my daies on the Theater of Kings in their glorious services. Madam, Heaven hath created me such a one, as you see ful of good wil, though of slender fortunes and means. Sir, We have continuallie lived together as one soul divided into two bodies, and since our amities have taken root in a mutuall temperance, and corre∣spondencie of humours, we have maintained in us a continuall familaritie, which neither death nor hell can ever have power to separate. Fairest, Our breasts shall be ever interchangeablie transparent. Fair one, Dissimulation or contradiction cannot ap∣proach the sincerity of our loves. Fairest, let me embrace you with the oppenness of my heart, and the profusion of my love, that our souls may evaporate themselves into one another. Sir, Your favours create me againe, and give me a new being. Sir, I shal never pretend any right to any honour in the world, but only to obey your commands. Mistris, The grace of speech dwells on your fair lips. Sir, Hereafter ages shall take Palms and Lawrels to crown the reliques of your honoured ashes. Fairest, these eies of mine, are but emblems of tears mixt with love. Madam, spread not that Cipress Vail over your face, lest you benight your beauty, and darken the bright raies of that which makes our day. Madam, Your beauty is a divinitie left on earth to be known and beloved of mortalls.
A description of Beauty. BEauty is Natures Ivy-Bush. It is her beauty only creates her queene; 'tis that which adds a commanding power to every syllable. Glory not too much in the prerogative of Nature, seeing she hath made thee man, make not thy selfe a woman. Your beauty is a Tyrant of a short reign, you can∣not call it your own, for you can neither give it, nor preserve it long. Beauty is the conqueress of man, never to be satisfyed with the raies of her chrystal painted eyes. A feature that excels all mortall sense. Such a one, that when she lay naked, his eyes did carve him out a Feast of love. Her body doth present those fields of peace that Po∣ets sing of in Elizium. She lay like eclipsed Cynthia, sweetly canopied with darkness, til he drew the curtains of love. Had Paris seen her naked, he had slighted his Nell of Greece for her. Trimming her beauty forth with blushing bravery, with the wonders of her beauty, mortall eyes are ne∣ver to be satisfyed, as if she were made only for ad∣miration, to be adored of men, or win grace from Heaven. A Complexion as clear as the Sky. Beauty is the image of the Creator, and the Rheto¦rick of Heaven.
THE School of Complements. Choice and fair Flowers, selected out of the Garden of Eloquence, to adorn our Language with variety of Ex∣pressions upon severall occasions Upon his absence. I Shall no longer esteem my selfe absent from you whil'st I hold any room in your heart and memory. Let those dul clods of earth, not yet informed with true promethean fire, measure affections by their Miles of Acres; we, whose souls are cast in a more pure mould, by a most subtile penetration and transfusion of hearts, enjoy a secure freedome in one anothers wi∣shes, and in the greatest distance, are cherished with a virtuall contiguity. It is a brutish love, and wants the quickning fire of reason, that can by circumstances be intermitted; the more extracted flames of our affections, shal like more glorious Pyramides burn bright and cleare, and light our souls, though thus seemingly disjoyned, to our dai∣ly mutual imbracements. Let not my remoteness change your purposes, more than it shakes the resolution I have made, to live, yours. Protestations of love. IT is as impossible for me not to love you, as it is for the Sun to forget his ordinary course. So am I ravished with your beauty, that it will prove harder for mee to forget you, than it would
prove difficult to resolve for death: and know for a certain, that I shall stil be rather content, and dispo∣sed to consent to the hatred of my selfe, than to the love of any other object, but you. Your sight may be forbidden me, and you may hinder me from speaking to you, but not to have the effiges of your divine beauty imprinted in my heart: and not to love and serve you, it is a thing not onely out of your power, but mine also; for I am to you as an accident, so inseparable, that you cannot be without me. Vpon her beauty. I Should have thought I had too much failed in so much duty, had I not directed it to so faire a mark; but the favour of your affections is that to which I sacrifice my best endeavours. Vanquished by your beauty, I have yeelded up the arms of my libertie and freedome, under your obedi∣ence. Nothing shall take from your heart, but death it self, the fair image of your divine beauty. Death it self, shall here stand vassal, and homage pay to your more powerful darts, when every quick∣ning glance from you shall ad new life, as he destroys the old. In admiration of her goodnes. IT is your goodness that hath supplyed my small merit; which could noo have dared to promise me the favours you can afford me. The goodness of your soul is so cleare and bright, that sin dares not approach too neer, for fear of discovering its own deformity. You need not seek for your inheritance, when the rich evidence of your vertue entitles you to heaven. I wonder not to see so many bankrupts in goodness, when I finde the Stock of Vertue rests alone in you.
These noble favours may quicken my endeavours, but never create a desert in me, they are so much beyond my all. On her leaving him. LOvers in despite of absence, lose not the remembrance of their lovers; they are as the Flowers; which (though trod on) do resume their lustre at the Suns approach. Although thou goest away yet we cannot part. Here in my heart thou still remainest, yet I must shed some tears, which like the morning dew, or as Aprill showers, shall make the spring-tide of our love (though by this win∣ter covered) grow fresh and green again. To forsake me, when your company is dearest to me, is no sign of true friendship, which parts not at death it self, since love remains for ever. Take pitty on all those bloody sorrows, which the appre∣hension of your absence makes me already so miserably to feel. To accuse in a Letter. IT is better to love with severity, than to deceive with sweetness, I expected a Cordial, but I received a Corrasive, your bitter-sweet was unequally tempered, and in your Pills, though sugar'd over, I found an unwelcome opera∣tion. I received thy Letter, but—I must chide thee (sweet) another cose from thy faire hand, wil make me surseit, you frowned when last we parted, and by that cloud you bid me expect a storm; it is a double bliss, thus sweetly to be decei∣ved; you frown indeed, but a thousand Cupids lodg them∣se ves in every wrinckle of your brow. I would forbear to write to you in this manner, were it not that the affection I bear to you, doth force, and by its authority, draw all these words from my heart and mouth.
Mistris, The Bees are not hated for their stings, no more should you hate me for the sharpness of my cir∣cumstances. We must not praise our selves for being better than the worst, but rather blame our selves for being worse than the best; since then I faile in my merits, give me leave to mourn for my imperfections. Farwell. I Must depart from you, yet shall not your service be deprived of my obedience. Adieu, fair Sun of my life, I leave you for this present, but be alwaies assured, that my minde, and my desires, shall never depart from you. Dear Love, I know not which way to begin to bid you farwel, nor how to finish this discourse, which once ended, our disconsolate departure follows. Wo is me, must I needs wander away from all my felicities at once, losing with the happiness of your sight, the most perfect object of beatitude? Farwel (Madam) be alwaies fortunate, whilst I shal languish unhappy, though most constant. Expressions of affection. YOU can never do so much for me, but that the affection wherewith I adore you, and the faith I have imposed in you, wil prove far greater. Mistris, You are the first, to whom my affectonate heart hath been offered, and shall (if you please) be the last that shal have the last possession of it. Do but let me once discover my affctons to you, & then command me to perpetual silence if you please. You are the eye of mine eyes, and thought of my thoughts, the perfecter of my defaults, the life of my love, the scope and end of all my desires and hopes. Beare wel in minde mine affection; that though I be removed from your fair eyes, I may not be so fa from your favours.
The Lovers impression of Costancie. I Shal in loving you, manifest such an affectionate stability and stedfastness, that my loyalty and my love shall inseparably wait upon you. My constancie may easily shew you, that I have as good an heart to die for you, as I have a mind and de∣sire to live and love you. I shall make it appear to after-times, that I am the man, who for your sake, have made my selfe an invin∣cible rock of stedfastness: for I shall stil hug my con∣stancie, and never let it stir from me til my last gasp. Vpon her Affability and Courtesie IT is your courtesie that lends me the favour which Heaven and Nature hath denyed me. Your courtesie wil force the most rigid Cato to turn your Proselyte, and make the Cynick leave his Tub, enamoured with your banity. Each part above you shines with a peculiar grace, but in your mild behaviour they all concentrate. Upon your Brow, Beauty, and honour sit enthron'd whence in your stately carriage they dispence their powerful Lawes. It is out of your generous disposition you wsh me wel, as it is of duty that I honour you. Vpon a LOVERS fear. LOvers live alwaies in more fear than hope, and wil sooner conceive of their sorrows, then hear of their joyes. Ladie, I have just cause to fear, lest by placng my love upon an object either too violent or too much di∣ant, my sense may be deceived: you far transcend my deserts, but my desires lie captive at your feet, one eam from your bright eie wil kindle them a new, and dd a new vigour to me your languishing prostrate. The fear I have left my slender merit should take
awaie our good mind to wish me well, doth in a sort make all those joyes imperfect, which my sweetest thoughts made me judge so fuil and entire. On her desires. FAirest, Be but as desirous of my content, as I am of your service. My desires make me as careful to please you, as I am bound by duty, and compelled by inclination to serve, you. I wish, Heaven that gave me the boldness of desire had likewise graced me with desert. To give or present. THis I dedicate, consecrate, and offer up unto you with the samt heart, wherewith I vowed you my service. Your bounty hath furnished me with power, and your example with will; accept therefore this small present, gleaned from your plentious Harvest, which shall ever te∣stifie to the ungratefull world, how much I glory to proclaim aloud my wealths chiefe founders. I should be ignorant and ungrateful too, should I pre∣sume to think it worthy your acceptance, when every jew∣el receives its Character of value from your esteem. The mass of all my wealth made up together, disclams the name of merit, and therefore here I freely give it all, and in the strong indentures of loyalty, I bind my self your, Prentice. I had rather present you with some small thing, and so be reputed ignorant, than ungrateful. Regard more the affection, than the merit of the gift, and so accept it, not as a thing of desert, but as a testimony of good wil.
A description of a Married woman, VVidow, and Maid. A Wfe is like a Garment worn and torn, A Maid like one made up and never worn; A Widow like a Garment worn thred-bare, Sold at the second hand, like Brokers ware. The Maids Complement upon his Eloquence. YOur eloquent deserts speak love, and I should wrong to lock it in the wards of covert bosome, when it deserves with characters of brass, asorted residence against the tooth of time, and a razor of ob∣livion; therefore my soul cannot but yeild you forth to publike thanks, forerunning more requiralls, Oh! how you are winding up the watch of your wit! Sir, I cannot but admire the delight and life of your wit, the light of your wisdome, and the Mercury of your Eloquence. His Answer in praise of her Elegancie. Sweet Mistris, I could not (without making my self guilty of irreverance) speak otherwise to you, than in a way of praise. I value love in all, but (faire Lady) most in you, where I find it richly sitting on the neck of honour. Fair one, such is the galled condition of the age that should my feeble Encomiums presume to touch a lttle at what your beauty in the largest manner merits, the fairest title I should gain for my true meaning, would be parasite. Madam, Let others daub and flatter, I'le not give over to draw true lines, but maugre all their painting, il proclaim you aloud, vertuous and faire.
In a Word (Madam) to live with you is to live with all the graces; for Nature hath made you the example of all her liberalities. Madam, I wil put it upon the file of thankful re∣membrance, and register it for a singular act of your benificence. A Lady and a Knight. Sir, say not you love unless you do, For lying wil not honour you. His answer. Madam, I love, I love to die, And wil not lye unless by you; You say I lye, I say you. A lovers sad passion for loss of his Mistris. VVHere shall I finde that Melancholie Muse That never heard of any thing but moan And read that passion that herpen doth us When she and sorrow sadly sit alone. To tel the world more than the world can tel, What fits indeed, most fitly figured hel. Let me not think once of the smallest thought, Nay speak of love then of the greatest griefe, Where every lover with sorrows over-wrought Live but in death, dispairing of reliefe: While thus my heart with torments torn assunde May of the world be call'd the woful wonder, The Day's like Night all darkned in distress, Pleasure becomes a subject unto pain; The Spirit over-prest with heaviness, While helpless horror vexeth every vein, Deah shakes her dart, grief hath my grave prepa Yet to more sorrow is my spirit spar'd.
The Only eyes that not endures the light, The Nght-ravens song that soundeth nought but death The Cockatrice that killeth with her sight The poysoned ayre that choaks the sweetest breath; Thunders and earthquakes all together met. These tel a little how my life is set. Were woes dissolv'd to sighes, and sighes to tears, And every tear a torment of the mind, The minds destress unto the deadly fears, That finde more death than death it self can find; Death to that life that living can descrie A little more yet of my misery. Put all the woes of all the world together, Sorrow and Death, set down in all their pride, Let miserie bring all her Muses hither, Wth all the horrors that the heart may hide, Then read the state but of my ruthful story, And say my griefe hath gotten sorrows glory. For Natures sickness sometime may have ease, Fortune (though fickle) sometime is a friend, The minds affection patience may appease, And death is cause that many torments end. To shew the nature of my pain, alas, Pain hath no nature to discry my pain, But where that pain it self in pain doth pass; Think on vexation so in every vein, That hopeless, helpless some endless pain may tel, Save hel it self (but mine) there is no hel. If such love be a ground of deadly grief, Consuming cares hath caught me by the heart; If want of comfort, hopeless of relief,
Be further moe, so weigh my inward smart: If love's unkindness, so my grief is grounded, If causeless wronged, so my heart is wounded. If love refused, so read on my ruin, If truth disgraced, so my sorrow moved, If faith abus'd the ground my sorrow grew in, If Vettues scorned, so my death approved: If death delaying, so my heart perplexed, If living, dying, so my spirit vexed. My Infants years mispent in Childish toyes, My riper years in rules of little reason, My better years in all mistaken joyes, My present time, (O most unhappy season) In fruitless labour and in endless love, O what a horror hath my life to prove! I sigh to see my infancy mispent, I mourn to finde my youthful life misled, I weep to feel my farther discontent, I dye to try how love is living dead, I sigh, I mourn, I weep, I living dye, And yet must live to shew more misery. The hunted Hart sometime doth leave the hound, My heart alas doth never leave the Chase, The live Hounds line sometimes is yet unfound, My bands are hopeless of so high a grace: Summer restores what winter doth deprive, But my love withered never can revive. I cannot figure sorrows in conceit, Sorrow exceeds all figures in our sense, But on my wo even sorrows all may wait,
To see a note exceed their excellence, Let me conclude, to see how I am wounded, A lover himself is in his love confounded. But whereof groweth this passion of the pain, That thus perplexeth every other part, Whence is the humor of this hateful vain, So damps the Spirit and consumes the heart, O let my soul with bitter teares confess, It is the ground of all unhappiness. If lack of love I am the note of need, If lack of friends no faith on earth remains, If lack of health, see how my soul doth bleed, If lack of pleasure look upon my pains, If lack of love, of friends, of wealth and pleasure, Say then my sorrow must be out of measure. Measure! No measure, measure can my thought But that one love that is beyond all measure, Which knowing how my grief have now been wrought Can bring her love into the highest pleasure; Which must my sorrows either cut off quite, Or never let me think upon delight. There is a lack that tels me of a life, There is a loss that tels me of a Love, Betwixt them both a state of such a strife As makes my spirit such a passion prove, That lack of one, and the others loss, alas, Makes me the wofulst wretch that ever was.
A Schollar in praise, or rather dispraise of his Mistris. A Schollar to win his Mistris love Compar'd her to three Goddesses above; And swore she had, to give her due deserts, Pallas, Iuno, and fair Venus Parts. Pallas was foul and grim, so out of measure, That neither Gods nor men in her took pleasure; Iuno so shrowd and curst was of her tongue That all mis-liked her both old and young; Venus unchast, strong Mars enticing still To garnish Vulcans temples, and fulfil Her lust. Now think you these are praises mean, Compared to a slut, a shrow, a quene; A woman kind, that is not true, Playes false, and makes her husband rue, If true she be, and nothing kind, She is a Corrasive to his mind: True kindness, and kind truth in one Makes up a happy union. On a dishonest woman. HEre lies a faire wife in earth foul and dirty, Who drew at fifteen, and went out at thirty. On a Maids inconstancy. SHall I weep, or shall I sing? I know not best which fits mourning If I weep I ease my brain, If I sing I sweeten pain. Weeping, Ile sing, and singing weep, To see how Maids no love can keep.
On a Maids lying sick. A Maiden faire with a Green-sickness, late, Pitty to see, perplexed was ful sore, Resolving how to mend her bad estate, In this distress Apollo doth implore, And cure for her ill, the Oracle assignes, To keep the first letter of these following Lines. On a beautifull and fair Lady, called, my Lady May: And her Deare loue, Mr. Field. THis is the sweet and pleasant month of May, Which cloaths the fields in his most rich aray, Adorning him with colours better dide Than any King can weare, than any Bride; But May is almost spent, the Fields grows dun With gazing over-much on Mayes hot Sun: Vouchsafe, O Zephyrus; thou gentle Wind, And you, O Flouds, unto the Fields be kind, Distil your honyed drops, this heat to lay, Or else poor Field wil burn in midst of May. On a Lovers departing. THough envious fortune which could ne're have while As yet to grace me with one pleasing smile But ever frown, new to augment my griefe, Bare me my sight, my refuge, and reliefe; Yet thou'ast my heart (my dear) instead of me, And as it lives, so shall it dye with thee. Though I must part, and parting be a pain, Keep thou my heart, til I return again; So that in part, I but depart from thee,
Thou hast my heart, the rest remains with me, Which rest, small rest, that finde, til having run, Its wonted course, and where it first begun: What more remains? best thoughts shall thee attend, My love in thee begun, in thee shall end. On a VVelsh man. A Welshman 'twixt Saint Tassies day and Easter, Ran on his Host is score for cheese a Teaster: His hostis choak't it up behind the dore, And said, good sir, for cheese, discharge your score, ods so (quoth he) what meaneth these, Do you think her knows not choak from cheese? On Virginity. Iewells being lost are found again, This never, this lost but once, is lost for ever: Two falling out, into a ditch they fl, For falling out, their falling out was well. On the dispraise of women. O Heavenly powers! why did you bring to light, That thng call'd woman, Natures Oversight? That born Tyrant, proud shop of Vanity, That guilded Weather-Cock, Trunck of miserie. That Wayward, Froward, that unconstant Evill, That seeming Saint, sole Factor for the Devil; For whats a woman? she is such a creature, As Nature striving to adorn her Feature, Forgot to make her honest; this was she That first pluck't Fruit from the forbidden Tree, For which accurst, she then began to fall From bad to worse, from worse to worst of all: Now therefore thus I will define a woman,
She is a spightfull Creature true to no man, 'Tis plain, she can do more than can the Devill, For man, which God made good, did she make evill, And oft those women, which we oft do cherish, Are oft the cause why men so oft do perish. An answer to the former. BEest be you heavenly powers that brought to light That precious thing call'd woman; mans delight, That free-born subject, kask ful of treasure, That constant author of mans hoped pleasure, That spotless harmless Saint, not knowing evil, No Devils Factor, unless man's the Devil; She is a work so purely wrought, that nature Knew not whether it were more adorn'd with feature Or with chast honesty; yea this was he Fruit of whose womb freed man from misery, For which she is blest, that her sons fault should fall From small to less, from less to none at all: And therefore thus I will define a woman, She is lovely, faithfull, constant, false to no man, And what she can do more than can the Devil, 'Tis true, she made those good whch he made evill, And if sweet womans love no man should cherish, Those that condemn them, without them let perish▪ Of VVoman of VVomen. Are Women fair? yea, passing fair to see to, Are Women sweet? yea passing sweet they be to Both fair and sweet they be to them that love them, Kinde and discreet to all but them that prove them. Be women proud? yea, passing proud and praise them, Are woomen kind? yea, wondrous kind and please them Envious and disdainful if you move them, More proud than wise, & yet we fools must love them, Are women wise, not wise, but wondrous witty,
Are Women witty? yea, the more is the pitty: They are so witty, and they are so wily, That being ne're so wise, they wil beguile you. Are Women fools? Not fools, but fondlings many: Are Women shrows? Not shrows, but sheepish nosey, Or, if in in sheeps attire they please to cloath them, 'Tis done as Foxes do, that none may knew them. Are women Saints? No Saints, nor yet no Devils: So Women Goods? No they are needful evills: So Angel-like, that Devils none need doubt them, And yet so needful, tha none can live without them. A Hushand on his wife a shrow. VVE lived one and twenty years A man and wife together, I could no longer keep hernere She is gone I know not whither. Could I but guess, I do protest, I speak it not to flattet, Of all the women in the World I never would come at her: Her body is bestowed wel, A handsome grave doth hide her, And sure her foul is not in hell, For the Devil could never abide her: I rather think she is soard aloft, For in a late great thunder Me thought I heard her very voice Rendring the Clouds assunder, Thus charity bids judge the best Of them that are departed, Oh! what a Heavenly thing is Rest To them that long have smarted.
A Lover to his Mistris with a pair of Gloves. If that from Glove you take the Letter (G,) Then Glove is love and that I send to thee. Her answer with a Handkerchief. If that from Clout you take the Letter (C,) Then Clout i out, and that I send to thee, An old VVidwe to a young VVench. AN old stale widower loving a young wench, Told her, nought but her his love would quench: Good Sir, quoth she, your lustfull suit withdraw, You shall not thatch my New-house with old straw. An Epithalamium for a VVedding Night. NOw is that welcom night addrest When love & beauty makes a feast Let not the Bridegroom be afraid Though he encounter with a maid, Sheel squeck, sheel cry Sheel fain, sheel eye, Sheel fear as she did tremble, But take her, and rowse her, And mowse her, and rowse he, For she doth but dissemble. Now Mistris Bride, thus much to you The Item I shall give is true, Young maidens must not be to coy To entertain their wishes joy, But take him, and hug him, And rug him, and lug him, For thus true love is tryed, Nor be too nice in yeilding things Which must not be denyed.
Protestations of Charity. Ile bind my hands to fasten just desire, My tongue shall fear to wrong my Mistris fair, And if to gaze on her mine eyes aspire, I wash them forth with my repentant tears If my proud hands dares once offend my love Or make an offer of a guilty touch, Ile cut the veins whereby my Fingers move, And blead the last, my love to her is such: If any part or motion of my sence, Transcends the limits of my loves direction, My bodies death shall ransome that offence, My souls engag'd so deep in her perfection. A Description of love. A Lover is like the Hearb Helitopia, which alwaies inclineth to that place where the sun shineth, & being deprived of the Sun, dieth, so as lunaries herb, as long as the Moon waxeth, bringeth forth leaves, and the waning shaketh them off: So a lover, whilst he is in the company of his ldy, where all joyes increase, uttereth many pleasant conceits, but banshed from the sight of his mistris, whereall mirth decreaseth either liveth in melancholly, or died with desparation. Of constancie in Lov, COnstancie is like unto the Stork who, wheresoe∣ever she fly, commeth into no nest but her own: or the Lapwing, whom nothing can drive her from her young ones, but death. The Tongue of a Lover should be like the Poin in a Diall, which though it go none can see it o∣ig: or a young Tree, which though it grow, noe can perceive it growing
The Tryangles in love THere must be in every Tryangle three Lines, the first beginneth, the second augmenteth, the third conclu∣deth it a figure: So in Love three Vertues: affection which draweth the heart: the second, Secrecie, which increaseth the hope: third, Constancie, which finisheth the VVork; without any of these three Rules, o Tryangle, without these three Vertues, no Love. Another. LOve is not unlike the fig-tree, whose fruit is sweet, but the root is more bitter than the claw of Byte or li the Apple in Persia, whose blossome savoureth lik honey, whose bud is more sowre than gall: as the adament draweth the heavie Iron, and the Harp the fleet Dolphin▪ so beauty allureth the chast mind to love, and the wisest wi to lust: and who more trayterous to Phillis than Demo∣phoon? yet he a traveller: who more perjured to Dido ha Aeneas? and he a stranger: who more false to Aride tha Theseus? yet he a Saylor: who more fickle to Medea tha Jason? yet he a Sta. Again, love is like musk, though it be sweet in smel, it is sower in the smack: the leaf of t Cedar tree, though it be fair to be seen, yet the sirrop dep∣v th sight; even so love, though it be pgned by saluting each other with a kiss, t it s shan off by fraud of the heart. A perfect Lover should be like the glass-worm, which shineth most bright in the dark: or like the pure frankinsenc, which smelleth most sweet when it is in the fire; or to the Damask Rose, which is sweeer in the stil, than on the stalk.
In praise of a loving friend. OF all the heavenly gifts on earth, Which mortall men commend, No treasure wel may countervail A true and faithfull friend. What sweeter solace can befall, Than such a one to finde, As in whose brest thou maist repose The secrets of thy minde. If flattering fortune seem to frown, And drive thee to distress, A true and faithfull friend wil help at need And make thy sorrows less: Oh precious Item! Oh Jewel great! On Friendship! Pearl of Price! Thou surely dost each thing excel, That man can wel devise: The Golden Mines are soon decay'd, When Fortune turns the Wheel, And Force of Arms is soon allay'd, If body sickness feel; And cunning art soon overthrown, Experience teacheth plain. And all things else their course doth change When friendship doth remain: But since by proof they have been taught A feigned friend to know, I wil not trust such glossing tongues More than any open Foe.
A Complementall Letter for receiving divers favours. SIR, I am so tyed unto you, by your many favours, as I profess, I know not how to carry my selfe in thankfulness unto you. Sir, This I earnestly desire you, that you wil instead of a recompence, for all your favours, accept thanks, and of your poor creature, who is able to give nothing take prayer for payment; what my good mind is to you, my tongue cannot express what my true meaning is, your heart cannot conceive. Sir, I hope it shall be read with the same mind it was written, & taken on the right hand; it shal (I trust) not want its due effect and good acceptance; I know it is not excellent, but the worst; your worthiness in∣deed (whom I have oft admired) deserves far better yet I pray you accept of it, and God, I trust, in time wil inable me to give a further testimonial of my poor service to you. Yours in the best bond that I may. Another Letter for one absent. KInd Sir, The scarcity of Letters make them prove dainties, being the only way to enjoy presence in affection, though not in realty: I confess, the bet way to judge of a things excellencie, is sometimes to want it, for we esteem not of the excellency of breath, til we want ayre to breathe in; and the good∣ness of your conversation, is seen sometimes in absence from you, seeing it is absence that kindles a desire to enjoy your presence. Sir, I suppose you are not ignorant of that common rule, that Letters are alwayes for to to bee indited in a kind of careless strain, which rule Tully that Prince of Orators, observeth in his Epistles; the Bonclace of
Rhetorich is better to adorn and imbrace the neck of some love-sick Gentlewomen, which is as a token sent from her lover to please her, and keep her from crying: I doubt not but you easily perceive what natural love ought to be united betwixt us, raked up in the ashes of forgetfulness, and almost quite extinguished for want of blowing; and in whose power is it to revive this lan∣guishing, but in you sir, who are the life of Rhetorick? Sir, the great esteem I have ever had of your friend∣ship, suffers me not to endure your absence any longer: This tyrannie of your humor or inclination, is too severe a punishment for me to groan under: For the eclipse of your better self, seems to me to be a retire∣ment of your affection: Let me therefore intreat you to return speedily; I conjute you by all those charms of passion I have ever been at your service, to make a spee¦dy redress to him, who is Your most humble Servant. The Answer. SIr, I make less account of my absence from the Court, and from my affairs then from you; your friendship is the only business of my speedy return I have already chid my self, and now have no more to do, but to precipitate my hast, and in person to make my excuse, with the tenders of all manner of service, in the quality of Your most humble Servitor. A Letter for clearing ones self of false accusation. SIr, I hope, that all the passions of my service have given you sufficient proofs, as never to doubt my loyalty, in which my innocency hath ever shined clearer than the best language of my pen can express, so that the malice of that person was but ill contrived, whose knavery I wil make your sport; and if you please but to reveal his name, I wil engage mine honour to make him sign me an acquittance with his blood. I ex∣press my self thus far, that at any rate I may purchase your higher esteem of me, or be for ever fargotten. Your abused friend.
A Congratulatory Letter for the good fortune of a friend. Sir, THe excess of my gladness, like the merits of yout affection, is not in any respect vulgar; for all my passions do but wait upon your good for∣tunes. Pardon therefore the defect of my Eloquence, since it is supplyed with the joy reigns in me, which had made me so sensible of that extraordinary contentment that in honoring you the world is possessed of, which long before this, foresaw that the felicity of this event belonged to your merits: perhaps most of your friends have prevented me in this congratulation: but this zeal and affection, cannot come too late from him, that is more than he is able to express, Yours. His Answer. Sir YOu have so sensibly touched me with your Let∣ter, (your joy as it were to the life) mingling my interest with yours, that, should I not render thanks to you, I should dye of a deepe impatience: I acknowledg I never merted the effects of such noble∣ness, as that you should account of me, as an object for your virtuous inclinations: the pleasure I entertain to consider your goodness, is more satisfaction to me than my advancement; as I prefer before other inte∣rests, the happiness of your affection, and the new-assurance of your friendship: which that I may the more seriously contemplate, I shall for ever reserve my admiration, and remain in the number of your best friends. Yours, L. D.
On the effects of their love YOu shall know one day in effect, what you now have put in imagination. The constancie of my affection hath been such that it hath overcome the worst of difficulties, and the expectation of the harbour hath made the danger easie. When admidst the waves of your disdain my halfe∣ship-wrack'd vessel began to sink; each sigh I fetched (I see at length) found a courteous gale, to bring me home to you my blessed Harbour. One day you wil come to know the conclusion of the irreprochable testimonies of my true and faithfull promises. Vpon her Eloquence▪ YOUR Eloquence is able to steale the Soul out of ones heart, and carry it whether it would not go. O speak again, 'twill make the Sphears lay by their warbling Lutes, and listen to your tongue. Each articulated syllable doth lay a powerfull cham upon my soul, and captivates my senses. One day is no more able to overcome you with good words, than with good actions. The eloquence of your most sweet words, closes my lips, and binds them to a perpetuall silence. Excuses IN excusing your unjust fear you seem to accuse my boldness. It is a mercy that you yet afford me, to let me plead m ne own excuse. I presume upon your pardon for my former suspi∣tious fears; and the rather; because the goodness of your nature stiles them, the individuall concomitants of love.
I pray you hear my reasons patiently, and judge without passion of my justification. It is for great minds to excuse great faults; upon the acknowledgment therefore of my late transgres∣sion, you cannot finde a fitter subject for your mercy. Experience of a Lover and of a Friend. I Have so much experience of your good will, that it only remains that you make tryall of my desire of acknowledgment. I have had such tryall of your friendship and fideli∣ty, that I hope you wil not faile me in time of need. Each messenger affords fresh Characters of your friendship, and every day I see the spring of your love breaking through new channels. Vpon his Face. THe wonders of your face made me their Captive as soon as I saw them, and that rare grace of yours, which makes you excel all others, retai∣ned me your Prisoner and Servant. As she appears, so Day breaks, and with her Beams disperses all my Clouds and mysts of discontent. The Epitome of Nature is comprised in her Face, where she hath freely given a tast of all her pride and glory. Vpon his Favours. IF you judge or deem me worthy to favour you, hold that your merits are much more than my desert I am ignorant what service might satisfie for the
favours I have received of you, if you please to in¦crease my knowledge, in telling me how I may serve you again, I shall be doubly obliged. I want opportunity, dutifully to acknowledge this favourable proof of your condition, and honesty. Vpon his fortunes. FOrtune strives, now to make me pay the interest of those pleasures, she formerly lent me. Dame Fortune is too covetous, and usurious, in taking from me the interests of my prosperity. I appeare to you just like an empty vessel that wants his lading, with full blown sailes of love; in∣deed tis true, and I am bound for the Indies, and if my compass fail me not, my Genius tells me I shall soon arive. O withdraw not those two stars, by their blest light I steer my crasy Bark, and hope to enjoy the wished for shore of happiness. Vpon her hatred. I Do not think (though I should give you occasion to hate me) that your good nature can wish me an injury, since you are not composed of any thing but love. Courtesie dwelt on your fore-head, but malice resided in your soul, and lay concealed in your minde. On her constancie. YOu use your friends as one doth flowers, which please onely when they are fresh and new. I perceive that ardent affection which was wont to keep me so alive in your thoughts, doth now no more reign in you.
In praise of her face. HER face is loves Coppy to read wonders on: She cannot put her face in such a form, but I must like it. Her lively face disdains all adulterous arts. A perpetuall spring of beauty dwells in that face of hers. Fairer than Chloris in all her pride. Her face vailed with a robe of darkness, shines clea∣rer through it, than the eye of the day. The fairest ever nature made for wonder. But to look upon her face is to live. Whose looks would force the Warring Elements in∣to order. For her retention of him in her memory. DO not that wrong to your true love, to let him slide out of your memory, the onely monument where his felicity desires to be inshrined. Keep me alive in your thoughts, as I hold you in the most sensible parts of my soul. Of his merits. I Could never do so great a thing but would be too small for your merits and my desires. Your merits drive me to love you, my humor per∣mits it, and my content wil needs have me imploy my endeavours to serve you. The praises you attribute unto me, proceed from your wil, and not from any merit of mine. The necessity of his affections. The necessity of love is most mighty in the world, for it overcomes all.
O how happy a thing is that necessity, that infor∣ceth us to imbrace such a desired blessing as your self. I was all frozen, untill the sunshine of your favour thawed my benummed spirits; but when you darted your quickned beams, the spring of my affections budded forth in the most pleasant bloomes of Love. The Magnetick Stone starts not with such naturall activity to the North-stars summons, as I when you command. Protestations of obedience. I Shall not, all the dayes of my life, have a wil which shall not obey yours. You know the power you have over me, and that I am so much yours, as you can wish me. To offer and present service. ALL the honour and ambition I aspire at, is to see my self imployed in your service. Let all men judge whether your beauty alone is not sufficient to command the affections I bear you. All that is mine is no less yours, than are your thoughts and words. The most favourable gift you can offer me, is your friendship, a jewel I prefer before all other treasures. VVishes. HEaven, which heares the vows of the faithfull, bless and content your desires. I need not wish you more, but a continuance of those graces you most eminently possess already. May you meet with such a Paramour, as my equal (for sure out-go he cannot,) your holyer flames; may
the same shaft, with an undivided hast, pierce both your hearts together; may both your loves bear the same date, and when we have made our selves un∣worthy of enjoying any longer such a worthy patern, and rich example of pure affection, after you have seen a second Generation, may death gently trans∣port you to that place of bliss, where he himselfe can never come. God make you the happyes Woman that lives; even as he hath made you the fairest, and most accom∣plished. Heaven grant that you may be as faithfull, as you are dear to me. Bewailing of a Lover. I, do so bewalle our separation, that nothing can e∣ver touch my soul, like the griefe I endure by it. The greatest griefe I carry along with me when part from this place, is, to see how I am for ever de¦prived of your fair presence. To give thanks. If I have done you any acceptable service, think it was but the shadow of what I desire to shew you, by reall effects. To tickle your eares with breath of Complement, or the ayre of some presently contradicted Newes, would be to imitate the What lack you? To give you good words, and make your better deeds pay too deer for them. I take this benefit from you, but as borrowed; I will pay you rent for it. Though the service I have done you, be but small, yet the desire I had to acknwledg the honours I have received from you, are exceeding great. On the deceits of Love. Your faire eyes have too much majesty to serve for baits, or allurements of a dissembling love.
Dot deceive him that wil out-braue death it selfe o insure your life, and withstand the frowns of fortune, to protect your honors. On his life. MY Life is a Comedy, and therefore no matter how long it be, so that it wil be wel acted swee∣test, if the last Scene be Tragick, your cruelty must be the Nemesis. Our life, without some pleasantness, is like a long Journey without an Ine: or like a bed of Roses where flowers are mixed with prickles, Lady, if you please, from your hospitable bounty, to refresh my over-wea∣tied and solitary progress, I shall conclude my time richly spent, having attained the end at which alwaies I aim'd, but you have hitherto clos'd up your fragrant sweet, and amidst the stearnest bryars of discontent, have left me miserably intangled. On the lustre of her eyes. Your eyes flash so much lightning, that like Suns, they dazell the sight of all such as dare behold them. Your souls bright lustre sparkles in your eye, and like the Persian, that only sun I adore. You have so established your soveraignty over my soul, that the least twinckle of your eyes, dispossess me of the state of my life. Amorous Expressions. This kiss and thy white hand. Her spring of beauty raised in him noble desires, which soone broke forth in liberall streams. Let me rule, lady, like a Planet, in the Orb of your fa∣vours. You have a most imperious beauty, I must obey it. Delight shall streame into our bosome, A faint lovers wishes cannot recall the hours. I wil imbrace thee as all wealth and honour.
Though she were divided from me by armies I would make way through death to gain her. Let me dwel an age upon those lips. She is a sparkling delightful piece of Nature. She is the queen and goddess of beauty. She is a Mine of pleasing joyes and sweetness. The great commandress of all hearts. I cannot spe to thee, go thy wayes. We'le stri make the example of Love an easie Law. As white as Truth; as innocent as Vertue. Take all your vows again, you are as free as the aire. The Cyprian queen compared to thee was but a Ne∣gro. Whose love is the Exchequer of wealth. A spring of Love issues from her Soul. I must walk in the dark, and be benighted to all the World but thee. Madam, I am a poor Flye, burnt in the Candle of your beauty. A Woman worthy of so composed a man. Crown your servant, Mistris, with this favour.
A Magnificent present of simili∣tudes, Comparisons, and Examples, Collected for the Readers Application. AS the glistring beams of the Sun, when it riseth decketh the heavens, so the beuty of a good wife adorneth the house: As golden Pillars do shine upon the sockets of Silver, so doth a faire face in a vertuous mind. Her tresses are like the coloured Hyacinth of Aarabia. Her love is such a fire, as either will burst forth, or burn the house, it is such a stream, as wil ether have his course, or break through the banks, and make a de∣luge, or else force their heartstrings to rack with secrecy He that is stung of a Scorpion, must be healed by af∣fection. To stop the stream, to make the ford flow more fierc∣ly, to repress the fire, to make it flame the more furi∣ously. Like a Demophoo that deceived Phillis. Like an Aeneus, that falsifyed his faith to Dido. Like Apolloes passion. Like Theseus, that forsook his Ariadne. Conclude not all things by generall axiomes. Measure not all mens minds by a few particular in∣stances. Though some have been fleeting, think not all to be false. Try me, I refer my passions to my proof, and as you find me loyal, so reward me with love. Had not Iuno been jealous of Iupiter, Io had not been turned into a Heifer. If suspition had not prickt Menelans, Helena had no stoln away with Paris. Procris had been alive, had she not suspected Cephalu Love shortneth not only the life, disquieteth the mind
but sometimes is the cause of most strange and bloody massacres. Her eye is like the Diamond, and so pointeth, that it pierceth to the quick. Her motion is so chast, as she is seen there in as in a mirrour. Courtly temper'd with a virtuous disdain. Her countenance is the very man of modesty. Her beauty is like the gorgeous Cedar, that is only for shew, nothing for profit. Like the apple of Tantulus, that is precious in the ey and dust in the hand. Like to the Star, Artophilax, that is most bright, but fitteth not for any compass. Like young men that standeth upon their outward portrature, Like Aeneas, a brave man, but a oul dissembler. Like a fond girl all, but little worth if they be not wealthy. To tye a head-strong girl from Love, is to call a Si∣ciphus stone, or breath words into the wind. Who must doth love, must seem most to neglect it. A denyal at the first, is counted a grant; a gentle an∣swer a mockery. Ladies use their lovers, as the Stork doth her young ones, who pricketh them til they bleed with her Bill, and then healeth them with her tongue. A bul being tyed to the figtree loseth his strength. A whole heard of deer stand a gaze if they smell a sweet apple. A Dolphin, by the sound of Musick, is brought to shore. As the kind spanel, though he hunt after Birds, yet forsaketh them to retrive the Partridg. As we commonly feed on beef hungarly at the first yet seeing the quail more dainty, change our dyet.
The admonition of a true friend should be like the practise of a wise Physician, who wrapt his sharp Pills in Sugar. Or like a Chyrurgion, who launcing the wound with an Iron, immediately applyeth to it soft lint. As Mothers deal with their Children for worms, who puts their bitter seeds into sweet Rasins. Vertue flourisheth when beauty fadeth, it waxeth young when age approacheth, and resembleth the Ivy leafe, who, although it be dead, continueth green. Let there be such a faithfull and inviolable league of love betwixt us begun, as neither length of time, nor the distance of place, nor threatning of friends, nor the spight of Fortune, nor the fear of death can al¦ter or diminish. Let us be like Hypocrates twins, who were born toge∣ther, and dyed together. If death should seperate you from me, I would imi∣tate the Eagle, which Sesta the Virgin brought up. As the precious Stone Sandestra, hath nothing in out∣ward appearance but that which seemeth black, and being broken, powreth forth beams like the Sun. Like Appelles, who when Beucephulus was painted, craved the judgement of none but Zeuxes. Like Prisius, who when Iupiter was carved, asked the censure of none but Lysippus. Plants are nourisht with little rain, yet drowned with much. How valiantly Ajax boasted in the seat of arms, yet Phillis bare away the armour. Eloquent words may please the eare, but sufficient matter perswades the heart. As the herb Moly hath a flower as white as snow, and a root as black as Ink. As amongst the Aegyptians there was no man estee∣med happy that had not a beast full of spots.
As the Indian Ura noscope doth ever view the azure Skies, and the bright burning rayes of the firmament, and never fixeth her eyes on the earth, deeming things sublunary, too base an object for the sensorum of her light. As a fained friend is much like a Serpent bred in Aegypt, called a Crocodile, who when she singeth poy∣soneth, and when she weepeth, devoureth. The Lyon so loveth her whelps, that she never tasteth of the prey, til they are fully satisfied. Like the apples of Arabia, which begin to rot before they are halfe ripe. As the wounds of the body, by often rubbing, are sometimes made incurable. As the savour of the Panther seemeth sweet to none but to bruit beasts. As continued rain moystneth the earth, so that it can∣not be tilled to bring forth fruit. As a ship in the Sea, without a guide, leanning now on one side, then on another, is often in great danger. As Bees when they strive together, or stirred up by some violent motion, with strowing of dust are brought into order and appeased. As apothecaries do cover their pills with some sweet substance, to make them go down the pleasanter. As the sucking of a Child, brings Milk into the Mo∣thers Brests. As there is no shelter where there is no Sun. As a Gardiner mingleth divers seeds together and casts them into the ground, yet wil they not be confoun∣ded together one with another, but every seed wil have its proper herb. As Swallows and Flyes are dead in the Winter, but by vertue of the Sun, revive again in Summer. As the Goldsmith by his art can sever divers Metals one from another, and some men out of one Metalcan draw another.
As the Sun and the Moon, being of one substance, differ in dignity and excellency. As Prometheus did make miraculous Images, such as none ever could make but himself. As continuall drops of Water hollow the hard stone. As those men that live by the River Nylus are made deal by the continuall noyse of the waters. As the disease of a Canker, alwaies infects the next part that is nigh it. As the Sea, when it rageth, the waters thereof cast up dirt and mire. As in fining, the dross is separate from the Metalls. As there is a certain weakness in the sight, which causeth a party to think he sees straws, whereas he sees men. As a Thunder-bolt cast out of the clouds, spareth the matter that submitteth it self to the force thereof, but breaketh to powder whatsoever resisteth. As the mornng dew soon after the rising of the Sun languisheth away. As the Medecinall plaster cannot heal a wound, if there be any Iron stricken in it: As the Rose, the most pleasant of all flowers, is ga∣thered upon rough bryers. Like the Ape, which with embracings doth wel-nigh kil-her young one. As the Moon hath so much the less light, by how much the nearer it is to the Sun. As the first step to health, is to know the disease. As by great showers and storms of rain, the ayre is clensed. As in Garlands the beauty of the flowers, except they be orderly composed, are not half so glorious. As the moon is not Eclipsed, nor loseth her light till she is at the full.
As they that dwell in low valleys are seldome hurt with lightning. As the pure Corall wil not alter the Colour. Like as the Silk-worm keepeth her body spare and empty, using to fast two or three dayes together, that she might stretch out her self, and spn her. Thred the finer. As a little spark many times setteth a whole house on fire. As Owles and night Crows see better in the night than in the day. Like as out of a River or Fountaine troubled, there can be no water drawn but what is muddy. As a strong Corrasive laid to a sore, eats out all the dead flesh. Like as when the body is distempered, and some mem∣bers putrfied, it is then best for the Patient to have his blood taken away from him. As Fire is never sufficed with wood, and Earth with water. As they that are sick of the dropsie increase their thirs by drinking. As children are like to their naturall Parents, in ho∣nour, speech, and laughter. As the Libard, with a strange knd of policy, to kil the apes, lyes down as if hee were stark dead; which the apes seeing, come all together, and in delight skips upon him: That the Libard heare patiently, untill he thinks they have all wearied themselves with sporting, then suddenly he leapeth up, and catcheth one of them in his mouth. As the Lamb is the more nimble and lively for shea∣ring. Like as the Pelican, which having brought forth her young ones dead, being stung or killed by
Serpents, she picketh out her heart blood to revive them. Like the undistinct sound of Musick, which deligh∣teth not. As the rain maketh the new-moon grass freshly to spring again, and comforts the earth, that it yeilds forth fruit. As the Estridge hath wings, yet flyeth not: As sweet scents and perfumes comfort the brain and heart. As the Sun in winter, when it is farthest off from the Pole, is nearest the earth. As Lightning blasts all it meets with, but the Law∣rel Tree. As the Chyrurgion cuts, and searches before he heal the wound. As in Musick, if the harmony of strings be not conso∣nant, the sound is not sweet, nor acceptable to the tu∣nable Ears. As no man can behold the Sun, unless it be a little covered with a little cloud. As the head gives sense and motion to the mem∣bers. As from the stock sap is derived to the graft, that it may live and grow. As a glass filled with an extreme strong liquor, can∣not burst in sunder, not because of any antipathy that is between them, but because the Glass is not of sufficient strength to contain the liquor. As a Whore hath no more to do with her Hus∣band, nor any thing of his, because of her breach of Wedlock. As they that come out of the clear Sun into the sha∣dow, have their sight darkned. Like as when one looks on any thing in the ayre, they appear in their proper forms and colours,
as they are, but if they be lookt upon through a greeen glas, they all appear green. As the soul doth so quicken the body, that notwith∣standing the Members of the same in them∣selves are but weak, yet they fall not quite to de∣cay, as long as they have any participation with the soul. As the light of the Sun yeilds him no pleasure that is in a dark dungeon. As a Woman brings forth Children in sorrow. As the Ocean which is but one, is divided into parts, according to Regions and Countries against which it lyeth. As the superfluous humours in the veins, are no parts of the body. As the Moon is not alwayes visible being in her change. As the Hand cut from the Body dyeth, and wanteth life. As the Vine, or Garden, decayeth with overmuch heat or Drought, except after the planting thereof it be wtred with showers. As men discern the weather by the wind. As Appelles the Painter much lamented if he mist one day without some line or picture. As Vines without lopping grow wild and fruit∣less. As a Tree bringeth forth, first leaves, then blossom, then fruit. As water moderateth wine. As fire is an instrument of medecinall arts. As the body withour the soul enjoyeth no life. As Roses and Lillies graw among thorns. As a Physician cureth a man by taking away his blood and ill humours, by cutting and searching the flsh.
As the Hiena hearing the voice of a man speaking like a friend, and the mind of a Wolfe devouring like a fend. As the Panther, who with the sweetness of his breath and beauty of his Coat, allureth such beasts, within his compass, as he intendeth to uncase, and prey upon their Karkase. As the flattering Syrens, that sweetly sing the saylors wrack; and the fowlers Pipe, that pleasantly playeth the Birds death. Like as the Grammer is the key of Knowledge, Lo∣gick the rule of reason; Rhetorick, the Mother of Elo∣quence; Musick, the sweet recreations of wearied minds, astronomy, the secret knowledg of the nature and course of the Heavens: arithmetick, the art of numbring, and Geomitry, the art to work by rule, compass, weight, and measure. As very a coward as China. As love is the bewitcher of the wit, the rebel to rea∣son, the betrayer of resolution, and the defiler of the thoughts. Friendship is praise worthy of all men. Bought friends are seldome sure. Like unto arabian Ravens, who so long as they are full, do make a pleasant noyse, but being empty, they yeild a hideous cry, As anger is accompanied with ambition, and causeth a man for to slay himself. As Ajax, seeing that the Greecians had preferr'd A∣lises before him, and had bestowed upon him the armour of Achilles as a recompence of his wisdom, fel mad. Like Swallows that think every sunshine a Summers day. Her mind is like the Tapers in Ianus Temple, which once set on fire, burn till they consume them∣selves.
To tender any thing to a Prince. MOst high and illustrous Prince, it may appear great boldness in me, to hope that the least beam of your love, should reflect on my unworthiness to cherish this imperfect & unworthy work of you loy∣al & obedient subject; yet nevertheless, I humbly recom∣mend it to your gracious protection; under which I en∣joy all the felicities that moy be; & in which I can take joy of them al. If your highness wil vouchsafe to accept it, who dares reject it? if allow it, who can reprove it? if protect it? what Momus barking, or Zoylus biting can any way hurt it, or annoy it? and thus most humbly craving pardon for this boldness, I cease to write, though I wil not to wish, that your highness's felicities may never cease. Another. THat which hath been imagined of a golden age, as an India of all perfect happiness, was but as a prophesie of your gracious reign, showring, down felicity in such a plentious manner, that all your subjects are thereby invi∣ted, to offer up unto you sacrifices of thanks and obedience, while I shall accompt it the chiefest honour, that my birth and stars could bequeath me, If I may approve my loyalty, in exposing my life to any danger in your service. Another. Sir, though I cannot worthily desire nor deserve your gracious favour, yet it wil shew you nearest heaven, and that you resemble the King of kings in accepting my weak and humble devotions, with the tenders of my loyal service: Let not the poorness of my merit, or the obligation, make them contemptible in your fight, for I have long had an earnest zeal to express with what integrity I adore the vertues wherewith you are reple∣nished, far above all flattery, so that your gracious reign is but the Galaxia, or milk-white path, through which you travel in your happy Government, and by Example lead your subjects to heaven.
Another. MAdam, there are no words significant enought to ex∣press how I honour your royall perfections, which render you beloved and respected of all the world; while I make it the chiefe imployment of life, to attend upon your commands, which to obey, is perfect happiness. An humble address to a great Lord MY Lord, in regard of those many favours which your honour hath heaped on me, I am bound, not only to acknowledge my happiness therein, but also to desire that you would alwaies reckon me in the number of your most obliged Servants. Other wise. My Lord, as it is a great happiness for me to come into your presence, and to offer my devotions to your excellency from the altar of an humble heart; so it will be an addition unto my felicity, if I may improve this present opportunity, to make tender of my service. Otherwaies, My Lord, it will become me, amongst others to acknow∣ledge your many excellent vertues, amongst which your noble Clemency and humility are the chiefest, whereof, as others have had experience, so I doubt not but you wil favourably accept the obligation and presentment of my humble ser∣vice.
Another to some great Lord. MOst noble Lord, as I hold it for a principall favour, in admitting me to kiss your honours hand, so shall I e∣steem my self most happy for ever, in that your honour wil be pleased to accept me henceforth, as ranked in that number and Catalogue of your most humble and obsequious servants. Another. My Lord, the rank you hold with the great and sin∣gular Ornaments of Vertues in you, do oblige me to offer unto your Lordship all that little is in me, and to ten∣der unto you upon all occasions, my service in obsequious humility. Another. Most honoured Lord, May your excellencies will be plea∣sed to permit me to exercise any small endeavours of ren∣dring my dutie to your Honour, in expectation that Heaven wil favour me so far, as to grant me opportunities, where∣by I may make appear in effect, the desires I have to present you with my best service and endeavours. A Letter of thankfulness for entertaining a friend. SIr, mine humble thankfulness knows nor how to express it self otherwise, than in the sending of you inclosed in a Letter, my hearty prayers for the in∣crease of your health and prosperity: Sir, no absence nor imployment, can make me forget my humble sr∣vice
and due respects unto you, to whom I never can be sufficiently grateful, such noble respects and favours I have received from you, as the least of them deserves my small praises and best services, which assuredly shal never be wanting to you from, Your sincerely devoted in all duty, &c. Another Letter: How to send a a token to a friend. Sir, IN token of a thankfull heart, for your courtesies shewed towards me, behold, I do here send this poor token, most humbly beseeching you to take it in good part, not weighing the value of the thing, which is of no value, but the simple and good mind and meaning of Your ever obliged Sarvant, &c. To intreat a courtesie of a friend. A. SIR, as necessity hath no Law, so it hath no shame for contrary to my disposition, I must become an importunate suitor unto you. A. Sir, name it, it must be something more than I know of, which I can deny you, who are alwaies modest in your requests. A. Sir, I fear I shall give you occasion to report the contrary; I wil desire you to lend me your horse, to car∣away a little treasure by moonshine. A. I do not wel understand you, pray interpret your selfe, and disguise not your meaning. A. Sir, I would desie you to dispence with me in a matter that concerns me near; I am to bear away the Usurers daughter, and carry her where she shal remain private, til storms be blown over: Pardon me, that I have no sooner made you acquainted with my pur∣pose.
A. I wil be ready to assist you; and since your fortune may receive addition from any service of mine, my horse, were he the Muses Pegasus, he should be your servant, it is but to carry away a piece of live Venisn, that's a mean trespass, Cupid hath enough in his park. A. I am glad you are so pleasant, and do so well apprehend my intents, I was afraid, lest my purpose being known (which was manifest in me to deliver) I should have suffered repulse, and have been blamed by you for my bold attempt. A. No sir, I do account it in you a bravery of mind that you dare aspire to reach a fortune, and pluck the Golden apples of Hesperides, watcht by the old Dragon the Usurer: But I would not have you lose time in talk I wil bid the Groom prepare my horse ready for your employment. A. Sir, The whole service of my life cannot require your kindness; for since you have granted this request so willingly, I shall own my good fortune to your fa∣vourable assistance. A. Sir, I wil pray that your attempt may be prospe∣rous, for I shall rejoyce in your happiness, as much as in mine own: Therefore my best wishes shall be your good Genius, to wait on you, while my prayers sollicit heaven for your happy success. A. Sir, you have exprest your self a noble friend, and when this business is past, all the study of my life shall be, to shew my thanfulness to you. A. Sir, I wish nothing, but that you may obtain your desires. To present a Ring to a Gentlewoman. A. Pardon me, if I (moved thereto by the zalous af∣fection which I bear you) do hre express it in the dumb language of a small present, unworthy your acceptance, yet I pray you wear it for my sake, it may draw down your eye to think on me, who am now wounded by the powerful beams of your beanty.
Gen. Sir, Though it would shew a scornfull mind in me, not to accept your love, tendred unto me in such a visible manner▪ yet I am sorry you should be at so great and need∣less charges; for wherein can I serve you to make requitall? Aym. It is you that make this unworthy present pre∣cious; for if you please to let it incircle your white finger, it being a Diamond Ring, will sparkle most in the dark; shewing that love, like a clouded Star, shines lightest in the night of misfortune. Gent: VVell sir, I am obliged to your courtesie, to receive it, and since you please to conser so rich a gift on my unwor∣thiness, I wil weare it for your sake. Aym. Then you honour me above my desert, for your acceptance of this sacrifice of my love, is to me above all rewards. The Ring is inscribed with amor circulus, love is a Circle without end. Gent. I must acknowledge your beauty, and my self your servant, for bestowing on me so rich a gift. Aym. The sparkling lustre thereof, cannot compare with the light beams of your eyes, but honour me so much to weare it on your finger. Gent. I promise that, and more acknowledge my selfe in∣finitely beholding to you. Aym. You have said too much concerning so poor a present; yet in your acceptance of this trifle, I shall e∣ver bless my own happiness. To wooe a coy, scornfull Maid. Aym. LEt not my love be misconstrued for presumption, if I once again strive to warm your affection, by declaring unto you, how much I honour your per∣fection; pray at last be mercifull, and do not stil reward my love with cold disdain.
Maid. Sir, I know that men have powerfull Lan∣guage, but I am none of those young ones; you are de∣ceived, if you think that fine Musk words can sweeten me up to betray my self, and for my beauty I would not have you dote on that; it suffices me without com∣mendation. Aym. Should I not commend what all admire, I were much too blame. Maid. Sir, Wise men admire nothing, for if I were beautiful, what is beauty but a fading flower, blasted often with too much breathing on, and cannot grow safely upon the stalk of Virginity, because every one will be reaching forth to gather it? Pray excuse me if I prevent such a danger, for love and I are quite faln out. Aym. Let me reconcile you to a good opinion of a chast love: there is no greater happiness than the sacred Vnion of Hearts, especially, when long and humble suits conquer disdain; and so I hope, perseverance will at last Crown me with your love, and bring you to entertain my desire with a mutuall affection. Maid. Sir, If you would be more thrifty of your breath, you may spend it to better purpose; for you may intimate your desires, and make tedious discourses. But in a word, I shall never love you. Aym. O say not so, you know not how much misery those few words would bring upon me; for hope, grounded on your gentle disposition, hath hitherto kept me alive, and made me walk like a faint shadow, whilest in my chamber I am like a mourner with a Taper by me, watching my own fu∣nerall, and I will dwell there in a mist of sighes, and all this for your sake. Maid. Sir, I hope you will not accuse me of your death; pray shake of this love, and I will then ac∣knowledg your kindness, in ceasing to trouble me with complaints; Learn wisdome, that will cure all di∣stempers.
Aym. Yet while I live I wil attend upon you, and when I am dead, I wil visit yo n a dream, and tel you you were a ciuell Maid.  clude, let one parting kiss, seal my transport to Eli, and I am gone. Maid, Sir, since you are so resolue, I will strive to give you a better answer at your next return. Aym. In confidence of that happiness, I wil presume to visit you again, and live to be your servant. A jesting discourse with a maid. Aym COme, why wil you be an enemie to your self, and let modestie keep you stil in the state of virginity I came to offer my ser∣vice, to help you out of this trouble. Maid. You are very kind, but I like my present es∣tate: Maids are happie. Aym. Alas! poor ignorance, dost thou talk of hap∣piness? I tel thee, until thou art married, thou art but a Cypher, and of no account. Maid. O sir, You are deceived; our hearts, are free from the passion of love, retain a world of happiness, being exempted from any wanto Knowledge, for maids dying in their present condition, do all go to heaven. Aym. You are deceived, their punishment: is to lead apes in hel, and therefore to avoid this; be kind while you may, and accept of a friendly offer. Maid. What offer? Aym. Lest it should raise a blush upon your cheek, I wil whisper it into your ear—you understand. Maid. Take heed sir, lest while you counterfeit a flame you kindle a real fire, I bear too much, thy infectious words have betrayed a base ignoble mind. Aym. Why? I did but tel you a truth: I had thought you had been more intelligent, and would not have
scarred at a bold word. Maid. Nay farwel. Aym. Pardon me, all I have spoken was to try your temper, and having found you both wise and wit∣ty, I wil desire you in a fair manner to grant me your love, which I only desire; and though I did appear rash and wanton, you shal find me worthy of your affections. To contract privately ones self, & to tythe knot of marriage. Aym. NOw our love hath arrived to a happy con∣clusion, the storms raised by our disdain be∣ing blown over, the union of our affections making a soft and gentle harmony, which the soul can only discern, therefore that our new begun love may never expire; I do here in the sight of heaven and all good angels, marry and contract my soul to yours, and give away my selfe wholly to be at your disposing, till the Ceremonies of the Church confirm my promise. Maid. With as true an affection, I do give my self over into your possession, and freely bestow on you my love, which shall never know alteration, but remain ever firm and constant to you; it is therefore expedient that you obtain my friends good wil, according to your promise, and til then we must remain only contracted in our affections. Aym. Heaven I beseech thee bear witness to our pri∣vate agreement, and may I never know one day of com∣fort when I break my promised Vow, let me now em∣brace you with the arms of affection, and thus with a soft kiss, seal the obligation of our loves To salute a friend newly arriv'd from a journey. Alex. SIir, When first the news of your return had ar∣rived to my knowledg, I was heigtn'd with an
earnest desire to behold you, and prevent other of your friends, by the first tender of my service, that as my love towards you, doth exceed theirs in true perfect sinceri∣ty, so it might in place obtain priority, and shew how ambitious I am of your favour. Aym. Sir, You still continue your former nobleness, making it your chiefe ayme to exceed others in per∣fection of mind; otherwise I had an intention to visit you; but it is your desire and happiness. to overcome others in kindness, for which, I can but return you thanks, and acknowledge you a worthy friend. Alex. Sir, you make too good an interpretation of my rash presumption, but it is held, that friends have but one soul in two bodies, therefore when I behold you, I enjoy the other halfe of my selfe, besides, after long absence, your com∣pany must needs be more precious, so that I had both love and reason on my side, to perswade me to come and visit you. Aym. Sir, I want words to express my mind, or to argue a case in love, but in my opinion, I ought to have visited you first, in regard I am very much ob∣liged unto you: But to proceed no farther in ceremony let us discourse of some other affairs; I will be bold to enquire how all our friends do? Alex. Sir, some of them hath undergone change of for∣tunes, and therein declared an invincible strength of mind but heaven be thanked, all that honour and respect you, are living and in health. Aym. Sir, I am wonderfull glad to hear of it, and I shall rejoyce exceedingly, when I meet any of my old acquaintance; I hope I am not altogether lost unto their remembrance, they will know me certainly. Alex. Sir, travel hath not wrought much change in you but I detain you too long I fear, from your rest. Aym. Sir, were I tyred with travel, as I am not; ye your company would very much refresh me.
Alex. Sir, I wil crave your pardon at this time, I know o tarry longer would be troublesome unto you, but to mor∣ow I wil wait on you again. To entertain a friend who is come to vis one. Alex. SIR, I am most glad to see you, though I have no other entertainment for you, but a kinde welcome. Aym. Sir, I expect no more; I come to give you a visit, and to be happy in your society; for in the generall, I do find none that can suit my disposition so wel as your self Alex. Sir, say what you please of me, I am vowed to your service; and your loving visitation is an addition to your many other kindnesses. Aym. Sir, all that I acknowledg, is a wil to do you service; but I have been slow in producing the effects, hereafter I wil study to deserve. Alex. Sir it is your ingenius goodness to decline the acknowledgement of your own vertue and deserts, far surpassing my merits, for 'tis I am bound to be your servant. Aym. Sir, it is I that am obliged to you by many strong tyes of affection, from which the service of my life cannot dis-ingage me; but I have trespass'd against manners, pray take the chair. Alex. Sir, wil you please to sit first, for it is an ho∣nour for me to wait your pleasure. Aym. Sir, I am provided, but if it may not appear too much boldness, what was the adamant that drew you, or occasion that made you so kind to visit my lodging? Alex. Sir, I shall tel you, I came not to borrow mo∣ney, or to force your good nature to any thing beyond civility, but onely to keep our love and amity fresh and in perfect strength, by a visit and some confe∣rence.
Aym. Sir, you have chosen a bad opportunity, my affairs carry me away from my friends, besides the ob∣ligation of my word to a Lady, to attend upon he thi day. Alex. Sir, I wil chuse some other time to wait upon you. Aym. Sir, I wil attend upon you, if I might know the place, and hour, where to meet you. Alex. Sir, I will not put you to that trouble, it will become me rather to wait on you. Aym. Pardon me Sir, I am much obliged to you. Alex. Sir, I am your servant. Aym. Sir, I am the servant of your servants, pray re∣member my respects to all my friends. A. Sir, I wil be yours, in that, and all other services To woce a fair young Gentlewoman. A. PArdon me, Lady, if I presume to speak what  have hitherto with much affection conceale from you knowledg. There is a Gentleman that hath beheld your heaven∣ly beauty; and with his judgment clearly discern'd you virtues, the ornaments of your mind, these have pro∣duced in him strange effects, so that in spite of his own reason, or disswasion of friends, he is violently com¦pelled to speak truth. Penel. Sir, call you this an affliction? 'tis a happines to speak and hear truth. Aym. Do you hold that opinion? then I will convince yo by your own Expressions: For if it be a happiness to hear trt then I hope you wil pardon me, if being compelled by th strength of my passion, I do truly tell you that I have place my affection wholly upon you; or as they commonly say, I  love you. Pen. Sir, I am sorry that you have made me th object of your love; I know your Birth and Person ma deserve one of greater account, and therefore I a
amazed at the unexpected novelty of your mot  imagining, but your bosome had been free from any flame, let your wisdom then suppress it, lest your love become fruitless in the event. Aym. I wil not be discouraged by your first answer▪ for neither are you beneath me in quality, who am your servant; neither can it appear to you so strange a mat∣ter, that I should be taken with your beauty, which o∣thers admire, though it be my fortune only to be bol∣der than the rest, and I hope not unwelcome. Pen. Sir, I would not have you cherish any un∣certain hope; nor build any assurance, where you have but a sandie foundation; Love cannot be compelled▪ but must low from the spring of naturall desire; b I find in my self no inclination to entertain your a∣ction; therefore you must pardon me if I deny you suit, which is not in my power to grant. Aym. Nothing is impossible to love; for if you wo believe that I bear a noble and constant affection ¦wards you, you would soon overcome this difficulty,  incline your mind to reward my affection with your a¦vour. Pen. Sir, I am confident that your affection is ri and perfect, nor seeking under a fair and coloura prtence to betray me; I cannot force my self to comen to your motion, being utterly ignorant in love matter therefore excuse me til time and consideration shal enforce me to answer your desire. Aym. I am comforted, that you have not utterly de∣nyed my suit, I hope at my next visit, to receive more incouragement, til then I take my leave, and presume only to breath my heart upon your hand, or if you please, your lip, desiring you to remember me in your absence, VVhen one meeteth a friend in the Street. A. GOd save you, sir, you are most happily met. How fare you?
Clor. Sir I am the better to see you wel and lusty, why wil not you do me the honor to visit me at my chamber? Alex. Sir I must confess I have often broke promise therein, but my business would not permit me; other wise I had long since waited on you. Clor. I should rather account my self obliged to wait on you; for I am bound unto you for many favours, espe∣cially for the last courtesie you did me, in matter which concerned me much. Wil you now do me he kindness to present my respects to a Gentlewoman. Alex. Sir, if she be honest, I am ready to go on your errand; I hope you wil not put me upon a disgracefull piece of service. Clor. I hope you have no such bad suspition of me; for she is both fair and a virtuous Gentlewoman, and hath a nimble wit; but I know you can deliver your mind in an excellent way. Alex. Sir, it is you whom Mercury the God of wit hath adorned with a gentle amarous speech; but I wil speak in your behalf, in as good moving effectual terms as I can remember. Clor. Sir, shal you do me a most perfect favor? Tel her, I am her ready and willing servant, and that the powers of love hath given her my heart, which I wil come to fetch, in hope she shall give it me back, and til then keep it warm in her own bosome; But what need I in∣struct you, who are all love and courtship. Alex. Sir, I will perform your command, though not in such words as you would desire, yet so as my sudden Genius shall prompt me; but I have heard it said, That in the way of love and glory, Lovers best tel their own story. Clor. Sir, Pardon me; I know whom I do intrust with
this business, I am assured of your fidely, and that you can deliver your mind in a powerfull manner, especially to Gentlewomen. Alex. Sir, it must be my love to you that will in∣spire me; for I promise you, I will strive to speake my best. Clor. Sir, I am confident in you, and at your return from my Mistris, I will prepare thanks for this great piece of service, and rest, yours obliged. Alex. Sir, It is but my duty; and I am happy to be imployed in any service that concerns you, Suppose this done. To court a Gentlewoman in the way of Marriage. Eugenius. MIstris, I doubt not but that you will judge me as rash as bold; but I beseech you by your Divine beauty, which glis∣tereth in your fair eyes, to excuse my audacitie, and to pardon my temeritie, which have emboldned me to come and present unto you, my most humble and most affectionate service. Calia. Sir, I am sorry that I have not the honour to know you, and I marvel that you wil offer service to me that of all am most unworthy. Eugen. Mistris, it is the sweetness of your naturall goodness, that causeth you to speak so humbly of your self. Calia. Pardon me sir, I speak nothing but what I know to be most clear truth. Eugen. Lady, The singular modesty which I have heard you express in your language, gives me a hope that you wil entertain my intentions, not as harsh and disconsonant, but agreeable and consonant, and that in time I shall obtain your grace and favour.
Calia. Sir, If there were any graces in me, they pro∣ceed from you, and with such expressions you honour your self. Eugen. Mistris, you are pleased thus to oblige me to a greater estimation of you, which makes you more ami∣able, and me more affectionate towards you: I there∣fore beseech you to believe, that my intentions were never otherwise than chast and vertuous, and that I never had any other end than honesty. Did you think rue to have framed some design prejudiciall to your honour? I had rather lose my being, than entertain any such thought; so firm is my resolution, for ever to continue your faithfull and most obedient servant, as the effects shall make evident, whensoever your commands shall call upon me. Calia. I humbly thank you sir, with my best affection, as also for the pains you have taken for one that no way merits such favours, I being your very humble servant. Eugenius. Lady, It is I that am so deeply engaged to you, that I am dis-inabled to quit my selfe of the obli∣gation; and therefore (most faire Mistris) I beseech and conjure you, to make use of my service and me, in whatsoever you shall judge me acceptable to serve you; and in the mean time, after a million of recom∣mendations, I wil be bold to take my leave of you and will leave my heart with you, as an hostage and pledge of fidelity and constancie. Calia. Farwel sir, and I give you humble thanks for this your loving visit. Eug. I hope to see you again, and very speedily, where for the ptesent I must leave you. Calia. Sir, so far as your intentions shal continue good and your suits lawfull, you shall alwaies find the doors open; and also to gentlemen like your self, who shal not want the best entertainment, according to my ability, & n that regard you shall not oftner come, than be wel∣ome.
Eugen. Lady I do assure you, that I now go to elon∣gate my self from the bright day, and confine my selfe into an abyss of melanchollick darkness: for I dare be bold to protest unto you, that without you, I enjoy not the light: and therefore all the time of this sad ab∣ence wil be so tedious to me, that moments will be hours; the hours dayes; and the dayes will be ages, un∣less it be so, that the experience of being in your fa∣vour, be my sole consolation, which will arm me with a resolute patience. Calia. You speak strong lines, sir; but it may be you are not so passionate as your words pretend; Farewell sir, til our next meeting. Eugen. Mistris, You do wrong to your beauty, and to my love, which is faithfull and loyall; but I hope that time wil make me appear to be more largely what I am; and seeing necessity constrains me to retire from you, I wil never retreat from that affection which your fair eyes have darted in my soul: and so Lady adieu til my next review, which I assure you shall be assoon as possible I can. Vpon her absence. EVgenius. I protest to you, my fairest, that I could never have believed that the torments of true af∣fection could have been so miserable; for I dare swear to thee, by those fair eys, the stars of my fortunes, that I dwelt with impatiencie and sorrows til I saw you. C. It is impossible sir, surely I can hardly believe it. Eug. Mistris I beseech you to believe it, if you please, for I assure you that I could no longer endure, nor sup∣port the violent and troublesome tediousness, which I endured in the time of your long absence, the object of my good, and sole content being removed.
C. Sir, it may very wel be, for you seem very passio∣nate in your expressions. Eugen. I protest that it is impossible for me to take a∣ny complacencie in the world, but in that only that flatters my affection, and in the aspect of your rae form and most excellent beauty. C. It pleaseth you to term it so; you are delighted in laughing at me, as you may at one that enjoyeth not the least glimps of beauty in her self. Eugen. Wherein, my dearest, should you conceive so of me; I do assure you, with the better part of my soul, that I should be miserable, did I not really speak what my affections suggest as truth: Know, Lady, that you see a man that is wholly yours, and deserves not to live, but for you and to do you service: But that which trou∣bleth me most, is, That of necessity I must absent my self from you upon a very urgent occasion, but I beseech you to believe ad conceive so of me, that whithersoe∣ver I go, I shall carry with me the lively delineaments of your perfections, and that I shall not live but by the idea of your beauty, with perfect resolution of obey∣ing you; and therefore (my sweetest) adieu for a while, and for the present have me excused, that I cannot en∣joy the felicitie of your most desired company, but must take my leave abruptlie. C. I infinitely thank you, and bid you also farwel, wishing you also a safe return. An enterchange of Ceremonies at parting with a friend, taking a long Journey. SIR, I am very sorry that my affairs do compell me to take my leave of you, from whom I have re∣ceved so many benefits, which have bound me in
many tyes ever to erve you, neither have I any way left to satisfie my self in requiting your former kind∣nesses, but to acknowledg them far above my requi∣tal, and to desire you that you would both receive the tender of my humble service, and command me in somthing, whereby I might express how much I ho∣nour your desert. Sir, J cannot chuse but grieve that you must now be divided from us by a tedious journey; yet since he loves himself better than his friend, that wil not yeild to a∣ny thing for his good; J am content in that respect to lose your company a while, wishing you a prosperous journey, and that in your absence you would remem∣ber me, who will alwayes in my dayly prayers, solicite heaven for your safe return, desiring to be excused for your poor entertainment, which, perhaps, makes you des∣rous to be gone. Sir, Pardon me, the entertainment J have found, was far above my desert; for which J render you a million of thanks. There remains nothing now, but tha you honour me with your commands. Sir, J intreat you make not so great hast to be gone Sir, J could willingly defer my journey, to enjo your company, but the wind stands faire for France therefore let us conclude all Ceremonies. Sir, Since you must dispence with your depar∣ture, do us the courtesie to revive our drooping minds wth the good Tydings of your safe arrivall in France. Sir, Be assured J cannot be unmindfull of you, nor of my other Friends, to whom J intreat you to com∣mend me, since J cannot take my leove of them in par∣ticular.
Sir, I am glad you wil do me that favour, to give me any imployment in your absence, I will perform your desires. Sir, I can but thank you for your love, in bringing me to my ship, which is a trouble that you would take upon you, though on my part undeserved. Sr, I am happy to serve you in any thing; God send you a prosperous voyage. Sir, I doubt not but I shall arrive in safety, trouble your self no farher, since I cannot remain with you to requite your kindness. Sir, Since you wil needs have it so, I wil bid you far∣wel, with all the affection of constant mind. To invite one to dinner. Alex. PRay let me prevail so far with you to intreat your company to dinner. Clor. Sir, I humbly thank you for your cour∣tesie; but my business wil not permit me, therefore I de∣sire to be excused. Alex. Nay good Sir, let me not be denyed, I must con∣fess indeed your cheer wil not be worthy of your stay, but you shall be heartily welcome. Clor. Sir, I should willngly obey your desire, but I fear to be too bold. Alex. Sir, You shall be most welcome, you shal com∣mand in my house as in your own. Clor. Your offer is so large and courteous, that I must yeild to wait on you, for you have overcome me in ce∣remonie, but you wil draw upon your self many incon∣veniences. Alex. Sir, You wil find but course fare, but such as it is, pray esteem your self most heartily welcome to, in a real manner without complement.
Clor. Sir, Here is much plenty, and you wrong your selfe to excuse your chear, whereof there is so great abundance, that unlss you would have provided, all the Variety that was in Noahs Arke, I know not how it could be excee∣ded. Alex. It is your favour to commend and accept of a∣ny thing, but pray excuse me, once more I desire it; if I had bin certain of your honouring my house with your presence, would have made better preparation for your nertainment. Clor. Sir, I desire you rather to excuse my boldness, in putting you to so much trouble; you may perceive that I think my selfe welcome by my liberall feeding; I am no mincing Bride, whose thoughts of eating are took away with the con∣ceit of the night following. Alex. I beseech you spare not, I am glad to see you so pleasant, and to increase your mirth, I wil drink to you a health in wine, in hope you wil pledge me. Clor. Sir, they say there is truth in wine, and if there be truth in wine, I wil finde it out, let the health be never so deep. Alex. I thank you for doing me this piece of justice, I pray see if you can make up a dinner, otherwise I know not how to be excused for inviting you. Clor. Sir, to decline ceremony, you have most worthily feasted me, and honoured me so much, that I must ever ac∣knowledge your exceeding bouny and courtesie. Ceremonies at sitting down at the Table. Alex. Gentlemen; Pray ye take your places, I know not how to direct you. But first let us wash. Gent. Gent. Be pleased to begin, for it is fit that we should follow you. Alex. In this matter Ceremonies are needless, but
you wil do nothing without an example, and therefore I wil begin. Gent. Then in obedience to your desire, we wil wash with you. Alex. I beseech you Gentlemen, to save me a labour and take your places. Gent. Sir, we expect your sitting down, and after∣wards we wil not contend much for priority of place. Alex. Come Master Getting, you are my old acquain∣tance, you shall favour me to sit here by me. Gent. By no means, that is not my place, here's a Gentleman that deserves to be seated there. Alex. Sir, I have designed you this place, prai let me rule you so far. Gent. Sir I should be loth to be too troublesome, and yet I would not presume before my betters. Alex. Sir, You are too full of excuse, you may yeild to take your due place, otherwise I should wrong you. Gent. Sir, I beseech you then to excuse me, and ac∣count it your fault if I transgress the bounds of man∣ners, in assuming a place far above my desert, and which is of right belonging to these other Gentlemen. Alex. We might have spar'd this Ceremonie, for the appetite loves good dainties, better than Comple∣ments. Now pray carve for your selves, you are kindly welcome. Gent. Sir; We wil not put you to any trouble in hel∣ping us, we know that manners wil allow us to make a dinner, we come to trespass on you. The Feasters excuse to his friend after Dinner. ALEX. Sir, I desire you to excuse your mean fare and slender entertainment, whereunto I have presumed much to invite you; but I hope our ancient
acquaintance, and your own good nature will procure me Pardon, in that I have done this only to enjoy your company and society; for your good discourse is to me a Feast, far ex∣ceeding any dainties that I could provide for you. Friend. Your reall kindness hath been such, and so unex∣pected, that I cannot give you sufficient thanks for your cour¦tesie and kinde entertainment: all that I can retribute, is t- promise, that I wil snatch an opportunity to express my gra¦titude. Alex. You have honoured me enough, in your acceptance of my good will. But it is not wholsome to stir suddenly after dinner: Let's discourse; you are conversant abroad, what News do you hear? Fr. Pardon me, sir, the world runs round about me, whilest I stand unmoved, never markig the motions there∣of, and therefore I am altogether ignorant in novelties; it may be you hear more. A. Indeed sir, J have so many affairs, that J can enquire after none, J thought you could have given us some good in∣telligence. Fr. Sir, J desire you to excuse me, for J hold it fruitless imployment; but to satisfie your request, if J knew any fresh News that were not yet in print, J should be bold to acquaint you with it, since you desire me. A. J wil not importune any further, but desire your pardon that J should impose on you the office of an intelligencer; excuse my intent therein, since what J desired was to pass away the time while we sit, but now if you please we will rise. Fr. Sir, then J most really thank you, you have made me bold with you, J wil accompany you a while to the fire, and then take my leave.
To offer service to a young Maid. AYM. Seeing you are alone, I would willingly atten on you, if you please to accept of my service. Maid. It is more than I desite or deserve, and it would appear boldness in me to accept of a strangers companie; For it is not for me to entertain all shews and offers of kindness, I can but thank you for your good wil, I am not far distant from mine own home. Aym. I pray let me bear you company, and by the way make me happy in some discourse, resolve me one que∣stion, wre you ever in love? Maid. Though it be no manners to answer one que∣stion with demanding another, yet wil I presume to ask you if you were never in love. Aym. Fair one, from thence springs my unhapp∣ness, I am too forward in these desires, I have be∣held many beauties, but you have prevailed more than the rest, to conquer my affection, and I must acknowledge that in meeting you, I have met death or life. Maid. Pray speak in plain terms; I am ignorant of your meanings Aym. I desire you then, know and believe, that I am already far in love with you; and I hope you will not scorn my sudden motion, if I should desire you to re∣ward my love with your favour, and by the way let me entreat you, to thnk that heaven have pointed our srange accidental meeting, and gave me boldness to ptition your favour and affection, which I hope you wil grant. Maid. Sir, I know not n this case how to give an an∣swer that may procure your content, but I desire you to impotune me no farther, but grant me time to consi∣der your motion, and this is my fathers house, whther if you pease to come hereater, I wil strve to resolve ou, howsoeer you shall be welcome.
Aym. But before I lose your presence, which is my chiefest happiness, let me tel you, that when you go, you bear away my heart with you, and I shall only lan∣guish in sorrow til I visit you again. Maid. Pray sir do not hold me any longer in ds∣course, there are many jealous eyes that do watch an occasion to expose me to censures, for maintaining with you such an usuall familiarity; let me intreat you, as you tender my credit, to leave me. Aym. I must obey you, honour me with an ordinary salutation, and I wil vanish like a shadow, and return again to wait on you, who are the substance of my life. To confer with a widow in an amorous wooing manner. AYM. I would entreat you, fair widow, not to discou∣rage me in my first suit, since your modesty and virtu∣ous carriage, in your husbands life time, hath made me bold to plead for affection, and to cherish a certain hope, that I should obtain your good liking. VVid. Sir, I would not have you imagine that my love to my former husband was Written in a Table-Boo, the Letters whereof may be soon wiped out, a∣gain; no, it wa engraven upon my heart, and there doth remain, to inform me that I ought not to wrong him with a second marriage. Aym. Nay, widow, I must acknowledge you have a fair prtence to put me off, with the remembrance of your said husband, but will you alwayes punish your self, and fast from the joyes of marriage. VVid. It is my ful resolved purpose, and therefore let not any wanton opinion, concerning me, give you hope of obtaining my love: alas! since his departure, I am dead unto the world, and do but only lye, to sigh, when I remember that I had so good an husband.
Aym. His goodness is gone with him, but for my part, I will be your loving active servant; come, come, put off grief and false imaginations of honouring of the dead: for if his soul were capable of any knowledg concerning earthly matters, he would rejoyce to see you happly married, and as he gave you all contentment in his life so he would desire that you might be supplyed in the same kind after his death. Widow. You speake unhappily, but pray be satisfied, that I intend not to marry, yet I respect, your good will, and in other matters, will remaine readie to requite your love. A. For other matters I am satisfied; but your love is the Mark whereat I aim; why would you thus strive to become a Virgin again, and forget the conceit of former pleasures, which are yet fresh in your remembrance; fie, fie, you do not wel to make your self so dul of apprehen∣sion; I am come to offer service in the right kind, and therefore you are very much to blame, to refuse the ten∣der of my respects. W. You speak mysteries: but I desire if you love me, shew it in ceasing to prosecute your suit; for I must tell you plainly it will prove fruitless and of none effect. Aym. I cannot believe but that I shall be more fortu∣nately happy to obtain your favour; words are not al∣wayes the interpreters of the heart, and I am confident for all this that you love me. W. Perswade your self to it, but I shall never give you cause to think so, yet I will ever respect you, and be ready to do you any lawfull courtesie. A. Well I thank you that I have so far thrived in my suit, I hope hereafter to get deeper into your favour. W. Your hope is built upon a false. Foundation; and had I known your intent, I would not have held discourse so long with you; I must leave your company. Aym. Let me rather take my leave, and seal a Kiss
upon your lips, until I visit you again; for no mortall widow shall discourage me, but I will come again with the more resolute affections. To excuse some offence done to a Gentlewoman. Aymwell. I Must acknowledge I was somwhat too bold to enforce a kiss from you, in the presence of other friends, but I pray excuse my passion, and let your mercie be shewed in pardoning, as my fol¦ly was in offending. Pen. Sir, it was so great a trespass, and so directly ay∣med against my white same and reputation, that no repen∣tance can satisfie for a fault of that nature. Aym. It cannot exceed the limits of forgiveness; or if your wrath must not be otherwise satisfied, enjoyn me some penance, as great as your anger, whereby  may recover your lost favour, and make it appear, ho sorry I am for committing so rash an offence. Penelope. Nay, you may enjoy that Kisse violentl took from me before so many witnesses, but never any more. A. I must confess it was my rashness, but if you wil that I repay it back again, I wil give you interest fo that one, and vow unto you never to offend you pati∣ence in the like kind. Penelope. VVell, since you are so willing to repent, and to shew unfeigned sorrow, I must needs accept them for present satisfaction, desiring you hereafter to be mor careful of my credit, and never again to make so bold an offer. A. You have charmed me to obedience, since you words are a Law, which I dare not transgress; for I am in all things your obsequious Servant. The Lovers farwell. Leonara. ALas! Sir, is this the hour that the sever rigor of your absence must eclips my day of their bright Beams? O how this sa
ews doth fire my spirits! and not without reason, since ou (to whom I had wholly consecrated my selfe) wil not ouchsafe a mercifull eie on my sufferings for your ab∣ence. Florestan. Mistris, fear not, but rest assured, that so long is Life will give leave to enjoy the Suns bightnss, never hall any other have power over me; do me only this favour, hat having given you these new assurances of my fidelity, ou would be pleased to render me some reall promises of ours. Besides I protest to you, Lady, I will never acknow∣edge other light tha yours, no more than the earth doth, any more than the Sun and Moon. Leon. Sir, they are no false Promises that I have made you, but true Assurances, drawn from my heart by the force of my passion. And know, that all things eie beneath, shall sooner change their naturall incli∣nations, than in me shall be seen any alteration from the resolution I have made, to love you, heaven it self be my witness. Florest. If, Mstris, you love me thus; let your minde be confident of an equall truth from me; and should you doubt of my affctions, I will give you my soul for a pledg, and my heart for a sacrfice, to shew you that my wods ar ufeigned; be pleasd thefore, to accept of this small gift, not as a thing worty f merit, but onely as a sufficient te∣stimony of my good will, fidelity, and faithfull love to∣wards you; it being a thing so small and unwothy of you, it will therefoe be the more commendable in you to accp. of it. Leon. Sir, I give you infinite thanks, and withall, do beseech you alo o receive this in requitall, for a remembrance of me, which is of a smaller value; be but pleased to take it in good part from her, who from henceforth shall not live, but through your sole remem∣brance. Flor. Tha ks to you, sweetest, the gift truly is plea∣sing
to me, but the giver much more. Leon. But Sir, is there no means to stay you for a little time, that I might enjoy your presence, which stands me instead of light and life, therefore your b ence will invelope me with darkness, and bring upon me (poor soul that I am) a thousand grievous deaths. Flor. Mstris, I hope not so, for I am constrained through ecessity of my business, to depart hence. Leon. O, I see now too wel, that that Constancie of you s, which I trusted to for remedie of my troubled thoughts, is vanished, to give present vent to my plaints, which you shall receive with my sighs and tears, for true and burning testimonies of the sorrow I have, to see my selfe about to be forsaken by him, by whom only I breath Flor. Mistris, I swear to you, my heart is alike touched with such strokes, for this our parting, that I can hardly breath for griefe of it, and do already see I have lost my self, in the loss of the sight of your star-like Beauty. For I▪ am sure, hat once absent from your luminous aspect, each pleasure wil be tome a subject of grief and sorrow. How∣ever, since it will not be otherwise, I shall so part with you, as that my life shall ever be at your service, and so farwell, dear Mistris, live still happy and content, whilest I languish unfortunate, though most constant; let not then my remoenss alter your mind, more than it shall shake the resolution I have long since made, to live and dye yours; as for mine own part, I shall not think my self absent from you, so long as I am longed in you heart and memory. L on. Farwell, Sir, you possess my Soul; and I do even leave it in your power, conserve it for a more happ e seaon than th of parting; and in the mean space, have p tty of all the bloudy griefes, which the meer apprehension of your absence, makes me alreadi
feel so vehemently, for J think it very strange to leave you, whose company is dearer to me than my life. But to make an end of this discourse, J do beseech, you Sir, and let me conjure you by the sweetness of that love J have horn you, and will all my life long de∣vote to you, in respect of my cruel fears, to write often to me, during the unhappy time of your absence, for in reading of your Letters, J shall perswade my selfe that J am not wholly deprived of you, or lost to your memory. Florestan. J vow to you Mistris, J will give to you so many Letters for confirmation of my loyalty, and the love J bear you, tht you shall have no cause to mistrust. And as the Di∣vine Creator, hath made you the fairest and most accompli∣shed, that he also make you the most pitifull to retain me in your most desired favour, that J may be able continually to witness how violent my affections are toward you. Lad. Heaven grant you may be as faithfull to me, as J am to you; and give you as much quiet and con∣tentment as you take from me. But what should J say more? J must cease to remember you of the force and heat of my affections, but not to intreat you to pity my martyrdome; and that wheresoever you are, to be mindfull of me. And so once more J intreat the Deity to grant you such prosperity, that your fortunes may parallel your perfection. Flor. Rest assured (sweet Mistris) to be beloved of me, hough not equall to your merit, to which height it is impos∣ble my affections should raise it self.
COMPLEMENTALL POEMS. On the beauty of his Mistress. BRighter than inside Barks of new-hewen Cedar, Sweeter than flames of fire perfum'd with mirth, And comlier than the Silver clouds that dance On Zephyrus wings, before the queen oth'Spring: 'Tis she doth teach those Torches to burn bright: It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night, As a rich Jewel in the Aethiop's ear, Beauty too rich for use, for love more dear; So doth a snowy Dove, trooping with Crows, As this my Mistris, o're her fellow shows: Since her whole bodies frame hath pow'r t'have moved The chast Hyppollitus for to have loved. In sum, her parts are white as Milk, As smooth as Ivory, and as soft as silk. O! who can her perfections tel, In whom alone all graces dwel? On her hair. Her hairs reflex with red streaks paint the Skies, Stars fall to fetch fresh lustre from her eyes: Whil'st that those golden threds play with her breath, Shewing lifes triumph in the map, of death. On her locks. Her locks being platted like a piece of wool, Are ful of sweet, as sweet of sweets is ful. On her Forehead. Her stately front was figured from above, Majestick, fair, wel polisht, high and pale, Pure white that dim s the Lillies of the Vale.
On her face. Her face like Cynthea's when in the ful she shneth, And blustring to her Love-mates bower declineth. Such brightness hath her angels face, Can make a Sun-shine in a shady place. On the colour of her face. Such colour hath her face, as when the Sun, In summer his first rising hath begun▪ On her Eye-brows and chks. Each Eye-brow hangs like Iris in the skes, On either Cheek a Rose and Lillie lyes. Another on her Eye-brows and breath. Her bright Brows drive the Sun to Clouds beneath, Sweet Morn and Evening dews fall from her breath. On her Eye-lids. Her arches be two heavenly lds: Whose wincks each bold attempt forbids. On her Eyes. Her eyes the contradictors of the night; Like marigolds, unsheath their glorious light. Another on the same. Two jettie sparks where Cupid chaftly hides His subtil shafts, that from his quiver glides, Piercing the hearts of others, yet they be Unhappy, since themselves they cannot see. On her smiles. Her smiles so sweet and nice: On eath do make a heavenly Paradice On her cheeks. Her cheeks with ripened lillies steep'd in wine, Or gorgious Clouds upon the Suns decline. Another on the sam. Her cheeks with kindlie Claret spred, Aurora like new out of bed. On her nose and breath. Her nose is streight and of a stately frame.
Her breath a sweet perfume a holy flame. On her chin. Her christal chin like to the purest white Is lovers pavillion and the boys delight. On her Ears On these Meanders if you gaze, You soon wil read a lovers maze. On her lips. Her lips like Roses over-waht with dew, Do by their breath their beauties stil renew. On hr lips and Neck. Hr lips more red than Coral stone, Her neck's more white than aged Swans that moan, O! who those uddie lips can miss, Which blessed still themselves do kiss? On her Mouth. Sweet mouth that send'st a musick-rosied breath, Whose very word darts me a living death. On her mouth and teeth. Wthin the compass of this hollow sweet, Thos orien rankss of silver pearls do meet. On her breath. She breaths forth flowers, she makes the spring, Perfumes the ayre and comforts every thing. On her tongue and words. Her words do fall like summer dews on me, Her tongue strikes Musicks sweetest harmonie. On her teeth. Her lips ne're part, but they shew, Of precious pearl a double row. On her speech. In all her words such virtues couched be, The learned thence fetch their Philosophy. On her voice. A voice which doth the Thrushes shrilness stain. And makes declining nature young again.
On her neck. Her necks an Ivory shining Tower, Or like delight that doth it self devour. On her shoulders. These parching squares with silver skin, Do pass the hate-spot-Ermaline. On her arms. Her twin-like arms, that stainless pair, Fit for a Kings imbraces are. On her hands. Her azured veins do use to stray, With pretty Cupids every way: Moist Pearl, warm snow, pure Ivory, Within these strange compacts do ly. On her fingers. Long, small, and fit for Orpheus Lute, Which made the savage Tyger mute. On her actions. Her deeds are like great clusters of ripe grapes Which load the branches of the fruitful vine, Ostering to fall into each mouth that gapes, And fil the same with store of costly wine. On her brests. Her Brests, those Ivory Globes, circled with blue, Save of their Lord no bearing yoke they knew. On her Paps. Her Paps like two fair apples in their prime, From those blest sweets, love sucks his summer-time. On her good Thought. Her mindful Breasts perfumes with Frnckinsense, And sweetest odors every fainting sense. On her wast and ribs. Fitly so named, since it doth wast Mens lives until it be embraced: Her ribs with white all armed be, Compact with curious symmetry.
On her Skin and flesh. Her lovely skin is white, like Curds new prest, And snowy flesh, as soft as wool new drest. On her navel. Her love delights the wandring thought Whilest that my eyes astray are brought: Since nature here would fain unite, In curious circles busie fight. On her Belly. Most beautious seal of Virgins wax, Pitty 'tis the impression lacks. This place with sense my joy doth fil, Since 'tis intitled Cupids hil, From whence a seemly passage there doth flow To stranger pleasures that are plac'd below. On her womb. Her Maiden womb the dwelling house of pleasure. O blest is he may search that secret treasure. On her Thighes. These are the subjects that do fit The Genius of an Ovids wit; Whose branches smooth, as in a Glass, Our Albions Cliffs in whiteness pass. On her Knees. These Knots of joy, and Gems of love, With motion makes all graces move. Nn the calves of her legs. Mark wel how fare the flesh doth rise, In her brave calves like crystall skies. On the small of her legs. View but her Atlus smallest small, More white than whitest bone of all. On her feet. Her feet so short and slender, little round, On earth a finer pair cannot be found.
A last of his Mistresses perfections. She hath Venus lip and eye, With Diana's chastity, In those parts I have reveal'd, Venus beauty is exprest; Yet there are some parts conceal'd Which my fancie judgeth best. The conclusion. Thus every part impairs a grace, And beauty dwels in every place. Loves Month. May is not loves month, May is ful of flowers, But dropping Aprill-love is ful of showers. Definition of love. Love is a friend, a fire, a heaven, a hel, Where pleasure, pain, & sad repentance dwel. Love will out. The light of hidden fire it self discovers: And love thats conceal'd bewraies poor lovers. On the parting of lovers. Lovers wel wot what grief it is to part, When 'twixt two bodies liveth but one heart. And lovers say the heart hath double wrong, When it is bar'd the assistance of the tongue. On the constancie of affections. Love wel is said to be a life in death, That laughs, and weeps, and all within one breath. Lovers Lottery. The World's a Lottery, a Lovers prise, Is such a Girl that's fair, that's chast & wise. The quality of Love. Love is a spirit all compact with fire, Not gross to sink, but light, and wil aspire. VVhat love is. Love is a Golden Bubble full of Dreams, That waking breaks and fills us with extreams.
Lovers delight to be alone. Lovers best lke to see themselves alone, Or with their loves, if needs they must have one. Vows of Lovers. We know not how to love, til love unblinde us; And vows made ignorantlie can ne're bind us. On the purity of their affections. Needs must Venus wars be sweet, When two Maiden-lovers meet. Impossibility of concealing love. The light of hidden fire it self discovers, And love that is conceal'd betraies poor lovers. On one sick with love. Where Venus strikes with beautie to the quick, Great are the cares of those that are love-sick. The errors of love, All men do erre, because that men they be, And men with beautie blinded cannot see. VVhat love is. Love is a subtil influence, Whose smallest force stil hangeth in suspence. Love admits of no contrary arguments. Love hates all arguments, disputing stil For sense against reason, with a senseless will. VVhat love is. Love is a blinded God, an angry Boy, A slave to beauties wil, a witless toy, A ravening bird, tyrant most unjust; A private hel, a very sea of lust. Another definition of love. Love is a sowre delight, a sugred griefe, A breach of reasons law, a secret thiefe, A living death, an ever dying life, A sea of tears; an everlasting strife: A bait for fools, a scourge of noble wits, A deadly wound, a shot which ever hits.
On sudden affection. From hasty love see thou abstain, 'Tis lust (not love) thou seeks thus to obtain. The effects of love. This is the least effect of Cupids dart, To change the mind by woundng of the heart. Cruelty of love. Love is not ful of mercy, as men say, But deaf & cruel where he means to prey. The parting of Lovers. Love goes to love as School-boyes from their Books But love from love; toward School with heavy looks A Maxime of love. 'Tis folly by our wisest worldlings proved, If not to gain by love, to be beloved. Loves wounds. One was the bow, One was the Dart, That wounded us both to the heart; Then since we both do feel one pain, Let one love cure us both again. The constancie of lovers. Once learn to love, the lesson is most plain, And being learnt is never lost again, The force of love. Were beauty under twenty locks kept fast, Yet love breaks through and picks them all at last Of Musick and love. As without breath no pipe doth move: No Musick's kindly without love. A loving conjunction. The day unto my hope doth now shine fair, I and my love, in love united are. Love finds an opportunity. When love hath knit two hearts in unity, They seldome fail to find and opportunity.
Offers of love not to be refused. Occasion's winged, and ever flyeth fast, Coming she smiles, and frowns once being past. Patience of Lovers. One may endure; for when the pain is past, Reward, though long it stay, yet comes at last. Sorrows of Lovers. ighs are the ease calamity affords, Which serve for speech when sorrow wanteth words. To his Mstris on her expected humiliation from him for a rude Kiss. f that I must such penance do, 'le bow unto no Saint but you. On the Tears of Lovers. n sighs the Lover speaks his secret pains, Tears are his Oratory, words do make him tremble, et womens tears fall when they most dissemble. On frozen affection. There where the hearts Atturney once is mute, The Clyent breaks as desperate off his suit. Of true and false love. True love's a Saint, so shal you true love know; False love's a Scythian, yet a Saint in show. Love breaks all silence. What Fish so dumb, what Beast so dul of heart, That hears love sing and will not bear a part? No business like that of love. The fair, the false love can dmit, all but the busie man: He that hath business, and makes love, does do uch wrong, as if a married man should woo. The perseverance of a Lover. Desire being Pilot, and bright beauties prize, Who can fear sinking where such treasure lyes. The beginning of love. air beauty is the spark of hot desire,
And sparks in time will kindle to a fire. On a Lovers advesity. As the Stars in darkelt night, So love by suffering shines more bright: For like unto a hidden flame, It wil at last break forth again, On lust. Lust maks Oblivion, beateth reason back, Forgetteth shames pure blush, and honours wrack. On Virginity. The ripest Corn dies if it be not reapt; Beauty alone is lost, too early kept. A cruel Mstris. Nothing so ill becomes the fair As cruelty, which yeilds unto no prayer. On Coyness. A wayward beauty doth not fancie move, A frown forbids, a smile engendreth love. Another. Fair words and power, attractive beauty, Brings men too wanton in subjective. Another. Hope and despair attend a Lover still, Hope for to save, despair to kill. On jealousie. Where jealousie in baset minds doth dwel, 'Tis metal Vulcans Cyclops sent from hel. On pleasures. Somthing must stil be left to cheer our sin, And give a touch of what should not have bin, To those that know but pleasures price, All's one, a Prison, or a Paradice. On chastity. The unstain'd vail which innocents adorn, The ungathered rose defended with the thorn.
Another on the same. Penelope in spending chast her dayes, As worthy as Vlysses was of praise. A chast Vow. To thee as constant as the Sun to day, Til from this light night hurries me away. Protestations of service. I have vowed both love and duty, To your vertue and your beauty. On the Court. Thither let Phoebus sons resort, Where shines their Father but in loves great Court? On her delaying marriage. Where hearts be knit, what helps if not to enjoy? Delay breeds doubts, no cunning to be coy. On his desires. What can be said, that lovers cannot say? Desire can make a Doctor in a day. On hand and heart. Heaven seals that faith which firmly stands, And joyns our hands with hearts, our hearts with hands On Misfortune. The man that stil amidst misfortunes stands, Is sorrows slave, and bound in lasting bands. On fate. They fall which trust to Fortunes fickle wheel, But staid by vertue men shall never reel. On disdain. In high disdain love is a base desire, And Cupids Flames is but a watry fire.
A Knot of most Excellent Letters Wherein is laid open all the Perfections, or art of Complementing, or inditing any Epistle or Love-Letters. A letter of a loving father to his sonne before his death. MY Son, thou art now coming into the world that I am going out of, and yet before my departure, I thought fit to write a few lines unto thee, what are (I hope) needful for thee to have a care of, whil'st thou livest in it; I know thou wilt not break thy bread all in one house, feed alwayes of one dish, nor live alwayes in one place; & therefore let me give thee a little kind admonition in this short Letter, for thy carriage in all courses; the Court is a place of more charge than ease; the City-Gawds of more pleasure than worth, and the Countrey sports of more pleasure than profit, yet is there no service to the King, no dwelling to the City, nor pleasure to the Countrey, but all the weight of the worth of them is in the hand of wisdom, who in the knowledge of the use of them, makes the best e∣steem of them: but lest I am too tedious, and long les∣sons may overcharge the memory, take this one rule for thy learning, in all, and thou shalt finde it good in ore than a few; Whersoever thou goest, note the best: choose the best, and keep the best: be nor buryed in earth before thou commest to the grave, no
build Castles in the Ayre, lest they fall down upon thy head; let not thy eye abuse thy heart, nor thy tongue thy will; and let reason govern thy will in all the passages of thy Nature, be neither needy nor ungratefull, uncourteous, or unkind, and examine thy conscience in the care of thy content; ground thy love upon Vertue, thy hope upon Reason, and thy Happiness upon Grace; Live as a Stranger in the World, and make what hast thou canst to Heaven: Be loyall to thy Prince, naturall to thy Country; Faithfull to thy Friend; Kind to thy Neighbour; and honest to the whole World; so shall God bless thee, the best love thee, and the worst not hurt thee. And thus so weak in body, that the Spirit fainteth, enforced me to express these few lines of fatherly love unto thee, with my Prayers to the Lord of Heaven for thy preservation in this World, and Eternall Happiness in the World to come, with my Love, Blessing, and therewith what I am able to leave thee, to the Merciful Guard of Heaven I commit thee, and rest, Thy loving Father, &c. His Answer. MY most loving father, this legacy of your love for the direction of my life, how much I prize it in my hearts thankfulness, the eye of your judgment shal behold in my observation, & give me leave to tel you, that in this little time that I have spent idly in this world I have had some tast of the meat that you have given me, where I find, that the best meat may be spoyled
spoyled in the dressing, whilest a cunning Cook will make a rich service of small cost; and though giddy heads are in love with gaudy toyes, yet the better sor of opinions, esteem a small Diamond before a great Sa∣phire; I care not if I rather adventure far for the honour of vertue, than lessen my Estate by breach of arms; and seeing there are so many counterfeits, that the best jew∣el may be mistaken; I will meddle with no such wares as may call repentance to an after-reckoning: while mine heart looketh toward heaven, I hope the Earth shall not blinde my eyes, nor the vain lights of Na∣ture prevail against the vertues of reason, but all is in the power of powers, by whose grace, being guided, I shall be ever so preserved, that howsoever my heart may be wounded, yet I hope I shal never be confounded; in hope whereof, and unto the which beseeching the al∣mighty, either in health to prolong your dayes, or in the election of his love, to call you to a better life, more esteeming these precepts of your love, than all the portion you can leave me, saving your blessing, and so I humbly take my leave, and rest, Your loving and most obedient Son, til death, &c. A Letter to a friend to borrow money. SIR, If borrowing of money be not a breach of friend∣ship, let me intreat your patience to open your purse I am loath to be too troublesome in making many words, where such affable gentleness out-passeth all merit, a present occasion puts me to the adventure of your kindness, the matter is not much; yet it will at this time pleasure me, as much as so much may do; the sum five pounds, the time three months, my credit the assurance, and hearty thanks the interest; thus
without troubling the Scrivener I hope my letter will be of sufficient power to prevail with your love, intrea∣ting your present answer; in the affection of an honest heart I commit you to the Almighty. Yours, or not his own. His Answer. SIR, if your friendship were a follower of fortune, Love would have but a little life in this World; the contents of your Letter hath put me to a strict account of my Estate, how I may help you and not hurt my self; I could make many excuses, but that they tast of small comfort, and therefore knowing time to be precious, and to avoid delayes, let this suffice, your request is granted, and the money I have sent you, and not doubting your credit, wil take your word for a bond, and for the use (without abuse) I wish but requitall upon the like occasion; Sir I am so glad that in this, or any thing in my power, I may make proof of my love: I rest in the same, Yours, or not mine own, &c. A love-letter to a worthy Gentlewoman. FAire Mistris, if I had no eyes, I should not like you, and if not wit, I should not love you; for the brightness of your beauty is for no blind sight to gaze upon, nor the worthiness of your vertue, for no weak brains to beat upon; if you say I flatter you, look into your self, and do me no wrong, and if I do you right, chide nor affection for a discovery, where truth is honourable; pardon my presumption if it ex∣ceed your pleasure, and commend his service, who will
make an honour of your favours; so intreating your patience for answer to my poor Letter, until I hear from you; and alwayes I rest, Your devoted to be commanded, &c. A Love-Letter to a Lady. Madam, SVch, and so extreme, are the passions of love, that the more they are quenched by disdain, greater flames are n∣creased by desire, and the more they galled with hate are, the more they gape after love; like to the Stone Tpzon which being once kindled, burneth most vehemently in the water: so I having my heart scorched with the beams of your beauty, and my mind flamed with your singular vertue, neither can any bitter looks abt my love, nor extreme dis∣courtesie diminish my affection, I am not be that wil leave the rose because it hath pricked my finger, or refuse the gold in the fire because it burnt my hand, for the mind of a faith∣ful lover, is neither to be daunted with despight, nor af∣frighted with danger. I rest, Yours, &c. Her Answer. SIR, if your wits go with your eyes, your brains may be on the outside of your head, and then if you deceive your self I hope you will not blame me: colours are but shadows and may be ful of illusions, and the worthiness of vertue may be a reach above the worlds reason, yet the discovery of affec∣tion may be more in words than in matter, especially where discretion sounds the depth of desert, though the honour of truth be worth regard, where there is no fault, there need no pardon, and therefore without trouble of patience, fin∣ding
no cause of displeasure, I thus conclude, love hath a priviedge to be at the command of kindness, in which I res to wish you much happiness, Your wel-willing friend, &c Another Love-Letter FAire Creature; To tel you I love you, were a phrase of too plain a fashion, and yet when truth is indeed the best Eloquence, affection needs no invention to express the care of her content, which being in thre Letters, makes a word soon to be read, which being Y: O: V: nothing doubting your spelling, I hope you will so kindly put together, that a conjunction of love shall have no seperation during life: And thus bese∣ching you to learn this Lesson by heart, without a cross in conceit, to hinder the course of loves comfort, till I hear from you in that nature that may make me a happy creature I rest; Yours wholly and only if you wil, &c Her Answer. KInd Sir, to tel you I love you, were too crosse an Answer with a comfortable request; and yet whn dissimulation is the worst fruit of invention, d s∣cretion may be pardoned in concealing of Love; Tou¦ching your. Letters, they are sooner read than under∣stood; while imaginative hopes may be deceived in their happiness, and yet to avoid all touch of ingrati∣tude, in that nature of kindness that may give honour to content, as a simple Schollar in the art of love, loath to have that by heart that may trouble more than my head, when seperations of conjunctions may indanger the death of comfort, wishing nothing amiss to them that mean all well I rest, Your, as I may be mine own, &c.
A Letter from a Lady to a Gentleman, whom she cal∣led her servant, for the preferring of a Gen∣tlewoman to her. SErvant, I have often spoken unto you for that you must needs do me: I am going to the Court, and shall have great use of a Gentlewoman to attend me. I know you have many Kinsmen and acquaintance among whom you may find one to fit me, I will take her at your hand, and regard her for your sake; and if her deserts answers my desires, she shall lose no love in my favour, and therefore leaving this trusty charge to the care of your discreet kindness, as you wil expect a greater courtesie at my hands, I rest, Your loving Mistris, &c. His Answer. GOod Madam, you speak unto me to help you to a Gen∣tlewoman, which with my Letter I have here sent you a woman, and Gentle, who, I hope, will not be altogether unworthy of your entertainment: for her person, she is not deformed, nor her face of the worst feature; she is eithr blear-eyed, nor tongue-tyed: And for her qualities, I hope she can do more than make curtesie and blush; her Pa∣entage is not bare, nor her breeding idle, and for her dispo∣sition, I hope will be nothing displeasing: to praise her in any perfection I dare not, but in all, will leave her to the tryall of your patience. So wishing my dutiful service in this, or hat else mayly in my power, so fortunate as to deserve your favour, and this Gentlewoman so gracious as to gain the continuance of your good opinion, in prayer for your health and hearts most wished happiness, I take my leave
at this time, but rest at all times, Your Ladyships most humble servant. A Letter of zealous love, written from a Gentleman to his Brother. BRother, since I last heard from you, I am sorry to hear that I do of you, that you are wound so far into the world, as if that you never meant to out of it: you know I have travelled far, seen much, and I have some understanding, by all the observation of time, in the courses of nature: I find Solomons truth in the tryal of the world, that there is a little of it, but is little worth in it, when all being but vanity, there is little vertue to be found in it: Believe me, brother, we are neer in one nature, but differ in another, in the flesh, but not in the spirit; for whil'st I contemplate the sub∣stance of the souls comfort, thou art puzzelled in the world among the puddles of the earth: yea I fear the nature of thy affect to be as far from the rule of religi∣on, as the most senceless creature is from the use of rea∣son. Brother, I know that thou hast wronged many, & thy self most, I would thou wert a Zacheus to right all; but bet∣ter betimes than too late: look home to the main chance, have a care of thy soul, and thy body wil be the better: believe it, there is no rust eateth so fast into any mr∣tal, as the venome of avarice into the heart of a wic∣ked man: Prodigality is the way to penury, but cove∣tousness is the root of all evil, betwixt both there is a mean, that to hit on is a kind of happiness, and if thou hast no ears but of Mydas, thou canst hear of nothing but gold, take a heart of Simeon, to joy in nothing but Christ Iesus: turn a new leaf, serve God, for whom thou wert created, & let nor the earth triumph over thee, for whom it was made to tread upon, lift up thine eyes to∣wards heaven, where one joy of the elect, is worth all the
Kingdoms of the World: Leave the world ere it leave thee, and love him ever that will never leave thee: Let they life be a Pilgrimage, and the earth but a passage, and the Heaven only the home of thy souls eternal happi∣ness: Once a day read these few lines for my sake, which if they do that good to thee, which I heartily pray for in thee, till when, and ever my hearts love. Thy loving Brother, &c. His Answer. MY good Brother, I thank you for your carefull and kind Letter, yet let me l you, that zeale without discretion, proves not the best part of Religion: Reports may be idle, and then belief may be erronious, when mistakings may breed abuse of good uses: I know that riches are witches, to them that make heaven of this world; but he that hath a leaden wit, wil never worship a Golden Calf; but since I know Abraham and Lazarus were alike in election, give me leave, while I am in this world, by Christ, rather than avarice, rather to be a husbandman, than to be a labou∣rer for hire: If I have wronged any, it is unwittingly whom if I know, I wil satisfie most willingly: and for the wound of conscience, I will hope to be so far from hypocrisie, that I shal be free from that fear: and there∣fore, though travel hath taught you much experience in the world, and having sufficient maintenance to pass through the world, you make the less account of the world, yet when carefull thrist breedeth no covetous thraldome, be not jealous of my love; with all the plea∣sures of the world, to make comparison with the least of heavens comfort. I know the highest Mountain is but earth, and the lowest valley is no other, and therefore when I carry my foot-stool on my head, let me walk like
a fool, or monster. In brief, I know the world, and  to use it, and keep account with my care, how I m most contentedly leave it, but for my love to him th made it, let me live no longer in it then I love and h¦nour him above it, and so intreating you to blow o ill breaths that may abuse my disposition, and to b perswaded so far of my souls health, that my joy is e∣ver and only, in Christ Jesus, to his preservation, lea∣ving the happy issue of your hopes in the nature of the best love til I see you, and alwaies I rest, Your most loving Brother, &c. A Letter of love to an honourable Lady. HOnourable Madam, if love were not above rea∣son, it would not be so high in regard, who dwel∣ling only in the spirits of the best understanding feeds the heart only with the fruits of an infallible re∣solution: What it is in its own nature, hath been diver∣sly described, but I think, never known but unto them that inwardly know it, Some hold it a Riddle tha none can interpret but he that made it: But if it be a I have read of it, a child, and beauty begot it; I hop Nature wil be her self, & not unkind to her own bre how to prove truth, the honour in your eyes, th  wrought my heart to your service, shal make n o to your favour in the happiness of your employme So craving pardon for my presumption, in my dev duty, to the honour of your command, I humbly ta my leave, Your Lady-ships in all humbleness; &c▪ Her answer. WOrthy knight, if love be above reason, it mus be either divine or devillish, and so regarded ac∣cordingly: what it is, I think is best known by
the effect of it; howsoever idle brains have beaten a∣bout the description of it: Riddles are but jests of wit, and miracles are ceased from being seen in our age. But  be a child, though of a strange Parentage, surely nature wil not suffer the Mother to be cruel to her own breed; but if it fall out to be an ungracious father, what then wil be thought of the children: Yet, lest in mis∣construing a conceit, I may mistake a content, since in the secret of nature may be a sense of strange under standing, I wil suspend my judgement, til I have made proof of my opinion: when eyes and hearts meet toge∣ther in discourse, I hope the business wil be soon ended that is referred to indifferent judgment. So til occasion be offered of the performance of imployment, hoping that vertue and honour will soon agree upon sure grounds; til I see you I rest, Your loving friend, &c. A Letter from a Knight to a Nobleman, for the enter∣taining of a Secretary. NOble LORD, I hear that your Secretary hath lately taken his leave of ths world, in whose place (if you be not provided) let my love pre∣vail with your honour, for the entertanment of ths bearer, a Gentleman, and a kinsman of mine, in whose commendations, I dare thus far use my cred , h s heart shall be as fair as his hand, upon any occasion of your imployment: and for his wt, it s both in caput and co¦py-hold, for he hath read much, and observed mor than a little, his discent hath been from the loyns of an honourable Line: and for his disposition every way, I hope you shall finde it no way displeasing: Not to trou∣ble you with long circumstance, leaving happiness to your acceptance, with my service to your command, in
all humble love, I take my leave at this time, but rest during life, Your Honours devoted, to be commanded, &c. The Lords Answer. MY kind Knight, I have received your Letter, ful∣filled your request, and entertained your Kins∣man, of whom I am already so wel perswaded, besides the assurance of your knowledg, that I think a little matter shal not make square in our loves. I find what you write of him, and shal have much imploy∣ment for him: I thank you for him, and if he continue his carriage, which I doubt not, he will be of better fortune than my favour, and yet somwhat the more for your sake, I wil take such a care of him, that ere many months pass, you shall find my love in him: so til I see you at my house, where you shall make your own wel∣come, I rest, Your most assured friend, &c. A Letter to a friend on the other side of the Sea. SIR, Distance of place must make no difference of minds, love and life amongst hearts make an en together; I have long longed to hear from you, an if I had known whither, I had ere this written unto you but now having met with him that meaneth shortly to see you, I have thought good to let you know, that  yet live to love you, and soger not to pray for you that all happness may befall you: glad I would be  see you, & in the mean tme to ear from you, how th world goeth there about you, whether all birds be
one feather, and how they flie together: What blazing Stars have been lately seen, and what your Astro∣nomers think wil follow of their appearance: whether your wine be watred before it come over; and how Youth and Age agree upon the Conjunction Copulative: How the great fith and little agree together in your seas; and how your Rabbets escape the Kite abroad, and the Pole-cat in their Borrows: how the Foxes and wolves prey upon your Geese and lambs; and what sport your Swallows make with the Flyes in the aire. I wish you not to write of any wonders, because they are incredu∣lous; nor of matters of state, for they may be, perhaps, ill taken: but only how honest men may thrive, and knaves have their reward; how wise men are honou∣red, and fools laught at; and how the weaker sort hold their strength with the stronger; when wenches eyes pul out mens hearts out of their bellies, their wits out of their brains, and the money out of their purses, and such matters of no moment; then must needs, if you wil take a little pains to set down in a little Paper; I shall be glad to look upon them, and in my love to requite them, for our world to hear it, were a world to think of it: but the messengers hast not, giving me time to write of it til the next Post; I wil say this of it, God bless the best, and mend or end the worst, grant all honest hearts good lives in it, and a joyfull departure when they are to leave it; to which prayer, hoping you will say Amen: til we meet, and alwayes I rest. Thine, or not his own, &c. His Answer. My long acquaintance, and worthy beloved friend, I have lately received your Lette, wherein I find your
desire to hear of the passages in the world, on this side the salt water, now to satisfie in as much as I can, let me tel you, that I find some difference in the natures of na∣tions, but touching their divisions, I think they are much alike through the whole world; for the one side I finde the powerful imperious, the ambitious, envious, the cove∣tous, never satisfied; the liscencious, idle, and the foolish unprofitable: On the other side, majesty, gracious, honour, vertuous, wealth, charitable, thrift, wealthy, wit, painful, and religion, loyall, and labour commodious. Now looking into the danger of greatness, the charge of honour, the care of wealth, the misery of want, the folly of wanton∣ness, and the beggary of idleness: I have chosen the mean for my part of Musick, where I shall neither strain my voyce, nor stretch my strings, but with little charge keep my instrument in tune: The passages are here as in o∣ther places, where Ianuary and May meet in conjunction there are strange kinds of countenances that shew not the best content. And when winds are highest in summer the fruit shal fall ere they be ripe: many idle exercises are more cost∣ly than comfortable; much talk, and little truth, and ga outsides, have poor insides, oathes and lyes are as common as highwayes, and painted images make fools idolls, honest men thought more silly than the wise men among the wizards of the world, and the devills among the brokers daily hunted with beggars, murmuring of war among the unquiet spirits, and peace guarded for fear of a close stratagem. In sum, such variety of business, that every mans brain is ful of humors; and for women, they are of such force, that they put men to great patience: for my self, I see the world at that pass, that I think him happy that is wel out of it. In sum, God bless the best, while the worst mend, and send us his grace & health, with a hap∣py meeting: so till hear from you, which I wish often with my hearts love, that shal never end but with life, & my
hearty commendations, I commit you to the almighty. Yours as mine own, &c. A Letter from an apprentice to his father, to send him some Money to succour himself withall, he being hardly used by a cruel Master and mistris. KInd and loving Father, my humble duty premi∣sed, with hope of your good health, with my Mo∣ther, and the rest of our good friends &c. The ex∣tremity which I have long endured at the hands of my unconscionable Master and Mistris, constraineth me (seeing no likelyhood of redress) to reveal, and ma∣nifest that unto you, which long I have concealed; which as it is uncouth unto me, in regard of your pater∣nall care of me, whilst I lived with you; so I doubt not (your fatherly love continued unto me) but it wil be displeasing unto you. I am placed by your good friend, A. W. in a service, where (til I was bound Apprentice) I had good usage, but since I was bound, I have seldom had good day; nay, after that you sent them the mony which Master A. W. did promise with me, they began to exasterate hard usage unto me, to debar from me, not only liberty, but victuals, finding many times faults without occasion, wrongfully beating and buffeting me without offence, which I neither can, nor do I think you wil wish me to endure. I am almost pin'd with want which how to redress, I know not, unless you vouch∣safe to supply my present wants: to leave my trade I am loath, to call my master in question I am more loath, where to have redress I know not, in this my extremi∣ty, unless you take some course for me, and send me wherewith to succour my selfe between time, untill it shal please God to turn their hard hearts. Thus having briefly acquainted you with my present estate, hoping
of your fatherly love unto me, humbly craving your and my Mothers dayly blessing, leaving you to the tui∣tion of the Almighty, expecting speedily to hear from you, I rest, Your Obedient Son, &c. His Answer. SON, I have received your Letter, wherein I am gi∣ven to understand that my Friend, A. VV. hath not so friendly discharged that friendly trust, which I reposed in him, as I expected. Notwithstanding I will in what I may, seek redress for thy wrongs: In the mean time deliver this twenty shillings to your Master, as a token from me, happly his hard usage of you is to draw somthing from me, which if I see I cannot by my gift which I have sent to him have mended, I wil come up my self, and take some course to remove you from him: In the mean time I send you ten shillings to supply your necessary wants, which I wish you sparingly (as you have occasion) to bestow, and not idely or wast∣fully, and let me hear from you alwayes by this Carry∣er. Serve God, endeavour to please your Master and Mistris, and whil'st I live, Boy, they shall know thou hast a Father; So in hast I rest, Your loving father, &c. A Letter of a Patient to his Physicin. MAster Doctor, your Patient commends him to your patience, to bear a little kind chiding for your too long absence, my disease holds his own and my pain nothing diminished, and if you come not the sooner, your Physick wil be past working, for my Stomack is weak, and my heart groweth faint, and yet
I feed, though my digestion be not he best; loath I am to languish, if I may have hope o comfort, but your absence makes me doubt of my recovery, I pray you therefore hast you unto me, an let me be assured of your comming, lest you com too late; you know my disease, and are acquainted with my body; for my cure I leave it to God and your conscience, and so intrea∣ting your present answer o your speedy presence, I com∣mend you to the Almighy. Your sick loving Patient, &c. His Answer. MY good Patient, I fear your impatience hath by som passion encreased your pain; I know the force of your disease cannot but be weakned, if you be not more afraid than burt, you will not dye of this malady: if my busi∣ness were not grea, I would see you, or if your need were great I would not be from you; but knowing every cramp is not a Convulsion, nor every stitch at the heart, I will only wish you to put off melancholly, to take heed of cold, to have mind rather of Heaven than earth; eat good meat, but not too much, drink good wine, but measurably, be in charity with all the world, but not too far with any, especially with the feminine gender; use motion for naturall Physick, and let a merry heart be your best Physician, for conceit is hurt∣full, if it be not contentive, and it is past the reach of my Reason to cure a corrupted mind: Shortly, and God willing, I will see you, in the mean time imagine I am with you, for indeed I wil not be long from you: and this let me tell you, that to put you out of fear, I have no fear of you, but that you will be past physick, ere my hope fail of your cure, and that wil not be in hast, and so hoping that you are not so weak in spirit, but that you can endure a little pain with patience in hope of assured health, til J see you, and alwayes I rest, Your Physician and loving friend,
A letter from a Son in prison to his mother, his estate being wasted, DEar and loving Mother; as ever your Maternall love hath heretofore been manifested unto me, so now J beseech you in this great extremity to extend it towards me; my means are consumed, my self captivated, ready to perish with want, and which way to turn me in this height of misery I know not, but un∣to you, whose ever careful respect of me hath bin such that nought could (or as yet J hope can) remove your love from me: wherefore in pity of my present misery, J desire you, good mother, to make some means for my Enlargment, my debts are not much, notwithstanding of my self, J am utterly unable to give satisfaction, in∣somuch, that unless you be pleased to commiserate my distress, J am utterly devoid of all hope of comfort, or Enlargement: if therefore you wil vouchsafe to set me at liberty, my future duty, and diligence shall obsequi∣ously in such sort be manifested,, that whatsoever hath heretofore bin amiss, shal be amended, to my good, & your comfort, whereof wishing you to be most assured and expecting your comfortable answer, J rest, Your distressed Son, &c. Her Answer. Son, J am sorry your folly hath brought you to such extremity: had you been heedfull in your cour∣ses, you might have prevented these disasters: notwith∣standing, since misery ought rather to be pittied than blamed (especially by a Mother) J will in this your extremity, in hope of your reformity, manifest a Mothers Love unto you: Your Debts shall be paid, you set at liberty, and some speedy course
be taken for your future maintenance, if you wil con∣m what you have written, I wil be wih you to mo∣row, til then comfort your self, and fear God, and pray for your poor Mother. Your loving Mother, &c. A letter to a Kinsman that came from the uni∣versity to the Court, and was given much to the Study. MY good Cousin, I hear, since you came from the University to the Court, you are inclined much to Melancholly, your mind only delighteth in reading and study, and among many variety of mat∣ters of import, that you take much delight in searching out of Petigrees, and Herauldry, the knowledg where∣of, I hold both honourable and profitable, but the use thereof requires a heedfull care; for in the dis∣coursing of matters unfit, you may be brought within the compass of folly: But as a friend to give you a Ca∣veat in all your course of that study, take my advice for the bettering of your understanding in the best of your Coats: Be not too busie with the Crown, and of all Beasts beware of the Lyon; if he sleep, wake him no lest you trouble his patience, and in his walk, cross no his way, lest his frown grows wrathfull: For othe beasts, think of them as your reason wil give you leave▪ where you find honours, note (if you can) the desert o them, and for bought Coats, consider of them in thei kinds; times alter, and natures in them, and therefor in the setting down of Antiquities, there may be muc deceit, through the corruption of the writers, or direc∣tors for strange Coats; and to see an Eagle have a Fl in her mouth, and a Mouse bite a Cat by the Tail, or  Goose keep a Fox in a Den, wonder at it, but make n words of it: and if you see a black swan in a blue Field
an Eele in her belly, running out at her tail, or a  cock pulled out of his feathers, and making hs  upon a Cross-bar, smile at the conceit; but keep  censure of it your self. To conclude, read much but be∣lieve little; think much, but speak little, and  much, but meddle little; but in medling with the mens coats, look that you lose not more than your  jerkin: and so wishing your studies as profitable as ple∣sing to you; til I see you, I commit you to the almighty▪ Your loving Cousin. His answer, SIR, I have read your Letter, and considered of the contents: To the Answer whereof, give me leave to tel you, that I am not determined to hurt mine eye∣sight with too deep looking into a Milstone, nor to be∣lieve Antiquity, further than reason may carry my un∣derstanding, and whatsoever I find of Coats, I will so carry my due and true allegeance to the Crown, tha I wil avoid all touch of disloyalty: For the Lyon wl neither trouble him, waking nor sleeping: and fo his walk, wish no beast to be so foolish, as to cross his pleasure in his passage: For your merry conceits o strange Coats, I will only smile at my conjecture of them, and so long as I know a Falcon from a buzzard, an Eagle from an Owl, and a Nightingale from  Cuckow, let me alone to judg of the nature of Birds, and how they are born, and when I look into the na∣ture of honour, whether by purchase, favour, or desert I note the time, with the persons, and so go on with m opinions to the judgement, I keep to my self: now fo what else may grow out of this study, either prf pleasure, loss of time, or repentance, I thank you fo your item, to keep my conceit from discourse, for all
things are to be taken in their right kind, and when arning grows hurtful, it proves wit not wel tempered nd therefore hoping so to make use of my brains, that  ead shal do my body no hurt, with many thanks  your kind instructions, I commend you to the Al∣ty. Your very loving Kinsman, &c. FINIS.
