F2359 E366_10 99861788 160085
A FULL RELATION OF His Majesties proceedings at Newcastle; Declaring his gallant Resolution to come to London, and to unite himself to his great Councell, the Honou∣rable Houses of PARLIAMENT. ALSO, The time of His Majesties coming to London; And severall remarkable Passages, concerning the disposall of His Royall Person. DECEMBER, 17. 1646. Published for generall satisfction, and presented to all His Maje∣sties Subjects within the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales. two angels holding the royal crest of Charles I LONDON, Printed for William Iohnson, 1646.
IOYFVLL NEWES FROM NEWCASTLE Being a full Relation of the proceedings of the Kings Majesty, concerning his com∣ming to LONDON. THe darksome Cloud which hath for many years appeared and hung over the heads of the Inhabitants of England doth now begin to shew its self with a most cleer and perfect resemblance, and in stead of coun∣tenancing a dismall shew, doth demonstrate is self in her full lustre, giving us some
glimpse of the apparent light, which begin∣neth to shine upon us, and the most happy and welcome appearance of that bright and glorious Cloud, which attends its motion, for the crowning of the Well-willers of the Peace of Zion, with unity and prosperity, as will manifestly appeare, by these bright stars and shining Comets, which I shall here faith∣fully represent unto you, as followeth: The gallant proceedings, and most happy concurrence of the Comissioners of the king∣dome of Scotland, with the Parliament of England, doth cause the hearts of all true sub∣jects to rejoyce, instancing unto us, the blessed unity which the Inhabitants of England and Scotland are now each other to embrace; for all things being concluded of, betwixt the Parliament of England, and the Parliament of Scotland, and their Armies to depart this Kingdome in a quiet and peaceable manner (of which I shal have occasion to speak more at large in the conclusion) the chiefest ob∣ject that we now look upon, is, the safe arri∣vall and happy return of the Kings most ex∣cellent Majesty, to his great Councell the ho∣nourable
Houses of Parliament, that so His Royall heart may be united and knit fast to them, whose faithfull endeavours, and unwea∣ried pains, have alwayes tended to the preser∣vation of the person of his Royall Majesty and his posterity, the advancing of his Crown and Dignity, the maintenance and preserva∣tion of the truth and purity of the Gospell of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, and the safety and liberty of all his Majesties Sub∣iects. And for the accomplishing of this, we are given to understand, that his Maiesty hath an earnest desire to come to London, and to u∣nite himself with his great Councell, that so the streames of bloud, which hath for many years gushed forth within the bowels of this bleeding Kingdom, may be stopped and pre∣vented, and this distressed and languishing Kingdom setled in peace and prosperity. Some supposes that his Maiesty will take his Journey from the North about a month hence, and others fancy his Maiesty to bee here about New years day. But we dayly expect his Maiesty, and it is supposed he will be here suddenly.
What a terrour will this be to the raging and potent enemy in Ireland, to see the hap∣py uniting, and firm knitting of the Head & Members, which hath for many years beene separated and divided. Nay, what a sting will it be to other Forraign enemies, to behold so gallant a uniting; whose former pride, were in boasting of nglands calamities, and laugh∣ing in their sleeves, to see our unnaturall Di∣visions. But now for the generall satisfaction of all people, I shall think it meet to insert some re∣markable Observations concerning the dispo∣sall of his Maiesties person, viz. First, that the honour, safety, and freedome of the Common-wealth, may be setled, & then the honour and safety of his Majesties Per∣son, so farre as the latter may stand with the former, and no otherwise. Secondly, that when his Maiesty were plea∣sed to cast himself upon his Subiects of Scot∣land, the honourable houses of Parliament were pleased to wote their dsposall of him, to prevent that harme which might befall his Maiesty, residing in the Scottish Army in England.
But afterwards this personall being of the King with the Scots begets a Nationall dis∣pute of his disposall betweene the King∣doms. The Scots claiming a right of coacting with the Parliament therein; yet declaring their opinions, that his going into Scotland is not the safest. It was also intimated, that seeing they ap∣prove best of his being in England; who shall take care for the good of the Kingdom, & the safety of the Kings person therin, but the Par∣liament of England, in whom the power is for treating and concluding for the good & safety of the Kingdome, though the King bee with their Army in England, and propound otherwise. Thirdly, the Parliament out of their great desire to have the King to come and remaine with them, sent to his Majesty Propositions from both Kingdoms, and agreed fot their pay and marching home. Which, for satisfaction of the whole King∣dome, I will here faithfully impart the man∣ner of their departure, as followeth:
That the 200000 l. to be told at York 100000 l. to be paid at North-Aerton, within fie caes after it is told. That when the money comes to Topcliffe the Scots shall give ho∣stages, that they sha quit all their quarters possessions and ga∣risons on the South de Tyne. Newcastle & Tinmouth, with all the armes &c. within ten dayes: Upon performance the hostages to be redelivered. Upon the delivery of the Garrisons on the South side of Tyne, and of Newcastle, Tinmouth, &c. the Kingdom of Scot∣land shal have Hostages upon redeivery of theirs, for assu∣rance that the other 100000. l. shall be paid on the Northside Newcastle within a mile of the works, within 8 dayes after the quitting Newcastle, Tinmouth, &c. and all the Forces to be drawn on the North side Tyne. For the payment of the other 200000. l. the Scots Commis∣sioners desired, that it might be paid out of the sale of Delin∣quents estates, or some other particular security. The house considered of this businesse, and ordered to ad∣here to their former Vote, which was to give them the pub∣lique Faith of the Kingdom for the same. And upon further debate thereupon, the house ordered that the sum of 900. l. should be allowed to the tellers of this first 200000. l. They likewise ordered, that the sum of 1600. l. should be allowed for and towards the defraying of the charges of the carriages, and conveying of this 200000. down to York. The Committee of both Kingdoms were likewise ordered to treat with the Commissioners of Scotland how their Forces should or may march for the best advantage of thoe parts, and that they may pay their quarters as they march into their owne Kingdom. And in case any miscarriage should bee in the carriage of the said monies to York, that the losse should be born by the whole Kingdom. FINIS.
