F388 E323_7 99861309 159549
A FAMOVS VICTORIE OBTAINED By Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, against the Lord HOPTON, and the PRINCE his Army, at Tor∣rington in the WEST. 3000. Armes taken. 50. Colonels. Majors, Cap∣tains, and other Officers. 700. Common Souldiers. 150. Horse. 100. Barrels of Powder. The Magazine, and all the Enemies Bag and Baggage. Two Trunkes of the Lord Hoptons, Plate and Money taken. The Lord Hopton, The Lord Went∣worth, Sir Iohn Digby, Major General Harris, and others fled, and the manner of the pursuit. Torrington Church blown up, and the great danger his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax escaped. There was also in the said Church one hun∣dred Barrels of Powder, and one hundred and forty of the Enemies Officers and Souldiers, which were all de∣stroyed in the said place. Certified by Letters to the Speaker of the House of Commons, on Thursday last, the 19. of this instant February, and the Heads thereof published in severall Churches about London. LONDON: Printed by B A. February 20. 1646.
For which purpose, the Lord Hopton begins to make a great flourish, draws what strength both of Horse and foot he can out of Cornwall, sends a party to relieve Dunster Castle, fortifies at Chimley, and Mr. Rowley his house, and akes up his head quarters at Torrington, neer Barnstable. From hence he sends out VVarnings, commanding the Countrey to bring provisions is to heir Forces, all the youth drives the Cattell, and severall Parties are daily abroad, plundering and gering Horses to encrease their strength; and then intend either with assistance that is expected from France, or the conjunction of other of the Kings army from about Oxford, to work their own ends, or prolong the wars: The strength they have to effect this, was about 4 or 5000 horse and foot; which doubtlesse (having been left at quiet would have encreased in a short time, and have become more formidable. Which his Excellency Sir Thomas Faisfax perceiving, and being at that time before Exeter, he hastned the perfec∣ting of the Bridg over the River at Topsam, finished his Posts made good the severall Guards and Posts, and consults with his Councell of VVarre, and left Exeter block't up, with the Foot commanded by Sir Hardresse VValler, and Col. Sheffeilds Regiment of Horse, and advanced himself in per∣son with Eight Regiments of Foot, and five of Horse, to Crediton, and Collonel Pickerings (that was) by Ti∣verton. The 16. instant being Munday, his Excellencie marched from Crediton towards Chimleigh, and in his march some Parties of ours lighted on some of the Enemies, and bad some small skirmishes, and about 100 in all of the Enemy were taken and brought in prisoners. The Countrey for the most part shewed themselves very joyful at his Excellencies approach, and brought in much provision to our Army.
By some of the Countrey we also understood, that the Prince was yet in Cornwal, and great endeavours were used to draw forth the Trayned Bands, but they generally refused to go out of their own Country. As for Sir Iohn Greenvil he used the like violence against the poorer sort of people, as his Kinsman Sir Richard did, causing them to be dragged forth, and tyed two together with Match, and others appointed to drive them on. There was also a Gentleman came from Pendennice, with a message from Duke Hamilton, now prisoner in that Castle, to desire a Passe for him to go to the King: where∣in he was referred to the Parlirment, to know their plea∣sure. Thus have I given you the heads of severall Letters out of the VVest; but this day came another Letter to our hands, which doth more particularly import the great Vic∣tory obtained against the Lord Hopton, which I shall give you thus, Another Letter from Sir Thomas Fairfax his Quarters. SIR, THe sixteenth of this instant February, wee marched from Crediton towards Chimleigh, and in our passage we had some sinall skirmishes with parties of the enemy, that we found abroad, and we took about one hundred pri∣soners in severall places: VVhen we came to Chimleigh
the enemy was gone, and had plundered a great part of the Town: Our designe was to fall on the Lord Hoptons head quar∣ters, which at that time we understood were at Torring∣ton, where they kept a strong Guard, and had made some strong Fortificstions. But before we came thither, we had Intelligence that about a hundred of the enemy kept a guard in Squire Roules his house: wherupon a party of our horse and Dragoons marched thither, but before they came there the enemy had gotten the alarum, and quitted the House, After this, we hasted to Torrington, and fell on the ene∣mies quarters, and in an instant entred the Town, in which was three thousand of the enemy, who upon our entrance, threw pown their arms, some crying for quarter, others shif∣ting for themselves. The musquets lay so thicke in the streets, that it was some interruption to our Horse in their march through the streets, a thousand and upwards were presently taken up neer together. The Lord Hopton left his dinner on the Table and fled, leaving behind him his Trunks of Plate and Silver, and other Treasure: wee had some prisoners of the themies in the Church, where was a hundred Barrels of powder, to which they gave fire, which blow'd up the Church and themselvs, and battered many houses in the Towne. A sheet of Lead fell within nine yards of the Generall, and many Tyles and other combustable matter, which did much indanger his person; but blessed be God, he had no hurt at all. The ene∣my is fled towards Barnstable and Sturton, and our horse are in pursuit of them, great store of prisoners are taken, and more continually brought in, sixty came together; but
as yet I cannot give you a cettain Relation how many wee have taken in all. Torrington, February 17. 1645. From other hands we hear, that there was taken 800. pri∣soners, whereof many of quality, and about three thousand Armes. Me thinks before I leave this subject, I should put you in mind how seasonable this and other mercies come to us; For it is seldom, that we have solemdized any day in thanks∣giving for one blessing on our army, but that very day wee had newes fresh cause of thankfulnesse, As the last Day of Thanksgiving for Dartmouth, came the newes of the Sur∣render of Chester, and the cay set a part commeunerating that mercy, came the Leteers of this great and renowned Victory, which for your better satisfaction, I shall here in the conclusion give you a perfect List, as followeth.
In the next place (as neer as I can gather from severall Letters) I shall give you a List of the whole, 3000. Armes taken. 50. Collonels, Majors, Captains, and other Offi∣cers. 700. Common Souldiers. 150. Horse. 100. Barrels of Powder, Match proportionable, All the Enemies Bagg and Baggage. Two Trunks of, plate, and money. The Lord Hepton fled. Major General Harris. Sir John Digby. Col. Trelange. The Lord Wentworth. Major General Web. The Church blown up, and: 140 of the Ene∣my officers and others in it. Torrington taken. Chilmley quitted. Esquire Roules house quitted. 200. Head of Oxen taken. 300. Sheep. Great store of Bacon, Cheese, and other vic∣tuall, which they had gotten out of the Country. With other rich prize FINIS.
