H1456 669.f.3[62] 99868689 160620
royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT A COPIE OF THE QVEENS LETTER From the Hague in HOLLAND to the Kings Maiesty residing at Yorke. Sent from the Hague by one of her Maiesties Gentlemen Ushers, March 19. 1641. THE memory of your Royall person, and the due obedience which I owe unto your Majesty, have respectively induced us to commend our Devotion unto you; But the Feares and Jealousies fomen∣ted betwixt your Parliament and your Majesty, have at the first audience affrighted us, to our great griefe and astonishment: Yet be still constant (my Liege) to lenity and patience, and doubt not but God in his good time will right all iniuries reflected on you: We confesse your passion at our departure, with which we likewise did mutually sympathize, but since that former passion is reduplicated by new acerbities, we are also possessed with the greatest part of the same. Our entertainement here at Holland was first very Noble, but of late we perspicuously see, that the Dutch liberality is much extenuated, notwithstanding the Princes gene∣rosity is still royally contributed to Us daily. The States of Holland doe not well accord with the Prince, which hath oftentimes grieved and perplexed Our thoughts; they intend to create a new Officer over the Ar∣mie, and will trust the Prince no longer for the payment of the Money, which greatly troubleth and perplex∣eth his Highnesse: But we have laboured to the highest extent of our power to compose that variance and dis-union betweene them both: And since we finde these distractions, feares and Jealousies, to assimulate and comply with those in England, wee are fully resolved to returne againe with expedition, and you may sud∣denly expect Us at Yorke, where we intend to be perhaps sooner then you imagine. In the meane time (deare Husband) consolate your selfe with clemencie, and let not too deepe a passion conquer your captive thoughts for by that meanes you will both unload your heart of sorrow, and elevate your minde with innocencie. Our pious cogitations have beene daily invocated on the divine Providence for your secure prosperity, and our sollicitous indulgencie for our deare Sonne, and other children hath been so carefull, that we were never forgetfull of either. The supposed danger of the Prince of Orange is now almost ended. But we heare for certainty and by credible information, that our Cousin the King of Denmarke is set forward with a Fleet for England, his intent God knowes: That our royall Brother likewise the King of France, with the King of Spaine, and the States of Venice are in a preparation of a great Navie, but God of his infinite mercy prevent the effusion of bloud, that the Branches of peace and tranquility may not spring from a bloudy root. For our owne part, we condole in a serious deploration the distractions and confusion of those Kingdomes, and doe confirme our former resolution, intending to visit your Maiesty suddenly, being resolved either to live or dye at your sacred feet, and in your owne Kingdome. London, printed for Iohn Price. 1642.
