H1736 E935_3 99862708 114881
THE STUMBLING-BLOCK OF Disobedience and Rebellion, Cunningly laid by Calvin in the Subjects way, Discovered, Censured, and Removed. By P. H. ROM. 14. 13. Offendiculum fratri tuo ne ponas. Let no man put a Stumbling-block, or an occasion to fall, in his brothers way. 1 SAM. 24. 6. And David said to his men, The Lord forbid that I should do this thing unto my Master the Lords anointed, to stretch forth my hand against him, seeing he is the anointed of the Lord. LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes for Henry Seile over against St. Dunstans Church in Fleet-street, 1658.
THE PREFACE. IT will appear to any who shal read this Trea∣tise, that it was written in the times of Monar∣chical Government, but in the later and decli∣ning times thereof, when the change of that Government was in agitation, and in part effected. In which respect I doubt not but the publishing of
this Discourse at this present time may seem unseasonable unto some, and yet it may be thought by others to come out season∣ably enough for these following reasons. 1. To give warning to all those that are in Supreme Authority to have a care un∣to themselves, and not to suffer any Popu∣lar and Tribunitian Spirits to grow amongst them; who grounding upon Calvins Do∣ctrine, both may, and will upon occasion, create new disturbances. 2. To preserve the Dignity of the Su∣preme Power, in what Person soever it be placed, and fix his Person in his own proper Orb, the Primum Mobile of Go∣vernment, brought down of late, to be but one of the three Estates, and move in the same Planetary Sphere with the other two. 3. To keep on foot the claim and Title of the Clergy unto the Reputation, Rights, and Priviledges of the Third Estate, which doth of right belong unto them; and which the Clergy have antiently enjoyed
in all, and to this day in most Christian Kingdoms. 4. To shew unto the world, on whose authority the Presbyterians built their dam∣nable Doctrine, not only of curbing and restraining the power of Princes, but also of deposing them from their Regal Dignity, whensoever they shall please to pretend cause for it. For when the Scotch Commission∣ers were commanded by Queen Elizabeth to give a reason of their proceedings against their Queen, whom not long before they had deposed from the Regal Throne; they justified themselves by those words of Cal∣vin, which I have chosen for the Argument of this Discourse. By the authority of Cal∣vin (as my Author hath it) they endeavoured to prove, that the Popular Magistrates are appointed and made to moderate and keep in order the excess and unruliness of Kings; and that it is lawful for them to put the Kings that be evill and wicked into prison, and also to deprive them of their Kingdoms. If these reasons shall not prove the seasonableness of
this Adventure, I am the more to be con∣demned for my indiscretion, the shame whereof I must endure as well as I can. This being said in order to my justification, I must add somewhat of the Book or Dis∣course it self; in which the canvassing and confuting of Calvins Grounds about the Ephori of Sparta, the Tribunes of Rome, and the Demarchi of Athens, hath forced me up∣on many Quotations both Greek and La∣tine; which to the learned Reader will ap∣pear neither strange nor difficult. And for the sake of the unlearned, which are not so well verst and studyed in forein Languages, I have kept my self to the di∣rection of St. Paul, not speaking any where in a strange tongue without an Interpre∣ter, the sense of every such Quotation being either declared before, or delivered after it. Lastly, whereas the Name of Appius Claudius doth many times occur in the Hi∣story of the Roman Tribunes, it is not always to be understood of the same Man, but of diverse men of the same Name in their
several Ages; as the name of Caesar in the New Testament signifieth not one man but three, that is to say, the Emperor Tiberius in the Gospels, Claudius in the Book of the Acts, and that most bloudy Tyrant Nero in the Epistle to the Philippians. Which being pre∣mised, I shall no longer keep the Reader in Portch or Entrance; but let him take a view of the House it self, the several Rooms, Ma∣terials, and Furniture of it; long Prefaces to no long Discourses, being like the Gates of Mindum amongst the Antients, which were too great and large for so small a City.
The Argument & occasion of this following Treatise. Joh. Calvini Institution. Lib. 4. cap. 20. sect. 31. NE{que} enim si ultio Domini est effrenatae dominationis correctio, ideo protinus demandatam nobis arbitremur; quibus nullum aliud quam parendi & pa∣tiendi datum est Manda∣tum. De privatis homini∣bus semper loquor. Nam si∣qui nunc sint Populares Magistratus ad moderan∣dum Regum libidinem con∣stituti (quales olim erant qui Lacedaemoniis Regibu oppositi erant Ephori; aut Romanis Consulibus Tri∣buni Plebis, aut Atheni∣ensium Senatui Demar∣chi; & qua etiam forte po∣testate, ut nunc res ha∣bent, funguntur in singu∣lis Regnis tres Ordines, cum primarios Conventus pe∣ragunt) adeo illos ferocienti Regum licentiae, pro officio, intercedere non veto, ut si Regibus impotenter grs∣santibus, & humili plebecu∣lae insultantibus conniveant; eorum dissimulationem nefa∣ria perfidia non carere af∣firmem, qua populi liber∣tatem (cujus se, Dei or∣dinatione, tutores positos norunt) fraudulenter pro∣dunt. NOr may we think because the punishment of licenti∣ous Princes doth belong to God, that presently this power is devolved on us, to whom no other warrant hath been given by God but only to obey and suffer. But still I must be un∣derstood of private persons. For if there be now any popular Officers ordained to moderate the licentiousness of Kings (such as were the Ephori, set up of old against the Kings of Sparta; the Tribunes of the peo∣ple against the Roman Consuls, and the Demarchi against the Athenian Senate; and with wch power perhaps, as the world now goes, the three Estates are seized in each several Kingdom, when they are solemnly assem∣bled) so far am I from hindring them to put restraints upon the exorbitant power of Kings, as their Office bindes them; that I conceive them rather to be guilty of a perfidious dissimula∣tion, if they connive at Kings when they play the Tyrants, or wantonly insult on the com∣mon people, in that they trea∣cherously betray the Subjects Liberties; of which they knew they were made Guardians by Gods own Ordinance.
Syllabus Capitum. CHAP. I. The Doctrine of Obedience laid down by Calvin; and of the Popular Officers, sup∣posed by him, whereby he overthroweth that Doctrine. (I) THe purpose and design of the work in hand. (II) The Doctrine of Obedience unto Kings and Princes, soundly and piously laid down by CALVIN. (III) And that not only to the good and gratious, but even to cruel Princes and ungodly Tyrants. (IV) With Answer unto such Objections as are made a∣gainst it. (V) The principles of Disobedience in the supposal of some popular Officers ordained of purpose to regulate the power of Kings. (VI) How much the practise of CALVINS followers doth differ from their Masters doctrine in the point of Obe∣dience.
(VII) Several Articles and points of Doctrine wherein the Disciples of CALVIN are departed from him. (VIII) More of the differences in point of Doctrine be∣tween the Master and his Scholars. (IX) The dangerous consequences which arise from his faulty principles in the point or Article of Disobedience. (X) The Method and distribution of the following work. CHAP. II. Of the Authority of the Ephori in the State of Sparta; and that they were not instituted for the ends supposed by Calvin. (I) The Kings of Sparta absolute Monarchs at the first. (II) Of the condition of that State when Lycurgus un∣dertook to change the Government. (III) What power Lycurgus gave the Senate; and what was left unto the Kings. (IV) The Ephori appointed by the Kings of Sparta to ease themselves and curb the Senate. (V) The blundering and mistakes of Joseph Scliger, about the first institution of the Ephori. (VI) The Ephori from mean beginnings grow to great Authority; and by what advantages. (VII) The power and influence which they had in the publick Government. (VIII) By what degrees the Ephori incroached on the Spartan Kings. (IX) The insolencies of the Ephori towards their Kings altered the State into a Tyranny.
(X) The Spartan Kings stomach the insolencie of the Ephori, and at last utterly destroy them. (XI) An application of the former passages to the point in hand. CHAP. III. Of the Incroachment of the Tribunes on the State of Rome; and that they were not in∣stituted for the ends supposed by Calvin. (I) The Tribunes of the People why first instituted in the State of Rome. (II) The Tribunes fortifie themselves with large immu∣nities before they went about to change the Government. (III) The Tribunes no sooner in their Office, but they st themselves against the Nobility and the Senate, contrary to the Ar∣ticles of their Institution. (V) The many and dangerous Seditions occasioned by the Tribunes in the City of Rome. (VI) The Tribunes and the People doe agree together to change the Government of the State. (VII) By what degrees the People came to be possessed of all Offices in the State, both of Power and Dignity. (VIII) The Plots and practises of the Gracchi, to put the power of Judicature and Supreme Majesty of the State into the hands of the People. (IX) The Tribunes take upon them to commit the Con∣suls, and bring all the Officers of the State under their com∣mand. (X) The Office and Authority of the Tribunes reduced
unto its antient bounds by Cornelius Sylla, and at last utterly destroyed. (XI) An Application of the former passages to the point in hand. CHAP. IV. Of what Authority the DEMARCHI were in the State of ATHENS; and of the danger and unfitness of the instances pro∣duced by CALVIN. (I) Athens first governed by Kings, and afterwards by one Sveraign Prince under other Titles. (II) The Annual Magistrates of Athens what they were, and of what Authority. (III) By whom and by what degrees the State of Athens was reduced to Democratie. (IV) Of the Authority of the Senate, and the famous Court of the Areopagites. (V) What the Demarchi were in the State of Athens, and of what Authority. (VI) The Demarchi never were of power to oppose the Se∣nate, nor were ordained to that end. (VII) Calvins ill luck in making choice of three such instances, which if true would not serve his turn. (VIII) The danger which lieth hidden under the design of such Popular Magistrates, as are here instanced in by Calvin. (IX) What moved Calvin to lay these dangerous Stum∣bling blockt in the Subjects way. (X) The dangerous Seditions and practises which have hence nsued in most parts of Europe. (XI) The Sectf Calvin professed Enemies to Monarchy, and the Power of Princes.
CHAP. V. What are the Three Estates in each several Kingdom, of which CALVIN speaks; and what they are particularly in the Realm of ENGLAND. (I) Of the division of a people into Three Estates; and that the Priests and Clergy have been always one. (II) The Priests imployed in Civil Matters and Affairs of State, by the Egyptians, and the Persians, the Greeks, Gauls, and Romans. (III) The Priests and Levites exercised in Affairs of Civil Government by Gods own appointment. (IV) The Prelates versed in Civil Matters and Affairs of State in the best and happiest times of Christianity. (V) The Clergy make the third Estate in Germany, France, Spain, and the Northern Kingdoms. (VI) That antiently in the Saxons times the Ecclesiasticks of this Realm were called to all publick Councels. (VII) The Prelates an essential fundamental part of the Eng∣lish Parliament. (VIII) Objections answered, and that the word Clerus in the Legal notion doth not extend unto the Prelates. (IX) That the inferior Clergy of the Realm of England had antiently their votes in Parliament to all intents and purposes as the Commons had. (X) Objections answered, and that the calling of the Clergy to Parliaments and Convocations were after different manners, and by several Writs. (XI) The great Diffranchisement and Slavery obtruded on the English Clergy, by the depriving of the Bishops of their Votes in Parliament. (XII) A brief discussion of the question, Whether that any two of the three Estates, conspiring or agreeing together, can conclude any thing unto the prejudice of the third. CHAP. VI. That the three Estates of every Kingdom whereof CALVIN speaks, have no authority either to regulate the power, or controll the actions of the Soveraign Prince. (I) The Bishops and Clergy of England, not the King, make the third Estate; and of the dangerous, consequences which may fol∣low on the contrary Tenet. (II) The different influence of the three Estates upon condi∣tional Princes, and an absolute Monarch. (III) The Sanhdrim of no authority over the persons or the actions of the Kings of Judah. (IV) The three Estaes in France of how small authority over the actions of that King. (V) The Kings of Spain not over-ruled or regulated by the three Estates. (VI) Of what authority they have been antiently in the Parliaments of Scotland. (VII) The King of England always accounted heretofore for an absolute Monarch. (VIII) No part of Soveraigntie invested legally in the English Parliaments. (IX) The three Estates assembled in the Parliament of England, subordinate unto the King, not co-ordinate with him. (X) The Legislative power of Parliaments is properly and legally in the King alone. (XI) In what particulars the power of the English Parliaments doth consist especially. (XII) The Kings of England ordinarily over-rule their Par∣liaments, by themselves, their Counsel and their Judges. (XIII) Objections answered touching the power and practise of some former Parliaments, and the Testimonies given unto them. (XIV) No such Authority given by God in holy Scripture to any populr Magistrates, as Calvin dreams of and pretends. (XV) The Application and Conclusion of the whole discourse.
THE STVMBLING-BLOCK OF Disobedience and Rebellion, Cunningly laid by CALVIN in the Subjects way, Discovered, Censured and Removed. CHAP. I. The Doctrine of Obedience laid down by CALVIN; and of the Popular Offi∣cers supposed by him, whereby he overthrow∣eth that Doctrine. (I) The purpose and design of the work in hand. (II) The Doctrine of Obedience unto Kings and Princes, soundly and piously laid down by CAL∣VIN.
(III) And that not only to the good and graci∣ous, but even to cruel Princes and ungodly Ty∣rants; (IV) With Answer unto such Objections as are made against it. (V) The Principles of Disobedience in the sup∣posal of some popular Officers ordained of purpose, to regulate the power of Kings. (VI) How much the practise of CALVIN's followers doth differ from their Masters Doctrine in the point of Obedience. (VII) Several Articles and points of Doctrine, wherein the Disciples of CALVIN are departed from him. (VIII) More of the differences in point of Do∣ctrine betwixt the Master and his Scholars. (IX) The dangerous consequences which arise from his faulty Principles, in the point or Article of Disobedience. (X) The method and distribution of the fol∣lowing Work. SOme Writers may be likened unto Jeremies Figs,Ierem. 24▪ 4. of which the Pro∣phet saith, that if they were good, they were very good; if evil, very evil, such as could not be eaten they were so evil. Of such a temper and esteem was Origen amongst the Ancients, of whom it was ob∣served (not without good cause) that in his Ex∣positions on the Book of God and other learned
Tractates which he writ and published, where he did well, none could do it better, and where he failed at all, no man erred more grosly. And of this sort and composition was Mr. Calvin of Geneva, then whom there is not any Minister of the Reformed Churches beond the seas, who hath more posi∣tively and expresly laid down the Doctrine of Obe∣dience unto Kings and Princes, and the unlawful∣ness of Subjects taking Arms against their Sove∣raign; nor opened a more dangerous gap to dis∣obedience and rebellions in most States of Christen∣dome. In which it is most strange to see how prone we are, (such is the frailty and corruption of our sinful nature) to refuse the good, and choose the evill; to take no notice of his words when it most concerns us, when we are plainly told our duties both to God and man; and on the other side to take his words for Oracles, his judgement for infal∣lible, all his Geese for Swans, when he saith any thing which may be useful to our purposes, or serve to the advancement of our lewd designs. The cre∣dit and authority of the man was deservedly great amongst the people where he lived; and in short time of such authority and esteem in the world abroad, that his works were made the only rule to which both Discipline and Doctrine was to be conformed: and if a Controversie did arise either in points Dogmatical, or a case of Conscience, his was sufficient to determine in it, at least to silence the gain-sayers. And as it is observed in the works of Nature, that corruptio optimi est pessima, and that the sweetest meats make the sowrest ex∣crements;
so the opinion and esteem which some of the Reformed Churches had conceived of him (which to say the truth was great and eminent) and the ill use they made of some words and pas∣sages in his writings, which most unfortunately served to advance their purposes, have been the sad occasion of those wars and miseries, which al∣most all the Western parts of Christendome, have been so fatally involved in since the times he lived. Which words and passages as they are cautelous∣ly laid down, and compassed round with many fair expressions of affection to the Supreme Powers, that they might pass without discovery, and be the sooner swallowed by unwary men: so by his followers (who are exceeding wise in their ge∣nerations) have they been hidden and concealed with all art that may be. For though they build their dangerous Doctrines upon his foundation, and toss this , this ball of discord and dissension from one hand to another; yet do they very cunningly conceal their Author, and never use his name to confirm their Tenets. And this they do upon this reason, that if their Doctrine give offence unto Christian Princes, and any of their Pamphlets be to feel the fire, or otherwise come under any publick censure, (as not long since hap∣ned to Paraeus) the Patron of their Sect might escape untouched, and his authority remain un∣questioned, to give new life unto their hopes at ano∣ther time. In which respects, and withall seeing that the heads of this monstrous Hydra of sedition do grow the faster for the cutting, and that the
lopping off the Branches keeps the trunk the fresher; I shall pass by the petit Pamphleters of these times, and strike directly at the head; and without med∣ling with the boughs or branches, will lay my Axe immediately to the root of the tree, and bring the first Author of these factious and Antimonarchical Principles (which have so long disturbed the peace of Christendome) to a publick trial. A dangerous and invidious undertaking I must needs confess; but for my Countreys and the Truthes sake, I will venture on it: and in pursuance of the same will first lay down the doctrine of Obedience as by him delivered, which I shall faithfully translate without glosse or descant; and next compare his Doctrine with our present practise, noting wherein his Scholars have forsook their Master, with ap∣plication unto those who do most admire him: and finally I shall discover and remove that Stum∣bling-block which he hath cunningly laid before us, (but hid so secretly that it can hardly be discerned) at which so many a man hath stumbled, both to the breaking of his own neck and his neighbours too. This is the race that I am to run; the prize I aim at is no other, then for as much as in me lieth to do good to all men, to those especially who think themselves to be of the houshold of Faith. And therefore , Let us on in Gods Name. "2. Subditorum erga suos Magistratus Officium primum est,Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 20. sect. 22. de eorum functione quàm honorificen∣tissimè sentire, &c. The first duty of the Sub∣jects towards their Magistrates, is to think won∣drous
honourably of their place and function, which they acknowledge to be a jurisdiction de∣legated by Almighty God; and therefore are by consequence to respect and reverence them, as the Ministers and Deputies of God. For some there are, who very dutifully do behave themselves to∣ward their Magistrates, and would have all men do the like, because they think it most expedi∣ent for the Common-wealth, and yet esteem no otherwise of them then of some necessary evils which they cannot want. But St. Peter looks for more then this,1 Pet. 2. 17. when he commandeth us to honour the King; and so doth Solomon also where he re∣quires us to fear God and the King.Prov. 24. 21. For the first under the the term of honouring, compre∣hends a good esteem, a fair opinion; the other joyning God and the King together, shewes plainly that in the person of a King there is a ray of sa∣cred majesty. And that of Paul is richly worth our observation, where he commands us to obey, not for wrath only,Rom. 13. 5. but for conscience sake. By which he means, that Subjects are not only to contain themselves within the bounds of their obedience, for fear they should incurre the anger and displeasure of their Prince or Governor (as men submit themselves to an armed enemy, whom they see ready to chastise them, if they should re∣sist); but also to perswade themselves that the expressions of their duties which they make to them, are made indeed to God himself, from whom what ever power they have is devolved upon them. Nor speak I of the men themselves,
as if the vizard of authority were enough to hide either their follies or their sloth, on their lusts or cruelties, or gain the name of virtues to their filthiest vices, but that the function is so venera∣ble and so full of honour, that they who execute the same and bear rule over us, are to be worthily esteemed and reverenced for their Office sake. "The second duty of the Subjects doth arise from this,SECT. 23. which is that we express the reverence and respect which we owe unto them by the acti∣ons of obedience; whether it be in yeelding obedience to their Lawes, or in paying tributes, or undergoing such publick services and burdens, as do relate unto the preservation of the publick, or executing such commands as are laid upon us. Let every soul (saith Paul) be subject to the higher powers;Rom. 13. 1. for he that doth resist the power resists the ordinance of God. Put them in minde (saith he to Titus) to be subject to Principalities,Tit. 3. 1. and powers, to obey Magistrates, and to be ready to every good work. And Peter thus, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake,1 Pet. 2. 13. whether it be to the King▪ as Supreme, or unto Governors as to those which are sent by him for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. And to the end the subject may not think that it is sufficient to counter∣feit or pretend obedience in the outward shew, but to perform it truly and sincerely from the very heart, Paul adds that we commend the health and flourishing estate of those under whom we live,1 Tim. 2. 1. in our prayers to God. I exhort (saith
he) that first of all supplications, prayers, interces∣sions, and giving of thanks be made for all men; for Kings, and for all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godli∣ness and honesty: Let no man here deceive him∣self. For seeing the Magistrate cannot be re∣sisted, but that God is resisted also; though the unarmed Magistrate may possibly be contemned and slighted without fear of punishment, yet God is armed sufficiently to revenge those insolencies, which are thus offered to himself in them. Now under this obedience, I also do include that mo∣deration and discretion, which private persons ought to have and to impose upon themselves as a rule or law, that so they neither intermeddle in affairs of State, nor invade the office of the Ma∣gistrate, nor put themselves on any publick un∣dertakings; if any thing be amiss in the publick Government, which stands in need of Reforma∣tion, it appertains not unto them to be tumul∣tuously active in it, or to put their hands unto the work, whose hands are tied (and to be tied) on all such occasions; but that they make it known unto the Magistrate, whose hands are only left at liberty to effect the same. My meaning is, that they do nothing uncommanded. For when the power or precept of the Governor doth in∣tervene, they are then armed with just autho∣rity, and may do accordingly. For as the Princes Privy Councel are said to be his Ears, and Eyes, so those inferiour Ministers, by whom he exe∣cuteth his commands or mandates, are not unfitly called his Hands."
"3. The Magistrate being such as he ought to be,SECT. 24. and as before we have described him, that is to say, The Father of the Countrey, the Shepheard of his people, the preserver of the publick peace, the great distributer of justice, and the avenger of the innocent; he must be somewhat more then mad who is not pleased with such a Government. But seeing that all Ages do afford examples of negligent and slothful Princes, who have no care at all of the publick safety; of others who are so intent of their private profit, as to make markets of all laws and priviledges, and to expose their ju∣stice and their favours both unto open sale: of some who drain their peoples purses to no other end, but to maintain a vain and wastful prodigali∣tie, and some who spend their time in nothing more, then either the rifling of the subjects houses, the deflouring of their wives and daughters, or in the slaughter of the innocent: that these should be received for Princes, and their commands obeyed at all, even in lawful matters, is such a thing, as some will hardly be perswaded to consent unto. For where men finde so much unworthi∣ness, and such filthy facts, as do not only mis-be∣come a Magistrate, but a private person; when they see no resemblance of that Image of God, which ought to shine most brightly in a Christian Magistrate; when they behold no track nor foot∣step of such a Minister of Gods, as is ordained for the incouragement and praise of those that do well, and for the punishment of those that are evil
doers: they take him not for such a Governour whose office and authoritie is extolled so highly in the Scriptures. And to say truth, it hath been always naturally implanted in the souls of men, not more to love and reverence a just vertuous Prince, then to abominate and detest an ungodly Tyrant. "But if we look into Gods Book,SECT. 25. we shall there be taught not only to submit our selves to the command of those Princes, who faithfully and as they ought do discharge their office; but of all those who are advanced unto the highest place of Government, though they do nothing less then per∣form their duties. For though the Magistrate be one of the greatest blessings given by God for the good of mankind; and that he hath confined the Magi∣strate within certain limits: yet he declares, that whatsoever they are they do receive their power from no hand but his▪ that if they principally do in∣tend the publick good, they are the greatest testi∣monies and examples of his goodness to us; if they prove insolent and unjust, they are the executioners of his wrath and judgement for the sins of the peo∣ple; that all are equally invested with that sacred Majesty wherewith he hath apparelled the most lawful powers. I shall proceed no further in this present business, till I have made some proof of that which is said before. Not that I mean to spend my time in the proof of this, that a wicked King is one of Gods curses on the earth: for be∣sides that there is none who gainsay the same, we should say no more in this of Kings, then of
the Theef that steals thy goods, or the Adulterer that defiles thy marriage bed, or the Murderer that seeks thy life, all which are reckoned for Gods curses in the holy Scripture. The point we purpose to make proof of, goeth not down so easily; that is to say, That in the vilest men, and most unworthy of all honour, if they be once advanced to the publick government, there doth reside that excellent and divine authoritie, which God hath given in holy Scripture to those who are the Ministers of his heavenly justice: who there∣fore are to be reverenced by the subject, for as much as doth concern them in the way of their publick duties, with as much honour and obedi∣ence, as they would reverence the best King, were he given unto them. "And first the reader must take notice of the espe∣cial Act and Providence of Almighty God,SECT. 26. (not without cause so oft remembred in the Scriptures) in disposing Kingdoms, and setting up such Kings as to him seems best.Dan. 2. 21, 37. The Lord (saith Daniel) changeth the times and the seasons; he removeth Kings, and setteth up Kings. And in another place, That the living may know that the most High ruleth in the Kingdoms of men, and giveth them to whomsoever he will. Which kinde of sen∣tences as they are very frequent in the Scriptures, so is that prophesie most plentiful and abundant in them. No man is ignorant that Nebuchadnezzar who destroyed Hierusalem, was a great spoiler and oppressor, yet the Lord tells us by Ezechiel, that he had given unto him the land of Egypt, for the
good service he had done in laying it wast on his commandement. And Daniel said unto him thus;Dan. 2. 37. Thou O King art a King of Kings, for the God of Heaven hath given thee a Kingdom, power and strength and glory; And wheresoever the children of men dwell, the beasts of the field, and the fowls of heaven hath he given into thy hand, and hath made thee Ruler over them all. Again to Belshazzer his son,Dan▪ 5. 18. The most high God gave unto Nebuchadnezzar thy father a Kingdom, and majesty and glory and honour; and for the maje∣sty that he gave him, all people, nations, and languages trembled and feared before him. Now when we hear that Kings are placed over us by God, let us be pleased to call to minde those several precepts to fear and honour them, which God hath given us in his Book; holding the vilest Tyrant in as high account, as God hath graciously vouchsafed to estate him in. When Samuel told the people of the house of Israel what they should suffer from their King, he expressed it thus,1 Sam. 8. 11. This will be the manner of the King which shall reign over you, he will take your sons and appoint them for himself, for his Chariots, and to be his Horsemen, and some shall rn before his Cha∣riots; And he will appoint him Captains over thousands, and Captains over fifties, and will set them to ear his ground and to reap his harvest, and to make his instruments of war, and instruments of his Chariots; And he will take your daughters to be his Confectionaries, and to be Coks, and to be Bakers; And he will take your fields, and
your Vineyards, and your Olive-yards, even the best of them, and give them to his servants; And he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your Vineyards, and give to his Officers, and to his Servants; And he will take your menservants, and your maid-servants, and your goodliest young men and your Asses, and put them to his work; He will take the tenth of your sheep, and ye shall be his Servants. Assuredly their Kings could not do this lawfully, whom God had otherwise instructed in the Book of the Law: but it is therefore called Jus Regis, the right of Kings upon the subject, which of necessitie the Subjects were to submit unto, and not to make the least resistance. As if the Prophet had thus said, So far shall the li∣centiousness of your Kings extend it self, which you shall have no power to restrain or remedie, to whom there shall be nothing left but to receive the intima∣tion of their pleasures, and fulfil the same. "But most remarkable is that place in the Pro∣phet Jeremie,SECT. 27. which (though it be somewhat of the longest) I wil here put down, because it doth so plainly state the present question.Jer. 27. 6. I have made the earth (saith the Lord) the man and the beast that are upon the ground, by my great power and by my out-stretched Arm, and have given it unto whom it seemed meet unto me; And now have▪ I given all these lands into the hand of Nebuchad∣nezzar King of Babylon my servant, and the beasts of the field have I given him also to serve him; And all Nations shall serve him, and his son, and his sons son, until the very time of his land come;
And it shall come to pass that the Nation and Kingdom which will not serve the same Nebu∣chadnezzar King of Babylon, and that will not put their neck under the yke of the King of Ba∣bylon, that Nation will I punish, saith the Lord, with the sword, and with the famine, and with the pestilence; Wherefore serve the King of Babylon, and live. We see by this how great a measure of obedience was required by God towards that fierce and cruel Tyrant, only because he was ad∣vanced to the Kingly throne, and did by conse∣quence participate of that Regal majesty, which is not to be violated without grievous sin. Let us therefore have this always in our minde and before our eyes, that by the same decree of God, on which the power of Kings is constituted, the very wickedest Princes are established: and let not such seditious thoughts be admitted by us, that is to say, that we must deal with Kings no otherwise then they do deserve; and that it is no right nor reason, that we should shew our selves obedient subjects unto him, who doth not mu∣tually perform the duty of a King to us." "4. It is a poor objection which some men have made,SECT. 28. viz. that that command was only pro∣per to the Israelites; for mark upon what grounds the command was given. I have given, saith he, the Kingdom unto Nebuchadnezzar, wherefore serve him, and ye shall live: and thereupon it needs must follow, that upon whomsoever God bestows a Kingdom, to whom we must address our ser∣vrce;
and that assoon as God hath raised any to the Regal Throne, he doth sufficiently declare his will to be, that he would have that man to reign over us. Some general testimonies of this truth are in holy Scripture;Prov. 24. 2▪ For thus saith SOLO∣MON, For the transgression of a land many are the Princes thereof;Job 12. 18. and JOB, He looseth the band of Kings, and girdeth their loins with a Girdle. Which if confessed, there is no remedy at all, but we must serve those Kings, if we mean to live. There is ano∣ther text in the Prophet Ieremie, by which the peo∣ple are commanded,Jer. 29. 7. to seek the peace of Babylon, whither God had caused them to be carried away cap∣tive, and to pray unto the Lord for it, for in the peace thereof was their peace to be. Behold the Israelites being dispoiled of their estates, driven from their houses, carried into exile, and plunged in a most miserable thraldom, are yet required to pray for the prosperitie of the Conquerour: not only as we are commanded in another place to pray for them that persecute us, but that his Empire might continue in peace and safetie, that they themselves might quietly enjoy the protection of it. Thus Da∣vid being appointed King by the Lords own Or∣dinance, and anointed with his holy Oyl, when un∣deservedy he was persecuted and pursued by Saul, would not give way that any corporal hurt should be done to that sacred person, whom God had raised unto the Kingdom.1 Sam. 24. 6. The Lord forbid, saith he, that I should do this thing unto my Master the Lords anointed, to stretch forth my hand against him, seeing he is the Anointed of the Lord. Again,
But mine eye spared thee, ad I said, I will not put forth my hand against my Lord, for he is the Lords Anointed. And again, who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords Anointed, and be guiltless? As the Lord liveth, the Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come to die, or he shall descend into battel and perish. The Lord forbid that I should stretch my hand against the Lords Anointed. "This reverence and dutiful regard we ought to carrie towards our Governours,SECT. 29. to the very end, however they may chance to prove. Which there∣fore I repeat the oftner, that we may learn not to enquire too narrowly into the men, but to rest our selves content with this, that they sustain that place or person by the Lords appointment, in which he hath imprinted and ingraved a most inviolable character of sacred Majestie. But some will say, that Rulers owe a mutual dutie to their Subjects. That hath been formerly confessed: from which if any should infer, that no obedience must be yeelded but to their just and legal power, he were a very sorry disputant. Husbands are bound in mutual bonds unto their Wives, and so are Parents to their Children. Suppose that both neglect their du∣ties, that Parents who are prohibited by God to provoke their Children unto wrath, be so untract∣able and harsh to them, that they do grieve them above measure with continual sowreness; and that husbands who are commanded to love their wives, and to give honour to them as the weaker vessel, should use them with contempt and scorn: should therefore children be the less obedient to their
Parents, or wives less dutiful to their husbands? We see the contrary, that they are subject to them though both lewd and froward. Since there∣ore nothing doth concern us more, then that we trouble not our selves with looking into the defects of other men, but carefully endevour to perform those duties which do belong unto our selves; more specially ought they to observe this rule, who live under the authority and power of others. Wherefore if we are inhumanely handled by a cruel Prince, or by a covetous and luxurious Prince dispoiled and rifled; if by a slothful one neg∣lected, or vexed for our Religion by a lewd and wicked: let us look back upon our sins, which God most commonly correcteth with this kinde of scourges; the thought whereof will humble us, and keep down the impatience of our angry spirits. Let us consider with our selves, that it appertains not unto us to redress these mischiefs; that all which doth belong to us is to crie to God, in whose hands are the hearts of Kings,Prov. 21. 1. and he turn∣eth them whither soever he will. He is that God which standeth in the Congregation of the mighty, and judgeth amongst the Gods: before whose face all Kings shall fall and be confounded, and all the Judges f the earth who do not reverence his CHRIST, but make unjust laws to oppress the poor, and offer violence to the man of low condi∣on, and make a spoil of Widows, and a prey of Orphans. "And here we may aswell behold his goodness,SECT. 30. as his power and providence. For sometimes he
doth raise Avengers from amongst his servants, and furnisheth them with power sufficient aswell to execute vengeance on such wicked Rulers, as to redeem his people so unjustly vext, from the house of bondage: and sometimes useth to that end, the fierce wrath of others, who think of no∣thing less then to serve his turn. Thus he redeemed his people Israel from the tyrannie of Pharaoh, by the hand of Moses; from Cushan Kng of Syria, by Othoniel; from other thraldoms by some other of their Kings and Judges. Thus did he ame the pride of Tyre by the arms of Egypt, the insolence of Egypt by the Assyrians, the fierceness of Assy∣ria by the Chaldeans, the confidence of Babylon by the Medes and Persians, after that Cyrus had be∣fore subdued the Medes. Thus did he sometimes punish the ingratitude of the Kings of Judah and Israel, and that ungodly contumacie which they carried towards him, notwithstanding all his bene∣fits conferred upon them, by the Assyrians first, the Baylonians after. But we must know that though these several instruments did the self same work, yet they proceeded not in the self same motives. For the first sort being thereto lawfully authorized and called by Almighty God, by taking up Arms against their Kings, did nothing less tn violate that sacred Majestie, which is inherent in a King by Gods holy Ordinance, but being armed from heaven, did only regulate and chastise the lesser power by the help of the greater; as Princes use sometimes to correct their Nobles. The later sort, though guided by the hand of God as to
him seemed best, so that they did unknowingly effect what he had to do, intended only the pursuit of their own designs." " 5. But whatsoever their designes and intenti∣ons were,SECT. 31. the Lord did justly use them to effect his business, when by their means he broke the bloudie Scepters of those insolent Kings, and overthrew their wicked and tyrannical Empires. Hear this ye Princes, and be terrified at the hearing of it. But let not this afford the least in∣couragement unto the subject, to violate or despise the authoritie of the Magistrate, which God hath filled so full of majestie, and fortified by so many Edicts from the Court of Heaven, though some∣times an unworthie person doth enjoy the same, and such a one as doth dishonor it by his filthie life. Nor may we think because the punishment of licentious Princes doth belong to God, that presently this power of executing vengeance is devolved on us▪ to whom no other precept hath been given by God, but only to obey, and suffer.De privatis homini∣bus semper loquor. Nam si qui nunc sint populares magistra∣tus ad moderandum Regum libidinem constituti (quales o∣lim erant, qui Lace∣daemoniis Regibus oppositi erant Epho∣ri; aut Romanis Consulibus Tribuni Plebis; aut Atheni∣ensium Senatui De∣marchi: & qua eti∣am fortè potestate, ut nunc res habent, fun∣guntur in singulis Regnis tres Ordines, quum primarios con∣ventus peragunt): adeo illos ferocienti Regum licentiae pro officio intercedere non veto, ut si Regi∣bus impotenter gras∣santibus, & humili plebeculae insultanti∣bus conniveant, eo∣rum dissimulationem nefariâ perfidiâ non carere affirmem; quia populi libertatem cu∣jus se Dei Ordinati∣one tutores positos norunt, fraudulenter produnt. But still I must be under∣stood of private persons. For if there be now any Po∣pular Officers, ordained to moderate the licentiousness of Kings, (such as the Epho∣ri of old set up against the Kings of Sparta, the Tri∣bunes of the people against the Roman Consuls, and the Demarchi against the Athe∣nian
Senate; and with which power, perhaps, as the world now goes, the three Estates are furnished in each several Kingdom, when they are solemnly assembled): so far am I from hindering them from putting a restraint on the exorbitant power of Kings, as their Office bindes them, that I conceive them guiltie rather of a perfidious dissimulation, if they con∣ive at Kings when they play the Tyrants, or wan∣tonly insult on the common people; in that they trea∣cherously betray the sub∣jects Libertie, of which they know they were made guardians by Gods own Or∣dinance and appointment. "But this must always be excepted, in the obedience which we have determined to be due to the commands of our Governors, and first of all to be observed, that it draw us not from that obe∣dience which is due to him, to whose will all the commands of Kings must be subordinate, to whose
decrees their strongest mandates must give place, and before whose Majestie they are bound to lay down their Scepters. For how preposterous were it to incur his anger, by our compliance with those men, whom we are bound no otherwise to obey, then for his sake only? The Lord is King of Kings, who when he speaks, is to be heard for all, and above them all. We must be subject to those men who have rule over us, but in him alone. If against him they do command us any thing, it is to be of none account. Nor in such cases is the dignity of the Magistrate to be stood upon, to which no injurie is done, if in regard of the more eminent and supreme power of God, it be restrained within its bounds.Dan. 6. 22. In this respect Daniel denied that he had trespassed any thing against the King, in not obeying his prophane and ungodly Edict, because the King had gone beyond his proper limits, and being not only injurious against men, but lifting up his horns against God himself, had first deprived himself of all Authoritie. The Israelites are condemned on the other side, for being so ready to obey their King, in a wicked action, when to ingratiate themselves with Jeroboam, who had newly made the Golden Calves, they left the Temple of the Lord, and betook themselves to a new superstitious worship. And when their Children and posteritie with the like facility applied themselves unto the humors of their wicked Kings, the Prophet doth severely rebuke them for it. So little praise doth that pretence of modesty deserve to have, with which some Court-Parasites
do disguise themselves and abuse the simple, affirming it to be a crime not to yeeld obedience to any thing that Kings command: as if God either had resigned all his rights and interess into the hands of mortal men, when he made them Rulers over others; or that the greatest earthly power were a jot diminished, by being subjected to its Author, before whom all the powers of heaven do trembling supplicate. I know that great and imminent danger may befall those men, who dare give entertainment to so brave a constancy; considering with what indignation Kings do take the matter, when they once see themselves neglected, whose indignation is as the messenger of death, saith the wise man Solomon. But when we hear this Proclamation made by the heavenly Cryer,Act. 5. 29. that we ought to obey God rather then men; let this conside∣ration be a comfort to us, that then we yeeld that obedience unto God which he looks for from us, when we rather choose to suffer any thing, then to deviate from the way of god∣liness. And lest our hearts should fail us in so great a business, S. Paul subjoyns another motive,1 Cor. 7. 23. that being bought by Christ at so great a price; we should not re-inthral our selves to the lusts of men, much less addict our selves to the works of wickedness."
6. These are the very words of Calvin, from which his followers and Disciples most extreamly differ both in their doctrine, and their practise. First, for their practise, CALVIN requires that we should reverence and respect the Magistrate for his Office sakeSect. 22.; and that we entertain no other then a fair esteem, an honorable opinion both of their actions, and their Counsels. His followers (like filthy dream∣ers as they are) do not only despise dominionJude 8., but speak evill of dignities; that is to say, they neither reverence the persons of their Supreme Magi∣strate, nor regard their Office: and are so far from cherishing a good opinion of those higher powers to which the Lord hath made them subject, that their hearts imagine mischief against them all the day long; and though they see no cause to condemn their actions, they will be sure enough to misconstrue the end. CALVIN requires that we should mani∣fest the reverence and respect we bear them by the outward actions of obedienceSect. 23.; and to the end, that this obedience should proceed from the very heart and not to be counterfeit and false, he addes that we commend their health and flourishing estate in our prayers to GodIbid.. His Followers study no∣thing more then to disobey them, in every one of those particulars which their Master speaks of, refusing to obey their laws, and to pay them tribute, and to undergoe such services and burdens as are laid upon them in reference to the publick safety, & spare not as occasion serves to manifest the disaffection of their hearts, by such outward acts as disobedience
and disloyalty can suggest unto them: and ae so far from praying for them, that many times they pray against them, blaspheming God because he will not curse the King, and making that which they call Prayer so dangerous and lewd a libel, that their very prayers are turned to sin. CALVIN requires such moderation in the subject, that they neither inter∣meddle in affairs of State, nor invade the Office of the Magistrate; and that if any thing be amiss in the publick Government which stands in need of Reformation, they presume not to put their hands unto the work, or be tumultuously active in itSect. 23.. His followers will not trust the Magistrates in the per∣formance of their own Office, but are all Counsellors and Statesmen; and think that nothing is done well, but what is done as they would have it, and by their own hands too, none other. Whether things be amiss or not, they must needs be doing. Not by presenting their desires for a Reformation, and making known the fault (if such fault there be) to their Supreme Magistrates, which was the way their Master taught them; but by raising tumults to affright them: The attempt of the French Hugonots at Ambois upon Charles the ninth, and the two tu∣mults at Edenburgh, the one about the year 1593. against the person of King James, and the other in the year 1637. against the Ministers of King Charles, will not be forgotten whilest Calvin and his Institu∣tions are in print amongst us. CALVIN requires that we should yeeld obedience not only to such Kings and Princes, which faithfully and as they ought do discharge their Office, but even to all those
also which do nothing less then perform their dutiesSect. 25., not only to the meek and gentle, but even unto the fiercest and most cruel Tyrant, if any such be raised by God to the Kingly throneSect. 27.. His followers resolve not to yeeld obedience to their Kings and Princes, though they can charge them with no fault but their too much lenity; unless it be that they have caused them to surfeit upon peace and plenty, or that the people grew too rich, and lived too happily, and drove too great a Trade, under their command: and are so far from yeelding obedience to a Tyrant, or a se∣verer and cruel Prince, call him which you will, that neither the innocent minoritie of Charles the ninth, nor the moderate Government of the Duchess of Parma, in the Netherlands; nor the milde peace∣able temper of King James when he reigned in Scotland, could save them from their insolencies and insurrections. Finally CALVIN doth declare that though we be inhumanely handled by a cruel Prince, or by a covetous and luxurious Prince dispoyled and rifled; though by a slothful one neglected, or vexed for our Religion by a lewd and wicked, yet it pertains not unto us to redress these mischiefs; that all the remedie that we have is to cry to GodSect. 29., and till God takes the work in hand, to obey and sufferSect. 31.: and absolutely condemns those seditious thoughts, (which some men are too apt to harbour) that we must deal with Kings no otherwise then they shall deserve Sect. 27.: His Followers, if they think themselves oppressed, though indeed they are not; or that Religi∣on is in danger, though indeed it be not; or the honor of the State neglected, though never of so
much repute, nor so bravely managed: will not descend so low as to cry to God, or be so pusillanmous and so poorly minded, as only to obey and suffer (that were a weakness fit for none but the primitive Chri∣stians); but take the sword into their hands (be it right or wrong) to force their Kings to come unto a reckoning with them, as if they would have re∣paration from them for their former sufferings, and could have reparation no way but that. And as for dealing with their Kings no otherwise then they do deserve, although the maxime be unsafe, and the very thought thereof seditious, as their Master tells them; would they would hold themselves to that, which had they done, so many Kings in Christendom had not been so unjustly handled, driven from their Palaces, expelled their Cities, robbed of their Fortresses and Revenues, assaulted in the open fields, and forced sometimes to change both their Counsel and their Guards, (the ordinary practise by the Hugonots in France, the Presbyteri∣ans in Scotland, the Calvinists in the Netherlands, and indeed where not?) had they been dealt withall no otherwise then they deserved. 7. Next let us look upon them in their points of doctrine, and we shall finde the Scholars and their Master at a greater distance, then before we saw them at in point of practise. CALVIN determines very soundly that Kings have their authoritie from none but God, non nisi a se habere imperiumSect. 25., that the supreme Magistracie is a jurisdiction devolved from God upon the person of the Magistrate or
delegata a Deo jurisdictioSect. 22.; that it is the singu∣lar work or act of God to dispose of Kingdoms, and to set up such Kings as to him seems meet, which he calls Singularem Dei actionem in distribuendis Regnis, statuendis{que} QUOS ILLI VISVM FVERIT REGI∣BVS Sect. 26., and finally that in every King or Supreme Governor, there is inviolabilis majestas, an indelible character of Majestia imprinted by the hand of God. His Scholars tell us that Kings are only creatures of the peoples making; and that whatever power they have, is derived from them. The Ob∣servator, and the Fuller Answer unto Dr. Fern, and almost all our later Scriblers do resolve it so. They tell us secondly, (which must needs follow from the former) that the people have the sole power of disposing Kingdoms, and setting up such Kings as they list themselves; and being so set up, that there is no more Majestie, no brighter beam of Gods divinitie in them, then in other men. Buchannan so affirms for certain, Populo jus est, imperium cui velit deferatBuchannan de jure regni.; and confidently reckoneth those reverend attributes of Majestie and Highness, which usually are given to Kings and Princes, inter soloecismos & barbarismos AulicosId. in Epist. ad, amongst the Solecisms and absurdities of Princes Courts. CALVIN determines very Oxthodoxly, that though the King degenerate and become a tyrant, though he infringe the subjects liberties, and invade their fortunes, persecute them for their pietie, and neglect their safetie, and be be∣sides a vitious and libidinous person; yet still his Subjects are to look upon him, in all things which pertain to their publick duties, with as much ho∣nour
and obedience, as they would do the justest and most vertuous Prince that was ever given unto a people. Eadem in reverentia & dignatione haben∣dum, quantum ad publicam obedientiam attinet, qua optimum Regem si dareur habituri essentSect. 25.. His Scholars sing another song, and use all arts imagi∣nable to excite the people to rise against them and destroy them. The Author of that scandalous and dangerous Dialogue, entituled Eusebius Philadelphus doth expresly say, that of all good actions the murther of a Tyrant is most commendableEuseb Phila∣delph. Dial.. Buchannan accounts it a defect in Polities, proemia eorum interfectoribus non decerniBuchannan de jure regni.; that publick honors and rewards are not propounded unto such as shall kill a Tyrant: and some late Pamphleters conclude it lawful to rebel in the case of tyrannie, because for∣sooth, If a King exercising tyrannie over his sub∣jects may not be resisted, (that is to say, if the subject may not take up Arms against him) he and his followers may destroy the Kingdom. And now we are fallen upon the business of resistance, CALVIN allows of no case (for ought I can see) in which the Subject lawfully may resist the Soveraign; quando∣quidem resisti magistratui non potest quin simul resi∣statur DeoSect. 23., for as much as the Magistrate cannot be resisted, but that God is resisted also: and reckon∣ing up those several pressures whereof Samuel spake unto the Jews, and which he calls jus Regis, as himself translates it, he concludes at last, cui parere ipsi necesse esset, nec obsistere liceretSect. 6., that no resistance must be made on the Subjects part, though Kings entrench as much upon them, both in their
liberties and properties, as the Prophet speaks of. His Scholars are grown wiser, and instruct us other∣wise. Paraeus saith, that if the King assault our persons, or endevour to break into our houses, we may as lawfully resist him, as we would do a Theif or Robber on the like occasionsParaeus in Rom. cap. 13.. And our new Masters have found out many other Cases in which the Subject may resist, and which is more then so, is bound to do it, as namely in his own behalf, and in Gods behalf, in behalf of his Countrey, and in be∣half of the laws; and in so many more behalfs, that they have turned most Christian Kings out of half their Kingdoms. But to go on, CALVIN determines very rightly, that notwithstanding any contract made or supposed to be made between a King and his people, yet if the King do break his Covenants and oppress the subject, the subject can no more pretend to be discharged of his Allegiance, then the wife may lawfully divorce herself from a froward husband; or children throw aside that natural dutie which they owe their Parents, because their Parents are unkinde, and it may be cruel. Those which doe otherwise conclude from the foresaid contract, he calls insulsos ratio cinatoresSect. 29., but sorrie and un∣savorie disputants: and reckoneth it for a sedi∣tious imagination, that we must deal no otherwise with Kings then they do deserve, nec aequum esse ut subditos einos praestemus, qui vicissim Regem no∣bis non se praestetSect. 27., or to imagine that it is neither sense nor reason that we should shew our selves obe∣dient
subjects unto him, who doth not mutually per∣form the dutie of a King to us. His Scholars are grown able to teach their Master a new lesson, and would tell him, if he were alive, that there is a mu∣tual contract between King and Subjects; and if he break the Covenant, he forfeiteth the benefit of the Agreement, and he not performing the dutie of a King, they are released from the dutie of subjects. As contrary to their Masters Tenet as black to white; and yet some late Pamphlets press no doctrine with such strength and eagerness, as they have done this: Nor have the Pulpits spared to publish it to their cheated Auditories, as a new Article of faith, that if the Ruler perform not his dutie, the contract is dissolved, and the people are at liberty to right them∣selves. What excellent uses have been raised from this dangerous doctrine, as many Kings of Chri∣stendom have felt already, so posteritie will have cause to lament the mischiefs which it will bring into the world in succeeding Ages. Finally CAL∣VIN hath determined, and exeeding piously, that if the Magistrate command us any thing which is contrarie to the Will and Word of God, we must observe S. Peters rule, and rather choose to obey God, then men: and that withal we must prepare our selves to endure such punishments as the offended Magistrate shall inflict upon us, for the said refusal; Et quicquid potius perpeti quam a veritate defiecte∣re Sect. 32., and rather suffer any torments, then forsake the way of Gods Commandements. The Magi∣strate, as it seems by him, must at all times be honoured by us, either in our active obedience, or
in our passive; if we refuse to do his will, we must be content to suffer for it. His Scholars are too wise to submit to that, and are so far from suffer∣ing for the testimony of the Gospel and a good conscience, that they take care to teach the people that it is lawful to rebel in behalf of God, to pre∣serve the true religion when it is in danger (or when they think it is in danger) by force of Arms, and to procure the peace of Hierusalem by the destruction of Babylon. Which being so, the difference be∣ing so great and irreconcileable between the Follow∣ers and their leader in the point of practise, between the Master and the Scholars in the points of do∣ctrine: me thinks it were exceeding fit the man were either less admired, or better followed; that they who cry him up for the great Reformer, would either stand to all his Tenets, or be bound to none; that they would be so careful of the Churches peace, and their own salvation, as not to swallow down his errors in his points of discipline, and pass him by with a Magister non tenetur, when he doth preach obedience to them, and doth so solidly discourse of the powers of Government.Tully Philip. 2. Aut undi{que} reli∣gionem [suam] tollant, aut usquequaque conservent, as Tully said of Antony in another case. But of this no more. 9. Hitherto CALVIN hath done well, few bet∣ter; of the Genevian Doctors none, ne unus qui∣dem, not so much as one. But there's an herb which spoils the pottage, an HERB so venomous, that it is mors in olla unto them that taste it. The figs in
the next basket are evill,Ierem. 24. very evill, not to be eaten, (as it is in the Prophets words) they are so evill. In that before he did exceeding soundly and judici∣ously lay down the doctrine of obedience unto Kings and Princes, and the unlawfulness of Subjects taking Arms against their Soveraign. In this to come he openeth a most dangerous gap to disobedience and rebellions in most States in Christendom, in which his name is either reverenced or his works esteemed of. For having fully pressed the points before delivered unto the conscience of the subject, and utterly disabled them from lifting up their hands against the Supreme Magistrate, or any occasion whatsoever: he shews them how to help themselves, and what course to take, for the asserting of their liberties, and the recovery of their rights, if the Prince invade them; by telling them that all he spake before was of private personsSect. 31., but that if there were any popular Officers, such as the Ephori of Sparta, the Tribunes of Rome, the Demarchi of Athens, ordained for the restraint of Kings, and Supreme Governors, it never was his meaning to include them in it. And such power he doth suppose to be in the three Estates of every King∣dom, when they are solemnly assembled; whom he condemns as guiltie of perfidious dissimulation, and the betrayers of the Subjects liberties, whereof they are the proper and appointed Guardans, if they connive at Kings when they play the Tyrants, or want only insult on the Common people. This is the gap through which rebellions and seditions have found so plausible a passage in the Christian world,
to the dethroning of some Kings and Princes, the death of others. For through this gap, broke in those dangerous and seditious doctrines, that the inferiour Magistrates are ordained by God, and not appointed by the King, or the Supreme Powers; that being so ordained by God, they are by him inabled to com∣pel the King to rule according unto justice and the laws established; that if the King be refractary and and unreclaimable, they are to call him to account, and to provide for the safety of the Common-wealth by all ways and means which may conduce unto the preservation of it: and finally (which is the darling doctrine of these later times) that there is a mix∣ture in all Governments, and that the three Estates conveened in Parliament (or by what other name so ever we do call their meeting) are not subordi∣nate to the King, but co-ordinate with him; and have not only a supplemental power, to supply what is defective in him, but a coercive also to restrain his Actions, & a corrective too to reform his Errors. But this I give you now in the generals only; here∣after you shall see it more particularly, and every Author cited in his own words for the proof here∣of. Many of which as they did live in CALVINS time, and by their writings gave great scandal to all soveraign Princes, but more as to the progress of the Reformation; so could not CALVIN choose but be made acquainted with the effects and conse∣quences of his dangerous principles. Which since he never did retract, upon the sight of those sediti∣ous Pamphlets, and worse then those, those bloudie tumults and rebellions which ensued upon it; but let
it stand unaltered to his dying day: is a cleer argu∣ment to me, that this passage fell not from his pen by chance, but was laid of purpose as a Stumbling∣block in the Subjects way, to make him fall in the performance of his Christian duty both to God and man. For though the Book of Institutions had been often printed in his life time, and received ma∣ny alterations and additions (as being enlarged from a small Octavo, of not above 29 sheets, to a large folio of 160) yet this particular passage still remained unchanged, and hath continued as it is from the first Edition of it, which was in the year 1536. not long after his first coming to Geneva. 10. But to proceed in our design. What fruits these dangerous doctrines have produced amongst us, we have seen too plainly; and we may see as plainly, if we be not blinde, through what gap these do∣ctrines entred, on what foundation they were built, and unto whose authoritie we stand indebted for all those miseries and calamities which are fallen upon us. Yet to say truth, the man desired to be concealed, and not reputed for the Author of such strange conclusions which have resulted from his principles: and therefore laies it down with great art and cau∣tion. Si qui, and Fortè, and ut nunc res habent, that is to say, Perhaps, and as the world now goes, and if there be such Officers as have been formerly, are the three disguises, which he hath masked him∣self and the point withall, that he might pass away unseen. And if there be such Officers as perhaps there are, or that the world goes here as it did at
Sparta, or in the States of Rome and Athens; as perhaps it doth; or that the three Estates, of each several Kingdom have the same authoritie in them as the Ephori, the Demarchi, and the Tribunes had, as perhaps they have; the Subject is no doubt in a good condition, as good a man as the best Mo∣narch of them all. But if the Ephori, the Demar∣chi and the Tribunes, were not appointed at the first for the restiaint and regulating of the Supreme Pow∣ers, as indeed they were not; and if the three Estates in each several Kingdom have not that authoritie, which the Ephori, and the Tribunes did in fine usurp, and the Demarchi are supposed to have, as indeed they have not; perhaps and peradventure will not serve the turn. The subject stands upon no better grounds, then before he did. Therefore to take away this stumbling-block and remove this rub, I shall propose and prove these three points ensuing. 1. That the Ephori, the Demarchi, and the Roman Tri∣bunes were not instituted at the first, for those ends and purposes, which are supposed by the Author. 2. If they were instituted for those ends, yet the illa∣tion thereupon would be weak and childish, as it re∣lates to Kings and Kingdoms; And 3. That the three Estates in each several Kingdom without all peradventures have no such authoritie, as the Author dreams of, and therefore of no power to controul their King. Which if I clearly prove, as I hope I shall, I doubt not but to leave the cause in a better condition then I found it. And in the proof of these, the first point especially, if it be thought that I insist longer then I needed on the condition
of the Spartan Ephori, the Roman Tribunes, and the Demarchi of Athens, and spend more cost upon it then the thing is worth; I must intreat the Reader to excuse me in it. I must first lay my grounds and make sure work there, before I go about my build∣ing: And being my design relates particularly to the information and instruction of the English Subject, I could not make my way unto it, but by a discoverie of the means and Artifices, by which some petit po∣pular Officers attained unto so great a masterie in the game of Government, as to give the Check unto their Kings. Which being premised once for all, I now proced unto the proof of the points proposed, and having proved these points, I shall make an end. Haec tria cum docuero perorabo, in the Orators language.
CHAP. II. Of the Authority of Ephori in the State of Sparta; and that they were not instituted for the ends supposed by Calvin. (I) The Kings of Sparta absolute Monarchs at the first. (II) Of the declining of the Regal power, and the condition of that State, when Lycurgus under∣took to change the Government. (III) What power Lycurgus gave the Senate; and what was left unto the Kings. (IV) The Ephori appointed by the Kings of Sparta to ease themselves, and curb the Senate. (V) The blundering and mistakes of Joseph Sca∣liger about the first Institution of the Ephori. (VI) The Ephori from mean beginnings grew to great authoritie; and by what advantages. (VII) The power and influence which they had in the publick Government. (VIII) By what degrees the Ephori incroached on the Spartan Kings. (IX) The insolencies of the Ephori towards their Kings altered the State into a Tyrannie. (X) The Spartan Kings stomach the insolencie of the Ephori, and at last utterly destroy them. (IX) An application of the former passages to the point in hand.
I. I Know it is conceived by some that the Kings of Sparta were but titularieUnlawful∣ness of resist∣ance, p. 90., that they were lit∣tle more then Subjects, at best of no more power and influence in the publick Government, then the Duke of Venice at this day in that Republick. And to say truth, they were but little better in the latter times, (though not altogether so restrained) after Lycurgus first, and the Ephori afterwards, had by their power and practises intrenched upon them; and pared away so many of the fairest Jewels in the Regal Diadem. But ab initio non fuit sic, it was not so from the beginning: the Spartan Kings being at first as absolute Monarchs as any other of those times, ubi addictius regnabanturTacit. Annal., when men were most de∣voted to the will of Princes. For if we look into the antient stories of the States of Greece, it will there be found, that at the return of the Heraclidae into Peloponnesus, under the conduct of Temenus, Ctesiphon, and Aristodemus, the sons of Aristoma∣chus of the race of Hercules; Temenus possessed himself of Argos, Ctesiphon of Messene, and Ari∣stodemus conquered the City and Dominion of Sparta; which, dying very shortly after, he left un∣to his two sons Eurysthenes, and ProclesPausanias in Lacon. l. 3., with the authority and name of Kings. So that acquiring the estate by conquest, and claiming by no other Title then by that of Arms, there is no question to be made but that they governed in the way of absolute Monarchs: it being not the guise of such as come in by conquest to covenant and capitulate with their Subjects, but to impose their will, for a
law, upon them; In the first times, and in Domi∣nion so acquired, Arbitria Principum pro legibus erantJustin. hist. l. 1., as we read in Justine. 'Tis true, the Royal Familie was divided from the very first, into two Regal Stems or Branches, both honoured with the name of Kings, both ruling the Estate in common by their mutual Counsels; of which the eldest house was that of Agidae, so called from Agis, son and Successor unto Eurysthenes; the second that of the Eurypontidae, denominated from Eurypon, the third from ProclesPausanias l. 3.. It was appointed so to be by Aristodemus, confirmed by the Oracle of Apollo, and so continued till the subjugating of all Greece to Macedon. But this concludes no more against absolute Monarchie, then if it should be said on the like occasion, that the Roman Emperors were no Monarchs, or that State no Monarchie, because Carus and Numerianus, Diocletian and Maximianus, Con∣stantius and Maximinus ruled the same together; as after Valentinian and his Brother Valens, and the two sons of Valentinian and Theodosius did by their example. And so it seems it was conceived by Cleo∣menes, who having rooted out the Ephori, and being grown almost as absolute in the State of Spar∣ta, as any of his Predecessors, caused his Brother Euclidas (upon the expiration of the Eurypontidae) to be made King with himPlutarch. in Agis & Cleo∣men.: which certainly he would not have done, had he believed that the as∣suming of a partner would have made him less. For that the Spartan Kings were as absolute Monarchs as any others of those times (when there was almost no form of Government in the world but that)
doth appear by Plutarch, where speaking of the condition of that Government in the time of Eury∣pon (whom he calls Eurytion) he saith that it was Plutarch. Lycurgo., sufficiently Monarchical, if it were not more. And hereto Aristotle doth agree, who stiles the Government of Sparta under Charilaus; before whose times (by reason of the negligence and connivence of some former Kings) the people were become too head-strong to be kept in order, by the name of Aristot. Polit. lib. 5. cap. 12., the tyrannie or absolute command of Charilaus in the State of Sparta. But whatsoever it was in the first foundation, it held not very long in so good condition. For Eurypon the Nephew of Procles, Plutarch. in Lycurg., affecting to be plausible and gra∣cious with the common people, improvidently let loose the reigns of Government, and was the first that laid aside that sole and absolute power of a King; whereupon followed great disorder and di∣straction, which continued long. For the people finding themselves at liberty, became very bold and disobedient; some of the Kings which did succeed being hated to the very death, because they did in∣devour the recovery of their old authoritie; others being forced to dissemble and wink at any thing, either in hope thereby to gain the love of the peo∣ple, or because indeed they were not strong enough to rule them. And this did so increase the stomach of the dissolute and rebellious multitude, that Eu∣nomus the Father of Lycurgus, being the fifth King
from Procles, and the third from Eurypon, was slain amongst them in a tumult. At such a dear and costly rate did Eurypon procure the favour and good will of the rascall rabble; by which he purchased nothing but the losse of Royalty, besides the empty honour of having the second house of the Royal Family to be called by his name, the Eurypontidae. Things growing thus from bad to worse, and both the Kings and people waxing weary of that disorder and confusion which did reign amongst them; both parties cast their eyes upon Lycurgus, of whose integrity and wisdome they had conceived a great opinion. For the peo∣ple finding that their Kings had nothing but the name and title, , and nothing else whereby they differed from the rest, sent many a several message to him to require his counsel: And on the other side, the Kings were as desirous that he should return (being then gone abroad to travel) in hope that the authority of his presence would bridle and restrain the people from their insolency and disobedience towards them. Id. ibid. But herein they were both deceived. For Lycur∣gus seeing how things stood, resolved to apply himself to neither party; but presently began to project and cast how he might change and alter the whole frame of Government: which to effect, he armed himself and his Associates, and possessed the market-place, and so proceeded to the alteration which he meant to make.Id. ibid. et in Agis & Cleo∣men. Cha∣rilaus who was then King, being forced to fly for sanctuary to the Temple of Juno. But Plato saith
there was another motive which induced him to attempt this change, which was the ill success the other Kings his kindred of the house of Hercules had found at Argos and Messene; where by degrees degenerating from a Monarchy unto a Tyranny, they were in a fair way , to overthrow themselves, their subjects, and their whole estates. To prevent this at Sparta, which he dearly loved, and to preserve his Family and the State together, Pat. Epist. 8., he set up the authority of the Senate as the only medicine, to cure the miserable distemper which the State was in. So far, and somewhat further Plato; of which more anon. 3. What the authority and power of this Se∣nate was, we see best from Plutarch.In Lycurgo. , &c. "In this change of State (saith he) which Lycurgus made, his chiefest alterati∣on was in the constitution of a Senate, which he made to have a Regal power and equal autho∣rity with the Kings in matters of the greatest weight and importance; and was to be the healthful counterpoise of the whole body of the Common-wealth. The other State before was ever wavering, sometimes inclining to tyrannie, when the Kings were too mighty, and sometimes to confusion, when the people did usurp autho∣rity: between which two, the Senate was ordained as the fittest medium to keep even the scale, and fortifie the State of the Common-wealth. For taking sometimes the Kings part, when it was needfull to pull down the fury of the people; and
sometimes holding with the people against the Kings, to bridle their tyrannical Government; they were the means that neither of the two did oppress the other." This Court or Senate had the supreme direction and command in all things of moment, which did concern the Common-wealth, both for peace and war; and had the highest jurisdiction and dernier resort, from which there could be no appeal: in which regard Pausa∣sanias cals it ,Pausanias in Lacon. l. 3. the soveraign Court of the Republick. It consisted of 28. Senators, all chosen out of the Nobility and chief men of the City; who together with the two Kings (who were allowed their voices in it) made up thirty in all; and unto these it did belong to call the assemblies of the people, to propound that to them which they thought convenient, and to dissolve them too when they saw occasion.Plutarch. ibid. But for the people so assembled, it was not lawful for them to propound any thing to be debated or de∣termined, nor to deliver their opinion in the point proposed: there being nothing left to them, but to testifie their assent to the propositions, which either by the Senate or the two Kings had been made unto them. So that whatever the Kings lost, the people got little by the alteration, being left out of all imployment in affairs of State, and forced to yeeld obedience unto thirty Masters, whereas before they had but two. And as for the authority which remained unto the Kings, it con∣sisted especially in the conducting of the Armies, and the supremacy in matters that concerned Reli∣gion
(for this hath alwaies gone along with the Kingly office). , &c.Xenophon de Repub. Lace∣damon. For it was ordered by Lycurgus, that the King should offer sacrifice for the prospetity of the Common-wealth, when the necessity of their affairs did re∣quire the same, as one descended from the gods; that they should participate of the thing sacrificed when the gods were served, and have a pig of every litter, that they might never want a sacrifice, if upon any sudden accident the gods were to be advised withall. , &c. It also appertained to them to command the Armies, as oft as they were sent abroad on any military imployment; and had a Pavilion allowed them at the publick charge, for entertainment of such company as repaired unto them. In these two points the honour and authority of the Kings consisted principally, which Aristotle also hath ob∣served. Aristot. Po∣litic. l. 3. c. 10.. Su∣premacy in Divine, command in Military matters, was all in which they differed from the other Se∣nators; and this command (I mean in military mat∣ters) was both perpetual and hereditary, as the same Author tels us there and in other placesId. ibid. & l. 2 c. 7. & l. 3. c. 11.. For matters which were meerly honourary, they had some prerogatives: the Kings being allowed a double Messe in all their Ordinaries, the Senators and all the pople arising from their seats to do him reverence, when he came amongst them, yeelding him more then humane honours when he was deceased, as to a Demi-god at least. And for their
maintenance and support when they were alive, there was allotted to them a proportion of the richest lands in many of the Villages and fields adjoy∣ning Xerophon in Repub. Lace∣daem.; enough to keep them out of want, though not sufficient to make them either rich or powerful. 4. The royalty and power of the Kings being thus impaired, the people absolutely discharged from having any hand at all in the publick Go∣vernment, and the authority of the Senate growing every day more insolent and predomi∣nant then at first it was, by reason that they held their place for term of life, as we finde in Plutarch in Agesilao. Plutarch; the Kings resolved upon a course of putting the people into such condition as might inable them to curb and control the Senators. To this end Theopompus the ninth King of the second house, with the consent of Polydorus his Associate, ordained certain Officers, being five in numberAristot. Pol. l. 2. 8., and chosen out of the body of the common peopleId. Polit. l. 2. c. 7., and annually renewed or changed, as occasion wasPlutarch in Agesilao.; to whom authority was give, , even in the highest points, and of most impor∣tance, as we are told by AristotleAristot. Poli∣tic. l. 2. c. 7., and shall see anon. These Offices he caused to be called by the name of Ephori, that is to say, the Overseers, and Superintendents of the State, Snidas., because they had the charge and oversight of the Commonwealth. And as amongst the Archontes in the State of Athens which were nine in number, one of them was called the , or the Archon in the way of excel∣lency,
after whose name the year was called, and their reckonings made (as Titio & Sempronio Coss. in the State of Rome); so had the Ephori their Eponymus, one who by way of eminency was cal∣led the EphorusPausan. lib. 3. in Lacon.. But for this first reason of their institution, take it thus from Plutarch,Plutarch in Lycurgo. , &c. "Lycurgus having thus tempered the form of his Common-wealth, it seem'd notwithstanding unto those which came after him, that this small number of thirty per∣sons which made the Senate, was yet too mighty and of too great authority. Wherefore to bridle them a little, they gave them (as he cites from Pla∣to) a bit in their mouthes, which was the authority of the Ephori, erected in the time of King Theopom∣pus, about 130 years after the death of Lycurgus." A second reason which induced those Kings to or∣dain these Ephori, was to ease themselves, and de∣legate upon them that remainder of the Royal power, which could not be exercised but within the City. For the Kings having little or no com∣mand but in wars abroad, cared not for being much at home, and thereupon ordained these Of∣ficers, to supply their places. Concerning which Cleomenes thus discourseth to the SpartansId. in Agis & Cleomenes. af∣ter they had destroyed the Ephori, and suppressed the Office: "informing them that Lycurgus had joyned the Senators with the Kings, by whom the Common-wealth was a long time governed, without help of any other Officers; that after∣wards the City having great wars with the Mes∣senians, the Kings were alwaies so imployed in
that war that they could not attend the affairs of the State at home, and thereupon made choice of certain of their friends to sit in judgement in their stead, whom they called the Ephori, , and for a long time did govern only as the Kings Ministers, though afterwards by little and little they took unto themselves the supreme authority." Ano∣ther reason hath been given of the institution, which is, that if a difference grew between the two Kings in a point of judgement, there might be some to arbitrate between them, and to have the casting voice amongst them when the difference could not be agreed. And this is that which Li∣sander and Mandroclidas (two that had been Ephori) suggested unto Agis and Cleombrotus the two Kings of Sparta; declaring,Id. ibid. "That the office of the Ephori was erected for no other reason, , &c. But because they should give their voices unto that King who had the best rea∣son on his side, when the other would wilfully withstand both right and reason; and therefore that they two agreeing might lawfully do what they would without controlment; that to resist the Kings was a breach of law, considering that the Ephori, by law, had no power nor privi∣ledge, but only to arbitrate between them, when there was any cause of jarre or controversie." And this was so received at Sparta, for an un∣doubted truth, that Cleomenes being sole King, upon the death of Agis of the other house, re∣called
called Archidamus the brother of Agis from his place of banishment, with an intent to make him King, not doubting but they two should agree together, and thereby make the Ephori of no power nor use. So then we have three reasons of the institution, (and more then these I cannot finde) of which there is not one that favoureth the device of CALVIN; or intimateth that the authority of the Ephori was set up, to pull down the Kings. And to say truth, it is a most unlikely matter that the Kings of Sparta having so little power remaining, should need more Officers to restrain them then they had before; that they should make a new rod for their own poor backs, and add five Masters more to those eight and twenty, which Lycurgus had im∣posed upon them. Which makes me wonder much at Tully, who doth acknowledge that the Ephori were ordained by Theopompus, (as both AeristotleAristot. Polit. l. 5. c. 11. and Plutarch do affirm) and yet will have them instituted for no other cause, nisi ut oppositi sint Regibus, but to oppose and curb the KingsCicero de le∣gibus l. 3.: but more that Plato (who had so much advantage of him both in time and place) should ascribe the institution to Lycurgus; and tell us that he did not only ordain the Senate, Plato Ep. 8. edit. gr. lat. To. 3., but that he did also constitute the Ephorate, for the strength and preservation of the Regal power. 5. For out of doubt it is affirmed by PlutarchPlut. in Ly∣curgo., confirmed by ScaligerScalig. ani∣madvers. in Euseb. Chron., and may be gathered
from some passages in Eusebius Chronicon, and the authoritie of Aristotle, who refers the same to Theopompus, as before was shewed, that the first Institution was no less then 130 years after the death of Lycurgus. Who was the first that bore this Office hath been made a question, but never till these later times, when men are grown, such Sceptics as to doubt of every thing. Plutarch affirms for certain,Plutarch. in Lycurgo. , that the first E∣phorus (that is to say, the first , who had the name of Ephorus by way of excellencie, for otherwise there were five in all) was called Ela∣tus: and hereto Scaliger did once agree, as ap∣pears expressly, pag. 67. of his Annotations on Eusebius, where he declares it in these words, Pri∣mus Elatus renunciatur . But after having a desire to controll Eusebius, he takes occa∣sion by some words in Diogenes Laertius to cry up Chilo for the man: first positively, Primus fuit Chilon, and next exclusively of Ela∣tus, Quibus animadversis non fuerit Elatus primus Ephorus sed Chilon. To make this good, being a fancie of his own (and as his own most dearly che∣rished) he produceth first the testimony of Laer∣tius, and afterwards confirms the same by a new emendatio temporum, a Calculation and accompt of his own inventing. The words produced from Laertius are these verbatim; ,
Diogen. Laet. l. 1. in Chilo.Which is thus rendred in the Latine, and I think exactly. Fuit autem Epho∣rus circa quinquagesimam & quintam Olympiada. Porro Pamphila circa sextam ait, primum{que} Ephorum fuisse sub Euthydemo, autore Sosicrate: primum{que} institu∣isse ut Regibus Ephori adjungerentur, Satyrus Lycur∣gum dixit. If it be granted in the first place, that Chilo was not made Ephorus until the 55 Olympi∣ad, as 'tis plain he was not, and Scaliger affirms as much, it must needs follow upon true account, that either Chilo was not the first Ephorus, or that the Ephori were not instituted in more then twice an hundred and thirtie years, after Lycurgus had new molded the Common-wealth, contrary unto that which is said by Plutarch, and out of him re∣peated by Joseph Scaliger. For from the time wherein Lycurgus made his Laws, which was in the 25 year of Archelaus, the eighth King of the elder house, unto the death of Alcamenes, which was the year before the first OlympiadEuseb. Chron. lib. post. p. 114. of Scaligers edit., were 112 years just, none under. From thence unto the last year of the 55. 220 years complete; which put together make no fewer then 332 years full, a large misreckoning. Whereas the second year of the fifth Olympiad, in which Eusebius puts the Institu∣tion of the Ephori, both in the Greek and Latine Copies set out by Scaliger himselfPag. 115. of the Latine, & 35. of the Greek Edition.; that second year I say being added to the 112 before-remem∣bred, in which King Alcamenes died, makes up the full number of 130, which we finde in Plutarch; and agrees punctually with the time of Theopompus,
who as it is confessed by Scaliger, did first ordain them. Nor doth Laertius say, if you mark him well, either that Chilo was the first that was ever Ephorus, or the first that joyned the Ephori to the Kings of Sparta, both which absurdities are by Scaliger imposed upon him. For unto any one who looks upon Laertius with a careful eye, it may be easily discerned, that he speaks no otherwise of the Ephorate, then of an Office instituted a long time before; with the condition of the which Chilo was well acquainted, and therefore thought himself more fit to undergo it then his Brother was, who very earnestly desired itLaertius in vi∣sa Chilon.. All that Laertius saith, is no more but this, that Chilo was made Ephorus first, (not the first Ephorus which was made, as Scaliger would have it) under Euthydemus; and that as Satyrus affirmed (who therein questionless was misled by Plato) Lycurgus was the first who joyned the Ephori to the Spartan Kings; which words, viz. , he hath left out of purpose to abuse his Author, and make him speak the thing which he never meant. His other blun∣derings and mistakes to make good this business, first laying the dissolution of the Ephorate by Cle∣omenes, non multo ante vel post initium PhilippiPag. 67. of the Animadvers., either not long before or shortly after the begin∣ning of the reign of Philip the last King of Mace∣don, but one (which indeed is true) and within nine lines, no more, laying it in the 13. year of the self same King Philip, (most extremely false) the changing of his Authors words from Fuit autem
sub Regibus Lacedaemon annis 350, as they occur in the Translation of S. Hierom, printed at Basil, into Fuit sub Regibus Lacedaemoniorum Annis 350, a∣gainst the Authors minde and the rules of Grammar, only to bring about his device of Chilo, and blinde his Readers eyes with a new Chronologie; and others I could point to if my leisure served, I purpose to forbear at the present time. Nor had I been so bold with Scaliger at all, or at least not now, but that the proud man is more bold with the Antient Fathers, whom he is pleased to look on with con∣tempt, and scorn, as often as they come before him: for which see pag. 255 of his Annotations. And so I leave him with that censure which he gives Eusebius, as learned and industrious an Antiquarie, as any Scaliger of them all, (no man dispraised): Erratis hujus Autoris enumerandis charta non suffece∣rit Animadvers. in Euseb. p. 255.; and so fare him well. 6. But to proceed, the Ephori being thus or∣dained by Theopompus, became not presently of such authority and power, as by degrees they did attain to: For being chosen by the Kings as their proper Ministers as before was said, and many times , even from their very neerest friends, as we read in PlutarchPlutarch. in Agis & Cleo∣men.; they were hard thrust at by the Senate, and forced to put up many an af∣front from that mightier body. And this was it that Chilo aimed at, when he told his Brother who at the same time desired the Office, and seemed of∣fended that he lost it, Laertius in vita Chilon.,
that he was better skilled in bearing injuries and affronts, then his Brother was. But this con∣tinued for no longer then whilest the Kings served their turns upon them to oppose the Senate, and kept the nomination of them in their own hands. For afterwards the Kings relinquishing the election to the common people, upon a forlorn hope, of gain∣ing their affections by so great a benefit; they be∣gan to set up for themselves, and in a very little time gained all the custom of the City. And of this new election I am apt to think that Chilo, whom before we spake of, was the first . Which I propose not so much out of a desire to comply with Scaliger, who for ought I can see, aimed at no such matter; as on the credit of Eusebius, whom he so much slighteth. For in Eusebius Chronicon of Joseph Scaligers own Edition, after he hath put down the institution of the Ephori in the second of the fifth Olympiad, as before I told you; he gives this Item in the third of the five and fiftieth (which is the very same that Laertius speaks of) Chilo qui de Septem Sapientibus fuit, Lacedaemone Ephorus constituiturEuseb. Chronic. lib. poster. p. 127., dispositione communus gentis, that Chilo one of the seven wise Masters was ordained Ephorus at Sparta, by the general consent of all the people. But whether this were so, or not, I am not able to determine absolutely. All I observe from hence is this, that it is past all question, that from this time they took upon them more then they had done formerly, and were intent on all advantages to improve their power. For whereas at the first
they were appointed by the Kings to sit in judge∣ment in their steeds, as before was said, by little and little Plutarch in Agis & Cleom., they drew that power un∣to themselves, and exercised it in their own name, by their own authoritie: not as the Ministers of the Kings, they would none of that, but as the Offi∣cers of the Common-wealth. And to that end they did erect a Court of Judicature, which for power and greatness of authoritie was little inferiour to the Senate; drawing unto them all such businesses as were Pausan. l. 3. in Laconicis., most worthy of care and consideration. By means whereof, as they drew many of the people to depend upon them, whose businesses and suits of law were brought to be determined by themAristot. Polit. lib. 3. cap. 1.; so they increased that dependance, by husbanding such difference as did oft arise between the Senate and the Kings, to their own advantage. For it is well observed by Aristotle, that as long as the Senate and the Kings did agree together, they kept all the power in their own hands: Id. ibid. l. 2. c. 9. but when they jarred amongst themselves, they gave the people opportunitie to become their Masters. But that which raised them to the height, and made them terrible at last both to King and Senate, was the mutual tie and correspondence which was be∣tween them and the people: by whom they were not only chosen, and therefore cherished by them as their own der creatures: but for the most part chosen , out of the body of the people, and sometime Aristot. Polit. l. 2. cap. 7.: out of the very
meanest and the neediest of them; which made them on the other side to court the people, and to apply themselves unto them upon all occasions. And though it happened many times, that some of them being indigent and needie men, were ea∣sily wrought upon by money, and apt to sell as well the justice as the honor of the Common-wealth, to enrich themselves and raise their families; where∣of Aristotle much complains, and that deserved∣ly Id. ibid. et c. 8▪: yet this corruption served to advance their power, and put them into a condition to be the bet∣ter able to oblige the people. So that the common sort of people doing all they could to advance the power and reputation of the Ephori, whom they accounted for their own, as indeed they were; and the Ephori striving by all possible means to gra∣tifie the people, by obtaining new laws and large immunities to be enacted for them, as they saw oc∣casion: they altered the whole frame of Govern∣ment, and made it of an Aristocracie to become an Oligarchie, and in conclusion a plain popular ty∣rannie. 7. For trusting to the power and interess which they had in the Commonaltie, and the support they were assured from them, if the case required it; they drew unto themselves the managerie of the State-affairs; and grew so powerful at the last, that if they did not all things of their own autho∣ritie, yet they had such an hand on the Kings and Senate, that nothing could be done without them.
Were any laws to be enacted, who but the Epho∣ri must propound them? Or any Taxes to be le∣vied for the necessarie uses of the Common-wealth, who but the Ephori must impose them?Plutarch in Agis & Cleo∣men. When Lysander had reduced the City of Athens unto such extremities, that they were glad to yeeld unto such conditions as the Conquerors were pleased to im∣pose upon them: from whom must the Capitula∣tions come, but from the Ephori? It was the Id. in. Lysan∣dro., the final resolution of the Epho∣ri, from which they were to expect either bonds or libertie. Cynado is accused of Treason against Agesilaus and the State of Sparta, the Ephori must take the information and proceed accordinglyXenophn. in vita Agesilai.: and if Pausanias be accused of holding correspon∣dence with the King of Persia, the Ephori send out their commands,Thucydides. l. 1. , and commit him presently to Prison. When any Am∣bassadors were sent forth on the publick service, from whom must they receive their power, from whom be furnished with instructions, but from the Ephri alonePlut. in Nici∣as.? and who but they must ap∣point Commanders for the Wars, require accompt of their imployments, and either punish or re∣ward them as they have deserved? When Cleony∣mus was displeased because Areus was preferred be∣fore him in his pretensions to the Kingdom: the Ephori did not only take upon them to sweeten and demulce the man by great gifts and presents, Pausan. l. 3. in Lacon. but also to confer upon him the command of the Army, though of right be∣longing
to the Kings. When Mindarus the Ad∣miral of their Navie was miserably beat by the A∣thenians in the straight of Hellespont, an express is presently dispatched to Sparta, to give unto the Ephori an account thereofPlutarch. in Alcibiades.: Lysander had no sooner revenged this quarrel, and beat the Fleet of the Athenians neer the self same place, but he acquaints the Ephori with his good success, with all speed that might beIdem in Ly∣sandro. And if the Wars prove fortu∣nate, and the spoil so great, that part thereof be sent to Sparta, to be laid up in the publick Trea∣surie; the Ephori, and none but they must have the fingering of the moneyId. ibid.. Finally there was no Commander of the Armies, or other Officer imployed by the Common-wealth, whom they called not to an accompt as their stomachs served; not staying till the Office was expired, and the Com∣mander or the Officer become a private man again, as in other States; but even in the midst of their Command and Magistracie whatsoever it was: and whom they did not punish when they came before them, either by imprisonment or deathXenophon de Repub. Lace∣daem., as to them seem'd best. Thus have we brought them to their height, and seen them absolutely possessed of the Supreme Power, in making peace or war as they thought convenient; and in disposing of the goods, the liberties, yea and the lives too of the Spartan subject. It had been a strange temper in them had they tarried there, and not incroached as much (whilest the tide went with them) upon the persons and the power of the Kings themselves.
8. For howsoever at the first they were the Ministers of the Kings as before was told you, and accomptable to none but them: yet after they were reckoned for the Officers of the Common wealth, they cast off all relation to the Kings, their Masters, and thought themselves their Equals at the best, and at last their betters. A point which Theopompus did but little dream of, when first he set them up to oppose the Senate, al∣though his Queen a wise and understanding Ladie, did evidently see, and tell him, what would follow on it. Of which we finde this storie in the works of Aristotle, and from him borrowed by Plutarch if I guess aright, that his wife seeing what design he was bent upon, and how unluckily he was car∣ried on to effect the same, advised him to take heed that by erecting this new Magistracie, he did not leave the Kingdom in a worse condition to his Heirs and Successors, then he received the same from his Predecessors; and that he answered there∣unto, Aristot. Polit. l. 5. c 11., that by this means he hoped to leave it stronger and more durable then it was before. But the event declared unto all the world that the woman was the better Prophet, and had the greater insight into things to come. The power of Soveraigntie when once communicated to the common people, or otherwise usurped by such popular Officers, as depend wholly on the people for their place and being, is seldom times re∣covered into Regal hands. And though some Kings may be perswaded by some subtile artifices (as it
seems Theopompus was) that by this means the Chair of State will stand the faster; yet the pro∣ceedings of the Ephori in the State of Sparta will in∣form us otherwise, and easily lay open the apparent danger of such weak surmises. For being made Officers of State, one of the first points they ob∣tained, was that the Kings made Oath unto them once in every moneth, Xenophon de Repub. Laced., that they would govern the Estate accord∣ing to the laws established in the Common-wealth, and that they would preserve the Kindom in the best condition that they could: the Ephori making oath to them in the name of the Citie, whose Offi∣cers they were, and by whom intrusted. Next they attempt to place such Counsellors about the Kings, as they might confide in, beginning with such Kings as were under Age; and the first trial which they made was in appointing one Cleandrides to be about King Plastonax, the 19. of the elder House, as his chief Counsellor and Director, with∣out whose approbation nothing must be donePlutarch in Pericles.. Ano∣ther of their usurpations and incroachments was to restrain their Kings in the point of marriage, and to impose some fine or disgrace upon them, if they presumed to marrie against their liking. Anaxan∣drides the 15. of the elder house, had married a Lady of brave parts, but it was her ill fortune to be barren a long time together. The Ephori com∣mand him without more ado Pausan. lib▪ 3. in Lacon., to give her a Bill of divorce, and send her going. Archidamus the 17. of the second House maried a
wife which brought him children. But fault was found she was too little, and thereupon the Ephori condemned him in a sum of money; saying , that she would not bring them Kings, but demy KingsPlutarch. in Agesilao.. And that you may perceive, how difficult a thing it was to please them in this point, Leonidas had married one that was neither barren, nor too little; and yet was quarrelled by the Ephori, and in fine condemned, for marrying with a woman of another NationId. in Agis & Cleomenes.. The funda∣mental laws of Sparta conferred upon the Kings the Supreme command over the Militarie men in all wars abroad. The Ephori did not only dispose it otherwise, and gave it unto such whom they de∣sired to oblige unto them, as you heard before: but kept the Kings at such a bay, that they nei∣ther could lead forth the Armies without their con∣sent, nor tarrie longer in the camp then they lit to let them; and if the action did miscarrie, the Kings were either fined or imprisoned for it. Age∣silaus being a very stirring Prince, and desirous to get honor in the wars, was not permitted to set forwards till he had bought the Ephori with a sum of moneyId. in Age∣sila.: and yet being in the height of his good success was called bck again, and glad to be conformable to the said commands. And so it fared with Agis and Cleomenes both, on the like occasions. And for the fining of their Kings, be∣sides what we have seen before in the former in∣stances, Plistoax being betrayed by Cleandrides, (whom the Ephri themselves had placed about
him) and his Army forced to disband and turn home again; is presently condemned in so great a sum, that he was not able to discharge itId. in Periles.. By means whereof the Kings were brought at last unto that condition, , as Aristotle truly notethAristot. Polit. l. 2. cap. 7., that they were forced to court and bribe the Ephori upon all occasions, to the great disservice of the State, and sometimes to the fatal overthrow of their chief designes. So that it is no marvail, if considered rightly, either that the Ephori kept their state and rose not up to reverence their King, when he came before them, though all the residue of the people and the Senate did it, as we read in XenophonDe Repub. Lacedaem.; or that Agesilaus used to rise up to them, as often as they came unto him about any business, as we finde in PlutarchPlut. in Age∣sila.; or that the Kings esteemed it such a point of Sove∣raigntie, that when they were commanded to attend the Ephori, , they did refuse to goe upon the first and second summons, and stirred not till the third command, as Cleome∣nes bragged in the said HistorianId. in Agis and Cleomen.. Which trust me was a point of no small importance. (9) And yet they staid not here, they went further still. They thought it not enough to con∣demn their Kings in vast and unproportionable sums of money, unless they laid restraints on their persons also, and had command upon their bodies. And therefore it is noted by Thucydides not without good reason, that they did not only punish with
imprisonment their great and principal Comman∣ders; Thucydid. hist. l. 1., but that it was lawful for the Ephori to do the like unto their Kings. Which to avoid, Pausanias was in∣forced to retire himself, and live a voluntary exile in another CountreyPlutarch in Lysander.. Nothing remains but they take authoritie to depose, and in fine to murther them; and if they gain not this, all the rest is no∣thing. And this they are resolved to gain, or be folulie foiled; nor did they fail in the attempt when they went about it. They quarrelled at Leonidas as before I told you, for marrying with a woman of another Countrey, without so much as seeking for their approbation. And that they may be sure to effect their business, Religion is pretended, and a star must fall, only to warrant their proceed∣ings. Which preparations being past they cite him to appear before them, and on default of his appearance they deposed him instantly, and confer∣red the Kingom on CleombrotusId. in Agis & Cleomenes. Bt these men being out of Office, he came out of Sanctuarie, and was restored again by the next years Ephori. Who to make proof that their anthoritie was as great as their Predecessors, thought it not argu∣ment enough to restore one King, except they did depose and destroy another. And thereupon laid hands on Agis of the other House, and inhumanelie haled him to the common Prison, and there most barbarously murdered him with his Mother and Grand mother. Id. ibid.. And this saith Plutarch was
the first time, that ever the Ephori put a King to death. And so perhaps it was the first, but the last it was not. For Archidamus the Brother of Agis being recalled from banishment by Cleome∣nes, to the end he might enjoy the Kingom which did by right belong unto him; was preseutly seised on by the murderers, and dispatched in private, for fear he should revenge the death of his slaugh∣tered BrotherId. ibid.. By which it is most evident without further proof, that the Spartan Aristocra∣tie was become a tyrannie, and of all Tyrannies the most insupportable, because meerlie popular. Or if more proof should be desired, both Aristotle, and his his Master Plato will not stick to say it; though they both died, before these two last Tra∣gedies were acted on the stage of Sparta. For Plato being to declare what he conceived of the Government of that Common-wealth resolves that it did Plato de legi∣bus l. 4., approach more neer to tyrannie then to any other form what ever; the power and empire of the Ephori being , plainly tyrannical, and no otherwise. And Ari∣stotle who had studied the condition of that State exactly, though at the first he seemed to think that it was very well compounded of the three good forms; yet upon full debate thereof, he concludes at last, Aristot. Poli▪ l. 2. c. 4., that the dominion of the Ephori was an absolute Tyrannie. Assuredly had they lived to have seen that day, wherein the Ephori embrued their hands in the bloud of their Princes, under pretence of safetie to the Common-wealth,
they would have voted it to have been a tyrannie in the highest degree; and then the most unsuf∣ferable Tyrants that ever wretched State groaned under. For though the Kings of Sparta were so lessened by Lycurgus laws, that little more was left unto them then the name and title; yet they were Kings, and held so sacred by their neighbors, even their very Enemies, that none dd ever offer to lay hands upon them in the heat and furie of their fights, Plutarch. in Agis & Cleom., out of the reverence they did bear to those beams of Majestie, which most apparently shined in them. (10) The Ephori being grown to this height of Tyrannie, were the more readie for their fall; which followed not long after that most barba∣rous fact, upon the persons of their Princes. The Kings had long since stomached them and their high proceedings, bearing Id. in Agesil. a kinde of heritable grudge betwixt them (as my Author calls it) ever since they took upon them to control their Masters: but either wanted oppor∣tunitie or spirit, to attempt any thing to their pre∣judice; and therefore thought it safer to procure their favours, then run themselves upon a hazard∣ous experiment. Pausanias, the 20. of the Elder House, was the first that ever did attempt either by force or practise to subvert the Office: the insolencies of the which were then grown so great, that being a stout and active Prince, he was not able to endure them. That he had entertained
such thoughts is affirmed by Aristotle, where he informs us that Lysander had a purpose to take away the Kingly Government (or rather to acquire it to himself, as we finde in PlutarchId. in Lysan∣dro.,) , and that Pausanias had the like to destroy the EphorateAristot. Polit. lib. 5. c. 1.. But what he failed to bring about, his Successors did at last accom∣plish. Of which Cleombrotus and Agis, joyning their hands and heads together did proceed so far, that going into the Market place well attended by their friends and followers, they plucked the E∣phori from their seats, and substituted others in their roomsPlutarch in Agis & Cleom., whom they conceived would be more pliant to their present enterprises: which was the first actual attempt, that ever had been made against them by the Kings of Sparta. But evulgato imperii Arcano, when so great a mysterie of State was once discovered, that the Ephori were but mortal men, and might as easily be displaced and deposed as any of the other Magistrates; Leonidas immediately upon his restitution to the Kingdom, made the like removal, and displaced those who had took part against him with the former KingsId. ibid.. So that the ice being broken, and the way made open, Cleomenes son unto Leonidas had the fairer way to abrogate the Office utterly, which at last he did. For being a brave and gallant Prince, and seeing that the project he was bent upon for the reduction of the Common-wealth to its primitive honour, could not be brought about but by their destruction; he fell upon them with
his Souldiers as they sate sate at supper, and killed four of them in the place, the fift escaping shrewdly hurt to the neerest SanctuarieId ibid.. That done he went into the Market place, and overthrew all the Chairs of the Ephori saving only one, which he reserved for himself as his Chair of State, and sitting in the same in the sight of the people, gave them an accompt of his proceedings, and the rea∣sons which induced him to it: "Declaring how the Ephori were at first appointed by the Kings them∣selves; that for long time they governed only as the Kings Ministers, and no otherwise; thatt many years after this, Astero∣pus one of the Ephori, building upon a new foun∣dation, and being the first Author of that dangerous change, they took the Government unto themselves, and exercised the same in their own names only; that though they had usurped a power which belonged not to them, yet had they managed it discreetly, they might perhaps have held it longer, and with better liking; but that licentiously abusing the authoritie which they had usurped by suppressing the lawful Governors ordained of old, by taking upon them to banish some of the Citizens, and to put some to death without law and justice, and finally by threatning those who were desirous to restore the Govern∣ment to its antient form, they were no longer to be suffered: that for his part he should have thought himself the happiest King that ever was, if possibly he could have cured his Countrey of
that foul affection without grief or sorrow; but being it was not to be done that way, he thought it better that some few should be put to death, then the whole Common-wealth run on to a swift destruction." This said, he presently dissolved the Assembly, and seriously betook him∣self to the Reformation which formerly he had pro∣jected, and in short time reduced the people to the antient Discipline, the state and reputation of the Common-wealth to its antient height. (11) Thus have we made a brief discoverie of the Spartan Ephori, upon what grounds first insti∣tuted, and on what destroyed; by what foul practises and unlawful means they gained the So∣veraigntie of the State, and by what they lost it: how, and by what degrees they came from low and mean beginnings to so strange a tyrannie, and with what suddenness they lost their power and their lives together. But in all this there is not any shew or colour for that which is affirmed by CALVIN, no ground for, nor veritie at all in that assertion, that the Ephori were at first ordained to oppose the Kings, to regulate their proceedings, and restrain their power: but rather that they were ordained (as indeed they were) to curb the Senate, to be the Ministers of the Kings, and sub-servient to them; to sit in Judgement for them, and discharge such Offices, as the Kings pleased to trust them with, in their times of absence. If Calvins popular Magi∣strates have no more authoritie, then the Spartan
Ephori, according to the rules of their Institution, they will have little colour to controll their Princes, and less for putting a restraint on the Regal power. The most they can pretend to must be usurpation, and that will hold no longer, if it hold so long, then they have power to make it good by bloud and violence, which I hope Calvin did not aim at. And if they have no other ground then an unjust title, prescription will not serve the turn, (for nullum tempus oc∣currit Regi, as our Lawyers tell us) when a coura∣gious Prince is concerned in it, and oppressed by it. If any Popular spirits entertain such hopes, if nothing else will satisfie their vast ambitions but to be equal with their Kings and Supreme Go∣vernors, and at last above them: let them re∣member what became of the Spartan Ephori, and that there was a Cleomenes which called them to a sad account for all those insolencies and affronts which they had put upon himself and his Predeces∣sors. And let all Kings and Supreme Governors take heed by the example of these Spartan Princes, how they let loose the reins of Government, and lay them on the necks of the common people: which if unbridled once, and left at libertie, will not be easily induced to receive that Bit in∣to their mouths which before they champed on: and that they give no way to such popular Ma∣gistrates as Calvin hath presented to us, who whatsoever colour and pretence they make, aim at no other mark then the Royal power, though
out of too much modestie they disclaim the title, and must be either Kings or nothing. Of which invasions and incroachments on the Supreme Power, our Author gives another hint in the Ro∣man Tribunes; the truth and fitness of which sup∣position must be looked on next.
CHAP. III. Of the Incroachments of the Tribunes on the State of Rome; and that they were not in∣stituted for the ends supposed by Calvin. (I) The Tribunes of the people why first Insti∣tuted in the State of Rome. (II) And with what difficultie and conditions. (III) The Tribunes fortifie themselves with large immunities, before they went about to change the Government. (IV) The Tribunes no sooner in their Office, but they set themselves against the Nobilitie and the Senate, contrary to the Articles of their Institution. (V) The many and dangerous Seditions occasioned by the Tribunes in the City of Rome. (VI) The Tribunes and the people do agree to∣gether to change the Government of the State. (VII) By what degrees the people came to be possessed of all the Offices in the State, both of power and dignity. (VIII) The Plots and Practises of the Gracchi to put the power of the Judicature, and Su∣preme Majestie of the State, into the hands of the people. (IX) The Tribunes take upon them to commit
the Consuls, and bring all the Officers of the State under their command. (X) The Office and authoritie of the Tribunes reduced unto its antient bounds by Corn. Sylla; and at last utterly destroyed. (XI) An application of the former passages to the point in hand. (1) ALthough the reasons which induced the people in the State of Rome to desire some Officers of their own, and the considerations which induced the Senate to give way unto it, are obvious to the eyes of every Reader, which hath perused the Roman stories: yet I shall briefly lay it down, the better to remove the intimation which we finde in Calvin, that they were purposely or∣dained to oppose the Consuls. The storie then in brief is this. The people having not long before expulsed their Kings, and got some reputation by their prowess in those petit States which bordered neerest to the City, found quickly that the libertie which they expected was nothing but a golden dream, not able to protect them from the com∣mon Gaols, and that their reputation in the wars would not pay their debts, or save them from the hands of their cruel Creditors. For serving in the wars at their own proper charges, and having little else to subsist upon but their trades or labor, they were fain sometimes to take up money upon usurie. And though they did return from the wars with victorie, and shewed those honorable
scars which they had received, fighting in defence of their Countrey and the Common-wealth; yet this did edifie but little with their hungry Credi∣tors: Plutarch in M. Coriolano. who did not sell their goods, if they were not solvent, but apprehended their persons also, and either laid them up in the common prisons, or made them serve in stead of Bond-men, and made them subject to the whip and other base cor∣rections fit for none but Slaves. And somewhat to this purpose the old man complained, as we read in Livie, declaring to the people (who were apt to hear it) how his Patrimonie had been seized on by the merciless Usurers, his person appre∣hended by them, and that he was not only made a Slave, but marked out for slaughter: Inde osten∣tare tergum foedum recentibus vestigiis verberumLivie. hist. l. 2., shewing withall upon his back the miserable prints which the whip had left. This made the people murmur, and at last to mutinie, and in tumultuous manner, minaciter magis quam suppliciter, rather with threats then supplications to require the Se∣nate to take some course for their relief: resolving otherwise to go no more unto the wars, serve the State who would. The Senate promised fair, as there was good cause, (the Volsci pressing hard up∣on them to their very gates); and by that pro∣mise won the people, and obtained a victorie. But when the wars were done, and performance looked for, in stead of finding a redress of their former grievances, the rigor of the law took place, & cre∣ditoribus tradibantur, and they were seised on by
their Creditors as in former times: the Senate think∣ing it unreasonable to make the law submit to the necessities of particular men, and against law to de∣fraud any man of the debts which were due unto them.Dionys. Hali∣carnass. lib. 6. But a new war approaching, a new pro∣mise made, and that neglected also when the war was ended; the people seeing no relief was like to come from the hands of the Senators, Longè aliâ quam primò instituerant viâ grassabantur, began to lend an ear to some desperate Counsels, and fell to entertain such hopes, as formerly they durst never dream of. For drawing themselves into a body under the conduct of Sicinius a troublesome and seditious person, they forsook the City, and in∣camped upon an hill adjoyning: resolving as they gave it out, to seek new dwellings, and that there was no place in Italy but would afford them air and water, , and ground in which they might be buried. There is no question to be made, but if the Senate had beheld the action with neg∣lect and scorn, as AppiusDionys. Hali∣carn. l. 6., and C. MartiusPlutarch in Coriolano., did advise they should; the people out of love to their wives and children, would have returned to their houses: or if they had presented them in time with any tolerable mitigations of the former laws, they might have taken off their edge, and appeased the tumult. But giving way unto their furie till it grew too high, and shewing in their resolutions far more fear then courage; the people got the better of them, and thought they stood upon the higher ground, as indeed they did. Which pride
and high conceit of theirs was the more increased, by the authoritie and perswasions of one Junius Brutus, who came not to them till they were too far ingaged, to go off with safetie. A man, as the Historian noteth, of a turbulent and seditious spi∣rit, more apt to kindle a rebellion, then to quench the flame; but otherwise Dionys. Hali∣carnass. l. 6., of very great fore-sight into business, and one that had a ready tongue upon all occasions. To him they gave the managing of the whole de∣sign, and he improved the trust to their best ad∣vange. Insomuch that when Menenius Agrippa was imployed unto them to demand their grievances, and had brought the point to such an issue, that there was nothing wanting to make up the breach, but some securitie to be given on the part of the Se∣nate, that the people should be no more deluded with such emptie promises; this Junius Brutus took upon him to propose the terms: and no se∣curitie would content him (as the plot was laid) but that some popular Magistrates should be forth∣with made, for the protection of the people. Con∣cedite nobis (inquit) Magistratus aliquot quotannis è nostro corpore creare, &c.Id. ibid. "Let us, saith he, have certain Magistrates to be chosen yearly out of our own body, on whom we shall not ask you to confer more power, then that they have authoritie to assist the Commons, when they are either injured or oppressed by violence, and to take order that they be not robbed of their rights and liberties. Other securitie then this we will trust
to none." Which when the people heard (for few of them were made acquainted with the plot before) , they made many a loud and joyful shout, praising the man unto the skies, and absolutely resolving to admit of no other terms, then what their Spokesman had proposed. (2) But yet the business was not done. It must first pass the approbation of the Senate, and there it met with very grreat heats and opposition before it passed, and passed not at the last but upon con∣ditions. The people had a faction in the very Senate, and a strong one too, who laboured what they could to obtain the point. Of these Valerius was the chief, whose Brother had not long before expulsed the Kings, and from his courting of the people was surnamed Poplicola: a family that had been always favourable to the popular partie, and more endevoured their content, then the honor or profit of the publick. In which regard Appius charged him to his face, Id. ibid., that the whole generation of them were so partial in behalf of the people, that they had almost destroyed the Common-wealth. Others and those of greater courage and Nobility, scorn∣ing that such an innovation should be made in the publick Government, opposed it with all might and main; not sparing to assure the Senate that in the setting up of this new authoritie, they would in fine put down their own. And of these Appius
and Caius Martius, (who after had the name of Coriolanus) were the leading men: who standing upon point of honor, advised the Senate that ha∣ving shaken off the tyrannie of their Kings, they should not prostitute themselves to the lusts of the peopleId. ibid.; that they should stand on their own ground, and not do any thing unworthy of their place and dignitie; that these were but the be∣ginnings of sedition, and that the purpose of the Commons was to abolish law, and set up a pari∣tie Plutarch in M. Coriolano.: Appius fore-telling, as inspired with the spirit of Prophesie, , how great a Seminarie of mischiefs it would prove to the Common-wealth, and calling all the Gods to witness that he had done his best to prevent the same. But when they found it like to pass, and that the major part of the house did incline that way, it was advised that they should hold the people to the terms by themselves proposed, and give their Officers no more power but to relieve the people from unjust oppression, and that they should only interpose, if any thing were passed in Senate to the peoples prejudice, but propose no∣thing of themselves, nor appear in any thing, un∣till the Senate had before considered of it; that the election should be made in centuriatis Comi∣tiis only, where the Patricii and their followers bare the greatest stroke; and finally that in their applications and addresses to the Lords of the Senate, in any business whatsoever, they should all agree upon the point, so that if any one
dissented, the agreement and consent of all the rest should pass for nothing. For seeing that Tribunes must be granted, they hoped that by their dis∣agreement the honor of the State might be kept upright, and that the Common-wealth was not quite past help, Dionys. Hali∣carn. l. 10., as long as any discord or dissension might be sown amongst them. Which last condition (for all the rest were broken assoon as they were agreed on) was most religiously observed till the very last, as we read in Plutarch, who gives it for a rule amongst them, that if one Tribune did op∣pose r;m Plutareh. in Caio. & Tiber. the agreement and command of all the rest did effect just nothing. Things being brought unto this temper, and all points agreed on, the people went to the election, and chose five new Officers, (according to the number of the Spartan Ephori) which they called Tribunes of the people; of which Sicinius and Ju∣nius Brutus must be two at least. We may be sure they took not all this pains for nothing. (3) And yet all this was nothing if they got not more. The Articles and Conditions which they had agreed on had bound them too precisely to their good behaviour; and if they did not break those bonds, they were Prisoners still. But first they must be fortified with some special privi∣ledges, to keep their persons out of danger; that they might boldly venture upon any project with∣out fear of law; and put themselves into such con∣dition,
that whatsoever wrongs they did, they would not be called to an accompt. To that end Brutus taking his opportunitie whilest the heats were up, and the Senate in a disposition to deny them nothing, causeth a law to be propounded & ob∣tained for the perpetual indemnitie of the Tribunes, , and for declaring of their Office to be sacred and inviolableDoys. Hali∣carn. l. 6.. The substance of the law was to this effect; "That no man should compell the Tribunes to doe any thing against their wills, nor beat, or cause them to be beaten, nor kill, or cause them to be kil∣led; if any should presume to do the contrarie , he was to be pursued as an execrable person, and his goods confiscate, and whosoever slew him should escape unpunished, and do a meritorious service to the Common-wealth." A Priviledge which they found good use of in the times succeeding, and made it serve their turns upon all occasions. Martius complained of them in the Senate for disobedience to the Consuls, and an intent to bring an Anarchie upon the State: Plutarh. in Coriolano. they vote this for a breach of priviledge, and nothing but his death or banishment will give them satisfaction for it. Apptus being Consul sends his Lictor to lay hands upon them for raising tumults in the CityLivie hist. Rom. lib. 2.; this is another breach of priviledge, and he shall answer for it when his year was out. Caeso Quintius like a noble Patriot, joyns with the Consuls and the Senate to oppress their insolencies, when neither law nor reason would prevail upon
them; this also is a breach of priviledge, and his life shall pay for itId. l. 3.. But to proceed, having obtained this law for their own securitie, their next work was to break or pass by those laws by which the State was governed in all times before, and which themselves had yeelded to at their first creation. It was the practise of the City from the first fnundation (and a continual custom hath the force of law) to give such respect unto the Senate, that the people did not vote nor deter∣mine any thing, Dionys. Hali∣carnass. l. 7., which the Senate had not first debated and resolved up∣on. This though no breach of priviledge was a main impediment to the advancing of those pro∣jects which they had in hand, and therefore fit to be removed, as removed it was: and so a way made open unto that confusion, which did expose the State to so many changes, that it was never constant to one form of government. Which be∣ing obtained, the next thing to be brought about, was to bring the election of the Tribunes into the hands of the people (who had before the least part in it) that so depending mutually upon one ano∣ther, they might co-operate together to destroy the State, and bring it absolutely under the com∣mand of the common people. For at the first, according to the Articles of the Institution, the Tribunes were to be elected in Comitiis Centuri∣atis as before was said, where none but men of years and substance (such as were of the Liverie, as we speak in England) had the right of Suffrage;
By means whereof the Patricians had a very great stroke in the Elections, Et per Clientum suffragia creandi quos vellent potestatem. hist., and by the voyces of their Clients or dependents set up whom they listed. They must no longer hold this power. The Tribunes were the creatures of the Common peo∣ple, and must be made by none but them. A law must therefore be propounded to put the Ele∣ction wholly into the hands of the people, and to transact the same in Comitiis Tributis, where no Patrician was to vote, but all things carried by the voyces of the rascal Rabble. Which though it caused much heat and no small ado, yet it was carried at the last; Appius complaining openly as his custom was, Rempub. per metum prodi, that the Senate did destroy the Common-wealth by their want of courage. And whereas at the first they had so much modestie as not to come into the SenateValer. Max∣im. lib. 2. c. 2., Sed positis subselliis ante fores decreta Pa∣trum examinare, but to sit without upon some benches, whilest they examined the decrees which had passed the house: they challenge now a place, though no vote in Senate t, and had free ingress and egress when they would themselves. (4) But their main business was to pull down the Nobles, and make them of no more esteem then the common sort. And upon this they set their strength, and made it the first hansel of their new authoritie. Martius had spoke some words in Senate which displeased the Tribunes, and they
incense the people to revenge the injury: who promising to assist them in their undertakings, an Officer is forthwith sent to apprehend him. This caused the Patricians whom the cause con∣cerned, to stand close together, and to oppose this strange incroachment; and generally to affirm, as most true it was, that when they yeelded to the setting up of this new authority, there was no power given them by the Senate Dionys. Hali∣carn. l. 7., but only to preserve the Commons from unjust oppressions. The like did Martius plead in his own behalf, as we finde in Livie, auxilii non poenae jus datum illi pote∣stati, plebis{que} non patrum Tribunos esseLivie. hist. lib. 2., that they were trusted with a power to help the Com∣mons, but with none to punish, and were not Tri∣bunes of the Lords, but of the people. And so much also was affirmed in the open Senate, that the authority of the Tribunes was at first ordained not to offend or grieve the Senate, but that the Commons might not suffer any grievance by it; and that they did not use their power, according to such limitations as were first agreed on, and as of right they ought to use it, Dionys. Hali∣carn. l. 7., but to the ruine and destruction of the Lawes established. Enough of conscience to have staved them from the prose∣cution, but that they had it in design, and resolved to carry it. For Brutus had before given out and assured the people, Id. ibid., that he would humble the Nobility,
and bring down their pride; and 'twas no reason that such a man as he should be disappointed, and not be master of his word. Martius being ba∣nished at the last, their next bout was with Ap∣pius Claudius, a constant and professed enemy of the popular faction: one who had openly took part against them in behalf of Martius, and af∣ter seeing them apprehend some Gentlemen who opposed their insolencies, had openly denied, jus esse Tribuno in quenquam nisi in plebeiumLivie. l. 2., that they could exercise their power on any but the Commons only. Him therefore they accused of Treason, or at least sedition, in that he had intrenched upon their authority, which was made sacred by the Lawes: and doubtlesse had condemned him to some shameful punish∣ment, had he not died before his triall. Which victory on Martius, and the death of Appius, did so discourage the Nobility and puffe up the Tri∣bunes, that from this time forwards (as the Hi∣storian doth observe) the Tribunes cited whom they listed to answer for themselves before the people, and to submit their lives to their finall sentence: which as it did increase the power of the popular faction in the depressing of the Nobles, and weakning the authority of the Senate; so did it open them a way to aim at and attain to all those dignities in the Common wealth, Dionys. Hali∣carn. l. 7., which were most honourable in themselves and had formerly be∣longed to the Patricians, and to none but them.
And yet the Senate and Nobility did not so give over, but that sometimes they put them in re∣membrance of their first conditions, and chal∣lenged them of breaking all those bonds and Co∣venants, which were so solemnly agreed on and accepted by them, at the first erection of their Office. For this did Fabius presse upon them when they went about to make some Law for the restraint and regulating of the power of the Con∣suls, viz. that their authority was given them ad auxilium singulorum, for the relief of such par∣ticulars as did want their help, not for the ruine of the publick; and that they should do well to bethink themselves,Livie. l. 3. Tribunos plebis se creatos, non hostes Patribus, that they were chosen Tri∣bunes to protect the people, not enemies to op∣presse the Senate. And the expostulation of the Senate was both just and necessary, when they de∣manded of the Tribunes on the same occasion, Dionys. Hali∣carn. l. 10., who gave them power to introduce new Lawes and subvert the old; and told them in plain terms they had broke their Covenants, and that they were not made upon such conditions as to do all things that they listed, nor to do any thing at all, but only to protect the poor, and preserve the Commons from oppression. Which put toge∣ther makes it a most evident truth, that in the creation of the Tribunes there was nothing lesse intended then to curb the Senate, or to set up a power to oppose the Consuls; as vainly and sediti∣ously
is supposed by CALVIN, though true it is they did abuse their power with the Common people, and the authority of their office to sup∣presse them both. 5. And this they were resolved to do, al∣though they had no other way to effect the same, then by raising seditions in the State, and putting the people into Arms upon all occasions: at which they were so perfect, and so constant in it, that seldome the whole year went round without some tumult or sedition of their setting forward, as will appear to any one who is versed in Livie. If they held quiet for one year, as they seldom did (till they had brought the City under their obedience) they broke out in the next that fol∣lowed with the greater violence: and when the course of the distemper was so intermitted, that it held not alwaies a Quotidian, it proved a Ter∣tian Feaver, or at most a Quartan, and therefore like to tarry longer with the afflicted Patient. How many seditions did they raise about the law Agaria, of which Livie tels us that it was never movedHst Rom. l. 2. sine maximis motibus without great tu∣mults and dissensions? How many tumults did they raise to oppose the Consuls, when they had any wars in hand, and were to press the Souldier to pursue those wars? How often finde we in that Author, Tribunitium bellum domi territare pa∣tres Id. lib. 3., that when the Fathers had no wars abroad, they found a Tribunitian war at home
which did more affright them? how often finde we them complaining, non ultra ferri posse Tri∣bunitios furoresId. lib. 4., that the insolencies of the Tri∣bunes were no longer sufferable; and that they could not look to be without continual alarms, and renewed distractions, whilest the seditions and the authors of them did succeed so prospe∣rously? Nay they were so accustomed to it, that having had some intermission (and that no other∣wise obtained, but by yeelding all things to the people which they had a minde to) Livie takes notice of it as a thing observable, permultos annos esseId. lib. 10., that many years had intervened since the Patricians and the Tribunes had their last conten∣tion. And all this while they managed their se∣ditions by the tongues end only, seldom procee∣ding unto blowes, and much lesse to bloud. But when the two Gracchi came in play and attained the Office, they fell from words to blowes, and from blowes to murther: Tiberius one of the two Brothers, and many of his friends and followers being tumultuously slain in the Common Forum, as he was acting the part of a busie and seditious Tribune; whom Caius the other of the two not long after followed both in life and death. And this, saith the Historian, initium in urbe Roma Ci∣vilis sanguinis gladiorum{que} impunitatis fuitVelleius Pa∣tercul. hist., was the first time that the sword was suffered to range at liberty in the streets of Rome, and to be dis∣coloured with the bloud of the Citizens; their dif∣ferences before that day (though not often after∣wards)
being determined by parlies, but not by bloudshed. Which being put together and con∣sidered seriously, it will appear to be no Paradox which we finde in Florus, where he affirmeth, Se∣ditionum omnium causas Tribunitiam potestatem excitasseFlorus histor. Rom. l. 3., that the Tribunitian power was the source and fountain of all those seditions, where∣with the quiet of the State had been disturbed. Nor was it said by Quintius without very good reason, that the authority of the Tribunes, in se∣ditione & ad seditiones nata, was born in a sedi∣tion and to raise seditions;Cicero de Legibus l. 3. that it was pesti∣fera potestas, a pestilent pernicious office, and that Pompey did exceeding ill to re-invest the Tribunes with that height of power, of which they had been justly dispossessed by Sylla. Upon which grounds it had been formerly averred by the Consuls and the rest of the Senate, that the Tri∣bunes were the cause of those distractions (, are the Authors words) which did so miserably afflict the Common-wealthDionys. Hali∣carn. l. 10.. But this, to say the truth, is so clear a point, that it needs no proof. I only shall observe and so pass it by, how justly the Nobility and Senate were punished by their own example; and for how little time they enjoyed that Soveraignty, which they had wrested from their Kings. From the expulsion of the Kings to the creating of the Tri∣bunes were but sixteen years; and from the death of Tarquin to the reign of Brutus and Sicinius, but one year, no more, and in that little span of
time the people profited so well in the school of rebellion, that they did not only beat the Senate at their own weapon of disloialty, but choaked them with their own objection. For when it was objected against the Tribunes, that their authori∣ty was gotten and maintained by seditious cour∣ses; the Tribunes handsomely replyed, that that objection might aswell be made against the autho∣rity of the Consuls; which had been introduced and established by no other means,Id. lib. 10. , then the rebellion of the Nobles or Patricians against their Kings. A very shrewd retortion, if you mark it well; and fit to be considered of in these present times. (6) If any ask to what end all these stirs were raised, and these seditions set on foot, he may please to know, that there was an intent from the first creating of the Tribunes to change the go∣vernment of the State, and to put the Supreme Power of all into the hands of the people; that is to say, to bring it under the command of a few factious persons, on whom the body of the peo∣ple had devolved their power. And this is posi∣tively affirmed by Florus, where having told us that the Tribunes were the cause of all the tu∣mults and seditions which had been raised within the City, he adds, that being at first ordained specie quidem tuendae plebis,Florus hist. Rom. l. 3. under pretence of be∣ing Protectors of the Commons, and taking care
for the preserving of their rights and liberties; they sought in very deed to usurp the Soveraign∣ty, re autem dominationem sibi acquirere, and to get the Supreme power into their own hands. To this end as the Tribunes strived to oblige the peo∣ple by causing new Lawes to be made in their behalf, and for the increase of their authority; so did the people readily obey the Tribunes, and ga∣thered into an head upon all occasions, aswell for the protection of their persons, as the confirma∣tion of their power. When Martius had decla∣med against them in the open Senate for their fa∣ctious and seditious courses, the Tribunes present∣ly made complaint to the people of it, calling upon them to assist them, , and to save their TribunesPlutarch in Coriolano.: at which the people were so madded, and ran on so furiously, that they were like to have fallen desperately upon all the Senate. And Appius found unto his cost, that in offering to attach a Tribune, (though he well deserved it) concio omnis coorta pro Tribuno in ConsulemLivie. l. 2., the whole assembly rose against him as one man, to defend their Tribune, the rascall multitude gathering together out of all the City to do him right against the Consul. And Plutarch tels us in the life of Tiberius Gracchus, that the people were so sottishly affected to him, that ma∣ny of the needy and seditious rout waited upon him all night long up and down the Town; Plutarch in Tiber. & C. Gracchis. some of them buying tents and lying about his house to watch it, as a guard to his person. And
on the other side the houses of the Tribunes were kept continually open aswell nights as daies, that they might serve as a Protection or a Common Sanctuary for men of all sorts to repair unto, whom either debt or misdemeanor, or some greater mat∣ter had made obnoxious to the Sergeants, or other Ministers of justice, to the great prejudice of the honest and well meaning Subjects in their suits and businesses. And besides this, the Tri∣bunes never failed to flatter and bewitch the peo∣ple by some piece of courtship, or by preferring some new Lawes (as before was said) for their ease and benefit. They had no sooner way then that to advance their power, or to obtain unto that absoluteness of command and empire, which they projected to themselves. For doubtlesse that of the Historian is exactly true, Dionys. Hali∣carn. lib. 6., that he that means to be a Ty∣rant must be first a flatterer; there being no rea∣dier way to advance a Tyranny then by being po∣pular, a profest servant of that people whom he would command. But this confederacy between the Tribunes and the people and the mutual ties that were between them, I cannot better lay before you then in Plutarchs words,Plutarch in Agis & Cleo∣men. who speaking of the Gracchi doth inform us thus, "That having received. many favours from the peoples hands they were ashamed to be indebted to them, and therefore earnestly endevoured to requie their courtesies, by making new Decrees and Lawes which they propounded and obtained for the
peoples profit; and on the other side, the people for their parts were not wanting to ad∣mire and honour them the more, by how much they perceived them studious of their good and benefit. So that with like strife on either side, the one to gratifie and oblige the other, their interesses were so mingled, and their intenti∣ons so concorporated, that they must needs hold on as they had begun, and either stand or fall together." By means whereof the people in conclusion became lords of all, the majesty of the State and the power of judicature being absolute∣ly vested in them: which since they could not manage but by their Atturneys, nor otherwise execute and discharge then by their Proxies, who but the Tribunes their own creatures must be trusted with it? And this is that which Tacitus observes to be the issue of those quarrels which were kept on foot between the Nobility and the Commons, modo turbulenti Tribuni,Tacit. hist. lib. 2. modo Consules praeva∣lidi, sometimes some factious Tribunes carried it away, and then again the Consuls had the better, and prevailed in power, according as they did comply with the peoples humours; till Marius and Sylla first, and Julius Caesar afterwards by their example, by force of Arms subdued both parties, and introduced an absolute Government. (7) Now for the steps by which the people did asend to this height of power, they were not raised at once, but were long a making. When
first the discontented Nobles had expulsed their Kings, and found they could not master all those difficulties which so great a business as that was did present unto them, without being sure to have the people theirs without fear of lapsing: Popli∣cola advised, and at last enacted it for Law, that no man should presume upon pain of death to take upon him any Office, Plutarch. in Publicola., un∣lesse it come unto him by the gift of the people; and that if any were condemned, and appealed to them, the execution should be respited, till the peo∣ple should give sentence in it. But then withall the Nobility kept all Offices both of power and State in their own hands only, the people being uncapable of the meanest office which did relate unto the Government of the Common-wealth; untill they gained the Tribunes and the two Ae∣diles (which were under officers to the Tribunes) to be chosen out of their own body. Which once obtained, there was no place, how high soever, which they did not aim at, and which their Tri∣bunes did not finde some way to compasse for them; the Nobles and Patricians still in vain com∣plaining how much they were dishonoured in the competition. First therefore having gained a Law (but with much adoe) that the Commons might be married into Noble Families, they presently propose another, ut populo potestas esset, seu de Plebe, seu de Patribus vellet, Consules faciendi,Livie. l. 4. that the people might have liberty to choose the Consuls out of which rank of men they listed: and
at the first attempt did prevail so far, that in stead of the two Consuls which they had before, six Military Tribunes should be chosen by them, to be possessed of all the Consular authority, and they to be promiscuously elected out of the Patricians and the People, as they saw convenientLivie. l. 4.; and having got this ground they went on a main. For not long after, P. Licinius Calvus a meer Plebeian, is made one of these Military Tribunes; and short∣ly after that the Magister Equitum, or the Com∣mander of the horse. Thus Silius and Aelius are made Questors, those of Patrician rank having had the canvass; and next that followed a Decree, that the Docemviri Sacrorum, who had the custo∣dy and charge of the Sibyls Books, partim ex Plebe, partim ex Patriciis,Id. lib. 6. should be indifferently chosen out of both Estates. In little time, the Tribunes pressing hotly for it, L. Sextus obtains the ConsulshipId. ibid., C. Martius Rutilius is first made Dictator, afterwards one of the Censors alsoId. lib. 7.; and P. Philo is advanced to the place and dignity of the PratorId. lib. 8.. Having thus took possession of all Civil Magistracy, which were of any power and dignity in the Common-wealth; the Tribunes would not rest nor content themselves, untill the Commons were made capable of the Priesthood also: which after some slight opposition made by Appius Claudius (a Family that never yeelded any thing to advance the people) was conferred upon them, five Augures, and four Pontifies being added to the former number, all chosen, and for ever to
be chosen by and out of the CommonsId. lib. 10.. There were only now two places of respect and credit, that of the Maximus Curio and the Pontifex Maxi∣mus, both which the Nobles did pretend to belong to them: but the Tribunes were resolved to have it otherwise. According to which resolution, C. Manilius got the Office of the Maximus CurioId. lib. 26.: and in the close of all, but a good while after, Om∣nibus honoribus plebi communicatisRofin. Antiq. Rom. l. 3. c. 22., after all other honors were conferred upon them, or rather com∣municated to them, one T. Coruncanius was de∣clared the Pontifex Maximus. All this and more they had, but it would not satisfie. (8) For there was wanting still both the power of Judicature, and the Supreme Majestie of the State to make all compleat; and to gain this the Tribunes must bestir themselves both with art and violence; or else they could not hope to estate it on them. A business of so high a nature, that it was never in a way to be brought about, till the two Gracehi undertook the contrivance of it: who being men of excellent parts and great abilities, did most unfortunately fall on the undertaking; and being fallen upon it did devise all ways which either art or wit could present unto them to effect the work. Of these Tiberius was the eldest, who stumbling in the way on the Lex Agraria, as being a means to make the poor people more confiderable, and the rich less powerful; and finding that Octavius one of his Colleagues did oppose him in it, deposed him
from his Office by force and violence, only be∣cause he stood upon the right of his negative voicePlutarch in Tib. & Caio.. He had before inflamed the people by making a seditious speech to prefer their business; and now he takes a course to inflame them more, for the advancement of his own. For one of his friends being found dead upon a sudden, not without some suspi∣cion of poyson, as he gave it out, he put on mourning apparrel, and brought his sons before the people, into the Common Forum, beseeching them to have compassion on his Wife and Children, as one that utterly despaired of his own safetie, having for their sakes got the hatred of the Noble men. And some∣times he would be the first man in the Market∣place, apparelled all in black, his face swelled with tears, and looking heavily upon the matter, would pray the people to stand to him, saying, he was afraid his Enemies would come in the night, and overthrow his house to kill him. By means of which devices he so wrought upon them, that many of them bought tents and lay about his house continually, to keep him from the hands of his deadly Enemies. So that being sure of their concurrence and assistance in any project which he should set on foot to advance himself, under pretence of doing service to the Common-wealth; he presently proposed a law, , that any man that would might appeal from the Judges to the people in what cause so∣ever. And that he might be sure to embase the Senate, to the improvement and increase of the
peoples power, he had prepared another of an higher nature, which was to adde unto the Senate an equal number of the Equites, or the Roman Knights, who were to be of equal power, and to have libertie of voting in all publick businesses with the antient Senators. In passing which and other of his Popular laws he got this trick, (and he was very constant to it) that if he found the sense of the house to be against him, and was not like to carry with him the major part of the voyces, he would quarrel with his fellow Tribunes to spin out the time till his partie were all come together; and if that could not do it neither, then he ad∣journed the Assembly to some other day. But yet for all these artifices and unworthy practises, he could not compass the design, but left it to be finished by his Brother Caius: Who taking the same course to ingage the people, which his Brther had pursued before, brought those designes about which Tiberius failed in.Id. ibid. For first where∣as the Senate were the only Judges in matters which concerned the affairs of the Common-wealth, which made them no less reverenced by the Roman Knights, then by others of the com∣mon people: Caius prevailed so far that he gained a law for adding three hundred of these Equites to as many Senators (for the Senate did consist of three hundred antiently) , gi∣ving them equall power of judging in all causes which were brought before them. So that by gai∣ning this and the former law of appealing to the
people upon all occasions, the people were estated in the power of Judicature, and the dernier resort (as the Lawyers call it) was in them alone. The only point now left was the Supreme Majestie, and that did Caius very handsomely confer upon them without noise or trouble. For whereas all other Orators when when they made their speeches, turn∣ed themselves towards the Palace where the Senate sate: he on the contrary turned himself towards the Market place where the people were, and taught all other Orators by his Example to doe the like. And thus (saith Plutarch) by the only turning of his look he gained a point of infinite con∣sequence and importance; , changing the Com∣mon-wealth from an Aristocratie, to a meer De∣mocratie: which was the matter so aimed at by his Predecessors. (9) The Tribunes had been insolent enough in the former times, but the obtaining of these laws made them more unsufferable. Before they used to quarrel all the greatest Officers, as if the State could not consist but by their contentions: there being no Magistrate so great, nor man so innocent, whom they exposed not sometimes to contempt and scorn, and made not subject to their tyran∣ni. The renowned Scipio himself, the very Atlas of the State when it was in danger, a man in whom there was not any thing but brave and gallant, could not scape so clear, but that he was accused
by these factious TribunesLivie. hist. lib. 28., and forced to live retired in his Countrey-house, far from the em∣ployments of that State, which did not otherwise subsist but by his abilities. Nor could they look on their Dictators but with eyes of malice, although they had as much authoritie as that State could give them, or any of their Kings had enjoyed be∣fore, whom they endevour to make subject to their pride and tyrannie by all means imaginable. And to that end, sometimes denyed him the honor of a Triumph, though he had deserved it in all mens judgements but their own; and sometimes making this Magister EquitumId. lib. 22., to be of equal power and authoritie with him: and finally sometimes they declaim against himId. ibid., to make him of no repu∣tation with the common people. And for their dealing with the Consuls, it had been a complaint of old, even in the dawning of the day of their new authoritie, Consulatum captum & oppressum a Tribu∣nitiae potestateId. lib. 2., that the Consulship was suppressed and captivated by the power of the Tribunes; and we can no where finde that they improved their modestie, as they did their power. Nor did they only quarrel with the Consuls, and proceed no fur∣ther, (though that had been an high affront to the Supreme Magistrate) but threatned to commit them to the Prison also, and many times their threat∣nings were not made in vain. For thus we read, that Caius Marius being TribunePlutarch in Mario., threatned to send Cotta the Consul unto Prison, but afterwards was taken off by fair perswasions: and Sulpitus,
one as violent as he, though not so valiant, as∣saulted both the Consuls as they sate in the Senate houseId. ibid., and killed one of their sons there, who was not so quick of foot as to scape his hands. Which though they were but bare attempts were yet lewd enough, sufficiently to the dishonor of such eminent Magistrates, and to the infamy and dis∣grace of the publick Government. And there∣fore to make sure work of it, and that the world might see they could more then threaten, Quintius will tell you in the Dialogue with his Brother Cicero, Brutum & P. Scipionem tales tan∣tos viros hominum omnium infimum & sordidissi∣num Trib. Pl. C. Curiatium in vincula conjecisseCicero de Le∣gibus lib. 3., that C. Curiatius, a most base and unworthy per∣son, had caused such gallant men as Brutus and P. Scipio to be cast in Prison. And if we make a further search we shall quickly finde, that M. Drusus being Tribune caused Philip the Con∣sul to be cast headlong out of his seat, to the no small danger of his life, only for inter∣rupting him in the middle of a factious speech; which was an insolencie beyond imprisonment. To speak of their behaviour towards the other Magistrates were a thing impertinent. For if the Consuls and Dictators could not scape their hands, there is no question to be made but that the Praetors, Censors, Quaestors, yea the Pontifices them∣selves, were most abundantly debased and insulted on by these popular Tyrants.
(10) Thus have we brought the Tribunes to as great an height both for power and insolencie, as were the Ephori before; and thereby made them ready for the greater fall. A fall which was not long a coming after they had made up the measure of their pride and tyrannie. For Lu∣cius Sylla having brought the estate of Rome un∣der his command, and knowing full well how dangerous these men would be to him, if they were suffered to continue in their former power, set forth a law by which they were reduced to their antient bounds; inabled only to relieve, not to wrong the Subject. Sylla Tribunis Plbis lege sua injuriae faciendae potestatem ademit, auxi∣lii ferendi reliquit, as we read in TullieId. ibid.. A thing that much displeased the people, and the Tribunes more. But Sylla was no , no great applier of himself to the peoples humors, and therefore cared but little how they took the mat∣ter. Pompey succeeding him in power and in pur∣pose too, took a course quite contrary; and re∣established them in that authoritie whereof Sylla had of late deprived them. For finding that the common people longed for nothing more then to see the Office of the Tribunes in the height again, and being resolved to lay the foundation of his greatness on the affections and dependence of the common peoplePlutarch. in Pompeio., , he gra∣tified them in that point, and thought himself an happy man to finde so fair an opportunitie to
oblige them to him. On which deceitful grounds (for they proved no other) he set them in their power again, as before was said; for which he stands accused by Quintus,t Cicero de Le∣gbu. l 3. and I think deserved∣ly: Certain I am that Pompey bought the short af∣fection and applause of the common people at no less a price then his own destruction: the Tri∣bunes being the very men which pulled down his pidePlutarch in I. Caesare., and set up Caesar to oppose him. Who going the same way to work that Sylla did, and knowing that a Tribune and a Tribunitian spirit were no friends to Monarchie, left them the name, but nothing else. The power and priviledge of the Office he kept unto himself for his own secu∣rity Dion histor. Rom. lib. 53.; as one that understood, none better, how many notable advantanges he should gain thereby, for the confirming of his Empire. Which course Augustus followed also, taking the Tribunitian power into his own hands, posito Triumviri no∣mine Tacitus An∣nal. lib. 1., assoon as the Triumvirate was expired by the death of his partners; and from thence reck∣oned the years of his Government, as Tribunitiae potestatis tertium, quartum, &c. which his Suc∣cessors did after his example till the time of Con∣stantine, when the name of Tribune was laid by as a thing forgottenRosin. Antiq. Rom.. The Empire was then cast into another kinde of mould then it had been for∣merly; new Offices ordained, new forms of Go∣vernment introduced, and a new Rome built: and to what purpose should they keep the name, when the thing was gone?
(11) Let us look back on all that is said be∣fore, and we shall finde but little reason to relie upon Calvins word. He saith the Tribunes were fet up to oppose the Consuls; but the best Wri∣ters do affirm that they were instituted only to protect the people, and to protect the people in such cases only when they did suffer any tort or unjust oppression. He reckoneth them for in∣stances of such popular Magistrates as were ordain∣ed to moderate and restrain the vast power of Kings and other Supreme Magistrates; but the best Writers do affirm that the Tribunes were not in∣stituted till the Kings were outed; nor instituted at the first to restrain the Consular power, though by degrees they did restrain it as they pleased; and finally that they were again abridged of their power and tyrannie, assoon as Monarchie was re∣stored, and the State brought to be obedient to one Soveraign Prince. He seems to intimate that the Consuls were not wronged by such oppo∣sitions as the Tribunes daily made against them, and that the Tribunes did no more in such oppo∣sitions then by their place and office they were bound to do. But the best Writers do affirm that the Consuls made complaint from time to time of those wrongs and insolencies which those proud creatures of the people did afflict them with; and they complained not without cause, as their stories tell us. So that there is but little ground for the supposition, touching the first creation of these
mighty Tyrants, which Calvin trimly puts upon us; less for the application of it to his end and purpose. What other power soever they enjoyed or exercised more then the power of interceding, when any Bill or Ordinance was to pass the Se∣nate, by which the people might have suffered in their goods and liberties, was an incroachment on the Consuls, and wrested from them by strong hand, sometimes with bloud, but never without dan∣gerous tumults. The best use can be made of such false surmises, especially when they are false and factious too (and some good uses may be made of the strongest poysons) is that an Item may be taken by all Kings, Princes▪ and Supreme Governors to have a care of their Estates, and nei∣ther suffer any Tribunes, or men of Tribunitian spirits, or such as challenge to themselves Tribu∣nitian power, to grow up under them, or live with∣in the verge of their Dominions. The Tribune and the Tribunitian spirit are no friend to Monar∣chie; and have so much of Pompey in them (who restored the Office) that they will never be con∣tent to endure an equall, much less to suffer a Su∣perior. For further proof of which (if more proof be requisite) and for discovering to the world with what arts and practises those factious and seditious spirits did attain their height: it would be a most excellent piece of service to all Soveraign Princes, if a just Tribunitian historie were composed by some man of judgement, for the recovery of this Age from the present maladies, and a Memento to the
future. But this I leave to those who have time and leisure, and other fit abilities to goe through with it. I have another task in hand, and the Demarchi call upon me to pass on to Athens, where we are like to finde worse work then we met with hitherto. Worse work I mean in this respect, that we are like to finde less ground for the sup∣position; for otherwise we are like to finde no work at all, as will appear more evidently by that which followeth.
CHAP. IV. Of what authority the DEMARCHI were in the State of ATHENS; and of the dan∣ger and unfitness of the instances produced by CALVIN. (I) Athens first governed by Kings, and after∣wards by one Soveraign Prince under other titles. (II) The Annual Magistrates of Athens what they were, and of what authoritie. (III) By whom and what degrees the State of Athens was reduced to a Democratie. (IV) Of the authoritie of the Senate, and the famous Court of the Areopagites. (V) What the Demarchi were in the State of Athens, and of what authoritie. (VI) The Demarchi never were of power to op∣pose the Senate, nor were ordained to that end. (VII) Calvins ill luck in making choyce of three such instances, which if true, would not serve his turn. (VIII) The danger which lyeth hidden under the disguise of such popular Magistrates, as are here instanced in by Calvin.
(IX) What moved Calvin to lay these danger∣ous stumbling-blocks in the Subjects way. (X) The dangerous oppositions and practises which have hence ensued in most parts of Europe. (XI) The sect of CALVIN professed Enemies to Monarchie, and the power of Princes. (1) THE State of Athens, as were all others at the first, was under the Govern∣ment of Kings, all of them of the race of Cecrops, from whom his Successors were called Cecropidae: and they, as other Kings in those antient times, ut libitum imperitabantTacit. Annal. lib. 3., governed the people un∣der them by no other rule then their own discre∣tion. Theseus the tenth from Cecrops, was the first King of Athens which let goe his hold, and parted with so many of the Regal rights, as made the Kings weak and the Subjects wanton. For having a desire to incorporate all the Inhabitants of Attica into the City of Athens, the better to unite them against forein force, and to assemble them together as occasion served, he was fain to win them to it by large promises of giving them some share in the publick Government: without which bait, the wealthier sort, and such as had authoritie in their several Burroughs, could not be drawn into the CityPlutarch in Theseo.. Yet still he kept unto him∣self and to his successors , as we finde in Plutarch, the chief Cnmmandery in the wars, and the preservation of the laws, together
with a superintendency in matters which concerned Religion; the main points of Soveraigntie. And in this State things stood till the death of Codrus, the seventh from Theseus, who giving up his own life to preserve his Countrey, became so honored and admired amongst his people, that they re∣solved for his sake to have no more Kings, for fear they should never meet with any who might be worthy to succeed him: which was one of the prettiest wanton quarrels that ever was picked a∣gainst a Monarchie. The Princes which succeed∣ed after his decease, they called not Kings, but , or Governors; but the change was only in the name, and in the manner of their getting the Supreme authoritie. For being once invested with the Supreme power, they held it during life with∣out check or censure; as is affirmed by Africanus, an antient writer: who laying down the succes∣sion of the Kings of Athens, to the death of Co∣drus African. apud Eusib. Chron. edit. Scaliger., addes this, , that after them succeeded the perpetual Ar∣chonte, who held the Government during life. The like Eusebius doth affirmEuseb. in Chro., and all Authors else, which treat of the affairs of Athens. The difference was, that formerly the Kingdom was suc∣cessive meerly, entailed upon the Princes of the line of Cecrops, now it began to be Elective, and to be given to them who best pleased the people: Et loco libertatis erat, quod eligi coeperuntTacit. hist. l. 1., and it was some degree of liberty, (and a great one too) that they had power to nominate and elect
their Princes. But long they did not like of this, although no doubt a great intrusion on the Regal dignity. The Princes were too absolute when they held for life, not so observant of the people as it was expected; because not liable to accompt, nor to be called unto a reckoning till it was too late, till death had freed them from their faults, and the peoples censure. And therefore having tryed the Government of 13 of these perpetual Archon∣tes, of which Medon the son of Codrus was the first, and the last Almaeon; In decem annos Ma∣gistratuum consuetudo conversa estEuseb. in Chr., they intro∣duced another custom, and every tenth year changed their Governors. These they called , African. apud Euseb. Chronic., or Decennial Archontes; of which they had but seven in all, and then gave them over: and from that time were governed by nine Officers or Magistrates chosen every year, who for that cause waa called , or the Annual Magistrates. And yet it is to be observed that in both these changes, the Archon whosoever he was, and whether he was for term of life or for ten years only, had all the power which for∣merly was belonging to the Kings, save the very name; in which regard Eusebius doth not stick to call them by the name of Kings: where speak∣ing of the institution of these Annual Magistrates, he doth thus express it, Athenis Annui principes constituti sunt cessantibus RegibusEuseb. Chron., as St. Hierom renders it.
(2) Now for these Annual Magistrates, they were these that follow, that is to say, Iul. Pollux in Onomast. l. 8. c. 9.▪ which we may call the Provost (who  was called the Archon) the Bishop or High Priest, the Marshal, and the six Chief Justices. Of these the Provost was the chief, , of whom they did denominate the ensuing year, and by whose name they dated all their private con∣tracts, and Acts of State.Id. ibid. Sect. 2. To him it appertained to have a care of celebrating the Orgies of Bac∣chus, and the great festival which they termed Thargelia, consecrated to Apollo and Diana; as also to take cognizance of misdemeanors, and in particular to punish those who were common drunk∣ards; and to determine in all cases which con∣cerned matter of inheritance: and furthermore to nominate Arbitrators for the ending of fuits and private differences, to appoint Guardians unto Orphans, and Overseers unto women left with childe by their husbands. The  whom we call the Bishop or high Priest, had the charge of all the sacred mysteriesId. ibid. Sect. 3., , and the administration of the usual and ac∣customed sacrifices; together with the cognizance of sacriledge, prophaneness, and all other actions which concerned Religion, as also power to inter∣ct litigious persons (or Common Barretters as we call them) from being present at the celebra∣ting of the holy mysteries. And he retained the name of , because that antiently their Kings,
(as in all places else) had the chief hand in mat∣ters which related to the publick service of the Gods, and the solemn sacrifices. On the which reason and no other, the Romans had their Re∣gem Sacrificulum, (whom Plutarch calls Plutarch in Problemat., in imitation of the Latine, but Dionysius Dionys. Hali∣carnens. hist. l. 5., in the true Greek phrase); of which Livie thus. Rerum deinde divinarum ha∣bita cura: & quia quaedam publica sacra per ipsos Reges factitata erant, necubi Regum desideri∣um esset, Regem Sacrificulum creantLivie hist. R∣man. lib. 2.. But to proceed, the Polemarchus whom we English by the name of Marshall, sate judge in cases of sedi∣tion, and such whereby the grandour of the State might suffer detriment; as also in all actions which concerned either Denizens, or Merchant-strangers: and unto him it appertained to sacrifice to Diana and to Mars, the two military DeitiesJul. Pollux in Onomast. l. 8. c. 9. 3., , and to pre∣scribe the funeral pomp for such as lost their lives in their Countries service. Each of these had their two Assessors, of their own election; but so that they were bound to choose them out of the Senate of five hundredId. ibid. Sect., from no lower rank. Finally for the , whom we call Chief Justices, they were six in number, Suidas in Lex., and had authority to give judgement absolutely in all civil pleas, to judge of strangers which abused the priviledges which they had in the City, of briberie, conspi∣racies, false inscriptions, in cases of adultery and
publick crimes; in points of trade, and actions which concerned the SannariesJul. Pollx in Onomall. l. 8 c. 9. sect. 1.; as also to re∣view the sentence of the Provost, and the decrees of the Senate if occasion were; and to give no∣tice to the people, , as Julius Pollux, if any man preferred a law which was not profitable and expedient for the Common-wealth. Such were the Officers, and such the duty of those Officers, ordained at Athens, upon the last alteration of the Government which before we spake of: and amongst these we finde not any popular Magistrate, who was to have a care of the Common people, and to preserve them in their rights and liberties from the oppression of the greater and more powerful Citizens; much less set up of purpose to oppose the Senate. And to say truth, we must not look for any such amongst the nine, nor in these times in which this altera∣tion of the Government was first established. They could not fall immediately from a Regal State, to a Democratical, but they must take the Aristocratie in the way unto it. They had been under Kings at first, or such as had the power of Kings, although not the name. And when they chose these Annual Officers, they chose them ex nobilibus urbis, out of the Nobles only, as Euse∣bius hath itEuseb. Chron.: which Scaliger is forced to grant to be so at firstScaliger in Animadvers., though out of a desire to confute his Author, he would very fain have had it otherwise. Whether or no they had such Offi∣cers as Calvin dreams of, when they had setled
their Democratie, we shall see anon: having first shewn by whom and by what degrees the govern∣ment of the State was cast on the peoples shoul∣ders, and the form thereof made meerly popular or Democratical. For certainly it is most true, that never any Democratical State shewed it self at the first in its proper colours, or came into the world by a lawful entrance; but crept into it se∣cretly at the back-dore either of faction or sedi∣tion. (3) Now the first man that gave the hint to the Democratie, and made the people fall in love with a factious libertie, was Theseus, a valiant but unfortunate King, who the better to induce the people of Attica to desert their dwellings, and be incorporated into Athens, promised them (as be∣fore was said) that all of them should have some share in the publick government, and after the form and manner of a Common-wealth. And so far he performed his promise, as to devest him∣self of some parts of Soveraigntie , and laid the first foundation of that popular State, which was after built: but he paid deer for itPlutarch. in Thseo.. For the people who before had been so tra∣ctable, that they would do whatsoever their Kings commanded, at the first words speaking; began to take more state upon them, and became so stub born, that they would do nothing on command, but looked to be flattered with and courted, upon all occasionsIdibid.. Which being noted by Menestheus
a popular man, but otherwise of the Royal bloud, he so sed that humor, and wrought so finely on them by his wit and cunning, that Theseus was in fine deposed, and his sons disherited, and the re∣mainder of the Royaltie conferred by them upon Menestheu, as their deed of gift. And though no doubt the people did improve their power, both when their Kings became elective, and when their Governors were elected but for term of years, and specially when the Magistrates were no more then Annual; yet they could get no further then an Ari∣stocratie, till the time of Solon; which were about 170 years after the Annual Officers were first esta∣blished: the Annual Officers being established in the first year of the 5. Olympiad, and Solons re∣formation hapning in the second of the 47. But Solon being chosen Provost (or the ,) and finding the Republick much embroyled in dangerous factions which had been long since bred between the Nobles and Commons, in the change of Governments: took on him by the joynt consent of both parties, the emendation of the laws, and the reducing of the State of the Common-wealth to a more peaceable and equal temperId. in Solone.. And he so ordered their affairs, that the chief Offices of the City remained in the hands of the Nobilitie, as before they were; which for the time contented them: but the election of those Officers, and the dernier resort, or the admittance of Appeals upon Writs of error (as we call them); that he con∣firmed unto the people; which did not only please
the people for the present time, but put them in∣to a condition of drawing to themselves the su∣preme authority. Insomuch that Aristotle though he seem to say, that Solon setled in the City a mixt form of Government, the Court of Areopagites (which he also instituted) pretending to an Oli∣garchie, the Annual Officers or Archontes to an Ari∣stocratie, and the power of judicature being vested in the common people, unto a DemocratieAristot. Po∣litic. l. 2. c. 10.: yet he confesseth at the last, that this power of judi∣cature, and the necessity which all men found of applying themselves unto the people, , changed the Republick in conclusion to a meer Democratie, as it continued till his time. But yet it was not brought about but with great adoe, Pisistratus first reducing the estate to an absolute MonarchyPlutarch. in Soone., (which because he got it from them by fraud and force, they called a Tyranny) and after Clisthenes freeing his countrey from that yoke (by driving his posteri∣ty out of Attica) restoring it unto an AristocratieId. in Ari∣stide, in Pericle, et Cimnc., as before it was. At last it seemed good to Ari∣stides, though for a time he concurred with Cli∣sthenes in his form of government, to cast a more indulgent eye on the common people, who had be∣haved themselves exceeding gallantly in the dread∣full war against the Persians: and to cause a law to be enacted that all authority and power of go∣vernment should be communicated equally to all the Citizens,Id. in Ari∣stide. , and that they should be capable of all the Offices
and honours in the Common-wealth. Which as it added much to the authority of the common people, so that authority was increased much more by the Arts of Pericles; who bearing a grudge unto the Court of the Areopagites, whereof he was never any Member, and finding that the power thereof, and of the Senate of five hundred, did derogate exceeding much from the power of the people, to whose faction he was wholly wedded: by the help and setting on of Ephialtes (a busie and popular man) took from them the hearing and determining of the weightiest causesId. in Pericle & imone., and put them over to the judgement and decision of the common people, who had no more before but the last appeal: and thereby perfected and produced that pure Democratie, which had so often been de∣sired, but in vain attempted. (4) The people being screwed to this height of power▪ and the dignity of the supreme Courts so much diminished, a man would think there was but little need of such popular Officers as Cal∣vin speaks of, ordained of purpose (as he thinks) to oppose the Senate, and counter-ballance their authority. Nor were those Courts at any time so inclined to tyranny, or likely in their consti∣tution to oppress the people, when their authori∣ty was greatest, and their power most eminent, as that the people needed any special Officers to restrain their insolencies, or to confine them to the limits of their Jurisdiction. Now for the Se∣nate,
it consisted at the first of 400 persons, an hun∣dred out of every Tribe; and to that number was restrained by Solon, whose device it wasId. in Solone.: but Clisthenes, having increased the number of the Tribes to ten, added one hundred more, which made five in all, (for each tribe fifty) and so con∣tinued till the expiration of that Common-wealth. A chief part of their business was, , &c. to deliberate and debate of all such matters as were to be commen∣ded to the care of the common people, that when the whole body of the people was assembled to∣gether, no point should be propounded to them but what the Councell of five hundred had fitted and prepared for their resolutionId. ibid.. It also apper∣tained to them , &c. to con∣sult about denouncing war and raising moneys, to advise upon the making of new Lawes, to judge of any accident which at any time hapned in the Ci∣ty, and of such matters which concerned their Al∣lies and neighbours; to impose tribute on the Sub∣ject, and to take care both of the Navie and the Temples; and furthermore to inqure into the car∣riage of the City Magistrates, to appoint keepers unto Prisoners taken in the wars, to judge of suits concerning Orphans, and sometimes in such cases as belonged more properly to a Court of warXenophon de Repub. Athen.. Other particulars there are which they were to deal in, but these the principal: and these though points of great concernment, and arguments of the power and trust committed to them, were little
like to tempt them to abuse their power in the oppressing of the people. For besides that they were chosen but for one year onlyXenphon de Repub. Athen., and that too not without a previous inquisition into their former life and conversation; which were suffici∣ent to induce them to hold fair quarter with the people by all means imaginable: they were bound by oath at their admission to that honour, to con∣sult the peoples good and benefit in most special manner, and not to imprison any of them, how mean soever, unlesse he were found guilty of some practise to betray the City, and diminish the au∣thority and power of the people; or that being one of the Farmers of the Tolls and Taxes, or a Collector of the Tributes, he became non-sol∣vent, and had not cleared his accompt with the Common-wealthDmosthen. in oratione com. Nceam.. As for the Court or Coun∣cell of the Areopagites, it consisted from the first beginning, , of such and such alone who had formerly been of the number of the nine chief MagistratesPlutarch in Solone, & Pe∣ricle.; and they being once admitted held for term of life: which made them, being men of eminence and reputation, to be more able to annoy the people, and to intench upon them in their rights and liberties, had their minde been answerable. For unto them belonged the general superintendency of all things in the Common-wealth, and them did Solon trust with this speciall power, that they shou'd be Id. in. Solen., and see the Lawes to be maintained and to have their course: and in particular to judge in
the case of murder, and man-slaughter, and brief∣ly in all Capital causes. And with these Courts or Counsels, call them which you will, the pru∣dent Legislator thought that he had setled and confirmed the Common-wealth, , as with two strong Anchors, in such a firm and constant manner, that neither the fabrick of the State should be easily shaken, nor the people apt to take offence, or run themselves upon unpeace∣able and seditious courses. (5) But if the Senate or the Councell should abuse their power, and use that sword to the op∣pression of the common people, which was com∣mitted to their hands for their weal and benefit: might not, and did not the Demarchi take the peo∣ples part, and save them from the wrongs and in∣juries intended towards them? Calvin so intimates indeed, but he speaks without book, being more guided to that error by the sound and etymologie of the word, then by the nature of the office. The best Greek Authors who have written the af∣fairs of Rome, do call the Tribunes of the people by this name Demarchi, and their authority or Of∣fice by the name of  also. Nothing more common in Polybius, Halicarnensis, Plutarch, and whosoever else have left us any thing of the Ro∣man stories in that language. But the Demarchi of Athens were of no such power, and had but small authority (God wot) in affairs of State. Mea∣sure them by the definition which is given by
Suidas, and he will tell you that they were cer∣tain Officers appointed in the Burroughs and free Towns of Attica, (being twelve in number) Suidas in Lex. . And for his power, he tels us that it did espe∣cially consist in making a Terrier of the lands of every Township, and keeping of the publick Re∣gisters which concerned the Burrough, in calling the people of the Town together when their oc∣casions did require it, and calculating of their voices by the poll, or scrutinie, and sometimes in distraining on their goods and chattels, if any of them were indebted to the State either in amercia∣ments or contributions. But take his own words with you for the more assurance.  (saith he) Id. ibid.. The Author of the Etymologicon magnum saith the same with Suidas, but in sewer words; and he describes this mighty man of whom Cal∣vin dreams, to be no other then the Bailiff of some ancient Burrough is with us in England, his power being limited and confined within the perambula∣tion of his own Parish, in which he could do lit∣tle more then take the valuation of his neighbours estate, and tell how much he was to be assessed at in the Subsidie BookEtymologicon Magnum in Dearcho., . So he, which is in sum what we had before. 'Tis true, there was another Of∣ficer
of the same name in the City also, and for each tribe one; the Alderman of the Ward we may fitliest call him; but not of much more power and reputation then the Countrey-Bailiff. Of these saith Harpocration an old Grammarian, that they were called Naucrari at the first, and had authority to arrest or destrain such persons as stood indebted to the Exchequer or the Common-wealth.Harpocrat. in Demarcho. , so Harpocration briefly in his wonted manner. But Julius Pollux in his Onomasticon goes to work more plainly, and telleth us of these Demarchi, that they were Jul. Pollux l. 8. c. 9. sect. 30., the governours or Aldermen of their se∣verall Wards, that formerly they were called Naucrari; that anciently the twelfth part of a Tribe or Ward was called Naucraria, and in the later times the whole Ward it self; that these De∣marchi had the ordering of the Taxes raised in every Ward, and looked unto the issuing of them for the publick use; and finally, that every Nau∣craria or Ward was to finde two horse-men and one ship for the service of the Common-wealth, , from whence in probability they derived the word. Add unto this from Suidas, as the close of all, Suidas in Lex., that they had also the setting forth of the great festivall called Panathenaea; ordained by The∣seus on the incorporating of all the people of At∣tica into the City of AthensPlutarch in Theseo..
(6) Put all that hath been said together touch∣ing these Demarchi (and more then this I cannot finde which concerns that Office) and we may easily perceive that they were men of no autho∣rity in affairs of State: so far from being likely to protect the people from the power and pres∣sures of the Senate, that they were rather execu∣tioners, or Ministers of justice to afflict the peo∣ple when the occasions of the Senate did require it of them. That the Demarchi were ordained to oppose the Senate, when it lay heavy on the necks of the common people; or actually did make head against them in behalf of the people if at any time they were oppressed and injured by it, cannot be found (I dare with confidence affirm) in any Author of good credit, either Greek or Latine. 'Tis true, there were some people-pleasers in the State of Athens, whom they called , who by applying themselves to the peoples hu∣mour, and seeming zealously affected to their power and profit, could lead them whither they would, and to what they listed: and sometimes did oppose themselves for the peoples sake, not only against the Senate, but all other Magistrates. Of these it is that Aristotle doth make frequent men∣tion in his books of Politicks, and seems to pro∣phecy, that if not looked into in time, Aristot. Poli∣ti c. l. 5 c 5., they would change the State into a Tyrannie. But these were neither Officers of State, nor justice, nor indeed any Officers at all, though
many times they did ill Offices to the Common-wealth, the better to advance the hopes of the po∣pular faction, and by it themselves. And it is true which Aristotle tells us in another place, , that the people had not only power to elect their MagistratesId. ibid. l 2. c. 12., but to call them also to accompt, in case of mal-ad∣ministration; and had their proper Officers appoint∣ed to that end and purpose. But then it is true withall, that amongst them we meet not these Demarchi of whom Calvin dreams; or any others which stood up in behalf of the common people, but only in behalf of the Common-wealth. Of this sort were the  superadded to the nine Ar∣chontes, and of authority to call them to an after-reckoning, if they found them guilty of extor∣tion Jul. Pollux. l. 8. c. 9. Sect. 16.: and of this sect were also those whom they called Logistae, some of the which ( Id. ibid. Sect. 13., saith mine Author) were purposely ap∣pointed to observe and enquire into the Acts of the Senate, and to proceed against them when their time was out, according as they saw occasion: which kinde of Overseers had an eye also on the Areopagites. And this is that which is observed by Aeschines the famous Orator, where speaking of the Fundamental constitutions of the Common-wealth, he tells us, that it was ordained by the Legislators, Aeschin. in Orat. contra Demsto. & Ctesiphon., that even the Senate of five hundred should give up an accompt of their ministration; and that the holy Councel of the Areopagites should be obnoxious
to the censure of the Logistae, for by that very name he calls them. Of any accompt they were to give to these Demarchi, or any thing they did de facto, or might do de jure, with reference to the ease and benefit of the common people, nothing but silece to be found in all Antiquity. And to say truth, it was not necessary that any popular Ma∣gistrates should be made of purpose, to save the people from the pride and tyrannie of the higher Courts, which were accomptable to the people upon all occasions, and were to be accomptable to them according to the fundamental institution of the Common-wealth. The State of Athens being one of the absolutest Democraties which was ever ex∣tant, and so accounted of by all who write of Po∣liticks, had little need or use of such popular Ma∣gistrates which Calvin fancieth in that place; which may be serviceable to the people in an Aristocratie, but in a popular estate of no use at all. Which makes me wonder by the way, why Plato should affirm a∣gainst right & reason, that the State of Athens in his time and the times before () was an AristocratiePlato in Me∣neximo.: when by the current of all writers and the course of story, it appars most evidently that it was not only a Democratie, but Plutarch. in Cimone., the purest and most unmixt Democratie that was ever read of. (7) Thus have we proved the first of the three points propounded in the beginning of this work, viz. that the Ephori, the Demarchi, and the Ro∣man
Tribunes were not ordained at first for those ends and purposes which are supposed by the Au∣thor: but more particularly, that neither the Epho∣ri of Sparta were first instituted to oppose the Kings, nor the Tribunes first ordained to oppose the Consuls, nor the Demarchi of authority to op∣pose the Senate. And we have proved (which is directly contrary unto Calvins aim) that the Ephori were at first ordained to ease the Kings, and to be aiding to them against the Senate, who began sensi∣bly to incroach on the Regal power: that the Tribunes were first instituted to no other end but to pre∣serve the people from unjust oppression, and that their opposition to the Consuls was accounted al∣wayes to be against the rules of their institution, and a breach of Articles: And as for these De∣marchi whom we spake of last, that neither by their institution nor by usurpation, they did oppose against the Senate in behalf of the people, but ex∣ecuted their commands upon the people, as their duty bound them. So that the great imagination which the Author had of shewing to the world a view of such popular Magistrates, as might in∣courage men of place and eminence to think them∣selves ordained after these examples to moderate their licentiousness of Kings and Princes; is fallen directly to the ground without more ado, as be∣ing built upon a weak, nay a false foundation, not able to support the building. And more then so, in case the instances proposed had been rightly chosen, and that the Ephori in Sparta had been
first ordained to oppose the Kings, the Tribunes to oppose the Consuls, and the Demarchi to keep under the Athenian Senate: yet these would prove but sorry instances of such popular Officers as were ordained ad moderandum Regum libidinem, to mode∣rate the licentiousness of Kings & soveraign Princes, for proof of which they were produced. The Epho∣ri were not instituted in the State of Sparta till the Kings were brought under the command of the Senate, and the State become an Aristocratie, in which the Kings had very little left them of the Royal dignity but the empty name, and were in power no other then the Dukes of Venice; save that they were to have the command of the Ar∣mies, which those Dukes have not. And for the Tribunes, 'tis well known to every one who hath perused the Roman story, that there were no such creatures to be found in Rome, till the Romans had expused their Kings, & were under the command of Cosuls; the Monarchie being changed to an Optima∣tie, and the people bound by solemn oaths never to admit of a King amongst them. The like may be affirmed also of the Demarchi of Athens, suppo∣sing that they were of as great authority, as either the Ephori or the Tribunes; that they were insti∣tuted in a time when the affairs of State were ma∣naged by nine Annual Magistrates, all of them chosen by the people and accomptable to them. In all these cases, um non in regno populus esset sed in libertateLivie his. lib. 2., when the people had sued out their Wardship, and thought themselves to be at
liberty, freed from those bonds which nature and allegiance formerly had laid upon them: they did no more then what a wise and understanding peo∣ple had good cause to do, in taking the best course they could for their future safety. And in my minde the people pleaded most unanswerably in their own behalf, when they alleadged, se foris pro imperio & libertate dimicantes, domi a civibus captos & oppressosId. ibid., that fighting vali∣antly abroad both for their own liberty and their Countries honor, against their Kings, they were oppressed and wronged at home by their fellow Ci∣tizens; that their condition as things stood, was better in times of war, then in times of peace; their liberty never more assured then when they were amongst their Enemies: and therefore being no otherwise bound to submit themselves to that change of Government, then as it had been introduced by their own consent, they had all the reason in the world to get as good terms as they could, and be no losers by the bargain. Which though it were the case and plea particularly of the people of Rome, might be used also very fitly by the Spartans and Athenians on the self same reasons. But this can no way be pretended or alleadged by those, who live in an established and successional Monarchie, where there is one only to command in chief, and nothing left to the SubjectTacit. Annal. praeter obsequii gloriam, but the glory of obedience on∣ly, and the necessity of submitting with a loyal heart to those commands and impositions which
may be aid upon them with an unjust hand. So that admitting it for true (as indeed it is not) that the Ephori, the Demarchi, and the Tribunes were ordained for the ends supposed; yet it can follow by no rules of law or logick, that because such popular Officers have been sometimes instituted to keep the scale upright and the balance even, betwixt the Nobles and the People in an Aristocratie, therefore the like are to be fancied in a setled Monarchie, for moderating the licentiousness, that is to say, (for that no doubt must be his meaning) for regulating the authority of the Soveraign Prince. (8) Thus have we seen a manifest discovery of Calvins purpose for setting up some popular Offi∣cers in every Kingdom to regulate the authority and restrain the power of Soveraign Princes; and we may see a secret and more subtile danger inclu∣ded in that short Parenthesis, then what is obvious at first sight to the unwary Reader. For by the instances proposed and presented to us, it seems to be his meaning, that these popular Officers should not hve power only to restrain their Kings when they transgress the bounds of law or equity, and either tyrannically oppress the Subject, or wilfully dilapidate the patrimony of the Common-wealth: but that they should set themselves against them and control their doings, in the same way & after the same manner, as the Ephori did the Kings of Sparta, or the Tribunes did the Roman Consuls. Now we
have shewn before out of several AuthorsVide chap. 2., that the Ephori did not only take upon them to ap∣point such Privie Counsellors about their Kings as to them seemed best, to limit and prescribe them in the choyce of their wives; to send them out unto the wars and recall them home, as if they had been hirelings only and of no more reckoning; to put them upon fine and ransome, if they did any thing which was not pleasing to these humo∣rous Gentlemen; to have them at command both to come and goe as often as they whistled for them, or held up a finger, and finally to look for lowly reverence from them, whensoever they vouchsafed to summon them to attend their pleasures: but also to imprison; next to banish, and in fine to murder them. And we have shewed you of the TribunesVide chap. 3, that after they had fortified them∣selves with large priviledges, and grew predominant in the affections of the common people; they did not only quarrel and oppose the Consuls under pretence of setting forth new laws for the peoples benefit, nor were content to put the people into the possession of all the offices and honors of the Common-wealth (which formerly belonged to the Nobles only) whether the Consuls would or not: but sometimes clapt them up in prison, and some∣times forced them to flie the Senate-house for their lives and safety, and sometimes threw them down headlong out of their Chairs of State, to the great danger of their lives, and disgrace of their persons. Princes should be in worse condition then their
meanest subjects, if they were under the command of such powerful masters, who being exalted from mean fortunes and ignoble families, little acquainted with good manners, and less with any thing which is brave and royal, would think themselves unwor∣thy of so great an Office, should they not Lord it to the purpose, and exercise all kinde of tyrannie on their captived Kings, which insolence and ma∣lice could suggest unto them. If Jack be once in office he must be a Gentleman; and gallop to the Devil if he get on Horse-back. Asperius nihil est humili cum surgit in altum, as the Poet hath itJuvenal. Si.. If once the bramble come to have Dominion over the trees of the Forrest, he will not only rob the Olive of his fatness, the Vine of his rich Wines, and the Fig-tree of his sweetness, but also will devour the CedarsJudg. c. 9., even the Cedars of Lebanon. No King or other Supreme Magistrate shall dare to stand before them; or if he do, a fire shall come out of the Bramble, and consume him utterly. Such popular Officers as those of whom Calvin speaks, are of such credit and authority with the common people (whose Officers they are in name, but in fact their masters) that if they do but blow the Trum∣pet, and say, We have no part in David, nor no in∣heritance at all in the son of Jesse;2 Sam. 0. every man will unto his tents, and forsake the King or Su∣preme Magistrate to follow after them though men of Belial. And this I do believe the rather to be Calvins meaning, because G. Buchannan who built on his foundation, and pursued is Principles,
doth not only exceedingly commend the act of Theopompus, in setting up the Ephori in the State of Sparta, and the Answer which he made his wife when she murmured at it: but thinks it very meet and reasonable that a free people (as all Subjects are in his opinion) should be armed with the like authority in reprimenda tyrannidis acerbitateDe jure regn apud Scotos., for the suppressing of tyrannical Government (in which themselves must be Judges) which the Ephori enjoyed at Sparta, and the Tribunes in the City of Rome. For though he durst not go so far in ter∣minis, as to advise the instituting of such popular Magistrates as Calvin speaks of in this place; yet he comes very neer it, to a tantamont. For that which Calvin doth ascribe to his popular Magistrates, Buchannan gives to the whole body of the people generally, to whom he doth allow as much au∣thority over the persons of their Kings, Quod illi in singulos è multitndine habentId. ibid., as they have over any one of the common people: and thinks it both unreasonable and absurd that they should not be called to accompt before the ordinary Judges of their several Kingdomes (which must supply the place of these popular Magistrates) as often as any of their subjects shall accuse them, of murder, or adultery, or neglects in government, or whatsoe∣ver else they shall charge them with; instancing in no fewer then twelve Kings of Scotland, who either were condemned to perpetual prison, or else by voluntary death or exile, Justas scele∣rum poenas ugerunt, escaped the punishment which
was most justly due unto them (as he most impu∣dently saith) for their wicked lives. (9) If any ask (as some justly may) what might induce our Author to these different courses, to la so sure a ground-work for obedience in the first part of his discourse, and afterward to build upon it such a superstructure, as absolutely pulls up his own foundation: the answer is, that the man was very much distracted between his reason and his passion, his conscience and his private interess. A∣liud{que} cupido, mens aliud suadet. His reason and his conscience told him, that every subject was to yeeld obedience to the authoritie and commands of the Soveraign Prince; and that if any other doctrine should be plainly preached, it would con∣duce both to the scandal and the hinderance of the Reformation. And his experience in the world could not choose but tell him, that many of the chief Reformers by their heat and violence had given too great advantage to the publick Enemy; and made the Protestant Religion to be much su∣spected, Nil aliud quaerere & captare quam Sediti∣onum opportunitatemCalvin in E∣pistola Dedic. ad Franciscum. l. 1536., for giving too much ground to seditious courses, and publishing some doctrines which were inconsistent with the rules of Government. This made him write so soundly of the Subjects duty even to wicked Princes, and the unlawfulness of resisting in the way of Arms, though open force and violence were offered to them by ungodly Tyrants: and this he doth so
well, that few do it better. Utinam sic semper er∣rasset CALVINUS, as once the learned Cardinal said of him in another case. But then his interess in the cause and quarrel of Geneva, who by the help of some such popular Officers as he speaks of here, had not long before expelled their Bishop, who had also all the jurisdiction of a temporal Prince within the City and the territory which belonged unto it, inclined him to say somewhat which might serve to defend that action, and give the like ad∣vantage unto other Cities to follow the example which was laid before them. The case is briefly touched by Thuanus thus;Thuan. Hist. sui temp. l. Jus Supremi Do∣minii in Civitatem Genevae Episcopos semper penes se retinuisse, donec mutata religione, Syndici qui sub Episcopali autoritate libertatem antea tuebantur, illud proprium sibi fecere, & ejectis Episcopis sub imperii patrocinio Rempub. administrabant. The Soveraigntie (saith he) or Supreme Dominion over the City of Geneva the Bishops still kept unto them∣selves, till in the alteration of Religion the Syn∣diks, who before preserved the libertie of the people under the government of the Bishops, assumed the same unto themselves, and absolutely casting out the Bishops governed it like a Commonwealth under the patronage or protection of the German Em∣perours. In which it is first clear on the Bishops side, that they had jus Supremi Dominii, the Sove∣raigntie or Supreme Dominion of the City. And so much is affirmed by Calvin, in another place, Habebat jus gladii & alias civilis juridictionis
Calvin in Epi∣stola ad Sadole∣tum.partes He had, saith he, the power of the Sword, and other parts of temporal jurisdiction; but as he thinks (but foolishly and against all records) Ma∣gistrati erptas, either by fraud or force extorted from the Civil Magistrate. Next it is clear, that the Bishops did continue the possession of this Su∣preme Power, till Viret and Farellus, two zealous Gospellers, came to live amongst them; who find∣ing that those of Berne in the year 1528. had made an aleration of Religion, practised the like upon the City of Geneva. Which not being likely to effect with the Bishops leave, and as little able to effect against his liking, considering the great power and sway, which legally and properly was inhe∣rent in him: they set the Syndicks (whom they had wrought upon before) to make head against him; who by a popular tumult made him fle the City, which presently they changed to a Com∣mon-wealth, after the manner of the Free or Im∣perial Cities. In which respect Calvin bestows upon Farellus the title of libertatis PatremIn Epistola ad Minist. Tigurin. 1553., the Father of that common libertie, which by his means the people of Geneva at that time enjoyed. As for the Syndicks by whose power and countenance they advanced the business, they were a kinde of popular Officer, who had the care of looking to the conservation of the peoples liberties, as Thuanus intimates; and were much used in many parts of France and Italy, as Bodinus tells usBodin de Re∣pub. lib. . c. .. Their Of∣fice did consist of two special points: the one a Magistratibus rationem reposcere, to call the ordinary
Magistrates to an after reckoning,Id. ibid. if they did any thing unworthy of their place and dignitie, or to the hinderance and disservice of the Common-wealth; which had somewhat in it of the Ephori in the State of Sparta: the other was, prospicere ne tenuiores & infimae sortis homines a nobilibus, uti fit, premerentur, to have a care that the poor people be not wronged or injured (as many times it hapneth) by the power of the Nobles; which was the main reason for the institution of the Roman Tribunes. In this regard the Civil laws interpret Syndicu to be the same with defensor CivitatisCalvin in Le∣ico Jurid. verbo Syndicus., the Conservator of the liberties of a Town or City, as full well they might: the Office being made up (as it seems it was) of that of the Ephori and the Tribunes mixt together. Now though this change was made before Calvins coming to Ge∣neva, which was not till the year 1535, yet he affirms it of himself that whatsoever had been done in the alteration, suffragio meo comprobaviCalvin in E∣pistola ad Car∣dinal. Sadolet., he had confirmed and approved as a thing well done: and therefore thought himself to be no less obliged to defend the action, then if it had been done at first by his own command. For doubtless that of Tully is exceeding true, Nil refert utrum voluerim fieri vel gaudeam factumCicero in Phi∣lip. 2.: between the doing of a foul and dsloyal act, and the approbation of it when it is done, is but little difference. (10) But to proceed; our Author being thus made a party in the cause and quarrel of Geneva,
thought himself bound not only to justifie unto others what himself approved; but also to lay down such grounds whereby the example might be fol∣lowed, and their disloaltie and rebellion the less observed, because they did not goe alone without company. In which respect (and 'tis a thing to be observed) although that Book of Institutions hath been often printed, and received many alterations and additions (as before was noted) yet this parti∣cular passage still remains unalered, and hath con∣tinued as it is from the first Edition, which was in the year 1536. when the rebellion of Geneva was yet fresh and talked of as an ill example. Nor was the man deceived in his expectation; For as he grew into esteem and reputation in the world abroad, so he attained at last to that power and empire over the souls and consciences of his followers, that his errors were accounted Orthodox, his defects perfections, and the revolt of the Gene∣vians from rheir natural Prince must by no means be called Rebellion, because projected and pursued by such popular Officers, to whom it appertained of common course to regulate the authoritie of Kings and Princes. And though he doth not say ex∣pressly that there either are or ought to be such popular Officers in every Realm or Common-wealth, but brings it in upon the by with his ifs and ands: yet ifs and ands are not allowed of in the laws to excuse rebellionsBacons history of King Henry the seventh., and by the setting up of that dangerous Si quis (si qui sint populares Magistra∣tus, as his words there are) he seems to make a
Proclamation that where there were such popular Officers, it was their bounden duty to correct their Princes after the manner of Geneva; where there were none, the people were (God help them) in an ill condition, unless some other means were thought of, for their ease and remedie. Upon which Principles of his, his followers raised such Positions, and pursued such practises as have di∣stracted and embroyled the most parts of Europe, and made it of a Garden to become a Wilderness. For finding that they could not easily create such Popular Magistrates to lord it over Kings and Princes who had not been accustomed to the like controlments; they put that power of regulating the Supreme Authoritie either upon the body of the people generally, whereof you were told be∣fore from Buchannan, or upon such to whom they should communicate or transfer their power, as occasion served, whereof you may hear further in that which followeth. And that not only in the case of civil libertie, for which the examples of the Ephori and the Roman Tribunes were at first found out, and that of the Demarchi thrust upon the Readers for the like foul end; but specially in such matters which concerned Religi∣on, wherein the extraordinary calling of some men in the holy Scriptures must serve for Pre∣cedents and examples to confirm their practises. From hence it was that Buchannan doth not only subject his King unto the Ordinary Judges and Courts of Justice as before was noted: but fearing
that Kings would be too potent to be so kept un∣der, adviseth this, Eorum interfectoribus praemia decerniBuchann. de jure Regni., that rewards should publickly be decreed for those who kill a Tyrant (and Kings and Ty∣rants are the same as heretofore in the word and notion, so now in the opinion of the Presbyterian or Calvinian faction) as usually are proposed to those who kill Wolves, or Bears. From hence it was that the inferiour or Subordinate Magistrate is ad∣vanced so high, as to be entituled to a power, ad∣versus Superiorem Magistratum se, Rempub. & Ec∣clesiam etiam armis defendereParaeus in Epistola ad Rom. cap. 13., of taking Arms against the King or superiour Magistrate, in de∣fence of himself, his Countrey and true Religion: which though they are the words of Paraeus only, yet they contain the minde and meaning of all the rest of that faction, as his son Philip doth de∣monstrate In Append. ad Cap. 13. E∣pist. ad Rom.. Hence was it that John Knox, de∣livered for sound Orthodox doctrine, Procerum esse propria autoritte Idololatrian tollere, & Prin∣cipes intra legum rescripta per vim reducereCamden. An∣nal. Eliz. An. 1559., that it belonged unto the Peers of each several Kingdom to reform matters of the Church by their own authoritie, and to confine their Kings and Princes within the bounds prescribed by law, even by force of Arms. Hence that Geselius one of the Lecturers of Roterdam preached unto his people, that if the Magistrates and Clergie did neglect their duty in the reformation of Religion, necesse est id facere plbeios, that then it did belong to the Common peopleNecessaria Respons., who were bound to have a
care thereof and proceed accordingly. And as for points of practise, should we look that way, what a confusion should we finde in most parts of Europe, occasioned by no other ground then the enter∣tainment of these principles and the scattering of these positions amongst the people? Witness the Civil wars of FranceJean de Serres inventaire de Fr., the revolt of HollandHistory of the Nether∣lands., the expulsion of the Earl of East-Friezland out the City of EmbdenThuan hst. l. 114., the insurrections of the ScotsCamden. An∣nal. An. 1559., the tumults of BohemiaLaurca Au∣striaca., the commoti∣ons of BrandenbourgContinuati. Thuan. hist l. 8., the translation of the Crown of Sweden from the King of Pole to Charles Duke of FinlandThuan. hist. l. 8. the change of Go∣vernment in England: all acted by the Presby∣terian or Calvinian partie in those several States, under pretence of Reformation and redress of grievances. (11) And to say truth, such is the Genius of the sect, that though they may admit an equal (as paritie is the thing most aimed at by them both in Church and State) yet they will hardly be perswaded to submit themselves to a Superiour; to no Superiours more unwillingly then to Kings and Princes: whose persons they disgrace, whose power they ruinate, whose calling they indevour to decry and blemish by all means imaginable. First for their calling, they say it is no other then an humane Ordinance, and that the King is but a creature of the peoples making; whom ha∣ving made, they may as easily destroy and un∣make
make again. Which as it is the darling doctrine of this present time, so is it very eagerly pursued by Buchannan, who affirms expressly, Quicquid juris populus alicui dederit, idem justis de causis posse reposcereBuchann. de ure Regni., that whatsoever power the peo∣ple give unto their King or Supreme Magistrate, they may resume again upon just occasions. Their power they make so small and inconsiderable, that they afford them very little even in matters tempo∣ral, and no authoritie at all in things spiritual. CALVIN professeth for himself, that he was very much agrieved to hear that King Henry the eight, had took unto himself the title of Supreme Head of the Church of England, accuseth them of incon∣siderate zeal, nay blasphemie, who conferred it on him; and though he be content at last to allow Kings a Ministerial power in matters which concern the Reformation of Gods Publick Worship, yet he condemns them as before of great inconsiderate∣ness, Qui facerent eos nimis spiritualesCalvin in A∣mos cap. 7., who did ascribe unto them any great authoritie in spiritual matters. The designation of all those who bear publick office in the Church, the calling of Coun∣cels or Assemblies, the Presidencie in those Councels, ordaining publick Fasts, and appointing Festivals, which anciently belonged unto Christian Princes as the chief branches of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction which is vested in them; are utterly denied to Kings and Princes in their Books of Discipline. In so much that when the Citizens of Embden did expel their Earl, they did it chiefly for this reason,
Quod se negotiis Ecclesiasticis & Consistorialibus praeter jus & aequitatem immisceretThuan. hist. l. 114., that he had intermedled more then they thought fit in Ecclesi∣astical causes, and intrenched too much upon their Consistorie. As for their power in temporal or civil causes, by that time Knoxes Peers and Bu∣channans Judges, Paraeus his inferior Magistrates, and CALVINS popular Officers have performed their parts, in keeping them within the compass of the laws; arraigning them for their offences, if they should transgress; opposing them by force of arms, if any thing be done unto the prejudice of the Church or State; and finally in regulating their authoritie, after the manner of the Spartan Ephori, and the Roman Tribunes: all that is left will be by much too little for a Roy d' Ivitot, or for a King of Clouts, as we English phrase it. Last of all, for their persons which God held so sacred, that he gave it for a law to his people Israel, not to speak evill of their Princes, saying, Thou shalt not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people; Let us but look upon these men, and we shall finde the basest attributes too, good for the greatest Kings. Calvin calls Mary Queen of England by the name of ProserpineCalvin in A∣mos cap. 7., and saith that she did superare omnes Diabolos, that all the Devils of hell were not half so mischeivous. Beza affords Queen Mary of Scotland no better titles then those of Medea and AthaliahBeza in E∣pist. ad Jo.; of which the last was most infamous in divine; the other no less scandalous in humane stories; the one a Sorceress and a Witch, the other a Tyrant and usurper. The
Author of the Altare Damascenum, whosoever he was, can fine no better a tribute for King James of most blessed memorie, then infensissimus Evan∣gelii hostisDidoclavius in Epistola ad Lctor., the greatest and deadly enemie of the Gospel of Christ. And Queen Elizabeth her self did not scape so clear, but that the zealous Bre∣thren were too bold sometimes with her name and honor, though some of them paid dearly for it, and were hanged for their labour. How that seditious Hugonot, the Author of the lewd and unworthy Dialogue, entituled Eusebius Philadelphus, hath dealt with three great Princes of the House of France, and what reproachful names he gives them, I had rather you should look for in the Author then ex∣pect from me; being loath to wade too far in these dirtie pudoles; save that I shall be bold to adde this general Character which Didoclavius gives to all Kings in general; viz. Naturâ insitum est in mnibus Regibus Christi odium, that all Kings natu∣rally hate Christ; which may serve for all. This is enough to let us see, how irreconcileable an hatred▪ these of the Calvinian faction bear against Kings and Princes; how well they play the part of the very Antichrist in exalting themselves against whatsoever is called God; and that the special reason why they affect so much to be called the Saints, is out of a strong probable hope to see the day in which they shall binde Kings in chains, and all the Princes of the earth in fetters of iron. Finally such is their disaffection unto sacred Monarchie, which they have sucked out of the grounds and principles here
laid down by Calvin, that we may justly say of them what was most truly said of the ancient Ro∣mans, quasi nefas esset Regem aliquem prope eorum terminos esseJustin. hist. l. 29., they have bestirred themselves so bravely in defiance of the Regal Government, as if they did account it an unpardonable sin to suffer any King, though most good and gracious, to border near them. Which lest they should not be of power to compass by their popular Magistrates, or by the Judges, or the Peers, or the People severally; which make the main Battel for this combat: let us next look on the Reserve, and see what hopes they have to effect the business by the three Estates conjoyned in Parliament, (or by what other name soever we shall call their meeting) which CALVIN in the last place doth reflect upon, but cautiously with a qua forte, or a peradventure, as in that before.
CHAP. V. What are the three Estates in each severall Kingdome, of which CALVIN speaks, and what particularly in the Realm of ENG∣LAND. (I) Of the division of a People into three Estates; and that the Priests or Clergie have been alwaies one. (II) The Priests employed in Civill matters and affairs of State, by the Egyptians and the Persians, the Greeks, Gaules, and Ro∣mans. (III) The Priests and Levites exercised in af∣affairs of Civill Government by Gods own ap∣pointment. (IV) The Prelates versed in Civill matters and fairs of State, in the best and happiest times of Christianity. (V) The Clergie make the third Estate in Germany, France, Spain, and the Northern Kingdomes. (VI) That anciently in the Saxon times the Ecclesiasticks of this Realm were called to all publick Councels.
(VII) The Prelates an essential fundamental part of the English Parliament. (VIII) Objections answered, and that the word Clerus in the Legal notion, doth not extend unto the Prelates. (IX) That the inferior Clergie of the Realm of England had anciently their votes in Par∣liament, to all intents and purposes as the Com∣mons had. (X) Objections answered; and that the calling of the Clergie to Parliaments and Convocati∣ons, were after different manners, and by seve∣ral writs. (XI) The great disfranchisement and slavery obtruded on the English Clergie, by the Idepri∣ving of the Bishops of their Votes in Parlia∣ment. (XII) A brief discussion of the question, whe∣ther any two of the three Estates conspiring or agreeing together, can conclude any thing unto the prejudice of the third. BUt first before we fall on the point it self, and search into the power ascribed by Cal∣vin to the three Estates of every Kingdome, we must first see what kinde of men they are, and of what condition, who constitute the said Estates: which being fist setled and determined, we shall the better be inabled to proceed accordingly in the inquiry after that authority which our Author
gives them of regulating the proceedings of the soveraign Prince, and putting a restraint on the exorbitant power of Kings. In which we shall presume for granted what our Author gives us, viz. tres Ordines in singulis Regnis, that in each several Kingdome there are three Estates; and those three we shall prove to be (though our Author is no otherwise to be understood) the Clergy, the Nobility, and the Common people: which distribution of the Subject into three Estates as 'tis very ancient, so was the distribution of them into three, neither more nor less, founded on good prudential motives and grounds of Polity. For as judicious Bodin very well observeth, should there be only two Estates, and no more then so, either upon such differences as might rise between them the one side would be apt to compell the other by force of violence; or else, aequatis Ordinum suffragiisBodin de Repub. l. 3. cap. ut., the ballance being even between them, their meetings would be many times dissolved without producing any notable effect to the bene∣fit of the Common-wealth. In which respect the counterpoise or addition of a third Estae was ex∣ceeding necessary, ut alterutri sese adjungens u∣trum{que} conciliet, that joyning unto either of the other two, it might unite them both into one opinion, and advance the service of the publick. And on the other side were there more then three, opinionum multitudo, the difference of opinions, and pretence of interesses, would keep them at perpetual distance, and hinder them from pitching
upon any point, in which all their purposes and aims were to be concentred. So that the casting of the body of a people into three Estates, seems most convenient for the furtherance of the pub∣lick service: and of those three three Estates the Priests (or Clergy, as we call them since the times of CHRIST) have generally been accounted one. For though Hippodamus (whom Aristotle justly taxeth for defectsAristot. Po∣litic. l. in Politic) ordained his three Estates to be the Souldiery, the Handicrafts∣man, and the Husbandman: yet wiser Statists saw no reason that the two last should passe for severall estates or ranks of men, being that both might be more fitly comprehended under the name and rank of the common people. And therefore the Egyptians did divide the people into these three ranks, the Priest, which is respondent to the Christian Clergy; the Souldier, who carrieth most resemblance to the State of Nebles; and those which lived by trades and labours, whom by one generall name they called OperariiDiodor. Sicu∣lus., as we now the Commons: which cours we finde to be ob∣served also by the ancient Gaules dividing their whole body into these three orders,Caesar. de Bel o Gallico. l. 6. the Drui∣des, who had the charge of matters which con∣cerned Religion; the Equites who managed the affairs of war; and then the Plebs, or common peo∣ple, who were subordinate to the other two, and directed by them. How this division hath succee∣ded in the States of Christendom we shall see here∣after.
(2) In the mean time we may take notice that the Priests of Egypt, the Druides of Gaul, and those who had the ordering of those services which concerned the gods, by whatsoever name or title they were known and called in other Countreys, were not so tied unto the Altars, and other ministerial Offices which concerned the gods, as not to have some special influence in or∣dering the affairs of the Common-wealth. The Priests of Egypt, as we read in Aelian (an Au∣thor of unquestioned credit) possessed the highest seats of judicature, and were the only Judges which that people had: Judices apud Egyptios iidem qundam fuerunt qui & sacerdotes,Aelian in Va∣ria histor. l. 14. c. 34. as that Author hath it. And so much is assured us by Synesius also a Christian Bishop of the EastSynsius Ep. 57., where he resembleth them in this particular to the Priests of Judah. The like we finde in Aga∣thias of the Priests of Persia, men better known in ancient Writers by the name of Magi: of whom he telleth us, eorum consilio publica omnia administrari, &c.Agathias in hist. Perfic. l. 2. that by their counsell and advice the principal affairs of the State were or∣dered, rewards proportioned and conferred upon well-deservers, and several punishments inflicted on the Malefactors, according to the quality of the misdemeanor; and finally that nothing was conceived to be rightly done, quod Magorum sen∣tentia non sit confirmatum, which had not passed the approbation of these Priests or Magi. If we
draw nearer towards the West, and look into the Government of the State of Athens, we shall finde the chief authority thereof to consist in the Se∣nate of 500, and in the famous Court of the Areopagites, as was noed in the ormer Chap∣ter: in which the Priests, or at the least the pricipal of that rank or order had both place and suffrage. For in that honourry Edict which they made in favour of Hyrcanus, we may clearly see that Dionysius the son of Asclepiades was one of the Priests, and also one of the PrytanaeiJoseph. Ju∣daic. Antiqu. l. 14. c. 16., or Presidents of the Councell, as we call them now; and that in calculating of the voices, , Dorotheus the chief Priest had the greatest stroke, and pronounced the Edict to be passed. And for the Court of Areopagites, it consisted as before we told you of such and such alone as formerly had bore the Office of the nine Annual Magistrates, whereof the , or Rex Sacrorum, (whom we may English the chief Bi∣shop) had the second placeSuidas in verbo .. And this appears yet further by a passage in the life of Pericles, where we are told of his design for the abasing of the power of the Areopagites, Plutarch in Pericle., of which Court he was not any Member, as the Author tels us, in that he had never borne the Office either of the Provost, or the King, or the Polemarchus, or any of the six chief Justices. So that the , the Rex Sacrorum, or chief Bi∣shop being of course to be admitted into the Court or Councel of the Areopagites when his
year was ended, it cannot be, but that there must be many of them in that famous Session; an equall number at the least, with those who had been Polemarchi, or the yearly . Add here, that we are told by Julius Pollux in his OnomasticonLib 8. cap. 8. sect. 3., that it pertained to this , or Rex Sacrorum, besides the service of the Gods, , to endite those before the Court who were guilty of murther; but then withall, that having put in the enditement, and laid by his Crown, , he sate upon the Bench with the other Judges and passed sentence on them. Thus was it with the Druides or the Priests of Gallia, who did not only take the charge of all sacred matters which did relate unto the ser∣vice of the gods, but de omnibus fere controver∣siis publicis privatis{que}Caesar de Bello Gallico l. 6., they did determine in almost all suits and controversies, as well publick as private; particularly in matters of inheritance, reall actions, capitall crimes, as murther and the like offences; and also had a power to decree both rewards and punishments as they saw occasion. And for the better dispatch of business both for their own ease and the peoples too, they chose some certain times or Terms in which they met together not far from Chartres (being in the mid∣dle of the Countrey) whither all sorts of people who had suits and differences did repair unto them, eorum{que} judiciis & decretis parebant, and to their Judgements and Decrees did submit themselves. And thus it also was with the Ptifices or Priests
of Rome who had not only a chief place in the holy Mysteries, such as concerned the publick wor∣ship of their gods; but also a great power and sway, in the greatest and most important businesses which concerned the State: which Tully makes one of those Constitutions or Arts of Govern∣ment, which seemed to have been devised by the gods themselves.Cicero in O∣rat. pro Domo ua. Cum multa divinitus a ma∣joribus nostris inventa at{que} instituta sunt, tum ni∣hil praeclarius quam quod Pontifices cosdem & Re∣ligionibus Deorum immortalium & summae reipub. praesse voluerunt. And as the principal Priests in Athens had their place and Vote not only in the Court of Areopagites, but in the Senate of five hundred as before was noted: so some of the more eminent sort of Priests had the like pre∣heminence, of sitting and voting in the Roman Senate, which was as high an honour as that State could give them. For besides that Rosinus hath observed that some of the Priess were chosen out of the number of the SenatorsRosin. An∣tiqu. Rom., who doubtless did not lose the right of suffrage which before they had; there is a memorable case in Livie touching C. Flaccus: who was no sooner chosen the Flamen Dialis, or Piest of Jupiter, but presnt∣ly he put in his title to a place in Senate, which anciently belonged unto his predecessors in the right of their Office, though of late years it seemed to have been foreited by discontinuance, The issue of which plea was this, that though Li∣cinius the Pretor did the best he could to crosse
the business, alleadging, Non exoletis vetustate Annalium exemplis stare jusLivie hist. Rom. lib. 26., that they were not to be guided in the case by worm eaten Precedents, but by the late practise of the Stae; yet it was otherwise determined by the Fathers generally, and Flaccus setled in his place in the Roman▪ Senate, Magno assensu Patrum Plebis{que} with the joynt con∣sent of all the people. But what need these par∣ticulars have been brought to confirm this point, when as it affirmed in generals by Synesius, a right godly Bishop of the Primitive times? Synes. Epist. 57., that in old times the same men were both Priests and Judges. Which said, he instanceth in the particulars of the Jews and Egyptians who for long time , had been chiefly governed by their Priests. (3) This brings me on to the power and pra∣ctise of the Priests in the land of Judah, who from the very first beginning of that State and Nation to the final dissolution of it, were of great au∣thoritie; not only in composing of inferiour dif∣erences which casually did arise amongst the people, but in the managerie of the chief affairs both of State and Government: and that not gained by connivence of Princes, or by entrench∣ing on the rights of the secular powers, but by the institution and appointment of the Lord him∣self. When Moses first complained that the sole Government of the people was a burden too heavie
for him to bear, it pleased God to appoint a standing Consistory ofNumb. 11. v. 16. Seventie Elders, men of abilitie and wisdom, who were to have a share in the publick Government, and to decide amongst themselves such weightie businesses, great mat∣ters Exod. 18. v. 22., as the Scripture calls them, which were reserved to Moses by a former Ordinance. Of these, the Priests, as men who for the most part were at better leisure then the rest to attend the service, and generally of more abilities to goe through with it, made alwayes a considerable number, and many times the major part. In which respect it was ordained by the Lord, when a matter did arise to be scanned in judgement between bloud and bloud, between plea and plea, and stroke and stroke, being matters of controver∣sie within their gates, the people should arise and goe unto the place which the Lord should choose, and come unto the Priests, the Levites, and unto the Judge that shall be in those days, and enquire and they shall shew them the sentence of judge∣ment Deut. c. 17. v. 8, 9.. The like is also ordered in the case of false witesses, where it is said, that If a false witness rise up against any man to testifie against him that which is wrong; then both the men between whom the controversie is shall stand before the LORD, before the Priests and Judges which shall be in those dayesDeut. 19. v. 17.. Which passages are not under∣stood of any particular Priests or Judges, dis∣persed in their several dwellings up and down the Countrey; but of the Priests and other Judges
united and assembled in that famous Consistorie of the 70 Elders, conveened together in that place which the Lord should choose; called by the Jews the Sanhedrim, by the Greeks , and was the great Councel of estate for the Jewish Na∣tion. To this Josephus doth attest, where he in∣formeth us Joseph. adv. Appon. lib. 2., that the Priests of Jewrie had the cognzarce of all doubtful matters; more plainly Philo, who knew well the customs of his native Countrey, where he affirms expressly and in termi∣nis; Philo de vita Mesis., that the Priests had place and suffrage in this great , or Court of Sanhedrim. And this is that which Casaubon doth also tell us from the most learned and ex∣pert of the Jewish Rabbins, Non nisi nobilissimos e sacerdotibus, Levitis, caetero{que} populo, & in lege peritissimos in Sanhedrim eligiCasaub Ex∣ercit. in Baron. 1. Sect 3., that is to say, that none but the most eminent of the Priests, the Levites and the rest of the people, and such as were most conversant in the Book of the Law, were to be chosen into the Sanhedrim. But to return again to the Book of God, the power and reputation of this Court and Consistorie having been much diminished in the times of the Kings of Judah, was again revived by Jehosophat. Of whom we read, that he not only did appoint Judges in the lad throughout all the fenced Cities of IVDAH2 Chron. 19. 5.: but that he established at HIERVSALEM a stand∣ing Councel, consisting of the Levites and of the Priests, and of the chief of the Fathers of ISRAEL,
for the judgements of the Lord and for controver∣sies Ibid. r. 8.: according to the model formerly laid by God himself in the Book of Deuteronomie. Which Court or Councel thus revived continued in full force, au∣thoritie and power, during the time of the cap∣tivitie of Babylon; as appears plainly by that passage in the prophesie of Ezekiel, where it is said of the Priests even by God himself, in con∣troversie they shall stand in judgementEzeck▪ 44. v▪ 24.; com∣pared with another place of the same Prophet, where he makes mention of the Seventie, of the Antients of the house of ISRAELId. c. 8. v. 11., and Jaaza∣niah the son of Shaphan standing in the midst, as Prince of the Senate. And after their return from that house of bondage, they were confirmed in this authoritie by the Edict and Decree of Artaxerxes, who gave Commission unto EZRA to set Magistrates and JudgesEzra c. 7. . 25. over the people; not after a new way of his own devising, but after the wisdom of his GodEzra c. 7. . 25., declared in the foregoing Ages by his servant Moses. In which estate they stood all the times succeeding, until the final dissolution of that State and Nation: with this addition to the power of the holy Priesthood, that they had not only all that while their place and suffrage in the Court of Sanhe∣drim, as will appear to any one who hath either read Josephus or the four Evangelists; but for a great part of that time, till the reign of Herod, the Supreme Government of the State was in the hands of the Priests. In which regard, be∣sides
what was affirmed from Synesius formerly, it is said by Justin, Morem esse apud Judaeos ut eosdem Reges & sacerdotes haberent, that it was the custom of the Jews for the same men to be Kings and PriestsJustin. hist. l. 36.: and Tacitus gives this ge∣neral note, Judaeis Sacerdotii honorem firmamen∣tum potentiae esse, that the honour given unto the Priesthood amongst the Jews, did most especially conduce to the establishment of their power and EmpireTacit. hist. l 3.. And yet I cannot yeeld to Baronius neither, where he affirms (the better to establish a Supremacie in the Popes of Rome) Summum Pont. arbitrio suo moderari magnum illud Concili∣m, &c.Baron. Annal. n. 57., that the high Priest was alwayes President of the Councel or Court of Sanhedrim: it being generally declared in the Jewish Writers, that the High Priest could challenge no place at all therein, in regard of his office and descent, but meerly in respect of such personal abilities as made himself to undergo such a weightie burden; for which see Phagius in his notes on the 16. of Deuteronomie. (4) Thus have we seen of what authoritie and power the Priests were formerly as well amongst the Jews as amongst the Gentiles; we must next see whether they have not been employed in the like affairs, under the Gospel of Christ, and that too in the best and happiest times of the Christian Church. In search whereof it is not to be looked for by the ingenuous Reader, that we should aim
fo high as the first 300 years after Christs Na∣tivitie. The Prelates of the Church were suspected then to have their different aims and interesses, from those who had the government of the Civil State, and therefore thought uncapable of trust and im∣ployment in it. But after that, according to that memorable maxime of Optatus, Ecclesia erat in Re∣publicâ Deschismat. Denst. l 3., the Church became a part of the Com∣monwealth, and had their ends and aims united; there followed these two things upon it: first that the Supreme Government of the Church depended much upon the will and pleasure of the Supreme Magistrate, insomuch as Socrates observeth, Socrat. Eccl. hist. lib. 5. c. 1., that the great∣est Councels have been called by their authoritie and appointment; And 2ly, that the Governours and Rulers of the Church of God, came to have place and power in disposing matters that apper∣tained to the well ordering of the Civil State. And this they did, not out of any busie or pragmati∣cal desire to draw the cognizance of secular causes into their own hands, or to increase their power and reputation with the common people: but meerly for the ease and benefit of those who did repair unto them for their help and counsel, and to comply with the command of the Apostle, who imposed it on them. S. Austin tells us of S. Ambrose with how great difficultie he obtained an opportunitie of conversing with him privately, and at large, as his case required: Secludentibus um ab ejus aure at{que} ore catervis negociosorum ho∣minum,
the multitude of those who had busi∣ness to him,August. Confes. l. 6. c. 3. and suits to be determined. by him, debarring him from all advantages of ac∣cess and conference. Which took up so much of his time, that he had little leasure to refresh his body with necessary food, or his minde with the reading of good Authors. And Posidonius tels us of S. Austin, causas audisse diligenter & piè, that he diligently and religiously attended such businesses as were brought before him, not only spending all the morning in that trouble∣some exercisePosidon. in vita August. c. 19., but sometimes fasting all day long, the better to content the suitor, and dis∣patch the business. The like S. Austin tells us of himself, and his fellow Prelates, first that the Christians of those times pro secularibus causis suis nos non raro quaererentAugust. in Psalm. 1: 8. serm. 74 & Epist. 147., did ordi∣narily apply themselves unto them for the de∣terming of secular causes, and cheerfully submit∣ted unto their decisions: next that the Prelates did comply with their earnest solicitations and desires, therein Tu multuosissimas causarum alie∣narum perplexitates patiendoId. de opee Monach c. 29., by intermitting their own studies to ingage themselves in the determining of such secular causes as were brought before them, for the contentation of the people, and the discharge of their own duty both to God and man. And this is that which both S. Ambrose and S. Augustine tell us in their several writings, viz. that they did undergoe
this trouble for no other reason then out of a conformitie and obedience to the words and intimation of S. Paul, 1 Cor. cap. 6. touching the ending of such suits and differences as did arise amongst the Faithful: S. Austin saying, Constituisse Apostolum talibus causis Ecclesiasticos cognitoresId. in Psal. 118. serm. 174., and iisdem molestiis eos affixisse Apostolos;Id. de opere Monach. 29. S. Ambrose, that he had undertook the businesses which were brought before him, Secundum sacrae formam praeceptionis qua eum Apostolus induebatAmb. Epist. 24., which did impose such a necessitie upon him, that he was not able to decline it. Both of them doe agree, in this, and Posidonius doth agree with both in the same particularPosidon. in vi∣ta August. c. 19., that they were not only war∣ranted, but obliged by S. Pauls injunction, to undertake the cognizance of such secular causes as were from time to time committed to their care and trust; and that they had not done their dutie, had they made any scruple of the undertaking. But these being only private mat∣ters, let us next see, whether their service was not used in affairs of State, and we shall finde that Constantine did always take some Bishops with him when he went to war; not only for their ghostly counsel in spiritual matters, but for advise in matters which concerned the oc∣casion Euseb. in vita Constant. l. 4. c. 54., the prosecution of the war which was then in hand: that Ambrose was twice sent Ambassadour from Valentinian the younger to
the Tyrant Maximus, which he performed to the great contentment of his Prince, and the preservation of the EmpireAmb. Epist. 27. lib. 5.; whereof he gives us an accompt in an express unto the Empe∣rour: that when Firmus had rebelled in Africk, and saw himself too weak to resist the Forces which were raised against him under Theodosius, Antistites ritus Christiani pacem oraturos misitAmmian. Mar∣cel. hist. l. 29., he sent the African Prelates his Ambassadours to treat of peace: that Marutha Bishop of Mesopotamia was in like nature sent to the Court of PersiaSocrat. Eccles. hist. l. 7. c. 8., in the time of the Empe∣rour Honorius. I. as after that Epiphanius Bi∣shop of Ticinum (which we now call Pavie) employed from the Ligurians to Athalaricus King of the Gothes in Italy, from him unto the Court of Burgundie, as Cassiodorus and Ennodius doe describe at large: that James the godly Bishop of Nisibis, (a frontier Town against the Persians) was also , both Governour of the place, and Captain of the Souldiers which were there in GarrisonTheodoret. hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 30.; and did most manfully defend it, against all the force and fury of the Persian Armies, An. 338. or thereabouts: and finally (which was an argument of great power and trust) that the Bishops in Justinians time were by him ap∣pointed to oversee the Civil Magistrates, and to give notice to the Emperour if they failed in any thing which did concern the Government
o the Estate in their several places; of which the very Edicts are still extant in the Book of NovelsNovel. 56. & in Append. ad Novel. 8.. (5) The Prelates being grown into this esteem for their integritie and wisdom, with the Roman Emperours; it is no wonder if they were imployed in the greatest Offices of trust and counsel, after the Empire was dismembred and shared betwixt such several Princes as grew up in the place of those mighty Monarchs: And this they did on so good motives, and with such success, that in short time the Prelates were not only used for advice and counsel, but the inferiour Clergie also were called unto imploy∣ments of the highest nature, and in conclusion with the Prelates made up the third Estate in most Christian Kingdomes. For being that the study of Divinitie is diffused and large, and that the knowledge of Philosophie and the Arts and Histories, is but attendant on the same and subservient to it; there was no question made at all in the times we speak of, but that a Church-man so accomplished might be as useful in the service of the Common-wealth, as those who wanted many opportunities to be so versed in Books the best guides to business: espe∣cially when to those helps in point of learning, were joyned a suddenness of apprehension, a perspicacity of judgement, and which swayed
most of all integritie of life and conversati∣on. These when they met together (as they often did) in men admitted by the Church unto holy Orders, it was not either thought or found (and indeed how could it?) that their admittance into Orders did take off from any of those natural or acquired indowments of which before they were possessed, or that it was a disabling to them to make use thereof, in any matter of debate or action which concerned the publick. And that it hath been so of old in all Christian Kingdomes, besides that it is intimated by our Author here, we shall clear∣ly see by looking over such particulars as have most influence and power in the affairs of Chri∣stendom. And first beginning (as of right) with the German Empire, Thuanus gives this note in generalAugust. Thu∣an. hist. lib. 2., Imperium in tria omnino membra dividi, that that Empire is divided into three Estates, over all which the Emperour is the head or the Supreme Prince. Of these the fist Estate is ex sacro Ordine, of the holy Hierarchie, composed of the three spiritual Electors, together with the residue of the Archbishops and Bishops, and many Abbots, Priors, and other Prelates. The second is of the Nobilitie consisting of the three temporal Electors, the Dukes, Marquesses, Lantgraves, Burgraves, Earls and Barons, of which there
is no determinate number; the Emperour having power to adde dayly to them, as he sees occasion. Te third Estate is of the free or Imperial Cities, in number 60. or thereabouts, who represent themselves at the General Diets, by such Commissioners or De∣puties as are authorized to that purpose. Now for these Diets, (for by that name they call their Conventus Ordinum, or Assembly of the three Estates) they are summoned at the will and pleasure of the Emperour only, and at such place and time as to him seems meet∣est Id. ibid.. Where being met, (as all the three E∣states must meet either in person or by their Ambassadours) they use to treat of Peace, and War, of raising Subsidies and Taxes to sup∣port the State, of leagues and conederacies, of raising and decrying moneys, of making, abrogating, and expounding laws, and of such other points and matters as do pertain unto the honour of the Empire and the pub∣lick sasti. Nor is this any new authoritie which the Ecclesiastical Estate hath gained in the latter times; but such wherein they were intrusted rom the first beginning of that Empire: It being affimed by Aventi∣nus (a Writer of unquestioned credit) that long before the institution of the seven Ele∣ctors, (which was in An. 996.) the Prelates, the Nobilitie, and the chief of the people
had the election of the EmperourAventini An∣nal. Booum. l. 5.. And if the Prelates were intrusted in so high a point, as the election of the Emperour or the Soveraign Prince; no question but they were imployed also in his publick Councels, in matters which concerned the managerie of the Common-wealth. Next pass we over into France, and there we finde the Subjects marshalled into three Estates, whereof the Clergie is the first. Rex coactis tribus Ordinibus, Sacerdotio, Nobili∣tate, Plebe, subsidia rei pecuniariae petiitPaul. Aemili∣us hist. Franc. l 9., that is to say, the King assembling or con∣veening the three Estates, viz. the Clergie, the Nobilitie, and the Commons, demanded sub∣sidies for the support of his Estate; So Paulus Aemilius doth inform us: Out of these three are chosen certain Delegates or Commissioners, some for each Estate, as of∣ten as the Kings occasions doe require their meeting, the time and place whereof is ab∣solutely left unto his disposing; and these thus met doe make up the Conventus Ordi∣num, or L' Assemblie des Estats, as the French men call it, in form much like the English Parliament, but in nothing else: the power and reputation of it being much diminished in these latter times, especially since the great improvement of the Court of Parlia∣ment, fixed and of long time fixed in Paris.
Which Court of Parliament, as it was in∣stituted at the first by Charles Martell, Mayre of the Paace to the Merovgnian line of France and Grandfather to Charle magne; so it consisted at the first of the same in∣gredients, of which the great Assembly des. Estats consisteth now, that is to say, the Prelates, and the Peers, and certain of the principal Gentrie which they call La nobless, together with some few of the most consi∣drable Officers of the Kings housholdAne du Chose. 8.. A Court of such esteem in the former times, that the Kings of Sicilie, Cyprus, Boho∣mia, Portugal, Scotland, and Navarre, have thought it no disparagement unto them to be members of it: and which is more, when Frederick the second had spent much time and treasure in his quarrels with Pope Innocent the fourth, he was content to sub∣mit the whole cause in difference unto the judgement of this Court. But being at last become sedentaire and fixed at Paris, as other ordinary Courts of Justice were, (which was in An. 1286. or thereabouts) the No∣bles first, and after them the Bishops with∣drew themselves from the troubles of it, and left it to the ordering of the Civil Law∣yers: though still the Peeres doe challenge and enjoy a place therein as oft as any point of moment is in agitation; the Bishop of
Paris, and the Abbor of St. Denys, conti∣nuing constant members of it to this very day. But for the Assemblie des Estats, or Conventus Ordinum, made up of the Clergie, the Nobilitie and the Commons, as before I told I you: he that would see the manner of it, the points there handled, and that re∣mainder of authority which is left unto them, let him repair unto ThuanneThuan hist. sui temp. lib., and look upon the great Assembly held at Bloys, An. 1573. He shall finde it there. Pass we next over the Pyrenees, to the Pealms of Spain, and we shall finde in each the same three Estates, whose meeting they call there by the nameBodin. de Re∣pub. lib. 3. c. of Curia, the Court, , or by way of ominencie; consisting of the Clergie, the Nobilitie, and the Commissioners of the Provinces and most antient Cities. But we must tell you by the way, that long before the institution of these Courts, and long before the division of Spain into so many Kingdomes; the Prelates of that Church were of such authority, that a chief stroke in the election of their Kings did be∣long to them. For in the eighth Council of Toledo summoned by Recesvinthus the 25. of the Gothish race of the Kings of Spain, An. 653. so long agoe, in which were present 52 Bishops, 12 Abbots, and the Delegates or Vicars of ten other Bishops, who could
not personally attend the service; it was or∣dered with the Kings consent, that from thence∣forth the Kings of Spain should be elected in the Regal City, or in what other place soever the King should happen to decease, by the joynt suffrages of the Prelates, and the great Lords of the Court, Majores Palatii as the Canon calls themConcil. Tolet. VIII. Can. 10.. But take the whole Canon with you for the more assurance, and you finde it thus. Abninc ergo & de∣inceps ita erunt in Regni gloria praeficiendi Rectores, ut aut in urbe Regia, aut in loco ubi Princeps decesserit, cum Pontificum Ma∣jorum{que} Palatii omnimodo eligantur assensu. But after Spain became divided into seve∣ral Kingdomes, and that each Kingdome had its Court, or Curia, as they call their Parliament, the Clergie were esteemed in each for the third Estate (the first indeed of all the three) and either in person or by their Proxies, made up the most con∣siderable part in those publick meetings. For proof of which we need but look in∣to the General history of Spain, translated out of French by Grimston, and we shall finde a Court or Parliament for the Realm of Aragon, consisting of the Bishops, Nobles, and Deputies of Towns and Commonalties, having place in the said Estates conveened by King James
at Saragossa Anno 1325. for setling the Suc∣cession, and declaring the HeirGen. hist. of Spain. l. 14., another at Monson, where the Estates of Aragon and Catalogne did conveen together 1236, to consult about the conquest of ValentiaId. lib. 11.; and before that another Assemblie of the Bishops and Noblemen called at Saragossa by Alfon∣so the Great, touching the War against the MooresId. lib. 9.. And as for the Realm of Naples, and Sicily, being appends on this Crown, there is little question to be made but that the Bishops and Clergie of both enjoyed the place and priviledges of the third Estate; both Kingdomes being antient∣ly holden of the Pope, and of his Erection and the Italian Bishops (as lying directly under his nose) more amply priviledged for the most part then in other Countries. Thus for Castile, we finde a Parliament of Lords, Prelates, and Deputies of Towns summoned at Toledo by Alfonso the Noble, An. 1210. upon occasion of an invasion made by the Moores;Id. lib. 10. another before that at Bur∣gos, under the same King, Anno 1179. for levying of money on the people to main∣tain the Wars n; that great Convention of the States held at Toledo by Ferdinand the Catholick 1479. for swearing to the succes∣sion of his Son, Don John, in which the
Prelates, the Nobility, and almost all the Towns and Cities, which sent Commission∣ers to the Assembly, are expressly namedId. lib.. Thus finally doe we finde a meeting of the Deputies of the three Estates of Navarre at the Town of Tasalla, Anno 1481. for pre∣serving the Kingdome in obedience to King Francis Phoebus, being then a minor, under ageId. lib. 22.: and that the Deputies of the Cler∣gie, Nobilitie, Provinces and good Towns of Portugal, assembled at Tomara, An. 1581. to acknowledge Philip the second for their King, and to settle the Government of that Kingdome for the times to comeId. lib. 30.. Now let us take a view of the Nor∣thern Kingdomes, and still we finde the peo∣ple ranked in the self same manner, and their great Councels to consist of the Cler∣gie, the Nbilitie, and certain Deputies, sent from the Provinces and Cities, as in those before. In Hungare, before that Realm received the Gospel, we read of none but Nobiles & PlebeiiBonfinius in hist. Hungar. Dec. l. 1., the Nobilitie and common people who did concur to the ele∣ction of their Kings; but no sooner was the Faith of Christ admitted, and a Clergie instituted, but instantly we finde a third Estate, Episopos & Sacerdotum CollegiaId. ibid. De. 2. l. 2., Bishops and others of the Clergie super-added
to them, for the election of the Kings, and the dispatch of other businesses which concer∣ned the publickId. Decad. 2. l. 3., as it continueth to this day. In Danemark we shall finde the same, if we mark it well. For though Pontanus seem to count upon five Estates, making the Regall Family to be the first, and sub∣dividing the Commons into two, whereof the. Yeomanry makes one, and the Trades∣man or Citizen the otherPontan in Doriae descript.: yet in the bo∣dy of the History we finde only three, which are the Bishops, the Nobility, and Civita∣tum delegatiId. in histor. Rerum Danic. l. 7., the Deputies or Commissi∣oners of Towns and Cities: Take which of these Accompts you will, and reckon either upon Five or on three Estates, yet still the Ecclesiastick State, or Ordo Ecclesiasticus, as himself entituleth it, is declared for one; and hath been so declared, as their stories tell us, ever since the first admittance of the Faith amongst them: the Bishops, together with the Peers and Deputies, making up the Comitia or Conventus Ordinum. In Poland the chief sway and power of government, next to the King, is in the Councell of E∣state. Secundum Regem maxima & Augustuis∣sima Senatus autoritas, as Thuanus hath itThuan. hist. sui temp. l. 56.. And that consisteth of nine Bishops, where∣of the Archbishops of Guisna and Leopolis
make alwaies two; of fifteen Palatines, for by that name they call the greater sort of the Nobility, and of sixty five Chastellans, which are the better sort of the Polish Gen∣try; who with the nine great Officers of the Kingdome, (of which the Clergy are as capable as any other sort or degree of subjects) doe complete that Councell. The Common people there are in no authori∣ty, (a procuratione Reipub. omnino summota) not having any Vote or suffrage in the great ComitiaThuan. hist. sui. temp. l. 56., or generall Assemblies of the Kingdome, as in other places. For Swe∣den, it comes neer the government and formes of Danemark, and hath the same estates and degrees of people as amongst the Danes, that is to say, Proceres & No∣biles, the greater and the lesse Nobility, Episcopi & Ecclesiastici, the Bishops and inferiour Clergy, Civitates & universita∣tes, the Cities and Towns Corporate (for so I think he means by vniversitates) as ThuanusId. lib. 131. mustereth them. And in this Realm the Bishops and Clergy en∣joy the place and priviledges of the third Estate (notwithstanding the alteration of Religion) to this very day; the Bishops in their own persons, and a certain num∣ber of the Clergy out of every Sochen (a
division like our Rurall Deanries) in the name of the rest, having a necessary Vote in all their Parliaments. And as for Scot∣land, their Parliament consisted anciently of three Estates, as learned Camden doth in∣forme us, that is to say, the Lords spiritu∣all, as Bishops, Abbots, Priors; the Tem∣porall Lords, as Dukes, Marquesses, Earles, Vicounts, Barons; and the Commissioners of the Cities and BurroughsCamden in descript. Scotiae.; To which were added by King James two Delegates or Commissioners out of every County to make it more conforme to the English Par∣liaments. And in some Acts the Prelates are by name declared to be the third Estate, as in the Parliament, Anno 1597. Anno 1606, &c. for which I do referre you to the Book at large.
(6) And now at last we are come to Eng∣land, where we shall find that from the first reception of the Christian Faith amongst the Saxons, the Ecclesiasticks have been called to all Publick Councels, and their advice requi∣red in the weightiest matters touching the safety of the Kingdome. No sooner had King Ethelbert received the Gospell, but pre∣sently we read that as well the Clergy as the Laity were called unto the Common Coun∣cell: which the Saxons sometimes called My∣cell Synoth, the Great Assembly, and some∣times WittenagemotsCoke on Li∣l. 2. sect., the Councell or As∣sembly of the Wise men of the Realm. An∣no 605. Ethelbertus Rex in fide roboratus Catholica &c. Cantuariae convocavit commu∣ne concilium am Cleri quam populi, &c.H. Spelman in Concil. p. 126. "King Ethelbert, as my Author hath it, being confirmed in the Faith in the year 605. (which was but nine years after his conver∣sion) together with Bertha his Queen, their Son Eadbald, the most Reverend Archbi∣shop Augustine, and all the rest of the No∣bility, did solemnize the Feast of Christs Nativity in the City of Canterbury; and did there cause to be assembled on the ninth of January the Common-Councell of his King∣dome, aswell the Clergy as the Lay Subject, by whose consent and approbation, he cau∣sed
the Monastery by him built, to be de∣dicated to the honour of Almighty God, by the hand of Augustine." And though no question other examples of this kinde may be found amongst the Saxon Heptarchs, yet being the West Saxon Kingdome did in fine prevail, and united all the rest into one Monarchy: we shall apply our selves unto that more pun∣ctually. Where we shall finde besides two Charters issued out by Athelstan, Consilio Wlfel∣mi Archiepiscopi mei & aliorum Episcoporum meorumAp. eund. p. 402, 403., by the advice of Wlfelm his Arch∣bishop and his other Bishops: that Ina in the year 702. caused the great Councell of his Realm to be assembled, consisting ex Episco∣pis, Principibus, proceribus, &c. of Bishops, Princes, Nobles, Earls, and of all the Wise men, Elders, and People of the whole King∣dome, and there enacted divers lawes for the Weal of his RealmApud eund. p. 219.. Thus do we read that Egbert, who first united the seven Kingdomes of the Saxons under the name of England, did cause to be conveened at London his Bishops and the Peers of the highest rank, pro consi∣lio capiendo adversus Danicos PiratasCharta Whit∣lafii Mercio∣rum Regis ap. Ingulf., to ad∣vise upon some course against the Danish Pi∣rates who infested the sea coasts of England. Another Parliament or Councell, call it which you will, called at Kingsbury, Anno 855. in the time of Ethelwolph the Son of Egbert, pro
negotiis regniChart. Ber∣tulfi. Merc. Re∣gis ap. Ingulf., to treat of the affaires of the Kingdome: the Acts whereof are ra∣tified and subscribed by the Bishops, Abbots, and other great men of the Realme. The same King Ethelwolph in a Parliament or As∣sembly of his States at Winchester, Anno 855. Cum consilio Episcoporum & principumIngulfi Croy∣land hist., by the advice and counsell of the Bishops and Nobility, confirmed unto the Cler∣gy the tenth part of all mens goods; and ordered that the Tithe so confirmed unto them should be free ab omnibus secularibus servitutibus, for all secular services and im∣positions. In the reigne of Edred we finde this, Anno 948. In Festo igitur nativitatis B. Mariae cum universi Magnates regni per Re∣gium edictum summoniti, tam Archiepiscopi & Episcopi ac Abbates, quam caeteri totius regni proceres & optimates Londoniis conve∣nissent ad tractandum de negotiis publicis toti∣us RegniId ibid. p. 497 edit. Lond.: viz. That in the Feast of the Nativity of the blessed Virgin, the great men of the Realm, that is to say, Archbishops, Bi∣shops, Abbots, Nobles, Peeres, were summon∣ed by the Kings Writ to appear at London, to handle and conclude about the publick af∣faires of the Kingdome. Mention of this As∣sembly is made againe at the foundation and endowment of the Abbie of CrowlandId. p. 500.: and afterwards a confirmation of the same by
Edgar, Anno 966. praesentibus Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus & Optimatibus RegniId pag. 501. & 502., in the presence of the Archbishops, Bshops, Abbots and Peers of the Kingdome. Like convention of Estates we finde to have been called by Canutus after the death of Edmund Ironside, for the setling of the Crown on his own head, of which thus the AuthorRog. Hove∣den. Annal pars prior. p. 250.. Cu∣jus post mortem Rex Canutus omnes Episco∣pos & Duces, nec non & principes cunctos{que} optimates gentis Angliae Londoniae congregari jussit. Where still we finde the Bishops to be called to Parliament as well as the Dukes, Princes, and the rest of the Nobility; and to be ranked and marshalled first (which clearly shewes that they were alwaies reckoned for the first Estate) before the greatest and most eminent of the secular Peers. And so we finde it also in a Charter of King Edward the Confessor, the last King of the Saxon race) by which he granted certain Lands and pri∣viledges to the Church of Westminster, Anno 1066. Cum consilio & decreto Archiepisco∣porum, Episcoporum, Comitum, aliorum{que} Op∣timatum Ap. H. Spel∣man in Concil. p. 630., with the counsell and decree of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, and others of his Nobles. And all this while the Bi∣shops and other Prelates of the Church did hold their Lands by no other tenure, then in pura & perpetua eleemosynaCamden in Brit., or Frank al∣moigne,
as our Lawyers call it: and there∣fore sate in Parliament in no other capacity then as spirituall persons meerly, who by their extraordinary knowledge in the word of God, and in such other parts of learning, as the world then knew, were thought best able to direct and advise their Princes in points of judgement. In which capacity and no other the Priors of the Cathedrall Churches of Can∣terbury, Ely, Winchester, Coventry, Bath, Wor∣cester, Norwich, and Durham, the Deans of Exce∣ter, York, Wells, Salisbury, and Lincoln, the Of∣ficiall of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Dean of the Arches, the Guardian of the Spiritualties of any Bishoprick when the See was vacant, and the Vicars generall of such Bishops as were absent beyond the SeasSelden Ti∣tles of hon. part. 2. c. 5., had sometimes place and suffrage in the house of Lords in the Ages following.
7. But when the Norman Conqueror had possest the State, then the case was alte∣red. The Prelates of the Church were no lon∣ger suffered to hold their Lands in Frankal∣moigne as before they did, or to be free from secu∣lar services and commands, as before they were. Although they kept their lands, yet they chan∣ged their tenure, and by the Conqueror, were ordained to hold their Lands sub militari servitute Ma. Pa∣ris in Will. 1. An. 1070., either in apite, or by Baronage, or some such military hold, and thereby were compellable to aid the Kings in all times of war, with Men, Arms, and Horses, as the Lay-subjects of the same tenures were required to do. Which though it were conceived to be a great disfranchisement at the first, and an heavy burden to the Prelacy▪ yet it conduced at last to their greater honor; in giving them a further Title to their place in Par∣liament, than that which formerly they could pretend to. Before, they claimed a place there∣in ratione Officii, only by reason of their Offices or spiritual Dignities; but after this, by reason also of those antient Baronies which were annex∣ed unto their Dignities; en respect de lour possessions, L'antient Baronies annexes a lour dignitiesStamfords Ples, l. 3 c. 1., as our Lawyers have it. From this time forwards we must look upon them in the House of Parliament, not as Bishops only, but as Peers and Barons of the Realm also, and so themselves affirmed to the Temporal Lords in the Parliament holden at Northampton under Henry 2. Non sedimus hic E∣piscopi,
sed Barones; nos Barones, ves Barones; Pares hic sumusAp Sel∣den. titles of hon. p. 2. c. 5.. We fit not here say they, as Bi∣shops only, but as Barons; We are Baros, and you are Barons; here we sit as Peers. Which last is also verified in terminis, by the words of a Statute, or Act of Parliament, wherein the Bishops are acknowledged to be Peers of the LandStat. 25 Edw. 3. c. 5.. Now that the Bishops are a fundamental and essential part of the Parliament of England, I shall endea∣vour to make good by two manner of proofs; wherof the one shall be de jure, & the other de fa∣cto. And first we shal begin with the proofs de jure, and therin first with that which doth occur in the Laws of King Athelstan, amongst the which there is a Chapter (it is Cap. 11.) entituled De officio Episcopi, & quid pertinet ad officium ejus; and there∣in it is thus declared. Episcopo jure pertinet omnem rectitudinem promovere, dei scilicet & seculi &c.Spelm. concil. p. 402. et convenit ut per consilium & testimonium ejus omne legis scitum, & Burgi mensura, & omne pondus sit secun∣dum dictionem ejus institutum, that is to say, it be∣longeth of right unto the Bishop to promote ju∣stice, in matters which concern both the Church and State; and unto him it appertaineth that by his counsel and award, all Laws & Weights, and Measures be ordained thorowout the Kingdom. 2. Next we will have recourse to the old Re∣cord entituled Modus tenendi Parliamentum. In which it is affirmed, ad Parliamentum summoniri & venire debere Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Ab∣bates, Pricres, & alios majores cleri, qui tenent per Comitatum aut Baroniam ratione hujusmodi tenu∣rae,
modus te∣nendi Parlia∣ment. that all the Arch-bishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, and other Prelates of the Church, who hold their lands either by an Earls fee or a Barons fee, were to be summoned and to come to Parliament in regard of their tenure. 3. Next look we on the chartularies of King Henry the first, recogni∣zed in full Parliament at Clarendon under Hen∣ry the 2d. where they are called avitas consuetudi∣nes, which declare it thus, Archipiscopi, Episcopi, & universae personae qui de Regetenent in Capite, habeant possessiones suas de Rege ficut Baroniam, &c. & sicut caeteri Barones debent interesse judiciis Curiae Regis cum Baronibus, quousque perveniatur ad dimi∣nutionem membrorum vel ad mortemMatth. Paris in Hen. 2.. The mean∣ing is in brief, that Arch-bishops, Bishops, and all other ecclesiastical persons which hold in Capite of the King, are to have and hold their lands in Barony, and that they ought as Barons to be present in all Judgements with the other Barons in the Court of Parliament, untill the very sentence of death or mutilation (which was very common in those times) was to be pronounced. And then they commouly did use to withdraw themselves, not out of any incapacity supposed to be in them by the Law of England, but out of a restraint impo∣sed upon them by the Canons of the Church of Rome. 4. In the great Charter made by King John in the last of his reign, we have the form of summoning a Parliament, and calling those toge∣ther who have votes therein, thus expressed at large. Ad habendum commune consilium Regni de auxilio assidendo, &c. & de scutagiis assidendis, faci∣emus
summoneri Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Abbaes, Co∣mites, & Majores Barones Regni sigillatim per lieras nostras: Et praeterea summoneri faciemus in generali per Vice-Cemites & Ballivos nostros omnes alios qui in Capite tenent ad certum diem, sc. ad terminum 40 die∣rum ad minus, et ad certum locum, &c.Id. in Ioh. In which we have not only a most evident proof, that the Bishops are of right to be called to Parliament, for grant∣ing subsidies and Escuage, and treating of the great affairs which concern the kingdom, but that they are to be summoned by particular Let∣ters, as well as the Earls and Barons or either of them; A former Copy of which summons issu∣ed in the time of the said King John, is extant on Record, and put in print of late in thePt. 2. c. 5. Titles of Honour. And we have here (I note this only by the way) a brief intimation touching the form of summoning the Commons to attend in Parliament, and the time of 40 daies expresly specified to in∣tervene between the summons and the beginning of the Parliament; Which Commons being such as antiently did hold in Capite, and either having a Knights fee or the degree of Knighthood, did first promiscuously attend in these publick meetings, and after were reduced to four (quatuor discretos milites de Comitatu tuo, asId. ibid. the writ ran unto the Sheriff) and at last to two, as they continue to this day. 5. We have it thus in the Magna Charta of King Henry the 3d. the birth-right of the English Subject, according as it stands translated in the book of Statutes. First we have granted to God, and by this our present Charter have confirmed for
us and our heirs for ever, that the Church of England shall be free, and shall enjoy all her whole Rights and Liberties inviolableMagna Charta cap. 1.. But it was a known Right and Liberty of the Church of England, that all the Bishops, and many of the greater Clergy (and peradventure also the inferiour Clergy wherof more anon) had their Votes in Parliament; and therefore is to be preserved inviolable by the Kings of England, their Heirs and Successors for ever. Which Charter as it was confirmed by a solemn Curse denounced on all the Infringers of it by Bo∣niface Arch-bishop of CanterburyMatth. Pa∣tis in Henr. 3., and ratified in no fewer man 30 succeeding Parliaments: so was it enacted in the reign of Edward the first, that it should be sent under the great Seal of England, to all the Cathedral Churches of the Kingdom, to be read twice a year before the people25 Edw. 1. c. 2.; that they should be read four times every year in a full County-Court 28 Edw. 1. c. 1., and finally that all judgements given a∣gainst it should be void25 Edw. 1. c. 3.. 6. We have the Prote∣station of John Stratford Arch-bishop of Canterbu∣ry in the time of King Edward the 3d. who being in disfavour with the King, and denyed entrance into the House of Peers, challenged his place and suffrage there as the first Peer of the Realm, and one that ought to have the first Voice in Parliament in right of his See. But hear him speak his own words, which are these that follow. Amici (for he spake to those who took witness of it) Rexme ad hoc Parliamentum scripto suo vocavit, & ego tan∣quam major Par Regni post regem, & primam vocem habere debens in Parliamento, jura Ecclesiae
meae Cantuariensis vendico, & ideo ingressum in Parliamentum petoAntiqu. Bitan. in Joh. Stratford., which is full and plain. 7. And lastly, there is the Protestation on Re∣cord of all the Bishops in the reign of King Richard the 2d. at what time William Courtney was Arch-bishop of Canterbury: who being to withdraw themselves from the House of Peers at the pro∣nouncing of the sentence of death on some guilty Lords, first made their Procurators to supply their rooms, & then put up their Protestation to preserve their Rights; the sum whereof, for as much as doth concern this business, in their own words thus. De jure & consuetudine regni Angliae ad Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem qui pro tempore fue∣rit, nec non coeteros Suffraganeos confratres & com∣patres, Abbates & Priores alios{que} Praelatos quoscun{que} per Baroniam de domino Rege tenentes, pertinet in Parliamentis Regis quibuscunque, ut Pares regni prae∣dicti personaliter interesse, ibidemque de regni negotiis ac aliis tractari consuetis cum caeteris dicti regni Pari∣bus & aliis ibidem jus interessendi habentibns consu∣lere & tractare, ordinare, statuere, & diffinire, ac ce∣tera facere quae Parliamento ibidem imminent facien∣da. This put together makes enough abundantly for the proofs de jure,(k) In vita Gul. Court∣ney. and makes the Bishops right to have Vote in Parliament to be undeniable: Let us next see whether this right of theirs be not confirmed and countenanced by continual pra∣ctice, and that they have not lost it by discontinu∣ance; which is my second kind of proofs, those I mean de facto. And first beginning with the reign of the Norman Conquerour, we find a Parliament
assembled in the fifth year of that King, wherein are present Episcopi, Abbates, Comites, & Primates totius AngliaeMatth. Pa∣ris in Williel∣mo 1., the Bishops, Abbats, Earls, and the rest of the Baronage of England. In the 9th. year of William Rufus an old Author telleth us, de regni statu acturus, Episcopos, Abbates, & quoscunque Regni proceres in unum praecepti sui sanctione egit; that being to consult of the affairs of the King∣dom he called together by his writ the Bishops, Abbots and all the Peers of the RealmEadmer. hist. Nov. l. 2.. Du∣ring the reign of Henry the 2d. (for we will take but one example out of each King reign, though each Kings reign would yield us more) a Parlia∣ment was called at London, wherein were many things dispatched aswell of Ecclesiastical as secular nature; the Bishops and Abbats being present with the other Lords. Coacto apud Londoniam magno Episcoporum, &. Procerum, Abbatum{que} Concili, mul∣ta ecclefiasticarum & secularium rerum ordinata nego∣tia, decisa litigia, saith the Monk of Malmesu∣ry Malmesb. hist. reg. Angl. l. 5.. And of this Parliament it is, I take it, that Eadmer speaketh, Hist. Novell. l. 4. p. 91. Proceed we to King Henry the 2d. (for King Ste∣phens reign was so full of wars and tumults that there is very little to be found of Parliaments) and there we find the Bishops with the other Peers con∣vened in Parliament for the determination of the points in controversie between Alfonso King of Castile and Sancho King of Navarre, referred by compremise to that King of England, and here deter∣mined by King Henry amongst other things, habito cum Episcopis Comitibus et Baronebus cum delibera∣tione
consilio, as in Roger HovedenHoveden Annal. pars poster. in Hen. 2.. Next him comes Rich. the first, his Son, during whose impri∣sonment by the D. of Austria, his Brother John then Earl of Moriton indeavoured by force and cunning in Normandy to set the Crown on his own head: which caused Hubert the Arch-bishop of Canter∣bury to call a Parliament (Convocatis coram eo Epi∣scopis, Comitibus et Baronibus regni)Id. in Joh. wherein the Bishops, Earls, and Barons did with one con∣sent agree to seize on his estate, and suppress his power, the better to preserve the Kingdom in wealth, peace and safety. After succeeded John, and he calls a Parliament, wherein were certain Laws made for the defence of his Kingdom, Com∣muni assensu Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, Co∣mitum, Baronum & omnium fidelium suoum Angiae, by the common counsell and assent of the Arch-bi∣shops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, and the rest of his Leiges. (Remember what was said before touch∣ing the writ of Summons in the said Kings time) From this time till the last Parliament of King Charles, there is no Kings reign, of which we have not many (though not all) the Acts of Parlia∣ment still in print amongst us. Nor is there any Act of Parliament in the printed Books, to the en∣acting of the which the Bishops approbation and consent is not plainly specified, either in the ge∣neral Proeme set before the Acts, or in the body of the Act it themself; as by the books themselves doth at at large appear. And to this kind of proof may be further added the form and manner of the writ by which the Prelates in all times have been
called to Parliament, being the very same verbatim with that which is directed to the temporal Ba∣rons, save that the Spiritual Lords are commanded to attend the service, in fide & dilectione, the tem∣poral in fide & homagio, and of late times in fide & ligeantia. A form or copy of which summons as antient as King Johns time, is still preserved upon Record, directed nominatim to the Arch-bishop of CanterburyV. Titles of hon. pt. 2. c. 5.; and then a scriptum est similiter to the residue of the Bishops, Abbats, Earls, and Barons. Then adde the Privilege of Parliament for themselves and their servants, during the time of the Sessions; the liberty to kill, and take one or two of the Kings Deer as they pass by any of his Forests in coming to the Parliament upon his commandementCharta de Foresta cap.; their enjoying of the same immunities, which are and have been heretofore enjoyed by the Temporal Ba∣rons Cambden in Britannia.: and tell me if the Bishops did not sit in Parliament by as good a title, and have not sate there longer by some hundreds of years in their Predecessours, as or than any of the Temporal Lords do sit or have sat there in their Progenitours; and therefore certainly essential, fundamental parts of the Court of Parliament. 8. But against this it is objected, first, that some Acts have passed in Parliament, to which the Prelates did not vote, nor could be present in the House when the Bill was passed; as in the sentencing to death or mutilation of a guilty per∣son: as doth appear both by the laws & constituti∣ons recognized at Clarendon, and the following pra∣ctice▪
This hath been touched on before, & we told you then, that this restraint was laid upon them, not by the Common law of England, or any Act or Ordinance of the House of Peers, by which they were disabled to attend that service. It was their own voluntary Act, none compelled them to it, but only out of a conformity to some former Ca∣nons (ad sanctorum Canonum institutaAntiqu. Brit. in Gul. Courtney., as their own words are) by which it was not lawfull for the Clergy men to be either Judges or Assessors in causa SanguinisConstitut. Othobon. fol. 45.. And yet they took such care to preserve their Interests, that they did not only give their Proxies for the representing of their persons, but did put up their Protestation with a salvo jure for the preserving of their rights for the time to come: jure Paritatis & interessendi in dicto ParliamentoAntiqu. Britan. in Gul. Courtney. quoad omnia & singula ibi excer∣cenda in omnibus semper salvo, as the manner was. Examples of the which are as full and frequent, as their withdrawing themselves on the said occa∣sions. But then the main objection is, that as some Acts have passed in Parliament absentibus Praelatis, when the Bishops did absent themselves of their own accord; so many things have been transacted in the Parliament excluso Clero, when the Clergy have been excluded or put out of the House by some Act or Ordinance. A precedent for this hath been found and published by such as envi∣ed that poor remnant of the Churches honour: though possibly they will find themselves decei∣ved in their greatest hope, and that the evidence will not serve to evince the cause. The Author
of the Pamphlet entituled, The Prerogative and pra∣ctice of Parliaments, first laying down his Tenet, that many good Acts of Parliament may be made though the Arch-bishops and Bishops should not consent unto themPrinted at London. 1628. p. 37. (which is a point no man doubts of, considering how easily their negative may be over-ruled by the far greater number in the House of Peers) adds, that at a Parliament hold∣en at S. Edmundsbury 1196 in the reign of Ed: 1. a Statute was made by the King, the Barons, and the Commons, Excluso Clero, & for the proof herof refers us unto Bishop Jewell. Now Bishop Jewell saith in∣deed, "that in a Parliament solemnly holden at St. Edmunsbury by King Edward 1. Anno 1296. the Arch-bishops and Bishops were quite shut forth, and yet the Parliament held on, and good, and wholsome laws were there enacted, the de∣parting or absence of the Lords Spiritual not∣withstanding Defence of the Apolog. pt. 6. c. 2. §. 1.. In the Records whereof it is written thus, Habito Rex cum Baronibus suis Parli∣amento, & Clero excluso statutum est, &c. the King keeping the Parliament with his Barons, the Clergy (that is to say, the Arch-bishops, and Bishops) being shut forth, it was enacted, &c." Wherein who doth not see, if he hath any eyes, that by this reason (if the proof be good) many good Acts of Parllament may be made, though the Commons either out of absence or opposition should not consent unto them? of whose consent unto that Statute (whatsoever it was) there is as little to be found in that Record, as the concur∣rence of the Bishops. But for Answer unto so much
of this Record so often spoke of and applauded as concerns the Bishops, we say, that this (if truly senced as I think it be not) was the particular act of an angry and offended King against his Clergy, not to be drawn into example as a proof or Argu∣ment against a most clear, known, and undoubted right. The case stood thus, A Constitution had been made by Boniface the 8th. Ne aliqua collecta ex ecclesiasticis proventibus Regi aut cuivis alii Principi concedaturMatth. Westm. in Edw. 1., that Clergy men should not pay any tax or tallage unto Kings or Princes out of their Spiritual preferments, without the leave of the Pope: under pretence whereof the Clergy at this Parliament at S. Edmundsbury, refused to be con∣tributory to the Kings occasions, when the Lay-Members of the House had been forwards in it. The King being herewith much offended, gives them a further day to confider of it, adjourning the Parliament to London, there to begin on the morrow after S. Hilaries day; and in the mean time commanded all their Barns to be fast sealed up. The day being come, and the Clergy still persisting in their former obstinacy, excluso e Par∣liamento Clero Consilium Rex cum solis Baronibus & populo habuit, totumque statim Clerum protectione sua privavitAntiqu. Brit. in R. Winchelsey.; the King (saith the Historian) exclu∣ding the Clergy out of the Parliament, advised with his Barons and his people only, what was best to be done, by whose advise he put the Cler∣gy out of his protection, and thereby forced them to conform to his will and pleasure. This is the summa totalis of the business, and comes unto no
more but this, that a particular course was ad∣vised in Parliament on a particular displeasure taken by the King against the body of his Clergy then convened together, for their particular refu∣sal to contribute to his wants & wars, the better to reduce them to their natural duty. Which makes not any thing at all against the right of Bishops in the House of Peers, or for excluding them that House, or for the validity of such Acts as are made in Parliament during the time of such ex∣clusion: especially considering that the King shortly after called his States together, and did ex∣cuse himself for many extravagant Acts which he had committedWalsing, in Edw. 1. anno 1297. against the liberties of the Subject (whereof this was one) laying the blame thereof on his great occasions, and the necessities which the wars which he had abroad, did impose upon him. And so much as in Answer unto that Record, supposing that the words thereof be rightly senced, as I think they are not, and that by Clerus there we are to understand Arch-bishops and Bishops, as I think we be not, there being no Record (I dare boldly say it) either of History or Law, in which the word Clerus serves to signi∣fie the Arch-bishops, and Bishops, exclusive of the other Clergy; or any writing whatsoever, wherein it doth not either signifie the whole Clergy gene∣rally, or the inferiour Clergy only exclusive of the Arch-bishops, Bishops, and other Prelates. Therefore in answer unto that so much applau∣ded Cavil of Excluso Clero, from what Record soe∣ver it either hath been hitherto or shall hereaf∣ter
be produced, I shall propose it to the conside∣ration of the sober Reader, whether by Clerus in that place, or in any other of that kind and time, we must not understand the ineriour Clergy, as they stand distinguished in the Laws from my Lords the Bishops. For howsoever it be true, that Clerus in the ecclesiastical notion of the word doth signifie the whole Clergy generally, Arch-bi∣shops, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons: yet in the legal notion of it, it stands distinguished from the Prelates, and signifieth only the inferiour Clergy. Thus do we find the Ecclesiasticks of this Realm divided into Prelates, men of Religion, and other Clerks, 3. Edw. 1. c. 1. the Seculars either into Prelates and Clerks, 9 Edw. 2. c. 3. 1 Rich. 2. c. 3. or Prelates and Clerks beneficed, 18 Edw. 3. c. 2. or generally into the Prelates and the Clergy, 9 Edw. 2. c. 15. 14 Edw. 3. c. 1, & 3. 18 Edw. 3. 2. 7. & 25 Edw. 3. 2. 4. & 8 Hen. 6. c. 1. and in all acts and grants of Subsidies, made by the Clergy to the Kings or Queens of England since the 32 of Henry 8. (when the Clergy subsidies first began to be confirmed by act of Parliament) So also in the Latin ideom, which comes neer∣est home, Nos Praelati & Clerus in the submission of the Clergy to King Henry 8.Regist. Waham., and in the sentence of divorce against Anne of CleveRegist. Cranmer., and in the instrument of the grant of the Clergy subsidies presented to the Kings of England ever since the 27 of Queen Elizabeth, and in the form of the Certificates (perStatut. 8 Eliz. c. 17. & ever since. Praelats & Clerum) returned by every Bishop to the Lord High Treasurer, and
finally, Nos Episcopi & Clerus Cantuariensis Pro∣vinciae in hac Synodo more nostro solito dum Regni Par∣liamentum celebratur, congregatiStat. 1 Phil. & Mar. c. 8., in the petition to K. K. Phillip and Mary, about the confirmati∣on of the Abby lands to the Patentees. So that though many Statutes have been made in these later times, excluso Clero, the Clergy (that is. to say the inferiour Clergy) being quite shut out, and utterly excluded from those publick Counsails; yet this proves nothing to the point that auy act of Parliament hath been counted good to which the Bishops were not called, or at the making of which Act they either were shut out by force, or excluded by cunning. As for Kilbancies book which that Author speaks ofPrerg. & pract. of Pal. p. 38., in which the Ju∣stices are made to say 7 H. 8. that our Soveraign Lord the King may well hold his Parliament by him and his Temporal Lords, and by the Commons also, without the Spiritual Lords, for that the Spiritual Lords have not any place in the Parliament chamber by reason of their Spiritualties, but by reason of their Temporal possessions: besides that it is only the opinion of a privat man, of no authority or cre∣dit in the Common wealth, and contrary to the practice in the Saxon times in which the Bishops sate in Parliament as Spiritual persons, not as Barons; the reason for ought I can see, will serve as well to pretermit all or any of the Temporal Lords, as it can serve to pretermit or exclude the Bishops, the Temporal Lords being called to Parli∣ament on no other ground, than for the Temporal possessions which they hold by Barony.
9. If it be said that my second answer to the argument of Excluso Clero supposeth that the infe∣riour lergy had some place in Parliament, which being not to be supposed makes the Answer void: I shall crave leave to offer some few observations unto the consideration of the sober and impartial Reader, by which I hope to make that supposi∣tion probable, and perhaps demonstrative. First then we have that famous Parliament (call it Concilium magnum, or Concilium commune, or by what other name soever the old writers called it) summoned by King Ethelbert, anno 605. which myConcil. Hen. Spelm. Author calleth Commune concilium tam Cleri quam Populi, where Clerus comprehendeth the bo∣dy of the Clergy generally, aswell the Presbyters, as the Bishops; as the word populus doth the lay-subject generally, as well Lords as Commons; or else the Lords and Commons one of the two must be needs left out. And in this sense we are to understand these words in the latter times, as where we read that ClerusMatth. Paris▪ in Hen. 1. Angliae & populus Vniversus were summoned to appear at Westmin∣ster, at the Coronation of King Henry the first, where divers Laws were made and declared, sub∣scribed by the Arch-bishops, Bishops, and others of the principal persons that were there assembled: that Clero & populo convocatoRog. Hov. in Hen▪ 2., the Clergy and people of the Realm were called to Clarendon, anno 1163. by King Henry the second, for the de∣claring and confirming of the Subjects liberties: that in the year 1185 towards the later end of
the said Kings reign, Convocatus est Clerus & po∣pulus cum tota Nobilitate ad fontem ClericorumMatth. pa∣ris in Hen. 2., the Clergy, Commons, and Nobility were called un∣to the Parliament held at Clerkenwell: and final∣ly that a Parliament was called at London, in which the Arch-bishop of Canterbury was present, cum toto Clero & tota secta LaicaliQuadri∣log. ap. Selden Tit. of Hon. pt. 2. c. 5., in the time of King John. Hitherto then the Clergy of both ranks and orders, as well as Populus or tota secta Laicalis, the Subjects of the Laity, or the Lords and Commons, had their place in Parliament. And in possession of this right the Clergy stood when the Magna Charta was set out by King Henry the 3d, wherein the freedoms, rights, and privileges of the Church of England (of which this evident∣ly was one) was confirmed unto herMagna Charta cap. 1.: of the irrefragable and inviolable authority whereof we have spoke before. The Cavill of Excluso Clero which hath been used against the voting of the Bishops in the house of Peers, comes in next for proof, that the inferiour Clergy had their place or vote with the house of Commons; (if in those times the Lords and Commons made two hou∣ses, which I am not sure of) the Clergy could not be excluded in an angry fit, or out of a particular design to deprive them of the benefit of the Kings protection; if they had not formerly a place a∣mongst them: & if we will not understand by Cle∣rus, the inferior Clergy, which much about that time (as before we shewed) began to be the legl English of the word; we must needs understand the whole Clergy generally, the Clergy of both ranks and or∣ders.
But our main proofs are yet to come, which are these that follow. First it is evident that antiently the Clergy of each several Diocese were chargeable by Law for the expences of their Pro∣ctors in attending the service of the Parliament; according as the Counties were by Common law (since confirmed by Statute 23 H. 6. c. 11.) to bear the charges of their Knights, the Burroughs and Cities of their Representees: which question∣less the Laws had not taken care for, but that the Clergy had their place in Parliament, as the Com∣mons had. And this appears by a RecordRotul. Parent. 26 Ed. 3. pt. 1. M. 22. of 26 of King Edward the 3d. in which the Abbat of Leieester being then, but never formerly com∣manded to attend in Parliament, amongst others of the Regular Prelates; petitioned to be dischar∣charged from that attendance, in regard he held in Frank-Almoigne only, by no other tenure. Which he obtained upon this condition, ut semper in Procuratores ad hujusmodi Parliamenta mittendot consentiat, &, ut moris est, eorundem expensis con∣tribuat, that is to say, that he and his Successors did give their voyces in the choyse of such Procu∣ratours, as the Clergy were to send to Parliament, and did contribute towards their charges as the custom was. Next in the Modus tenendi Parliamen∣tum, which before we spake of, there is amodus con∣vocandi Clerum Angliae ad Parl. RegisModus te∣nendi Parl. M., a form of calling the English Clergy (that is the Prelates & Clergy as John Selden (e) renders it) to the Court of Parliament: said to be used in the time of Edward the Son of Ethelred,(s) V. Titles of hon. pt. 2. presented to the Conquerour,
and by him observed: which shews the Clergy in those times had their place in Parliament. Which being but a general inference shall be de∣livered more particularly from the Modus it self, which informs us thus, Rex est caput, principum & finis Parliamenti, &c.Modus te∣nendi Parl. Ms. c. 12. "The King is the head, the beginning and end of the Parliament, and so he hath not any equal in the first degree; the se∣cond is of Arch-bishops, Bishops, and Priors, and Abbats holding by Barony; the third is of Pro∣curators of the Clergy; the fourth of Earls, Ba∣rons, and other Nobles; the fifth is of Knights of the Shire; the sixt of Citizens and Burgesses: and so the whole Parliament is made up of these six degrees." But the said Modus tells us more, and goeth more particular∣ly to work than so. For in the ninth chapter, speaking of the course which was observ'd in can∣vassing hard and difficult matters, it telleth us that they used to choose 25 out of all degrees, (like a grand Committee) to whose consideration they referred the point; that is to say, two Bishops, and three Proctors for the Clergy, two Earls, three Barons, five Knights, five Citizens, and as many Burgesses. And in the 12th. that on the fourth day of the Parliament the Lord high Steward, the Lord Constable, and the Lord Marshal were to call the house, every degree or rank of men in its se∣veral Order; and that if any of the Proctors of the Clergy did not make appearance, the Bishop of the Diocese was to be fined 100 l. And in the 23d. chapter it is said expresly, that as the Knights,
Citizens, & Burgesses in things which do concern the Commons have more authority than all the Lords; so the Proctors for the Clergy, in things which do concern the Clergy, have more authori∣ty than all the Bishops. Which Modus if it be as antient as the Norman Conquerour, as both Sir Edward Coke conceivethPreface to the 9th. part of Reports., and the title signi∣eth, it sheweth the Clergies claim to a place in Parliament to be more antient than the Commons can pretend unto: but if no older than the reign of King Edward third, as confidently is affirmed in the Titles of HonourTitles of hon. pt 2. c. 5., if sheweth that in the usage of those later times the Procurators of the Clergy had a right and place there as well as Ci∣tizens and Burgesses, or the Knights of the Shires. And this is further proved by the writs of Summons directed to the Arch-bishops and Bishops, for their own comming to the Parliament; in the end whereof there is a clause for warning the Dean and Chapter of their Cathedralls, and the Arch-dea∣cons with the whole Clergy to be present at it, that is to say the Deans and Arch-deacons personally, the Chapter and Clergy in their Proctours, then and there to consent to such Acts and Ordinances as shall be made by the Common counsail of the Kingdom. The whole clause word for word is thisExtant ibid. pt. 2. c. 5., Praemunientes Priorem & Capitulum (or Decanum & Capitulum as the case might vary) Ecclesiae vestrae N. ac Archidiacanos totumque Cle∣rum vestrae Dioceseos, quod iidem Decanus & Archi∣chidiaconi in propriis personis suis, ac dictum Capi∣tulum per unum, idemque Clerus per duos Procura∣tores
idoneos plenam & sufficientem potestatem ab ip∣sis Capitulo & Clero habentes, praedicto die & loco personaliter intersint, ad consentiendum iis quae tunc ibidem de communi consilio ipsius Regni nostri divina favente clementia contigerit ordinari. Which clause being in the Writs of King Edward 1. and for the most part of the reign of his next Successors, till the middle of King Richard the second, at which time it began to be fixt and formal; hath still continued in those writs (without any diffe∣rence almost between the Syllables) to this very dayId. ibid.. Now that this clause was more than Verbal, and that the Proctors of the Clergy did attend in Parlia∣ment, is evident by the Acts and Statutes of King Richard the second: the passages whereof I shall cite at large, the better to conclude what I have in hand. The Duke of Glocester and the Earl of Arundel having got the mastery of the King, ob∣tained a Commission directed to themselves and others of their nomination, to have the rule of the King and his RealmStatur 21 R. 2. c. 2.: and having their Com∣mission confirmed by Parliament, in the 11 year of his reign, did execute divers of his Friends and Ministers, and seized on their Estates as forfeit∣ed. But having got the better of his head-strong and rebellious Lords, in the one and twentieth of his reign he calls a Parliament, in the Acts whereof it is declared, "That on the Petition of the Commons, of the assent of all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Proctors of the Clergy, he repealed the said Statute and CommissionIbid. c. 2., and with the assent of the said Lords and Com∣mons
did ordain and establish that no such Commis∣sion nor the like be henceforth purchased, pursued or made. This done, the heirs of such as had been condemned by vertue of the said Com∣mission, demanded restitution of their Lands and Honors. And thereupon the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Procuratours of the Cler∣gy (the Commons having prayed to the King before as the Appellants prayed) severally examined did assent expresly that the said Parliament and all the Statutes, &c. should be voyd, &c. and restitution made as afore is said.Ibid. c. 12. And also the Lords Spi∣ritual and Temporal, the Procuratours of the Clergy, and the said Commons were severally examined of the Questions proposed at Notingham, and of the Answer which the Judges made unto the same: which being read aswell before the King and the Lords, as before the Commons, it was demanded of all the States of the Parliament, what they thought of the Answers, and they said that they were lawfully & duly made, &c. And then it followeth, whereupon the King, by the assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Procura∣tours of the Clergy and the said Commons, and by the advise of the Justices and Sergeants, afore∣said (who had been asked their opinion in point of Law) ordained and established that the said Parliament should be annulled and held for none." Adde unto this that passage in the 9 of Edward 2. where it is said, that many Articles containing divers grievances committed against the Church of England, the Prelates & Clergy, were propounded by
the Prelates and Clerks of our Realm, in Parliament, and great instance made that convenient remedy might be appointed thereinProem ad articulos Cl∣ri.: that of the complaints made to the King in Parliament by the Prelates and Clergy of this Realm, 50 Ed. 3. 5. & 8 Rich. 2. c. 13. and that of the Petition delivered to the King in Parliament by the Clergy of England, 4 Hen. 4. c. 2.Selden hist. of Tithes. c. 8. 33. And finally that memorable passage in the Parli∣ment, 51 Edw. 3. which in brief was this. The Commons finding themselves agrieved aswell with certain Constitutions made by the Clergy in their Synods, as with some laws or Ordinances which were lately passed, more to the advantage of the Clergy than the Common people, put in a Bill to this effect, viz. "That no Act nor Ordi∣nance should from thenceforth be made or granted on the Petition of the said Clergy, without the consent of Commons; and that the said Commons should not be bound in times to come, by any constitutions made by the Clergy of this Realm, for their own advantage, to which the Commons of this Realm had not given con∣sent." The reason of the which is this (and 'tis worth the marking) "car eux ne veullent estre obligez a nul de vos estatuz ne Ordinances faitz sanz leur assent, because the said Clergy did not think themselves bound, (as indeed they were not in those times) by any Statute, Act, or Ordi∣nance, made without their Assent in the Court of Parliament." Which clearly shews that in those times the Clergy had their place in Parlia∣ment as the Commons had. Put all which hath
been sayd together, and tell me if it be not cleer and evident that the inferiour Clergie had their place in Parliament; whether the Clause touch∣ing the calling of them thither, were not more than verbal in the Bishops writs, and is true that in the writ of summons directed to their several and respective Bishops they were called only ad consentiendum, to manifest their consent to those Acts and ordinances, which by the Common coun∣sell of the Realm were to be ordained. But then it is as tru withall, that sometimes their advice was asked in the weighty matters, as in the 21 of K. Richard the 2. and sometimes they petitioned and remonstrated for redress of grievances, as in the instances and cases which were last produced. And 'tis as true that if they had been present only ad consentiendum, to testifie their assent to those Acts which by the common Counsell of the Realm were proposed unto them: their presence was as necessary, and their voice as requisite to all intents and purposes (for ought I can see) as the voice and presence of the Commons in the times we speak of. For in the writs of summons issued to the several Sheriffs for the electing of Knights, Ci∣tizens and Burgesses to attend the Parliament, it is said expressely, first that the King resolveth upon weighty motives touching the weal and safety both of Church and State to hold his Parliament,Foma Brevis pro fammonit. Parliamenti. et ibidem cum Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus dicti regni nostri colloquium habere et tractare, then and there to advise and treat
with the Prelates, Peers and Nobles of this Realm: Which words are also expressely used in the writs of summons directed to the Bishops, and to every of them; who also are required in a further clause consilium suum impendereTitles of hon. part 2. cap. 5., to give the King their best advice in his great affairs. So that the Prelates and Nobility conveened in Par∣liament made the Kings great Counsel, and were called thither to that end. What then belong∣ed unto the Commons? 1. No more than did belong to the Clergy also, that is to say, the giving of their consent to such Laws and Statutes as should there be made. VVhich notwithstand∣ing in tract of time gave them such a sway, and stroak in the course of Parliaments, that no law could be made, nor no tax imposed without their liking and allowance. And this is that which is expressed in the last clause of the said writ, by which the Knights and Burgesses are to come preparedForm a Brevis, &c. ad faciendum et consentien∣dum iis quae tune ibidem de consilio dicti Regni nostri super negotiis antedictis contigerint ordinari. VVhich is the very same which you had before in the writ directed to the Bishops, for summoning the Clergie of their several Diocesses, and that here is a faciendum which the other had not. A word which if you mark it well, hath no opera∣tion in the Construction of the text, except it be in paying subsidies, or doing such things as are appointed to be done by that great Counsel of the Kingdom; VVhich clause, though it be cunningly left out (that I may say no worse) in
the recital of the writ by the Author of the Book entituled, the Prerogative and practice of Parlia∣ments: is most ingenuously acknowledged in the Declaration of the Lords and Commons assem∣bled at Oxon,Declara∣tion of the treaty P. 15. where it is said, that the writs of summons, the foundation of all power in Parliament, are directed to the Lords in expresse termes to treat and advise with the King and the rest of the Peers of the Kingdom of England; and to the Commons to do and consent to those things, which by that Common councell of England should be ordained. And thus it stands, as with the Common people general∣ly in most states of Christendom, so with the Commons antiently in most states of Greece; of which Plutarch telleth usPlutarch in Lyeurgo:, that when the peo∣ple were assembled in Counsell, "it was not lawful for any of them to put forth matters to the Counsel to be determined, neither might any of them deliver his opinion what he thought of any thing, but the people had only authority , to give their assent unto such things as either the Senators or their Kings do propound unto them." 10. But against this it is objected, first, that it is not to be found at what time the Clergie lost their place and vote in Parliament, and there∣fore it may reasonably be presumed that they had never any there: and 2ly. that if they had been called ad consentiendum (though no more than so) we should have found more frequent
mention of their consent unto the Acts & Statutes in our printed Books. For answer unto which it may first be said, that to suppose the Clergie had no voice in Parliament, because it is not to be found when they lost that Privilege, is such a kind of Argument (if it be an argument) as is made by Bellarmine,Bellarm. de Eccl. lib. 4. cap. 5. to prove that many of the contro∣verted Tenets of the Church of Rome, are neither terroneous nor new, because we cannot say expressely, quo tempore, quo autore, when and by whose promoting they first crept in. And though we cannot say expressely when the inferiour Clergy lost their place in Parliament, in regard it might be lost by discontinuance or non-usage; or that the clause was pretermitted for some space of time the better to disuse them from it; or that they might neglect the service in regard of their attendance in the Convocation, which gave them power and reputation both with the Com∣mon people: yet I have reason to beleeve, that this pretermission and disuse did chiefly happen under the government of the Kings of the house of Lancaster, who being the true heirs and suc∣cessours of Iohn of Gaunt, cast many a longing eye on the Church revenues, and hardly were perswaded to abstain from that height of sacri∣lege, which Henry the 8 did aftercome to. And this I am induced to beleeve the rather, in regard that in the confirmation of the Churches rights so solemnly confirmed and ratified in all former Parliaments; there was a clog put to or added in these times, which shaked the Fabrick:
the confirmation being first of such rights and liberties as were not repealed, 3. Hen. 5. cap. 1. & 4 Hen. 5. cap. 1. and afterwards of such as by the Common law were not repealeable, 2 Hen. 6. cap. 1. which might go very far indeed. And secondly I find that in the 8 of Henry the 6. an Act of Par∣liament was passed, that all the Clergy called to Convocation by the Kings writ, and their servants and Family shall for ever hereafter fully use and enjoy such liberty and defence in comming tarrying and re∣turning, as the great men and Comminalty of the Realm of England called to the Kings Parliament do enjoy,8 Hen. 6. cap. 1. &c. Which being an unnecessary care or caution when the Clergie had their voice in Parliament, and very necessary to be taken for∣merly, if they had never had such voice: makes me conceive, that it was much about this time that they lost that privilege. But this I leave as a conjecture, and no more than so. For answer to the second argument, that if they had been called of old ad consentiendum, we should have found more frequent mention of their consent unto the Acts and Statutes of the former times; besides that it is a negative proof, and so non con∣cludent, it strikes as much against the presence and consent of the Knights and Burgesses in the el∣der Parliaments, as it can do against the Clergie. For in the elder Parliaments under K. Henry 3. and K. Edward the first there is no mention of the Commons made at all, either as present or con∣senting; nor much almost in all the Parlia∣ments till K. Henry 7. but that they did petition
for redresse of greivances, and that upon their spe∣cial instance and requestIn the Proem to the several Ses∣sions. several laws were made for the behoof and benefit of the Com∣monwealth: which part the Clergie also acted in some former Parliaments, as before was shewed. So that this negative Argument must conclude against both or neither. But secondly I answer, that in these elder times in which the Proctors for the Clergy had their place in Parlia∣ment, they are included generally in the name of the Commons. And this I say on the authority of the old modus tenendi Parliamentum, in which the Commons are divided in the Spiritualty and the Temporalty; and where it is expressely said that the Proctors for the Clergie, the Knights, the Citizens and the Burgesses did represent the whole Comminalty of the Realm of EnglandCap. ult.. And this holds good in law (for ought I find unto the contrary) to this very day. Certain I am that Crompton in his book of the Iurisdiction of Courts, where he fpeakes of Parliaments, doth tell us that the Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, and Barons of the Cinque ports,Grompton Iurisd. des. Courts. ca. ove le Clergie qu' eux assemble au Pawles, represent le corps de tout le Comminalty Dengliterre, together with the Cler∣gie which assembled at S. Pauls, doe represent the body of the whole Comminalty of England. So then, the Clergie were not only called but were present also, according to that clause in the writ of Summons (which before I spake of) di∣rected to their several and respective Bishops, as the Kings spiritual Sheriffs, if I may so say,
inabled by the Laws to that end and purpose. Which some endeavouring to avoid, have at last found out that the clause before recited out of the Writ to the Bishops, is not a calling of the Clergy to attend in Parliament, but to command them to attend in the Convocation: which I have heard much pressed by those who pretend unto some knowledge in the course of things. Which though it be a gross mistake, and inconsistent with the words and circumstances of the VVrit it self, which relates meerly to the Parliament, and business of a Parllamentarie nature: yet for the clearing of the point, and undeceiving such as have been deceived, they may please to know, that besides this VVrit by which the Clergy are commanded to appear in Parliament, there is a∣nother writ and another form of calling them unto the service of the Convocation, which is brief∣ly this. The King sends out his VVrit or Man∣dat to the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, requiring him super quibusdam arduis & urgentibus negotiis, &c.Regist. Warham.. for divers great and weighty reasons concerning the Kings honour, the Churches safe∣ty, and the publick peace of his dominions, to sum∣mon all the Bishops, Deans and Chapters, Arch-deacons, and the whole Clergy of his Province to meet in Convocation at a day and place appointed. On the reception of which Writ the Arch-bi∣shop sendeth out his Monitory to the Bishop of London (who by his place is Dean of the Episcopal CollegeAntiqu. Britan. in initio., and to disperse the Mandates of the Metropolitan) requiring him to appear himself in
person, and to send out his warrant unto every Bi∣shop of the Province, to appear there also, and to take order that the Deans of the Cathedrals, and Arch-deacons personally, the Chapter by one Pro∣curator, the Clergy of the Diocese by two, (whom we usually call Clerks of the Convocation) do at∣tend that service (p).Regist. Warham.. VVhich comming to the hands of each several Bishop they do according∣ly give intimation to their Deans and Chapters, to their Arch-deacons and the Clergy; and they accordingly prepare themselves to obey the Mo∣nitory, and to return Certificate of their doings in it. The like proceeding is observed also for the Province of York. So that the calling of the Clergy to the Convocation being by a different VVrit and another form, which hath no reference to nor dependance on the writs directed by the K. to each several Bishop for their attendance in the Parliament, it must needs be (as I conceive it) that by that clause remaining in the VVrits aforesaid, the Clergy have good right and title to a voice in Parliament, though they have lost their jus in re, the benefit, the use and possession of it. 11. But I speak this as once the Apostle said in another case, not by commandement but by permis∣sion. For I perswade my self the Clergy do not aim so high at the recovery of a right so long antiquated and disused, but would be well e∣nough content with the restitution of the Bi∣shops to their vote in Parliament, of which they stood possessed by so strong a Title, as the very constitution of the Parliament, and the fundamen∣tal
laws of the English government could confer upon them. For though the Bishops sate in Parliament in their own personal capacities, and not as the representative body of the Clergy; yet the poor Clergy found it some respect unto them to be thus honoured in their heads: and were the more obliged to obey such Acts as were establi∣shed in that Court, wherein these heads had op∣portunity of interceding, if perhaps any thing were propounded which might be grievous to the Clergy, and many times a power of hinde∣ring and diverting if not by voice and numbers, yet by strength of reasons. They were not alto∣gether Slaves and Bond-men whilest the Church held that remnant of her antient rights; for whilest the heads retained that honor, the body could not choose but rejoyce in it and be che∣rished by it. But since they have been stripped of that (by what unworthy Acts the world knows too well) they are become of such condi∣tion, that the most despicable Tradesman in a Cor∣porate Town is more considerable in the eye of the State, and hath a greater interesse in the affairs thereof, than the greatest Prelate, and to say truth than all the Clergy of the Realm. For being there are three Ingredients which make up a Freeman (as S. Francis Bacon well observed in his speech concerning the Post-nati) that is to say, 1. jus Ci∣vitatis, which did inable a man to buy and sell, and to take Inheritances; 2. jus suffragii, a voice in the passing of Laws and Election of Officers; and 3. jus honoris, a capability of such offices
and honors as the State could give him: the Clergy by this means are limited to the first right only, & utterly excluded from the other two, and ther∣by put into a worse condition, than the meanest Freeman in the Kingdome. Insomuch that whereas every needy Artizan if he be free of any Corporate Town or City, every Cottager that dwelleth in an antient Burrough, and every Clown which can lay claim to sorty shillings per An∣num of free hold, either for life or of inheritance, hath a voyce in Parliament, either in person or by Proxie; and is not bound by any law but what himself consents to in his Representatives: the Clergy only of this Realm (as the case now stands) being one of the greatest States of this Kingdom, as is acknowledged expresly in terminis by Act of Par∣liament 8 Eliz. c. 1., are neither capable of place there in their personal capacities, nor suffered to be there in their Procuratours, as of old they were; nor have so much as any voice in choosing of the Knights and Burgesses which represent the body of the people generally. I know it hath been said in reply to this, that the Clergy may give voices at the election of the Knights and Burgesses, and that it is their own neglect if they do it not. But I know too, that this is only yielded unto such of the Clergy, as are possessed os Lands and Hou∣ses in those several places where such elections are to be made, and not then neither in most places, except it be to make a party for particu∣lar ends, especially where some good man or the
main cause it self is concerned therein: which as it totally excludeth the greatest part of the Clergy from having any voyce at all in these Elections, (the greatest part of the Clegy (the more the pity) having neither Lands nor Hou∣ses to such a value in fee simple) so it gives no more power unto those that have, than what of necessity must serve (I am sure occasionally it may) to their own undoing. For to say truth, those that give out that the Clergy may give voice at such elections, use it but as a shift for the pre∣sent turn: intending nothing less indeed (as hath oft been seen) than that the Clergy should be capable of so great a trust. The reason is, be∣cause there is not any Free-man of a City or a Cor∣porate town who hath a voice in the election of a Citizen to serve in Parliament, nor almost a∣ny Cottager or Free-holder who hath a voice in the election either of a Knight or Burgesse, but is di∣rectly eligible to the place himself. Of Citizens & Burgesses lected from the very meanest of the people, we have many instances, and shall have more according as they find their strength, and have received a taste of the sweets of Goverment. And for the choosing of the Knights of the seve∣veral Shires, it is determined by the Statutes that as 40 s. land of free-hold per Annum8 Hen. 6. c. 7., is e∣nough to qualifie a Clown for giving a voice at the election; so the same Clown if he have 20l. land per Annum is capable of being chosen for a Knight of the Shire, as appears plainly and ex∣presly by the Statute law. For though the writ
directed to the severall and respective Sheriffs prescribe a choice of duos milites gladio cinctos; yet we know well that by the Statute of King Henry 6. which is explanatory in this case of the Com∣mon law, such notable Esquires or Gentlemen, born of the same Counties, as shall be able to be Knights 23 Hen. 6. 15., are made as capable as a dubbed Knight to at∣tend that service; and he that hath no more than 20 l. per Annum either in Capite or Socage is not only able by the law to be made a Knight1 Ed. 2. c. 1., but was compellable thereunto even by the Statute-Law it self, untill the Law was lately altered in that point17 Carl. c. 1.. And on the other side it is clear enough (for there have been of late some experiments of it) that though a Clergy-man be born an Esquire or Gentleman (for they are not all born ex fece Plebis, as the late Lord Brook L. Brook against Epis∣copacy. forgetting his own poor extraction hath been pleased to say) and though he be possessed of a fair Estate descended to him from his Ance∣stors, or otherwise possessed of some Lands or Houses in Town, Burrough, or City, whereby he stands as eligible in the eye of the Law, as a∣ny Lay-Gentleman of them all; yet either he is held uncapable, and so pretermitted; or if re∣turned, rejected at the House it self to his fowl reproach. It is a Fundamental constitution of the Realm of England, that every Free-man hath a voice in the Legislative power of Parliament: & it is an old rule in Politics, uod omnes tangit ab omnibus tractari debetAnd so acknowleged in a writ of Summons of K. Edw. 1.. Which being now deny∣ed to the English Clergy, reduceth to them to that
condition which St. Paul complains of; and make them no otherwise accounted of by the Common people, than as, , the filth and off-scowring of the world to this very day. 12. This tempts me to a brief discussion of a question exceeding weighty in it self, but not so much as thought of in this great disfran∣chisement, the slavery obtruded lately on the Eng∣lish Clergy: that is to say, whether that any two of the three Estates conspiring or agreeiug together can conclude on any thing unto the prejudice of the third. Bodinus that renowned States-man doth resolve it negatively; and states it thus, nihil a duobus ordinibus discerni posse, quo uni ex tribus incommodum inferatur, si res ad singulos ordines seor∣sum pertinetBodin. de Rep. l. 3. c. 7., that nothing can be done by two of the Estates to the disprofit of the third, in case the point proposed be such as concerns them se∣verally. The point was brought into debate up∣on this occasion. Henry the 3d. of France had summoned an Assembly of the three Estates or Con∣ventus Ordinum to be held at Bloys, Anno 1577. (The form and order of the which we have at large described by Thuanus Lib. 63.) But find∣ing that he could not bring his ends about so easi∣ly with that numerous body, as if they were contracted to a narrower compass, he caused it to be mov'd unto them that they should make choice of 36, twelve of each Estate, quos Rex cum de postu∣latis decerneret in consilium adhibere dignareturThuanus in hist. temp. l. 63.,
whom the King would deign call to counsail for the dispatch of such affairs and motions as had been either moved or proposed unto him. Which being very readily assented to by the Clergy and Nobility, who hoped thereby to find some favour in the Court, and by degrees to be admitted to the Privy Counsel, was ve∣ry earnestly opposed by Bodinus, being then Delegate or Commissioner for the Province of Veromandois, who saw full well that if bu∣sinesses were so carried, the Commons (which made the third Estate,) would find but little hopes to have their grievances redressed, their petitions answered.Bodin. de Rep. l. 1. c. 7 And therefore labour∣ed the rest of the Commissioners not to yield unto it, as being utterly destructive of the Rights and Liberties of the Common people: which having done, he was by them intrusted to debate the business before the other two Estates, and did it to so good effect, that at the last he took them off from their resolution, and obtained the cause. What Arguments he u∣sed in particular, neither himself nor Thuanus telleth us. But sure I am that he insisted both on the antient customes of the Realm of France, as also of the Realms of Spain and England, and the Roman Empire; in each of which it was received for a ruled case, nihil a duobus ordinibus statui posse, quo uni ex tribus prejudicium creare∣tur, that nothing could be done by any of the two Estates unto the prejudice of the third.
And if it were a ruled case, then in the Parlia∣ment of England, there is no reason why it should be otherwise in the present times, the equity and justice of it being still the same, and the same reasons for it now as forcible, as they could be then. Had it been otherwise resol∣ved of in the former ages, wherein the Clergy were so prevalent in all publique Counsails, how easie a matter had it been for them either by joyning with the Nobility to exclude the Commons, or by joyning with the Commonalty to exclude the Nobles? Or having too much conscience to adventure on so great a change, an alteration so incompatible and inconsistent with the Constitution of a Parliament; how easily might they have suppressed the potency, and impaird the Privileges of either of the other two, by working on the humours or affecti∣ons of the one to keep down the other? But these were Arts not known in the former daies, nor had been thought of in these last, but by men of ruine, who were resolved to change the Government (as the event doth shew too clearly) both of Church and State. Nor doth it help the matter in the least degree, to say that the exclusion of the Bishops from the House of Peers, was not done meerly by the pra∣ctice of the two other Estates, but by the asset of the King, of whom the Laws say he can do no wrong, and by an Act of Parliament wherof our Laws yet say, quae ul doit imaginer chose disho∣nourable,
Plowden in Commen∣tar. that no man is to think dis∣honourably. For we know well in what condition the King was when he passed that Act, to what extremities he was reduced, on what terms he stood, how he was forced to flye from his City of London, to part with his dear Wife and Children, and in a word so over∣powred by the prevailing party in the two Houses of Parliament, that it was not safe for him (as his case then was) to deny them any thing. And for the Act of Parliament so undu∣ly gained, besides that the Bill had been re∣jected when it was first brought unto the Lords, and that the greater part of the Lords were frighted out of the House, when contrary un∣to the course of Parliament it was brought a∣gain; it is a point resolved both in Law and reason, that the Parliament can do nothing to the destruction of it self, and that such Acts as are extorted from the King are not good and valid, whereof we have a fair example in the Book of Statuers15 Ed. 3.. "For whereas the King had granted certain Ar∣ticles pretended to be granted in the form of a Sta∣tute, expresly contrary to the Laws of the Realm and his own Prerogative and rights royal (mark it, for this is just the case) which he had yielded to eschew the dangers, which by denying of the same were like to follow:" in the same Parlia∣ment it was repealed in these following words; It seemed good io the said Earls, Barons, and other
wise men, that since the Statute did not proceed of our free will, the same be void; and ought not to have the name nor strength of a Statute, and therefore by their counsail and assent we have decreed the said Sta∣tute to be void, &c. Or if it should not be re∣pealed in a formal manner, yet is this Act however gotten, void in effect already by a for∣mer Statute, in which it was enacted in full Parliament, and at the self same place where this Act was gained, that the Great Charter (by which and many other Titles the Bishops held their place in Parliament) should be kept in all points, and if any Statute be made to the contra∣ry, it shall be holden for none42 Ed. 3. c. 1..
CHAP. VI. That the three Estates of every Kingdom where∣of CALVIN speaks, have no authority either to regulate the power, or controll the Actions of the Soveraign Prince. (I.) The Bishops and Clergy of England, not the King, make the third Estate, and of the dangerous consequences which may follow on the contrary Tenet. (II.) The different influence of the three Estates upon conditional Princes, and an absolute Mo∣narch. (III.) The Sanhedrim of no authority over the persons, or the actions of the Kings of Judah. (IV.) The three Estates in France of  small authority over the actions of that King. (V.) The King of Spain not over-ruled, or regu∣lated by the three Estates. (VI.) Of what authority they have been antiently in the Parliaments of Scotland. (VII.) The King of England alwaies accounted heretofore for an absolute Monarch. (VIII.)  part of Soveraignty invested legal∣ly in the English Parliaments. (IX.) The three Estates assembled in the Parlia∣ment of England, subordinate unto the King, not co-ordinate with him. (X.) The Legislative power of Parliaments is
properly and legally in the King alone. (XI.) In what particulars the power of the English Parliament doth consist especially. (XII.) The Kings of England ordinarily over∣rule teir Parliaments by themselves, their Counsel, and their Judges. (XIII.) Objections answered touching the power and practice of some former Parliaments, and the testi∣monies given unto them. (XIV.) No such Authority given by God in Holy Scripture to any such Popular Magistrates, as CAL∣VIN dreams of and pretends. (XV.) The Application and Conclusion of the whole Discourse. I Have been purposely more copious in the former Chapter, because I thought it neces∣say to declare and manifest who made the three Estates in each several Kingdom, which are pretended by our Author to have such power of regulating the authority, and censuring the acti∣ons and the persons of their Soveraign Princes. And this the rather in regard it is thought of late, and (more than thought) presented to the world in some publick writings, (especially as it relates to the Realm of England) that the King, the Lords, and Commons, make the three Estates: which brings the King into an equal rank with the other two in reference to the businesse and af∣fairs of Parliament. A fancy, by what Acci∣dent soever it was broached and published,
which hath no consistence either with truth, or ordinary observation, or with the practice of this Realm, or of any other. For the proof of this my position, that the King is none of the three Estates as is now pretended, if all proofs else should fail, I have one from Calvin, whose judgement in this point amongst many of us, will be instar omnium. For where he saith in singulis Regnis tres esse Ordines,Calvin, instt. 4. cap. ult. that there are three Estates in each several Kingdom, and that these three Estates con∣vened in Parliament, (or by what other name soever they call their meeting) are furnished with a power Regum libidinem moderandi, of modera∣ting the licentiousness of Kings and Princes; and that they become guilty of perfidious dissimula∣tion, si Regibus impotenter grassantibus, &c. If they connive at Kings, when they play the Ty∣rants, or wantonly insult on the Common-people: I trow it cannot be conceived that the King is any one of the three Estates, who are here trusted (or at least supposed to be intrusted) with sufficient power, as well to regulate his au∣thority, as to controll his actions. If Calvin be allowed to have common sense, and to have wit and words enough to expresse his meaning, (as even his greatest Adversaries do confesse he had) it must be granted that he did not take the King of what Realm soever, to be any of the three E∣states: or if he did, he would have thought of o∣ther means to restrain his insolencies, than by leaving him in his own hands, to his own cor∣rection. Either then Calvin is mistaken in the
three Estates, (& if he be mistaken in designing the men he aims at, may he not be mistaken in the power he gives them?) or else the King is noe, & indeed can be none of the three Estates, qui primari∣os conventus peragunt, who usually convene in Par∣liament for those ends and purposes before remem∣bred. But not to trust to him alone, though questionlesse he be ideoneus testis in the present case; Let us behold the Assembly of the three E∣states or Conventus Ordinum in France (from whence it is conceived that all Assemblies of this kind had their first Original) and we shall find a very full description of them in the Assemblie des Estats at Bloys under Henry 3. Anno 1577. of which thus Thuanus.Thuanus in histor. sui temp. l. 63. "Rex insublimi loco sub uranisco sedebat, &c. The King, saith he, sate on an high erect∣ed Throne under the Canopy of State, the Queen-mother, and the Queen his wife, and all the Cardinals, Princes, Peers upon either hand. And then it followeth, Transtris infra dispositis ad dextram suam sacri Ordinis Delegati, ad laevam Nobilitas, & infra plebetus ordo sedebat, that on some lower forms there sate the Delegates of the Clergy towards the right hand of the King, the Nobility towards the left, and the Commis∣sioners for the Commons in the space below." We may conjecture at the rest by the view of this: Of those in Spain, by those Conventions of the States which before we spoke of, at Burgos, Monson, Toledo, and in other places, in which the King is alwaies mentioned as a different person, who called them, and dissolved them as he saw
occasion. For Scotland, it is ordinary in the stile of Parliaments, to say the King and the Estates do ordain and constitute;Statutes of Scotland. (for which I do refer you to the Book of Statutes) which clearly makes the K. to be a different person from the Estates of that Kingdome. And as for England, besides what may be gathered from the former Chapter, we read in the History of Titus Livius, touching the Reign and Acts of K. Henry the 5th. that when his Funerals were ended, the three Estates of the Realm of England did assemble together and declared his Son K. Henry the 6. being an Infant of 8 months old to be their Soveraign Lord,Tit. Liv. M. S. in Bibl. Bodl. as his Heir and Successor. "And in the Parliament Rolls of K. Richard the 3d. there is mention of a Bill or Parchment presented to that Prince, being then Duke of Glocester, on the behalf and in the name of the three Estates of this Realm of England, that is to wit, of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Commons by name: which forasmuch as nei∣ther the said three Estates, nor the persons which delivered it on their behalf were then assemb∣led in form of Parliament, was afterwards in the first Parliament of that King by the same three Estates assembled in this present Parliament (I speak the very words of the Act it self) and by authority of the same, enrolled, recorded, and approved:Ap Speed in K. Rich. 3 And at the request, and by the assent of the three Estates of this Realm, that is to say, the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and Commons of this Land assembled in this present Parliament, and by authority of the same, it
be pronounced, decreed, and declared, that our said Soveraign Lord the King was, and is the very and undoubted heir of this Realm of Eng∣land, &c." And so it is acknowledged in a 1 Eliz. cap. 3. Statute of 1 Eliz. ca. 3. where the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in that Parliament as∣sembled, being said expresly and in terminis to re∣present the three Estates of the Realm of England, did recognize the Queens Majesty to be their true, lawfull, and undoubted Soveraign Liege Lady, and Queen. This makes it evident, that the King was not accounted in the times before for one of the three Estates of Parliament, nor can be so accounted in the present times. For considering that the Lords and Commons do most confessedly make two of the three Estates, and that the Clergy in an other Act of Parliament of the said Queens time, are confes∣sed to be one of the greatest States of the Realm,Statut. 8 Eliz. cap. 1. which Statute being still in force, doth clearly make the Clergy to be the third; either there must be more than three Estates in this Kingdome, which is a∣gainst the Doctrine of the present times, or else the King is none of the Estates, as indeed he is not, which was the matter to be proved. But I spend too much time in confuting that which hath so little ground to stand on, more than the dangerous consequences which are covered under it: For if the King be granted once to be no more than one of the three Estates, how can it choose but follow from so sad a Principle, that he is of no more power and consideration in the time of Parliament, than the House of Peers, which sometimes hath consisted of
three Lords, no more; or than the House of Com∣mons only, which hath many times consisted of no more than 80 or an hundred Gentlemen: but of far lesse consideration to all intents and purposes in the Law whatever, than both the Houses joy∣ned together. What else can follow hereupon but that the King must be co-ordinate with his two Houses of Parliament, and if co-ordinate, then to be over-ruled by their Joynt concurrence, bound to conform unto their Acts, and confirm their Ordinances; or upon case of inconformity and non-complyance to see them put in execution against his liking and consents, to his foul re∣proach. And what at last will be the issue of this dangerous consequence, but that the Lords con∣tent themselves to come down to the Commons, and the King be no otherwise esteemed of than the chief of the Lords, the Princeps Senatus if you will, or the Duke of Venice, at the best no more, which if Sir Edward Dering may be credited, as I think he may in this particular, seems to have been the main design of some of the most popular and powerfull Members then sitting with him, for which I do refer the Reader to his book of Speeches. Which dangerous consequents whe∣ther they were observed at first by these who first ventured on the expression, or were impro∣vidently looked over, I can hardly say. Cer∣tain I am, it gave too manifest an advantage to the Antimonarchical party in this Kingdome, and hardned them in their proceeding against their King, whom they were taught to look on and e∣steem
no otherwise than as a Joynt-tenant of the Soveraignty with the Lords and Commons. And if Kings have partners in the Soveraignty, they are then no King; such being the nature and law of Monarchy, that si divisionem capiat interitum capiat necesse est,Lactant Institut. Div. l. 1. c. if it be once divided, and the autho∣rities thereof imparted, it is soon destroyed. Such is the dangerous consequence of this new Ex∣pression, that it seemeth utterly to deprive the Bi∣shops, and in them the Clergy of this Land, of all future hopes of being restored again to their place in Parliament. For being the Parliament can consist but of three Estates, if the King fall so low as to pass for one, either the Bishops or the Com∣mons, or the Temporal Lords must desert their claim, the better to make way for this new pre∣tension: and in all probability the Commons being grown so potent, and the Nobility so numerous and united in blood and mariages, will not quit their interesse; and therefore the poor Clergy must be no Estate, because lesse able, as the world now goeth with them, to maintain their title. I have of∣ten read that Constantine did use to call himself Euseb. de vita Con∣stant. the Bishop or Superin∣tendent of his Bishops; and I have oft heard our Lawyers say, that the King is the general Ordinary of the Kingdome: but never heard nor read till within these few yearrs, that ever any King did possess himself of the Bishops place or vote in Par∣liament, or sate there as the first of the three E∣states (as antiently the Bishops did) to supply their absence. By which device, whether the Clergy
or the King be the greater losers (though it be partly seen already) future times will shew. (2.) This rub removed, we next proceed to the examination of that power, which by our Author is conferred on the three Estates: which we shall find on search and tryal to be very dif∣ferent, according to the constitution of the King∣dome in which they are. For where the Kings are absolute Monarchs, as in England, Scotland, France, and Spain,Bodin de Repub. l. 1. c. the three Estates, have properly and legally little more authority, than to advise their King, as they see occasion, to represent unto his view their common grievances, and to pro∣pose such remedies, for redresse therof, as to them seem meetest, to canvass and review such errone∣ous judgements as formerly have passed in infe∣riour Courts, and finally to consult about, and prepare such laws as are expedient for the pub∣lick. In other Countries where the Kings are more conditional, and hold their Crowns by com∣pact and agreement betweeen them and their Sub∣jects; the reputation and authority of the three Estates is more high and eminent, as in Polonia, Danemark, and some others of the Northern King∣domes, where the Estates lay claim to more than a directive power, and think it not enough to ad∣vise their King, unless they may dispose of the Kingdome also, or at least make their King no better than a Royal Slave. Thus and no otherwise it is with the German Emperors, who are obnoxi∣ous to the Laws,Thuan. hist. sui temp. l. 2. and for their Government
accomptable to the Estates of the Empire: inso∣much that if the Princes of the Empire be per∣swaded in their consciences that he is likely by his mal-administration to destroy the Empire, and that he will not hearken to advice and counsel Anonym. Script. ap Phi∣lip. Paraeu in Append. d Rom. 13. ab Electorum Collegio Caesaria potestate privari po∣test, he may be deprived by the Electors, and a more fit and able man elected to supply the place. And to this purpose in a Constitution made by the Emperor Jodocus, about the year 1410. there is a clause, that if he or any one of his Successors do any thing unto the contrary thereof, the E∣lectors and other States of the Empire sine rebelli∣onis vel infidelitatis crimine libertatem habeant,Goldast. Constit. Impe∣rial. Tom. 3. p. 424. should be at liberty without incurring the crimes of Treason or Disloyalty, not only to oppose, but resist them in it. The like to which occurs for the Realm of Hungary, wherein K. Andrew gives authority to his Bishops, Lords, and other Nobles sine nota alicujus infidelitatis;Bonfi∣nius de Edict. publ. p. 37. that without any imputation of disloyalty, they may contradict, oppose, and resist their Kings, if they do any thing in violation of some Laws and san∣ctions. In Poland the King takes a solemn oath at his Coronation, to confirm all the Privileges, rights and liberties which have been granted to his Subjects of all ranks and orders by any of his Predecessors: and then addes this clause, quod si Sacramentum meum violavero, incolae Regni nullam no∣bis obedientiam praestare tenebuntur; which if he vi∣olates, his Subjects shall no longer be obliged to yield him obedience.Bodin de Rep. lib. 1. cap. 8. Which oath as Bodine
well observeth, doth savour rather of the condi∣tion of the Prince of the Senate, than of the Majesty of a King. The like may be affirmed of Frederick the first King of Danemark, who being called un∣to that Crown on the ejection of K. Christian the 2d. An. 1523. "was so conditioned with by the the Lords of the Kingdome, that at his coro∣nation, or before, he was fain to swear, that he would put none of the Nobility to death or ba∣nishment, but by the judgement of the Senate, that the great men should have power of life or death over their Tenants and Vassals, and that no Appeal should lye from them to the Kings tribunal, nor the King be partaker of the confiscations; nec item honores aut imperia privatis daturum, &cId. ibid. nor advance any private person to commands or honors, but by autho∣rity of his great Counsel." Which oath being also taken by Frederick the second, made Bodinus say, that the Kings of Danemark, non tam reipsa quam appellare Reges sunt, were only titular Kings, but not Kings indeed: Which character he also gives of the Kings of Bohemia.Id. ibid. p. 88. But in an ab∣solute Monarchy the case is otherwise, all the prerogatives and rights of Soveraignty being so vested in the Kings person, ut nec singulis civibus nec universis fac est, &c. that it is neither lawful to par∣ticular men, nor to the whole body of the Sub∣jects generally to call the Prince in question for life, fame, or fortunes:Id. ibid. p. 210. and amongst these he reckoneth the kingdoms of France, Spain, England, Scotland, the Tartars, Muscovites, & omnium paene
Africae & Asiae imperiorum, and of almost all the Kingdomes of Africk, and Asia. But this we shall the better see by looking over the particu∣lars as they lye before us. (3.) But first before we come unto those par∣ticulars we will look backwards on the condition and authority of the Jewish Sanhedrim; which being instituted and ordained by the Lord him∣self, may serve to be a leading case in the pre∣sent business. For being that the Iews were the Lords own people, and their Kings honored with the title of the Lords Anointed: it will be thought, that if the Sanhedrim, or the great Coun∣cel of the seventie had any authority and power over the Kings of Iudah, (of whose jus Regni such a large description is made by God himself in the first of Sam. cap. 8.) the three Estates may reaso∣nably expect the like in these parts of Christendom. Now for the authority of the Sanhedrim, it is said by Cardinal Baronius, that they had power of ju∣dicature over the Law, the Prophets, and the Kings themselves.Baron. Annal. Eccl. An. 31. §. 10. Erat horum summa autoritas ut qui de lege cognoscerent, & Prophetis, & simul de Regnibus judicarent. Which false position he confirms by as false an instance, affirming in the very next words, horum judicio Herodem Re∣gem postulatum esse, that King Herod was conven∣ted and convicted by them; for which he cites Iosephus with the like integrity. I should have wondred very much what should occasion such a grosse mistake in the learned Cardinal, had I
not shewn before, that as he makes the Sanhedrim to rule the King, so he hath made the high Priest to rule the Sanhedrim: which to what purpose it was done every man can tell, who knoweth the Cardinal endeavoureth nothing more in his large Collections, than to advance the dignity and supremacy of the Popes of Rome.Id. in Epist dedi∣cator. But for the pow∣er pretended to be in the Sanhedrim, and their proceedings against Herod as their actual King; Iosephus when he cite's is so far from saying it, that he doth expresly say the contrary. For, as Jose∣phus tells the story, Hyrcanus was then King, not Herod; and Herod of so little hopes to enjoy the Kingdom, that he could not possibly pretend any Title to it. But having a command in Galilee pro∣cured by Antipater his Father, of the good King Hyrcanus, he had played the wanton Governor a∣mongst them, and put some of them to death against Law and Justice. For which the Mo∣thers of the slain , did often call upon the King and people in the open Temple, ,Joseph. Antq Judic. l. 14. cap. 17. &c. that Herod might answer for the murther before the Sanhedrim, Which being granted by the King, he was accordingly convented by them, and had been questionlesse condemned, had not the King, who loved him dearly, given him no∣tice of it; on whose advertisement he went out of the Town, and so escaped the danger. This is the substance of that story: and this gives no au∣thority to the Court of Sanhedrim, over the persons or the actions of the Kings of Iudah. Others there
are, who make them equal to the Kings, though not superiour, (Magnam fuisse Senatus autoritatem & Regiae velut parem,Grotius in Matth. cap. 5. v. 22. saith the learned Grotius:) And for the proof thereof allege those words of Sedechias in the Book of Ieremie: who when the Princes of his Realm required of him to put the Prophet to death, returned this Answer,Jerem. 38. 5. Be∣hold he is in your hnd, Rex enim contra vos nihil potest, for the King is not he that can do any thing a∣gainst you. Which words are also cited by Mr. Prynne to prove that the King of England hath no Negative voyce;Prynne of Parl. pt. 2. p. 73. but by neither rightly. For Calvin (who, as one observeth, composed his expo∣sitions on the book of God according to the do∣ctrine of his InstitutionsHookers preface.) would not have lost so fair an evidence for the advancing of the power of his three Estates: had he conceived he could have made it serviceable to his end and purpose. But he upon the contrary finds fault with them, who do so expound it, or think the King did speak so honorably of his Princes, ac si nihil iis sit nequan∣dum Calvin. in Jerem. c. 38. v. 5. as if it were not to deny them any thing. Not so, saith he, it rather is amerulenta Regis querimonia, a sad and bitter complaint of the poor captivated King against his Counsellors; by whom he was so over-ruled, ut velit nolit cedere iis cognitur, that he was forced to yield to them whether he would or not: which he expresly calls inexcusabilem arrogantium, an intollerable piece of sawciness in those Princes, and an exclu∣sion of the King from his legal rights.
(4) Let us next take a view of such Christian Kingdomes as are under the command of abso∣lute Monarchs. And first we will begin with the Realm of France, the government whereof is meerly Regal, if not despotical, such as that of a Master over his Servants: which Aristotle defineth to be a form of Government, , Aristot. Politic. l. 3. wherein the King may do whatsoever he list, according to the counsel of his own mind. For in his Arbitrary Edicts which he sendeth abroad, he never mentioneth the consent of the People, or the approbation of the Counsel, or the advice of his Judges (which might be thought to dero∣gate too much from his absolute power) but con∣cludes all of them in this Regal form, Car tel est no∣stre plaisir, for such is our pleasure. And though the Court of Parliament in Paris do use to take up∣on them to peruse his Edicts, before they passe a∣broad forView of France by Dallington. Laws, and sometime to demurr on his grants, and patents, and to petition him to reverse the same, as they see occasion; yet their perusal is a matter but of meer formality, and their demurs more dilatory than effectual. It is the Car tel est nostre plaisir that concludes the busi∣ness, and the Kings pleasure is the Law which that Court is ruled by. As for the Assemblie des Estats, or Conventus Ordinum, it was reputed an∣tiently the Supreme Court for government and ju∣stice of all the Kingdome; and had the cogni∣zance of the greatest and most weighty affairs of State. But these meetings have been long
since discontinued, and almost forgotten: there being no such Assembly from the time of K. Charles the eighth, to the beginning of the reign of K. Charles the ninth,Thuanus hist. sui temp. which was 70 years, and not many since. And to say truth, they could be but of little use, as the world now goeth, were the meetings oftner. For whereas there are three Principal, if not sole occasions of calling this As∣semblie, or Conventus Ordinum, that is to say, the disposing of the Regency, during the nonage or sickness of the King, the granting aids and sub∣sidies, and the redress of the grievances: there is now another course taken to dispatch their busi∣ness. The Parliament of Paris, which speaks most commonly as it is prompted by power and greatness, appointeth the Regent;Contin. Thuani. An. 1610. the Kings themselves together with their Treasurers and Under-officers determine of the taxes,View of France. and they that do complain of grievances may either have recourse to the Courts of justice, or else pe∣tition to the King for redress thereof. And for the making new Laws or repealing the old, the naturalization of the Alien, and the regulating of his sales or grants of the Crown-lands, the publick patrimony of the Kingdome, which were wont to be the proper subject and debates of these grand Assemblies: they also have been so disposed of, that the Conventus Ordinum is neither troubled with them, nor called about them. The Cham∣ber of Accompts in Paris (which hath some resem∣blance to our Court of Exchequer) doth absolute∣ly dispose of Naturalizations, and superficially sur∣veyeth
the Kings grants and sales,Andr. Du Mesn. which they seldom cross. The Kings Car tel est nostre plaisir is the Subjects law, and is as binding as any Act or Ordinance of the three Estates: and for repeal∣ing of such Laws as upon long experience are conceived to be unprofitable, the Kings sole E∣dict is as powerfull as any Act of Parliament. Of which Bodinus, doth not only say in these general terms, Saepe vidimus sine Ordinum convocatione & consensu leges à Principe abrogatasBodin. de Rep. lib. 1. cap. 8.. that many times these Kings did abrogate some antient laws without the calling and consent of the three E∣states: but saith, that it was neither new nor strange that they should so do, and gives us some par∣ticular instances, not only of the later times but the former ages. Nay when the power of this Assemblie des Estats was most great and eminent, neither so curtailled nor neglected as it hath been lately; yet then they carried themselves with the greatest reverence and respect before their King, that could be possibly imagined. For in the As∣sembly held at Tours under Charles the 8. though the King was then no more than 14 years of age, and the authority of that Court so great and aw∣full that it was never at so high an eminence for power and reputation, quanta illis temporibus, as it was at that time: yet when they came before the King, Monseiur de Rell being then Speaker for the Commons or the third Estate, did in the name of all the rest, and with as much humility and reve∣rence as he could devise, promise such duty and obedience, such a conformity of his will and
pleasure, such readiness to supply his wants, and such alacrity in hearking unto his Com∣mandements, that as Bodinus well observes, his▪ whole Oration was nothing else, quam per∣petua voluntatis omnium erga Regem testificatioId. ibid., but a constant testimony and expression of the good affections of the subject to their Lord and Soveraign. But whatsoever power they had in former times is not now material, King Lewis the thirteenth, having (on good rea∣son of State) discharged those Conventions for the time ensuing, Instead whereof he instituted an Assembly of another temper, and such as should be more obnoxious to his will and plea∣sure, consisting of a certain number of persons out of each Estate, but all of his own nomination and appointment, which joyn'd with certain of his Counsel and principal Officers, he caused to be called L' Assembly des Notables, assigning to them all the power and privileges which the later Con∣ventions of the three Estates did pretend unto; right well assured that men so nominated and in∣trusted would never use their powers to his de∣triment, and disturbance of his Heirs and Suc∣cessors. 5. But to proceed, Bodinus having shewn what dutifull respects the Convention of Estates in France shewed unto their King, addes this note, nec aliter Hispanorum conventus habentur, that the Assembly of the three Estates in the Realms of Spain carry themselves with the like reverence
and submission to their Lord the King: Nay ma∣jor etiam obedientia & majus obsequium Regi exhibe∣tur, Id. ibid. the King of Spain hath more obedience and observance from his three Estates, than that which is afforded to the Kings of France. Which being but general and comparative, is yet enough to let us see that the Assembly of Estates in the Realms of Spain, which they call the Curia, is very observant of their King and obsequious to him, and have but little of that power which is suppo∣sed by our Author to be inherent in the three Estates of all the Christian Kingdoms, But this Bodinus proveth more particularly, ascribing to the King, and to him alone, the power of calling this Assem∣blie when he sees occasion, and of dissolving it again when his work is done; according as is u∣sed both in France and England. And when they are assembled and met together, their Acts and consultations are of no effect, further than as they are confirmed by the Kings consent. Which he declareth in the same form (eadem formulà quâ apud nos) that hath accustomably been used by the Kings of France, which is authoritative e∣nough; that is to sayId. ibid. p. 90. decernimus, statuimus, vo∣lumus, We will, and we appoint, and we have decreed. The Kings of Spain, though not so despo∣tical in their Government as the French Kings are, are as absolute Monarchs, and have as great an influence on the three Estates, to make them pliant to their will, and to work out their own ends by them, as ever had the French Kings on their Courts of Parliament: a touch whereof we had
before in the former Chapter. And this we may yet further see by their observance of the plea∣sure of King Philip the 2d. Who having maried the Lady Elizabeth Daughter of Henry the 2d. of France, Convocatos Castellae & reliquarum Hispaniae Provinciarum Ordines,Thuan. ist. sui temp. h 23. l. calling together the E∣states of Castile and his other Provinces of Spain, he caused them to swear to the succession of his Son Prince Charles, whom he had by the Lady Mary of Portugal, and after having on some jealousies of State put that Prince to death, caused them to swear to the succession of another son by the Lady of Austria. And for the power of his Edicts, which they call Pragmaticas, they are as binding to the Subject as an Act of Parliament, or any kind of Law whatever: examples of the which are ve∣ry obvious and familiar in the Spanish Histories. For though there be a body of Laws in use a∣mongst them, partly made up of some old Gothish Laws and Constitutions, and partly of some parts of the Law imperial: yet for the explanation of the Laws in force, if any doubt arise about them, or for supplying such defects which in the best colllection of the Laws may occur sometimes, the Magistrates and Judges are to have recourse to the King alone, and to conform to such in∣structions as he gives them in it. And this is it which was ordained by Alfonso the tenth, qui etiam magistratus ac judices Principem adire jussit, quoties patrio jure nihil de proposita causa scriptum essetBodin. de Rep. lib. 1. cap. 8., as Bodinus hath it. 'Tis true that for the raising of supplies of mony, and the imposing of extraordi∣nary
taxes upon the subject, the Kings of Spain must be beholden to the three Estates, without whose consent it cannot legally be done. But then it is as true withall, that there are customa∣ry tributes called ServitiaId. ibid. p. 90. which the King raiseth of his own authority without such con∣sent. And their consenting to the extraordinary is a thing of course: the Spanish Nation being so well affected naturally to the power and great∣ness of their Kings, whom they desire to make considerable if not formidable in the opinion of their Neighbours, that the Kings seldome fail of monies if the Subjects have it. Finally that we may perceive how absolute this Monarch is over all the Courts or Curias of his whole domi∣nions; take this along according as it stands ver∣batim Spanish hist. 67. by Tyrannell. in the Spanish Historie. "The King of Spain as he is a potent Prince and Lord of many Countries, so hath he many Counsels for the managing of their affairs distinctly and a∣part without any confusion: every Counsel trea∣ting only of those matters which concern their Jurisdiction and charges: with which Coun∣sels and with the Presidents thereof, being men of chief note, the King doth usually confer touching matters belonging to the good Go∣vernment, preservation, and increase of his E∣states, and having heard every mans opinion, he commands that to be executed which he holds most fit and convenient.." 6. Next let us take a view of Scotland, and we
shall find it there no otherwise (I mean in refe∣rence to the point which is now in question) than in France or Spain. For besides that Bodinus makes it one of those absolute Monarchies, ubi Reges sine controversia omnia jura Majestatis habent per sese, Bodin. de Repub. l. 2. c. 7. in which the Kings have clearly all the rights of Majesty inherent in their own persons only: it is declared in the Records of that very King∣dome, that the King is directus totius dominus, Camden n Britan. de∣icript.  the Soveraign Lord of the whole State, and hath all authority and jurisdiction over all estates and degrees, aswel Ecclesiastical as lay or temporal. And as for those Estates and Degrees convened in Parliament, we may conjecture at their power, by that which is delivered of the form or order which they held it in; which is briefly this. Form of holding the Parl. in Scotl. "Assoon as the Kings writ is issued out for summoning the Estates to meet in Parliament, he maketh choyse of eight of the Spiritual Lords, such on whose wisdom and integrity he may most rely; which eight do choose as many of the Temporal Lords, and they together nominate eight more out of the Commissioners for the Counties, and as many out of the Commissioners for the Towns or Burroughs. These 32 thus chosen are called Domini pro Articulis, Lords of the Articles: and they together with the Chancellor, Treasurer, Kee∣per of the Privy Seal, and Principal Secretaries of state, and the Master of the Rolls (whom they call Clerk Register) do admit or reject every bill; [but not before they have been shewn unto the King] if they pass there they are presented afterwards
to the whole Assembly, where being thorowly weighed, and examined, & put unto the votes of the house; such of them as are carried by the ma∣jor part of the Voices (for the Lords and Commons sit together in the same house there) are on the last day of the Sessions exhibited to the King: who by touching them with his Scepter pronoun∣ceth that he either ratifieth and approveth them, or that he doth disable them and make them void. But if the business be disliked by the Lords of the Articles it proceeds no further, and never comes unto the consideration of the Parliament, or if the King dislikes of any thing in it when they shew it to him, it either is ra∣zed out or mended before it be presented to the publick view." King James of blessed memory, who very well understood his own power and the forms of that Parliament, describes it much to the same purpose, in his Speech made at White∣hall, March 31. Anno 1607. "About twenty daies (saith he) before the Parliament, Procla∣mation is made throughout the Kingdom to de∣liver unto the Kings Clerk of Register all Bils to be exhibited that Session before a certain day. Then are they brought unto the King, and perused and considered by him, and only such as he alloweth of are put into the Chancellors hands to be propounded to the Parliament, and none others. And if any other man in Parlia∣ment speak of any other matter than is in this sort first allowed by the King, the Chancellor telleth him that the King hath allowed of no
such Bill. Besides, when they have passed them for Laws they are presented to the King, and he with his Scepter put into his hands by the Chancellor, must say, I ratifie and approve all things done in this present Parliament. And if there be any thing that he disliketh it is razed out before." So the eldest Parliament-man as he said himself, at that time in Scotland. This was the form of holding Parliaments in Scotland, which, whosoever doth consider with a serious eye may perceive most plainly, that it is wholly in the Kings power to frame the Parlia∣ment to his own will, or at the least to hinder it from doing any thing to the prejudice of his Roy∣al Crown and Dignity: in that the nominating of the Lords of the Articles did in a manner totally depend on him. Which being observed by the Scots, they took the opportunity when they were in Arms to pass an Act during the Presidency of the Lord Burley, Anno 1640.Acts of Parliaments, 16 Carol. for the abolition of this Order, and for reducing of that Parliament to the forms of England; as being thought more advantagious to their purposes, than the former was. So that the violent disloyalty of the Scotish Subjects, their Insurrections against their Kings, and murdering them sometimes when their heels were up, which makes that Nation so ill spoke of in the Stories of Christendom, are not to be impu∣ted to the three Estates convened in Parliament, or to any power or Act of theirs, but only praefer∣vido Scotorum ingenioRivet cont. tenuit. as one pleads it for them, unto the natural disposition of that fierce
and head-strong people, yet easilier made sub∣ject unto rule and government. The three Estates assembled in the Court of Parliament, (when in the judgement of our Author they are most fit to undertake the business) have for the most part had no hand in those desperate courses. 7. And now at last we ate come to Eng∣land, where, since we came no sooner, we will stay the longer: and here we shall behold the King established in an absolute Monarchy, from whom the meeting of the three Estates in Parlia∣ment detracteth nothing of his power and autho∣rity Royal. Bodin as great a Politick as any of his time in the Realm of France, hath ranked our Kings amongst the absolute Monarch of these We∣stern partsBodin de Rep. l. 1. c. 8.. And Camden as renowned an Antiquary as any of the Age he lived in, hath told us of the King of England, supremam potesta∣tem & merum imperium habereCamden in Britan. de∣script., "that he hath supreme power and absolute command in his dominions; and that he neither holds his Crown in vassallage, nor receiveth his investi∣sture of any other, nor acknowledgeth any Su∣periour, but God alone." To prove this last, he cites these memorable words from Bracton an old English Lawyer, omnis quidem sub Rege, & ipse sub nullo sed tantum sub deo, that every man is under the King, but the King under none saving only God. But Bracton tells us more than this, and affirms expresly, that the King hath supreme power and jurisdiction over all causes and per∣sons
in this his Majesties Realm of England, that all jurisdictions are vested in him and are issued from him, and that he hath jus gladii, or the right of the sword, for the better governance of his people. This is the substance of his words, but the words are these,Bracton de leg. Agl. l. 2. c. 24. Sciendum est (saith he) quod ipse dominus Rex ordinariam habet jurisdictio∣nem & dignitatem & potestatem super omnes qui in regno suo sunt. Habet enim omnia jura in manu sua quae ad coronam & laicalem pertinent potestatem, & materialem gladium qui pertinet ad Regni guber∣nandum, &c. He addes yet surther. Habet item in potestate sua leges & constitutionesId. l. 2. c. 16., that the Laws and constitutions of the Realm, are in the power of the King: by which words, whether he meaneth that the Legislative power is in the King, and whether the Legislative power be in him, and in him alone, we shall see anon. But sure I am, that he ascribes unto the King the power of interpreting the Law in all doubtfull cases, in du∣biis & obscuris domini Regis expectanda interpretatio & voluntas, which is plain enough. For though he speaketh only de chartis Regiis & factis Regum, of the Kings deeds and charters only, as the words seem to import; yet considering the times in which he lived (being Chief Justice in the time of King Henry the 3d.) wherein there was but little written Law more than what was com∣prehended in the Kings Grants and Charters, he may be understood of all Laws whatever. And so much is collected out of Bractons words by the L. Chancellor Egerton, of whom it may be said
without envy, that he was as grave and learned a Lawyer, as ever sat upon that Bench. "Who gathereth out of Bracton, that all cases not determined for want of foresight are in the King, to whom belongs the right of interpre∣tation, not in plain and evident cases, but only in new questions and emergent doubts; and that the King hath as much right by the con∣stitutions of this Kingdom, as the Civil law gave the Roman Emperors, where it is said, Rex solus judicat de causa a jure non definitaCase of the Post-nati. p. 107, 108.." And though the Kings make not any Laws without the counsel and consent of his Lords and Commons, whereof we shall speak more in the following Section, yet in such cases where the Laws do pro∣vide no remedy, and in such matters as concern the politick administration of his Kingdoms, he may and doth take order by his Proclamations. He also hath authority by his Prerogative Royal to dispense with the rigour of the Laws, and sometimes to pass by a Statute with a non obstante, as in the Statute 1 Henr. 4. cap. 6. touching the va∣lue to be specified of such lands, offices, or annuities, &c, as by the King are granted in his Letters patents. But these will better come with∣in the compasse of those jura Majestatis or rights of Soveraignty, which our Lawyers call sacra & individuaCamden in Bit.: sacred, by reason they are not to be pryed into with irreverent eyes; and individual or inseparable, because they cannot be commu∣nicated unto any other. Of which kind are the levying of ArmsCase of our Assairs. p. 3., suppressing of tumults and
rebellions, providing for the present safety of his Kingdom against sudden dangers, convoking of Parliaments, and dissolving them, making of Peers, granting liberty of sending Burgesses to Towns and Cities, treating with forein States, making war, leagues, and peace, granting safe conduct and protection, indenizing, giving of ho∣nor, rewarding, pardoning, coyning, printing, and the like to these. But what need these par∣ticulars have been looked into, to prove the abso∣luteness and soveraignty of the Kings of England, when the whole body of the Realm hath affir∣med the same, and solemnly declared it in their Acts of Parliament. In one of which is affirmed, 16 Rich. 2. c. 5. that the Crown of England hath been so free at all times, that it hath been in no earthly subjection, but im∣mediatly to God, in all things touching the regality of the said Crown, and to none other. And in another Act, that the Realm of England is an Empire gover∣ned by one supreme head and King, having the Digni∣ty and Royal Estate of the Imperial Crown of the same, unto whom a Body politick compact of all sorts and de∣grees of people, divided in terms and by names of Spi∣ritualty and Temporalty been bounden and ought to bear next to God a natural and humble obedience24 Henr. 8. c. 12.. And more than so, that the King being the supreme head of this Body Politick is instituted and furnished by the goodness and sufferance of Almighty God with ple∣nary whole and entire power, preheminence, authority, prerogative, and jurisdiction to render and yield justice and final determination to all manner of Subjects within this Realm, and in all causes whatsoever.
Nor was this any new Opinion invented only to comply with the Princes humour, but such as is declared to have been fortified by sundry Laws and Ordinances made in former ParliamentsIbid.: and such as hath been since confirmed by a solemn Oath, taken and to be taken by most of the Subjects of this Kingdom, Which Oath consisting of two parts, the one Declaratory, and the other Promissory; in the Declaratory part the man thus taketh it doth declare and testifie in his conscience, that the Kings Highness is the only supreme Governor of this Realm and of all other his Dominions, and Countries, aswell in all spiritual or ecclesiastical things or causes as tem∣poral, &c.(l) 1 Eliz. c. 1. And in the Promissooy part, they make Oath and swear, that to their power they will assist and defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminences, and Authorities granted or belonging to the Kings Highness, his Heirs and Succcesseors, or united and an∣nexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. Put all which hath been said together, and it will ap∣pear, that if to have merum imperium, a full and absolute command, and all the jura majestatis which belong to Soveraignty, if to be so supreme as to hold immediatly of God, to have all persons under him, none but God above him; if to have all authority and jurisdiction to be vested in him, and proceeding from him, and the material sword at his sole disposal for the correcting of offenders and the well ordering of his people; if to have whole and entire power of rendring justice and final de∣termination of all causes to all manner of Subjects, us also to interpret and dispence with Laws; and
all this ratified and confirmed unto him by the so∣lemn Oath of his Subjects in the Court of Parlia∣ment, be enough to make an absolute Monarch: the Kings of England are more absolute Monarchs than either of their Neighbours of France or Spain. 8. If any thing may be said to detract from this, it is the new devise so much pressed of late, of placing the chief Soveraignty, or some part thereof, in the two Houses of Parliament: concerning which Mr. Prynne published a discourse entituled The supreme power of Parliaments and Kingdoms; and others in their Pamphlets upon that Argument have made the Parliament so absolute, and the King so limited, that of the two the Members of the Houses are the greater Monarchs. But this is but a new devise, not heard of in our former Monuments & Records of Law: nor proved, or to be proved indeed by any other Medium, than the Rebellions of Cade, Tiler, Straw, Kett, Mackerell, and the rest of that rascall rabblePrynnes book of Parl. &c. p. 3.; or the seditious Parliaments in the time of K. Henry the 3d. King Edward the 2d. and King Richard the 2d. when civil war and faction carried all before it. For neither have the Hou∣ses or either of them enjoyed such Soveraignty de facto in times well setled, and Parliaments lawful∣ly assembled, nor ever could pretend to the same de jure. Or if they did, as many have been apt enough to raise false pretences, it would much trouble them to determine whether this Sove∣raignty be conferred upon them by the King or the people, whether it be in either of the Houses se∣verally,
or in both united. If they can challenge this pretended Soveraignty in neither of these ca∣pacities, nor by none of these Titles, it may be warrantably concluded that there is no such Soveraignty as they do pretend to. And first there is no part nor branch of Soveraignty conferred upon them by the King. The writs of Summons which the Declaration of the Lords and Commons as∣sembled at Oxon. 1643. doth most truly call the foun∣dation of all power in ParliamentDeclara∣tion of the Treaty. p. 15., tell us no such matter. The writ directed to the Lords doth enable them only to confer and treat with one another, & consilium vestrum impendere, and to advise the King in such weighty matters as con∣cern the safety of the Kingdom. But they are only to advise, not compell the King, to counsell him, but not controll him; and to advise and counsel are no marks of Soveraignty, but rather works of service and subordination. Nor can they come to give this Counsel without he invite them, and being invited by his writ cannot choose but come, except he excuse them: which are sure notes of duty and subjection, but very sory signs of power and soveraignty. 'Tis true, that being come together they may and sometimes do, on a writ of Error, examin, and reverse or affirm such judgements as have been given in the Kings Bench: and from their sentence in the case there is no appeal, but only to the whole body of that Court, the King and both the Houses, the Head and MembersCase of our Affairs. p. 7, 8.. But this they do, not as the upper house of Parliament, but as the distinct court of the
Kings Barons of Parliament of a particular and mi∣nisterial jurisdiction, to some intents and purpo∣ses, and to some alone: which though it doth invest them with a power of judicature, confers not any thing upon them which belongs to Soveraign∣ty. Then for the Commons, all which the writ doth call them to is facere & consentire, to do and consent unto such things which are ordained by the Lords and Common Counsel of the Kingdom of England, and sure conformity and consent, which is all the writ requireth from them) are no marks of Soveraignty, nor can an Argument be drawn from thence by the subtillest Sophister, to shew that they are called to be partakers of the Sove∣raign power, or that the King intends to denude himself of any branch or leaf thereof to hide their nakednesse. And being met together in a body collective, they are so far from having any share in Soveraignty, that they cannot properly be called a Court of Judicature, as neither having any power to minister an OathId. p. 9., or to imprison any body (except it be some of their own Members if they see occasion) which are things incident to all Courts of Justice, and to every Steward of a Leet, insomuch that the House of Comons is compa∣red by some (and not incongruosly) unto the Grand Inquest at a general SessionsReview of the Obser∣vat. p. 22., whose prin∣cipal work it is to receive bils, and prepare busi∣nesses, and make them fit and ready for my Lords the Judges. Nay so far were they hereto∣fore from the thoughts of Soveraignty, that they were lyable to sutes and punishments for things
done in Parliament, though only to the preju∣dice of a private Subject, untill King Henry 8. most graciously passed a Law for their indemni∣ty. For whereas Richard Strode one of the com∣pany of Tinners in the County of Cornwall, being a Member of the Commons House, had spoken som∣what to the prejudice of that Society, and con∣trary to the Ordinances of the Stanneries; at his return into the Country, e was arested, fined, imprisoned. Complaint whereof being made in Parliament, the King passed a Law to this ef∣fect, viz.4 Hn. 8. c. 8. That ull sutes, condemnations, executi∣ons, charges and impositions put or hereafter to be put upon Richard Strode, and every of his Complices that be of this Parliament, or ay other hereafter, for any Bill, speaking, or reasoning of any thing concern∣ing the Parliament to be communed and treated of, shall be void and null: but neither any reparation was allowed to Strode, nor any punishment inflicted upon those that sued him, for ought appears upon Record. And for the Houses joyned to∣gether (which is the last capacity they can claim it in) they are so far from having the supreme autho∣rity, that (as it is observed by a learned Gentle∣man) "they cannot so unite or conjoyn as to be an entire Court either of Soveraign or Ministe∣rial jurisdiction; no otherwise co-operating than by concurrence of Votes in their several Hou∣ses, for preparing matters in order to an Act of ParliamentCase of our Affairs. p. 9.: Which when they have done, they are so far from having any legal authority in the State, as that in Law there is no stile nor
form of their joynt Acts; nor doth the Law so much as take notice of them until they have the Royal Assent. So that considering that the two Houses alone do no way make an entire Body or Court, and that there is no known stile nor form of any Law or Edict, by the Votes of the two Houses only, nor any notice taken of them by the Law; it is apparent that there is no So∣veraignty in their two Votes alone." How far the practise of the Lords & Commons which re∣maind at Westminster, after so many of both Hou∣ses had tepaired to the King, &c. may create Pre∣cedents unto posterity, I am not able to determine: but sure I am, they have no Precedent to shew from the former Ages. But let us go a little further and suppose for granted, that the Houses either joynt or separate be capable of the Soveraignty, were it given unto them: I would fain know whether they claim it from the King, or the people only. Not from the King, for he confers upon them no further power than to debate and treat of his great Affairs, to have access unto his person, freedome of Speech (as long as they contein themselves within the bounds of Loyalty) authority over their own Members: which being custumarily desiredHakewell of passing bils in Parliament, and of course obtained (as it relates into the Com∣mons) shews plainly, that these vulgar privileges are nothing more the rights of Parliament, than the favours of Princes, but yet such favours as impart not the least power of Soveraignty. Nor doth the calling of a Parliament ex opere operato as you know who phrase it, either denude the King of
the poorest robe of all his Royalty, or confer the same upon the Houses, or on either of them; whether the King intend so by his call, or other∣wise. For Bodin (whom Mr. Prynne hath honored with the title of a grand PoliticianPryn of Parliam. par. 2. p. 45.) doth affirm expresly, Principis majestatem nec Comitorum convo∣catione, nec Senatus populique praesentia minuiBodin. de Repub., that the majesty or Soveraignty of the King is not a jot diminished either by the calling of a Parlia∣ment or Conventus Ordinum, or by the frequency and presence of his Lords and Commons. Nay to say truth, the Majesty of Soveraign Princes is never so transcendent and conspicuous as when they sit in Parliament, with their States about them, the King then standing in his highest Estate, as was once said by Henry 8. who knew (as well as any of the Kings of England) how to keep up the ma∣jesty of the Crown Imperial. Nor can they claim it from the people, who have none to give; for nemo dat quod non habet, as the saying is. The King (as hath been proved before) doth hold his Roy∣al Crown immediately from God himself, not from the contract of the people. He writes not populi clementia, but Dei gratia, not by the favour of the people, but by the grace of God. The con∣sent and approbation of the people (used and not used before the day of coronation) is reckoned only as a part of the solemn pomps which are then accustomably used. The King is actually King to all intents and purposes in the Law whate∣ver, immediately on the death of his Predeces∣sor. Nor ever was it otherwise objected in the
Realm of England, till Clark and Watson pleaded it at their arraignment in the first year of King JamesSpeeds History in K. James.. Or grant we that the Majesty of this Kingdom was first originally in the people, and by them devolved upon the King by their joynt con∣sent: yet having given away that power by their said consent, and setled it upon the King by an Act of State, confirmed by Oaths and all solem∣nities which that Act requires; they cannot so retract that grant, or make void that gift, as to pass a new conveyance of it, and settle it upon their Representees in the House of Commons. Or if they could, yet this would utterly exclude all the Lords from having the least share or portion in this new found Soveraignty; in that they repre∣sent not the common people, but sit there only in their own personal capacities, and therefore must submit at last to these new made Soveraigns, who carry both the Purse & Sword at their own girdles. So then the people cannot give the Soveraignty, and if they have no power to give it, the Lords and Commons have no claim thereunto de jure. See we next therefore how much of this Soveraignty they or their Predecessors rather have enjoyed de facto, in peaceable and regular times, fit to be drawn into example in the Ages following. The chief particulars in which the Soveraignty consists we have seen before; and will now see whether that any of them been exercised and injoyed in peaceable and regular times by both or ei∣ther of the two Houses of Parliament. And first for calling and dissolving Parliaments, making of
Peers, granting of liberty to Towns and Cities, to make choyse of Burgesses, which antiently had no such liberty, treating with forein States, denouncing war, or making Leagues or Peace after war com∣menced, granting safe conduct and protection, in∣denizing of Aliens, giving of honors unto eminent and deserving persons, rewarding, pardoning, coy∣ning, printing, making of corporations, and dispensing with the Laws in force; they are such points which never Parliament did pretend to till these later times, wherein every thing almost is law∣full (I am sure more lawull) than to fear God and honor the King. Nor do I find that Mr. Prynne hath laboured to entitle them to these particu∣lars. For levying of Arms and the command of the Militia, besides that the Kings of England have ever been in possession of it, and that possession never disturbed or interrupted by any claim of right made in the behalf of the two Houses, (which is as sure a title as the Law can make): the Hou∣ses have declared by a Act of ParliamentSat. 7 Ed. 1. cap. 1., that of right it belongs unto the King streightly to defend (that is prohibit) all force of Arms, and that the Par∣liament is bound to aid him in that prohibition. Touch∣ing the Royal navy and the ports and forts, the Kings prescription to them is so strong and binding, that in the 3d. of Edward 3.Edw. 3. the House of Commons; did disclaim the having cognisance of such mat∣ters as the guarding of the Seas, and marches of the Kingdome: which certainly they had not done had they pretended any title to the ports and navy. As for suppressing tumults, and providing for the
safety of the Kingdom against sudden danger, the Law commits it solely to the care of the King: obli∣ging every Subject by the duty of his allegeance to aid and assist him at all seasons when need shall require11 Henr. 7. c. 18.. And for their power of declaring law in the House of Peers, wherein they deliver their opinion in the point before them, in true propriety of speech they have none at allCase of our Affairs, p. 4.. And this is that which was affirmed by his Majesty at the end of the Parlia∣ment, Anno 1628. saying, that it belonged only to the Iudges under him to interpret laws, and that none of the Houses of Parliament joynt or separate (what new Doctrine soever might be raised) had any power ei∣ther to make or declare law without his consent3 Car.. And if it be done with his consent, it is not so pro∣perly the declaring and interpreting of an old law, as the making rather of a new, saith a learned GentlemanCase of our affairs, P. 5.. 9. Others have found out a new way to in∣vest the Parliament with the robes of Soveraignty, not as superiour to the King, but co-ordinate with him: and this say they appears sufficiently in that the two Houses of Parliament have not only a power of con∣sulting but of consenting, and that too in the highest office of the Monarchy, (whereof they are a Coordina∣tive part) the making of LawsFuller Answer to D. F. p. 2.. Which dange∣rous doctrin as it was built at first on that former error which makes the King to be one of the three Estates in Parliament, so it is super-structed with some necessary consequents; whether more treaso∣nable or ridiculous, it is hard to say. For on
these grounds the Author of the Fuller Answers hath presented us with these trim devisesId. pag. 1., viz. that England is not a simple subordinate and absolute, but a coordinative and mixt Monarchy; that this mixt Monarchy is compounded of three coordinate Estates, a King and two Houses of Parliament; that these three make but one supreme, but that one is a mixt one, or else the Monarchy were not mizt; and finally, which needs must follow from the pre∣mises, that although every Member of the Houses sorsim, taken severally, may be called a Subject, yet all collective in their houses are no Subjects. Audi∣tum admissi risum teneatis? Can any man hear these serious follies and abstain from laughter? or think a fellow who pretends both to wit and learning should talk thus of a Monarchy (which e∣very one that knoweth any thing in Greek, know to imply the supreme government of one) compoun∣ded of three coordinate Estates, and those coordinate Estates consisting of no fewer than 600 persons? Or that a man who can pretend but to so much use of reason as to distinguish him from a beast, could fall on such a senselest Dotage, as to make the same man at the same time to be a Subject and no Subject; a Subject in the Streets and in his private House, no Subject when he sits in Haberdashers Hall for advance of moneys, or in either of the two Houses of Parliament? And yet this senseless Doctrine is become so dangerous, because so u∣niversally admired and hearkned to, that the be∣ginning and continuance of our long Disturban∣ces may chiefly be ascribed unto this opinion, to
which they have seduced the poor ignorant peo∣ple. The rather in regard that some who have undertook the confutation of these brainless solies, have most improvidently granted not onlyAs in the book called Conscience satisfied. that the two Houses of Parliament are in a sort coordinate with the King ad aliquid, to some Act or exercising of the supreme power, that is to the making of Laws; but that this coordination of the three Estates (of which the King is yielded every where for one) is fun∣damental, and held by the two Houses on no worse a title than a fundamental Constitution; which is as much as any reasonable Parliamentarian need de∣sire to have. Therefore in Answer to the Fuller, (not taking notice of his foolish and seditious in∣ferences) we will clear those points. 1. That the two Houses of Parliament are not coordinate with the King, but subordinate to him; And 2. that the power of making laws is properly and legally in the King alone. As for the first we had be∣fore a Recognition made by Act of Parliament, by which the Kingdom of England is acknowledged to be an Empire governed by one supreme head and King, to whom all sorts and degrees of people ought to bear next to God a natural and humble obedience24 H. 8. c. 12.: which certainly the Lords and Commons had not made to the dethroning of themselves, their heirs and successors from this coordinative part of Sove∣raignty, if any such coordination had been then be∣lieved. Or if it be supposed, to excuse the matter, that K. Henry the 8th. being a severe and terrible Prince did wrest this Recognition from them (which yet will hardly serve for a good defence:)
what shall we say to the like recognition made in the beginning of Queen Elizabeths reign1 Eliz. c. 1., when she was green in State, and her power unsetled, and so less apt to work upon her people by threats and terrors? Assuredly had the Houses dream't in those broken times of that coordinative Soveraignty, which is now pretended, they might have easily regained it, and made up that breach which by the violent assaults of King Henry the 8th. had been made upon them: which was a point they never aimed at. Besides, if this coordinative m∣jesty might be once admitted, it musts needs follow, that though the King hath no Superiour, he hath many Equalls; and where there is Equality there is no Subjection. But Bracton tells us in plain terms, not only that the King hath no Superiour in his Realm, except God almighty, but no Equal nei∣ther: and the reason which he gives is exceeding strong, Quia sic amitteret praeceptum, cum par in Parem non habeat potestatemBracton de leg. Agl. l. 1. c. 8▪, because he could not have an Equal, but with the losse of his Authori∣ty and Regal Dignity, considering that one Equal hath no power to command an other. Now lest the Fuller should object (as perhaps he may) that this is spoken of the King out of times of Parliament, and of the Members of the Houses seorsim, taken severally as particular persons; but when they are convened in Parliament, then they are Soveraigns and no Subjects: first he must know, that by the Statute of Queen Elizabeth all of the House of Commons are to take the oath before re∣membred for the defending of all preheminences,
and authorities united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, and for bearing faith and true allegiance to the King, his Heirs, and lawfull Succes∣sours, and that if any of them do refuse this Oath, he is to have no voice in ParliamentStat. 5 Eiz. 1.. 2. He cannot choose but know, that even sedente Parlia∣mento, both the Lords and Commons use to ad∣dress themselves to his sacred Majesty in the way of supplication and petition, (and certainly it is not the course for men of equal rank to send Peti∣tions unto one another); and that in those Petitions they do stile themselves his Majesties most humble and obedient Subjects. Which is not only used as the common Complement which the hypocrisie of these times hath taken up, (though possibly it might be no otherwise meant in some late ad∣dresses) but is the very phrase in some Acts of Parliament25 Hen. 8. c. 22. &c., as in the Acts at large doth at full appear. 3. They may be pleased to know, how happy a thing it was for the Realm of England that this Fuller did not live in former times: For had he broached this Doctrine some Ages since, he would have made an end of Parliaments. Prin∣ces are very jealous of the smallest points of So∣veraignty, and love to reign alone without any Rivals: their Souls being equally made up of Pom∣peys and Caesars, and can as little broke an Equul, as endure a Superiour. And lastly, I must let him know what Bodinus saith, who telleth us this, Le∣gum ac edictorum probatio aut publicatio quae in Cu∣ria vel Senatu fieri solet, non arguit imperii maje∣statem in Senatu vel Curia inesseBodin de Rep. l. 1. c. 8., viz. That the
publishing and approbation of Laws and Edicts which is made ordinarily in the Court or Parlia∣ment, proves not the Majesty of the State to be in the said Court or Parliament. And therefore if the power of confirmation or rejecting be of a greater trust and more high concernment, than that of consulting and consenting, as no doubt it is, the power of consulting and consenting, which the Fuller doth ascribe to the two Houses of Parlia∣ment, will give them but a sory Title to Co-ordi∣native soveraignty. 10. This leads me on unto the power of ma∣king Laws, which as before I said, is properly and legally in the King alone, tanquam in proprio Subjecto, as in the true and adequate subject of that power. And for the proof thereof, I shall thus proceed. When the Norman Conqueror first came in, as he wonne the Kingdom by the sword, so did he govern it by his power: His Sword was then the Scepter, and his will the Law. There was no need on his part, of an Act of Parli∣ament; much less of calling all the Estates together, to know of them after what form, and by what Laws they would be governed. It might as well be said of him, as in the flourish and best times of the Roman EmperorsJustin. In∣stitut. l. 1. c., Quod Principi placuerit le∣gis habet vigorem, that whatsoever the King willed it did pass for▪ Law. This King and some of his Successours being then , and ha∣ving a despotical power on the lives and fortunes of their Subjects, which they disposed of for the
benefit of their friends and followers, Normans, French, and Flemangs, as to them seemed best. But as the Subjects found the yoke to be too heavy and insupportable; so they addressed themselves in their Petitions to the Kings their Soveraigns, to have that yoke made easier, and the burden light∣er, especially in such particulars, of which they were most sensible at the present time. By this means they obtained first to have the Laws of Ed∣ward the Confessor, contain'd for the most part in the great Charter afterwards: and by this means, that is to say, by powring out their prayers and desires unto them, did they obtain most of the Laws and Statutes, which are now remaining of the time of King Henry the 3d. and King Ed∣ward the first. Many of which as they were issu∣ed at the first either in form of Charters under the Great Seal, or else as Proclamations of Grace and favour; so do they carry still this mark of their first procuring, the King willeth, the King comman∣deth, the King ordaineth, the King provideth, the King grants, &c. And when the Kings were plea∣sed to call their Estates together, it was not out of an opinion that they could not give away their power, or dispence their favours, or abate any thing of the severity of their former government, without the approbation and consent of their people: but out of just fear lest any one of the three Estates (I mean the Clergy, the Nobility, and the Commons) should insist on any thing, which might be prejudicial to the other two. The Com∣mons being alwaies on the craving part, and suf∣fering
as much perhaps from their immediate Lords, as from their King, might possibly have asked some things which were as much derogatory to the Lords (under whom they held) as of their Soveraign Liege the King, the chief Lord of all. In this respect, the Counsel and con∣sent as well of the Prelates as the Temporal Lords, was accounted necessary, in passing of all Acts of Grace and Favour to the people: because that having many Royalties and large immunities of their own, a more near relation to the per∣son, and a greater interesse in the honour of their Lord the King; nothing should passe un∣to the prejudice and diminution of their own Estates, or the disabling of the King to support his Soveraignty. And this for long time was the Stile of the following Parliaments, viz.Preface, an. 1 Ed. 3. "To the honour of God and of holy Church, and to the redresse of the oppressions of the people, our Soveraign Lord the King, &c. at the request of the Commonalty of his Realm, by their Petition made before him and his Counsel in the Parliament, by the Assent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other great men assembled in the said Parliament, hath granted for him and his Heirs. &c." To this effect, but with some little (and but a very little) varia∣tion of the words, was the usual Stile in all the Prefaces or Preambles of the Acts of Parlia∣ment, from the beginning of the Reign of King Edward the third, till the beginning of the reign of King Henry the 7th. save that sometimes we
find the Lords complaining10 Ed. 3. &c., or petitioning21 Ed. 3. &c., and the Commons assenting28 Ed. 3. &c., as their occasi∣ons did require: and sometime also no other motive represented, but the Kings great desire to provide for the ease and safety of his people, upon deliberation had with the Prelates and Nobles, and learned men assisting with their mutual Counsell 23 Ed. 3.. And all this while there is no question to be made, but that the power of making Laws was conceived to be the chiefest flower of the Royal Diademe, to which the Lords and Commons neither joynt nor separate, did not pretend the smallest Title more than petitioning for them, or assenting to them: it being wholly left to the Kings grace and goodness, whether he would give ear or not unto their petitions, or hearken unto such advise as the Lords or other great men gave him in behalf of his people. And this is that which was declared in the Parliament by the Lords and Commons (and still holds good as well in point of Law as Reason) that it belong∣ed unto the regality of the King to grant or deny what Petitions2 Her. 5. in Parliament he pleaseth. But as the Kings came in upon doubtfull Titles, or other∣wise were necessitated to comply with the peo∣ples humours, (as sometimes they were) so did the Parliaments make use of the opportuni∣ties for the increase of their authoritie, at least in the formalities of Law, and other ad∣vantages of expression. So that in the minori∣ty of King Henry the sixth, unto those usual words by the advise and assent of the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and at the special instance and request of the Commons (which were inserted ordinarily into the body of the Acts from the beginning of the reign of King Henry the 6th.) was added this, By the authority of the said Parliament3 Hen. 6. c. 2. & 8 H. 6. 3. &c.. But still it is to be observed, that though those words were added to the former clause, yet the power of granting or ordaining was acknowledged to belong to the King alone; as in the places in the Margin, where it is said, Our Lord the King considering the premises, by the advise and assent, and at the request aforesaid, hath ordained and granted by the authority of the said Parliament, 3 H. 6. 2. and our Lord the King conside∣ring, &c. hath ordained and established by authority of this Parliament, 8 H. 6. 3. And thus it general∣ly stood, (but every general rule may have some exceptions) till the beginning of the reign of King Henry the 7th. about which time that usual clause, the special instance or request of the Commons, began by little and little to be laid aside, and that of their advise or assent to be inserted in the place thereof: for which I do refer you to the book at large. Which though it were some alteration of the former stile, and that those words By the autho∣rity of this present Parliament, may make men think that the Lords and Commons did then pretend some title unto the power of making laws: yet neither advising or assenting are so operative in the present case as to transfer the power of making laws to such as do advise about them, or assent unto them; not can the aleration of the forms and stiles used in an∣tient
times, import an alteration of the form of Go∣vernment, unless it can be shewed, (as I think it cannot) that any of our Kings did renounce that power, which properly and solely did belong un∣to them, or did by any solemn Act of Communi∣cation, confer the same upon the Lords and Commons convened in Parliament. And this is that which is resolved and declared in our Common law, where it is saidCited in the unlawful∣ness of resist. p▪ 107., Le Roy fait les loix avec le con∣sent du Seigneurs et communs, et non pas les Seigneurs et communs avec le consent du Roy, that is to say, that the King makes Laws in Parliament by the assent of the Lords and Commoni, and not the Lords and Commons by the assent of the King. And for a further proof of this, and for the clearing of this point that the Lords and Commons pretend to no more power in the making of laws, than opportu∣nity to propound and advise about them, and on mature advise to give their several Assents unto them, we need but look into the first Act of the Parliament in the third year of King Charles, be∣ing a Recognition of some antient Rights belong∣ing to the English subject. An Act conceived ac∣cording to the primitive form, in way of a Peti∣tion to the Kings most excellent MajestyStatut. 3 Carol., in which the Lords and Commons do most humbly pray as their Rights and Liberties, that no such things as they com∣plained of, might be done hereafter; that his Majesty would vouchsafe to declare that the Awards, doings, and proceedings to the prejudice of his people in any of the pre∣mises, shall not be drawn hereafter into consequence or
example, and that he would be pleased to declare his Royal pleasure, that in the point aforesaid all his Of∣ficers and Ministers should serve him according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm. To which al∣though the King returned a fair general Answer, assuring them that his Subjects should have no cause for the time to come to complain of any wrong or op∣pressions contrary to their just Righs and Liberties; yet this gave little satisfaction till he came in person, and causing the Petition to be distinctly read by the Clerk of the CrownIbid., returned his Answer in these words, Soit droit fait come est desire, that is to say, let right be done as is desired. Which being the ve∣ry formal words by which the said Petition and e∣very clause and Article therein contained, be∣came to be a law and to have the force of an Act of Parliament, and being there is nothing spoken of the concurrent authority of the Lords and Com∣mons for the enacting of the same, may serve in∣stead of many Arguments for the proof of this, that the Legislative power as we phrase it now, is wholly and solely in the King; although re∣strained in the exercise and use thereof by con∣stant custome, unto the counsel and consent of the Lords and Commons. Le Roy veultSmith de Rep. Angl., or the King will have it so, is the imperative phrase by which the Propositions of the Lords and Commons are made Acts of Parliament. And let the Lords and Commons agitate and propound what Laws they please for their ease and benefit (as generally all Laws and Statutes are more for the ease and be∣nefit of the Subject, than the advantage of the
King): yet aswell now, as formerly in the times of the Roman Emperors, Quod Principi placuerit legis habet vigorem, nothing but that which the King pleaseth to allow of, is to pass for Law: the laws not taking their coercive force (as judicious Hooker well observeth) from the quality of such as devise them, but from the power which giveth them the strength of lawsHooker Ecclesiast. Pol▪. I shut up this Discourse with this ex∣pression and comparison of a late leatned Gentle∣man, viz. "That as in a Copyhold Estate, the Co∣pybolder of a meer Tenant at will comes by custom to gain an Inheritance, and so to limit and re∣strain the will and power of the Lord, that he cannot make any determination of the Copyhold∣ers Estate otherwise than according to the custome of the Mannour; and yet doth not deprive the Lord of his Lordship in the Copyhold, nor parti∣cipate with him in it, neither yet devest the Fee and Franktenement out of the Lord, but that they still remain in him, and are ever parcel of his DemesnCase of our Affairs. p. 6.: so in the restraining of the Kings Legislative power to the concurrence of the Peers and Commons, though the custome of the King∣dom hath so fixed and setled the restraint, as that the King cannot in that point use his Sove∣raign power without the concurrence of the Peers and Commons according to the custom of the Kingdom; yet still the Soveraignty (and with it the inseparable Legislative power) doth reside soly in the King." 11. If any hereupon demand to what end
serve Parliaments, and what benefit can redound to the Subject by them; I say in the Apostles words, much every wayRom. 3. 2.. Many vexations often times do befall the Subjects without the know∣ledge of the King, and against his will; to which his ears are open in a time of Parliament. The King at other times useth the eyes and ears of such as have place about him, who may perhaps be guilty of the wrongs which are done the peo∣ple: but in a Parliament he seeth with his own eyes, and heareth with his own ears, and so is in a better way to redresse the mischief than he could be otherwise. Nor do the people by the opportunity of these Parliamentary meetings, obtain upon their Prayers and petitions a redress of grievan∣ces only, but many times the King is overcome by their importunity to abate so much of his power, to grant such points, and pass such Laws and Sta∣tutes for their ease and benefit, as otherwise he would not yield to. For certainly it is as true in making our approaches and petitions to our Lord the King, as in the pouring out of our prayers and supplications to the Lord our God: the more mul∣titudinous and united the Petitioners are, the more like to speed. And therefore said Bodinus truly, Princi∣pem plaeraque universis concedere quae singulis denega∣rentur Bodin. de Rep. l. 1. c. 8., that Kings do many times grant those favours to the whole body of their people, which would be absolutely denied or not so readily yiel∣ded to particular persons. There are moreover many things of greater concernment, (besides the abrogating of old Laws and making new) which
having been formerly recommended by the Kings of England, to the care and counsel of their people convened in Parliament, are not now regularly di∣spatched but in such conventions: as are altering the tenure of Lands, confirming the rights, titles, and possessions of private men, naturalizing Aliens, legitimating Bastards, adding sometimes the se∣cular authority to such points of Doctrin and forms of worship as the Clergy have agreed upon in their Comvocations, if it be required, changing the publick weights and measures thorowout the Kingdom, defining of such doubtfull cases as are not easily resolved in the Courts of Law, raising of Subsidies and Taxes, attainting such as either are too potent to be caught, or too hard to be found, and so not tryable in the ordinary Courts of Justice; restoring to their blood and honours such, or the Heirs of such, as have been formerly attainted; granting of free and general pardons Sir Tho. Smith, de Rep. Angl. Camden in Brit. Crompt. of Courts, &c., with divers others of this nature. In all and each of these the Lords and Commons do co-operate to the publick good, in the way of means and pre∣paration, but their co-operation would be lost and fruitless, did not the King by his concomitant or subsequent grace produce their good intentions in∣to perfect Acts, and being Acts either of special grace and favour, or else of ordinary right and ju∣stice, no way derogatory to the Prerogative Roy∣al, are usually confirmed by the Royal assent, without stop or hesitancy. But then, some other things there are of great importance and advan∣tage to the Common wealth, in which the Houses
usually do proceed even to final sentence (the Com∣mons in the way of imquisition or impeachment, the Lords in that of judicature and determination) with the consent and approbation of the King, though many times without his personal assent and presence. The King may be abused in his Grants and Patents, to the oppression of the peo∣ple, or the dilapidation and destruction of the Royal Patrimony; Judges, and other the great Officers of Law and Equity are subject to cor∣ruptions, and may smell of gifts, whereby the passages of Justice do become obstructed; The Ministers of inferiour Courts as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, either exhaust the miserable subject by extortions, or else consume him by delayes; Er∣roneous judgements may be given through fear or favour to the undoing of a man and his whole posterity, in which his Majesties Justices of either Bench can afford no remedy; The great ones of the State may become too insolent, and the poor too miserable; and many other waies there are by which the Fabrick of the State may be out of Order: for the removing of which mischiefs, the rectifying of which abuses, the Lords and Commons in their several waies before remembred, are of special use; yet so, that if the Kings Grants do come in question, or any of his Officers are called to a reckoning, they used heretofore to signifie unto his Majesty what they found therein, and he accordingly either revoked his Grants, or dis∣placed his Servants, or by some other means gave way unto their contentment: the Kings consent
being alwaies necessary, and received as a part of the final sentence, if they went so far. So that we may conclude this point with these words of Bodin, who being well acquainted with the Government of this State and Nation, partly by way of conference with Dr. Dale the Queens Ambassadour in France, and partly in the way of observation when he was in England, doth give this resolution of the point in controversieBodin. de Repub. l. 1. c. 8., Habere quidem Ordines Anglorum authoritatem quandam, jura vero majestatis, & imperii summam in unius Principis arbitrio versari. The States saith he of England have a kind of authority, but all the rights of Soveraignty and command in chief, are at the will and pleasure of the Prince alone. 12. And to say truth, although the Lords & Com∣mons met in Parliament are of great authority, e∣specially as they have improved it in these later times; yet were they never of such power, but that the Kings have for the most part over-ruled them, & made them pliant & conformable to their own desires: and this not only by themselves, but some∣times also by their Judges, by their counsel often. For such was the great care and wisdom of our former Kings, as not to venture single on that numerous body of the two Houses of Parliament, whereby the Soveraignty might be so easily over∣matched; but to take with them for Assistants as well the Lords of their Privy Counsel with whom they might advise in matters which concerned
them in their Soveraign rights, as their learned Counsel (as they call them) consisting of the Jud∣ges and most eminent Lawyers, from whom they might receive instruction as the case required, and neither do, nor suffer wrong in point of Law: and by both these, as well as by the power and awe of their personal presence, have they not only regulated but restrained their Parliaments. And this is easily demonstrable by continual pra∣ctice. For in the Statute of Bigamie made in the fourth4 Ed. 1. year of King Edward 1. it is said exprely, "that in the presence of certain reverend Fa∣thers, Bishops of England, and others of the Kings Counsel, the Constitutions under-written were recited, and after published before the King his Couusel, forasmuch as all the Kings Coun∣sel, as well Justices as others did agree, that they should be put in writing and observed." In the Articuli super Chartas, when the Great Char∣ter was confirmed at the request of the Prelates, Earls, and Barons,28 Ed. 1. c. 2. we find these two clauses: the one in the beginning thus, Nevertheless the King and his Counsel do not intend, by reason of this Statte, to diminish the Kings rightIbid. c. 20., &c. The other in the close of all in these following words, And notwithstanding all these things mentioned, or any part of them, both the King and his Counsel, and all they which were present at the making of this Ordi∣nance, do will and intend that the right and preroga∣tive of his Crown shall be saved in all things. In the 27th. of King Edward the 3d.27 Ed. 3. The Commons presenting a Petition to the King, which the Kings
Counsel did mislike, were content thereupon to mend and explain their Petition, the form of which Petition is in these words following. "To their most redoubted Soveraign Lord the King, praying the Commons, that whereas they have prayed him to be discharged of all manner of Articles of the Lyre, &c. which Petition seemeth to his Counsel to be prejudicial unto him, and in disherison of his Crown▪ if it were so gene∣rally granted: his said Commons not willing nor desiring to demand things of him, which should fall in disherison of him or of his Crown perpetually, as of Escheats, &c. but of trespasses, misprisions, negligences, and ignorances, &c." In the 13 of the reign of King Richard the 2d. when the Commons did pray that upon pain of forfei∣ture, the Chancellor, or Counsel of the King should not after the end of the Parliament make any Ordinance against the Common law13 Rich. 2., the King (by the advise of his Counsel) answered, Let it be used as it hath been used before this time, so as the Rega∣lity of the King be saved, for the King will save his Re∣galities, as his Predecessors have done. In the 4th. year of King Henry 4.4 Hen. 4. when the Commons complained against Sub-poenae's and other writs grounded upon false suggestions, the King (upon the same advise) returned this answer, that he would give in charge to his Officers, that they should ab∣stain more than before time they had to send for his Subjects in that manner. But yet (saith he) it is not our intention that our Officers shall so abstain, that they may not send for our Subjects in matters and causes ne∣cessary,
as it hath been used in the time of our good Progenitors. Finally, not to bring forth more parti∣culars in a case so clear, it was the constant cu∣stome in all Parliaments, till the Reign of King Henry 5.Henr. 5▪ that when any Bill had passed both houses, and was presented to the King for his Royal Assent, the King by the advise of his Privy Counsel, or his Counsel learned in the Laws, or some∣times of both, did use to crosse ou and oblite∣rate as much or as little of it as he pleased, to leave out what he liked not, and confirmed the rest; that only which the King confirmed being held for Law. And though in the succeeding times the Kings did graciously vouchsafe to pass the whole Bill in that form which the Houses gave it, or to reject it wholly as they saw occasion: yet still the Privy Counsel, and the Judges, and the Counsel learned in the Laws, have and enjoy their place in the House of Peers, aswell for preservati∣on of the Kings rights and Royalties, as for dire∣ction to the Lords in a point of Law, if any case of difficulty be brought before them; on which occasions the Lords are to demand the opinion of the Judges, and upon their opinions to ground their Iudgement. As for example, In the Par∣liament 28 of Hen. 6. The Commons made sure that VVilliam de la Pole Duke of Suffolk, should be committed to Prison for many treasons and other crimes28 Hen. 6▪, and thereupon the Lords demand∣ed the opinion of the Judges, whether he should be committed to Prison or not; whose Answer was, that he ought not to be committed in re∣gard
the Commons had not charged him with any par∣ticular offence, but with generals only; which opini∣on was allowed and followed. In another Parlia∣ment of the said King, held by Prorogation, one Thomas Thorpe the Speaker of the House of Com∣mons, was in the Prorogation-time condemned in 1000 l. dammages, upon an Action of Trespass at the sute of Richard Duke of York, and was com∣mitted to Prison for execution of the same. The parliament being reassembled, the Commons made sue to the King and Lords to have their Speaker delivered to them, according to the privilege of ParliamentsThe pri∣vilege of the Barons, p. 15.: the Lords demanded the opinion of the Judges in it, and upon their Answer, did conclude, that the Speaker should still remain in Prison according to Law, notwithstanding the privilege of Parliament; and according to this resolution the Commons were commanded in the Kings name to choose one Tho▪ Carleton for their Speaker, which was done accordingly. Other ex∣amples of this kind are exceeding obvious, and for numbers infinite; yet neither more in num∣ber, nor more obvious than those of our Kings serving their turns by and upon their Parliaments, as their occasions did require. For not to look on higher and more Regal times, we find that Richard the 2d. a Prince not very acceptable to the Com∣mon people, could get an Act of Parliament21 Ric. 2., to confirm the extrajudicial opinion of the Iudges, given before at Notingham; that King Henry 4th. could by an other Act reverse all that Parliament, 1 Hen▪ 4. entayl the Crown to his posterity, and keep his
Dutchy of Lancaster and all the Lands and Seig∣neuries of it, from being united to the Crown; that King Edward the 4th. could have a Parlia∣ment to declare all the Kings of the House of Lancaster, to be Kings in fact but not in right 1 Ed. c. 1., and for uniting of that Dutchy to the Crown Imperial, notwithstanding the former Act of se∣paration; that King Richard the 3d. could have a Parliament to bastardize all his Brothers Chil∣dren, to set the Crown on his own head, though a most bloody Tyrant, and a plain UsurperSpeeds hist. in K. Ri∣chard. 3.; that King Henry 7. could have the Crown entay∣led by an Act of Parliament, to the issue of his own bodyVerulam. hist. of K. Hen 7. without relation to his Queen of the house of York, which was conceived by many at that time to have the better Title to it; ano∣ther, for paying a Benevolence which he had requi∣red of the subject11 Hen. 7. c. 10., though all Benevolences had been damned by a former Statute made in the short, but bloody reign of King Richard the 3d. that King Henry 8.65 Hen. 8. c. 22, & 28. c. 7. & 35 H. 8. c. 1. could have one Act of Par∣liament to bastardry his Daughter Mary, in fa∣vour of the Lady Elizabeth; another to declare the Lady Elizabeth to be illegitimate, in expectation of the issue by Queen Jane Seymour; a third for set∣ling the succession by his Will and Testament, and what else he pleased; that Queen Mary could not only obtain several Acts in favour of her self and the Se of Rome1 Mar. ss. 2. c. 1, 2. & 1. & 2 Ph. & M. c. 8. 10., but for the set∣ling of the Regency on the King of Spain, in case the Children of that Bed should be left in non∣age. And finally that Queen Elizabeth did not only
gain many several Acts for the security of her own Person, which were determinable with her life, but could procure an Act to be passed in Par∣liament for making it high treason to affirm and say, That the Queen could not by Act of Parliament, bind and dispose the Rights ad Titles which any person whatsoever might have to the Crown.13 Eliz. c. 1. And as for raising monies, and amassing treasures by help of Parliaments, he that desires to know how well our Kings have served themselves that way by the help of Parliaments, let him peruse a book intituled, the Privilege of Parliaments, writ in the manner of Dialogue between a Privy Counsellor, and a Iustice of Peace, and he shall be satisfied to the full. Put all that hath been said together, and sure the kingdom of England must not be the place, in which the three Estates convened in Parliament have power to regulate the King, or restain his actions, or moderate his extravagances, or where they can be taxed for peridious treachery, if they connive at Kings when they play the Tyrants, or wantonly insult on the Common-people, or otherwise abuse that power which the Lord hath given them. Calvin was much mistaken if he thought the con∣trary; or if he dreamt that he should be believ'd on his ipse dixit, without a punctual enquiry in∣to the grounds and probability of such a dange∣rous intimation as he lays before us. 13. But against this it is objected, that Parlia∣ments have disposed of the Militia of the King∣dom, of the Forts, Castles, Ports, and the Navie Royal, not only without the Kings leave, but against his liking: that they have deposed some
Kings, and advanced others to the top of the Re∣gal Throne: And for the proof of this they pro∣duce examples out of the reign of K. Henry 3. K. Edw. 2. and K. Richard the 2.Prynnes Book of Parl. part. 2. Examples, which if rightly pondered, doe not so much prove the power, as the weakness of Parliaments, in being car∣ried up and down by the privat conduct of every popular pretender. For 'tis well known that the Parliaments did not take upon them to rule, or ra∣ther to over-look K. Henry 3. but as they were di∣rected by Simon Montfort Earl of Leicester, who having raised a potent faction in the State, by the assistance of the Earls of Glocester, Here∣ford, Derby,Ma. Pa∣ris, Henr. 3. and some others of the great Lords of the kingdom, compelled the King to yeeld unto what terms he pleased, and made the Parliaments no other than a means and instru∣ment to put a popular gloss on his wretched pur∣poses. And 'tis well known that the ensuing Parliaments which they instance in, moved not of their own accord to the deposing of King Ed∣ward the 2. or King Richard the 2. but sailed as they were steered by those powerfull Counsels, which Queen Isabel in the one, and Henry Duke of Lancaster in the other, did propose unto them. Walsing∣ham in Hist. Angl. & Hy∣podig. Neu∣striae. It was no safe resisting those (as their cold wisdoms and forgotten loyalties did suggest unto them) qui tot legionibus imperarent, who had so ma∣nany thousand men in arms to make good their project, and they might think as the poor-spiri∣ted Citizens of Samaria did in another case (but a case very like the present) Behold two Kings
stood not before him, how then can we stand2 Kings 10. 4.? For had it been an argument of the power of Parlia∣ments, that they deposed one King to set up ano∣ther, dethroned King Richard to advance the Duke of Lancaster to the Regal diadem, they would have kept the house of Lancaster in possession of it, (for the full demonstration of a power indeed) and not have cast them off, at the first attempt of a new plausible pretender, declared them to be kings in fact, but not in right, whose lawfull right they had before preferred above all other titles, and set the Crown upon the heads of their deadly E∣nemies. In the next place it is objected that Par∣liaments are a great restraint of the Soveraign power (according to the Doctrine here laid down by Calvin) in that the King can make no laws, nor levy any money upon the Subject, but by the counsel and assent of the Lords and Commons as∣sembled in Parliament. But this objection hurts as little as the former did. For Kings, to say the truth, need no laws at all. In all such points wherein they have not bound themselves by some former laws made for the common use and bene∣fit of the Subject, they are left at liberty, and may proceed in governing the people, given by God unto them, according to their own discretion, and the advice of their Counsel. New Laws are chiefly made for the Subjects benefit, at their de∣sire, on their importunate requests, for their spe∣cial profit; not one in twenty, nay, I dare bold∣ly say not one in an hundred, made for the ad∣vantage of the King, either in the improvement
of his power, or the increase of his Revenue. Look over all the Acts of Parliament, from the beginning of the reign of King Henry 3. to the present time, and tell me he that can, if he finds it otherwise: Kings would have little use of Par∣liaments, and less mind to call them, if nothing but the making of new Laws were the matter aimed at. And as for raising monies and impo∣sing taxes, it either must suppose the Kings to be always unthrifts, that they be always indigent and necessitous, and behind-hand with the world (which are the ordinary effects of ill husbandry) or else this argument is lost, and of little use: For if our Kings should husband their estates to the best advantage, and make the best benefit of such escheats and forfeitures & coniscations as day by day do fall unto them; If they should follow the example of K. Henry 7. and execute the penal Laws according to the power which those Laws have gi∣ven them, and the trust reposed in them by their People; if they should please to examine their revenue, and proportion their expence to their comings in, there would be litle need of subsidies and supplies of money, more than the ordinary aids and impositions upon Merchandize, which the Law alloweth of, and the known rights of So∣vereignty backed by prescription, and long custom have asserted to them: So that it is by Accident, not by right and nature, that the Parliament hath any power or opportunity to restrain their King in this particular; for where there is no need of asking, there is no occasion of denying;
by consequence no restraint upon, no baffle or af∣fronting offered to the Regal power. And yet the Soveraign need not fear (if he be tollerably carefull of his own estate) that any reasonable demand of his in these mony matters, will meet with opposition or denial in his Houses of Parli∣ament. For whilest there are so many Acts of Grace and favour to be done in Parliament (as what almost in every Parliament but an enlargement of the Kings favours to his peo∣ple) and that none can be done in Parliament but with the Kings fiat and consent: there is no question to be made, but that the two Houses of Parliament will far sooner choose to supply the King (as allwise Parliaments have done) than rob the Subject of the benefit of his grace and favours, which is the best fruit they reap from Parliaments. Finally, whereas it is objected (but I think it in sport) that the old Lord Bur∣leigh used to say, that he knew not what a Parliament in England could not do; and that King Iames once said in a Parliament, that then there were 500 Kings, which words were took for a Concession that all were Kings as well as he in a time of Par∣liament; they who have given us these Objecti∣ons do either mis-understand their Authors, or abuse themselves. For what the Lord Burleigh said of Parliaments (though it be more than the wisest man alive can justifie) he spake of Parlia∣ments, according as the word is used in its proper sense; not for the two Houses, or for either of them exclusive of the Kings presence and consent; but
for the supreme Court, for the highest Judicato∣ry, consisting of the Kings most excellent Ma∣jesty, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Representees of the Commons; and then it will not serve for the turn intended. And what King James said once in jest (though I have of∣ten heard it used in earnest upon this occasion) was spoke only in derision of some daring Spi∣rits, who laying by the modesty of their Prede∣cessors, would needs be looking into the Pre∣rogative, or finding errors and mistakes in the present Government, or medling with those Arcana imperii which former Parliaments be∣held at distance, with the eye of reverence. But certainly King James intended nothing lesse than to acknowledg a co-ordinative Soveraignty in the two Houses of Parliament, or to make them his Co-partners in the Regal power. His carriage and behaviour towards them in the whole course of his Government, clearly shews the contrary: there never being prince more jealous in the points of Soveraignty, nor more uncapable of a Rival in those points than he. 14. But yet the main objection (which we may call the Objection paramount) doth remain unanswered. For if the three Estates convened in Parliament, or any other popular Magistrate, whom Calvin dreams of, be ordaned by the Word of God, as Guardians of the peoples
Liberties; and therefore authorised to moderate and restrain the power of Kings as often as they shall invade or infringe those liberties, as Cal∣vin plainly saies they were; or that they know themselves to be ordained by Gods word to that end and purpose (cujus se lege Dei Tutores positos esse norunt) as he saies they do: then neither any discontinuance or non-usage on their parts, nor any prescription to the contrary al∣ledged by Kings and supreme Princes, can hin∣der them from resuming and exercising that Authority which God hath given them, when∣soever they shall finde a fit time for it. But first I would fain learn of Calvin in what part of the Word of God we shall finde any such Authority given to those popular Magistrates (by what name soever they are called in their several Countreys) as he tels us of. Not in the old Testament I am sure, though in the institu∣tion of the seventy Elders there be some hopes of it. For when Moses first ordained those El∣ders, it was not to diminish any part of that power which was vosted in him, but to ease him∣self of some part of the burthen which did lie upon him. And this appears plainly by the 18. Chapter of the Book of Exodus. For when it was observed by Jethro his Father in Law, that he attended the businesses of the people from morning till night, he told him plainly ultra vres sas negotium esse, that the burthen was too heavy for him, vers. 18. and therefore
that he should choose some Under-officers, and place them over Thousands, over Hundreds, and ever Fifties, and over Tens, Vers. 21. Levius{que} sit tibi partito in alios onere: that so it might be the easier for him, those officers bearing some part of the burthen with him. Yet so that these inferior Officers should only judge in matters of inferior nature, the greater matters being still reserved to his own Tribunal. Which counsel, as it was very well approved by Moses, so was it given by Jethro and approved by Moses, with reference to the will and pleasure of All-mighty God, vers. 23. And what the Lord God did in it we shall finde in the Book of Numbers chap. 11. For when Moses made complaint to God, that the Burthen of all the people was laid on him, vers. 11. (where note it is the burden still which he makes complaint of) and that he was not able to hear all the people alone, because it was too heavie for him, vers. 14. God willed him to make choice of seventy of those Officers, which before he had placed over the people, and to present them to him in the Tabernacle of the Con∣gregation, where he would give unto them the Spirit of Government, ut sustentent tecum ous populi, to the end that they might bear the burthen of the people with him, vers. 17. No∣thing in all this, but the easing of the Supreme Magistrate of some part of the Burthen, which was before too heavie for him, without any diminution of his power in the least respect.
Nor doth it make for Calvins purpose, that God said to Moses, that he would take of the Spirit which was upon him, and put it on the seventy Elders, vers. 17. the Spirit resting upon Moses in as full a measure as at first it did, not lessened by the communication of it to those Un∣der-officers. And so the point is stated by two learned writers, though otherwise of different perswasions in the things of God. By Estius for the Pontificians it is so determined,Estius in  sacrae scripturae loca. Num. 11. v. 17. Non sig∣nificatur per hoc, quod minus haberet Moses de spiritu quam antea, sed significatur, quod ex eo∣dem spiritu gratiae, quo repletus Moses populum illum regebat, etiam alii adjutorium essent habi∣turi, ad eundem populum regendum.Deodat. Annot. in Num. 11. The very same with that of Deodatus for the Protestant or reformed writers. Not that the gift of the Spirit (saith he) should be in any manner truly (or really) diminished in Moses, but because that infallible conduct of the Spirit of God, which untill then had been peculiar to Moses, should be made common to all the seventy in the publick government. And much lesse did it derogate from the spirit and power of Moses, that the seventy were indued by God with the gift of prophesie, vers. 25. that being but a personal grace, and perhaps but temporary to those per∣sons neither, to gain them at the first the grea∣ter estimation amongst the people, whom they were to govern; never pretended to by any of their Successors in that Magistracy for the
times insuing. And therefore when Moses was told of it, he made light of the matter, and was so far from envying at it, that he seemed to wish that all Gods people might be able to prophesie to one another,Estius in Num. 11. v. 29. vers. 29. conceiving rightly nihil abesse dignitati suae personae, as my Author hath it, that it did nothing derogate from his power and dignity; though Jshua out of an honest zeal to his Masters greatnesse might fear it tended, or might tend unto the diminution of his Masters dignity and credit, as is observed by Deodate. What power these seventy Elders had in succeeding times, when they were drawn into a body, and made up that great Court which was called the Sanhe∣drim; and how far they were then from curbing and restraining the power of those several Kings under which they lived, hath been shewn already. Now if the old Testament do give so little countenance to that great Authority which Cal∣vin hath assigned so peremptorily to his three Estates, or any other popular Magistates in their several Countreys, I am sure the New Testa∣ment doth afford them lesse; in which obedi∣ence to the Supreme Magistrate, is punctually and frequently required of all sorts of persons. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, saith the Apostle of the Gentiles, Rom. 13. 1. If every soul, then neither any Papal, Presbyteri∣an or popular pretender can challenge any exem∣ption from that obedience and subjection to the
higher powers, which is required of them in this Text; and much lesse exercise any jurisdiction or Authority over them, whereby they may be brought in subjection to him.Hieronym. in Rom. 13. "St. Jerome tels us that this rule is given by the Apostle, for fear lest some presuming on that Christi∣an Liberty unto which they were called, might possibly refuse to yeeld obedience and pay their just Tributes to those higher powers to which the Lord had made them subject." And therefore he desires to humble them and bring them unto a better understanding of their Christian duty, ne forte propter superbiam, ma∣gis quam propter Deum contumeliam patiantur. Lest the reproach or punishment which they suffered for it, should be imputed rather to their pride and arrogancy, then their zeal to God. Now what St. Jerome tels us in the general on∣ly, is by St. Chrysostome prest particularly, with reference almost to all degrees and estates of men: Here the Apostle sheweth (saith he) that these things are commanded to all men,Chrysost. in Rom. Hom. 23. both Priests and Monks, and not to temporal men only, which he declareth in the beginning, when he said, Let every soul be subject to the highest powers: although thou be an Apostle, although thou be an Evangelist, although thou be a Pro∣phet, although thou be whatsoever thou art. Which said he gives this reason for it, that Re∣ligion is not overthrown by this subjection. If no Apostle could pretend to an exemption from
those common duties which Subjects owe unto their Princes; then certainly the Pope who pre∣tends to sit in Peters Chair, and to challenge all the priviledges which belonged unto him, must needs be in as great subjection to a Christian Emperor, as the Apostles were (in their times) to any Heathen King. If those things were required of Priests and Monks, as he saies they were, then must the Papal Clergie, (whether they be Monasticks or secular Priests) perform those duties, and yeeld that due obedience un∣to those Kings and Princes under whom they live, which are here required. But so it is, that partly by strong hand, and partly by taking their opportunities in the darker Ages of the Church, the Pope hath not only freed his Clergie from the power of Princes, in matters even of Ci∣vill nature and concernment; but challengeth for himself a power above them, and exercised it for a long time with great pride and Tyran∣ny, contrary to the Apostles Rule and the Fa∣thers Commentary. If no Evangelist or Pro∣phet could challenge any such exemption as the Father plainly saith they could not; then much lesse can the Presbyterian Minister pretend unto it, though he be both a Prophet and an Evan∣gelist also in his own conceit. Which notwith∣standing, the Scottish Presbyterians had got unto so great a head in the minority of King James, in all matters, which related to Ecclesiastical cog∣nizance (and to that cognizance they reduced
all matters) they commonly declin'd the Kings judgement, and his Courts of Judicature as al∣together incompetent; appealing from them ei∣ther to their own Presbyteries, or to the next general Assembly of their own appointing: and standing so wilfully to those Appeals, that some of them had like to have paid dear for it, (after that Kings coming into England) if the King had not been more mercifull to them, then they deserved at his hands. If no man whatsoever he be, can lawfully acquit himself from this subjection as is said by Chrysostome; what will become of Calvins popular Magistrates, and of the great authority which he gives them over Kings and Princes; those popular Officers being included equally with the rest of the people, in St. Pauls injunction? It's true that Calvins po∣pular Officers may seem to have some colour for it, both from our English Translation and the vulgar Latine; by which obedience is re∣quired sublimioribus potestatibus, to the higher powers; and all such popular Officers, whatso∣ever they be, may warrantably be lookt upon as higher powers, in respect of the residue of the people. But first the words in the original, viz. , do not so properly signifie, the higher, as the supreme powers: and so the word is rendred in the first of St. Peter cap. 2. vers. 13. in which submission is required to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whe∣ther it be unto the King, , as to the
Supreme, or unto such as are sent by him, &c. , saith St. Peter in the singular, , saith St. Paul in the plural number; both words proceeding from , in the Nominative Case, and consequently being of the same sense and signification. But secondly permitting them the benefit of these translations, yet will they finde but little colour for that coercive power, that soveraign Authority and Jurisdiction, which Calvin hath assigned to the three Estates or any other popular Officers over Kings and Princes. For though such popular Officers may warranta∣bly be lookt upon as higher powers in respect of the residue of the people, as before was said, yet are they lower powers in respect of the King, from whom as they receive all the Authority which they have, whatsoever it be, so unto him they are to render an accompt of their actings in it, whensoever he pleaseth. So that these popu∣lar Officers may be compar'd not unfitly unto the Genera subalterna in the Schools of Logick; each of them being subordinate to one another (the Constable to the Maior or Bayliff in a corporate Town, or to the Justices of the Peace in the County at large, the Maiors and Justices to the Judges in their several Circuits, the Judges in their several Circuits and their Courts of Judicature to the Lord Chancellor for the time being, and he unto the three Estates when convened in Parliament) till they end all in ge∣nus summum, in that supreme power which
is subordinate to none, and unto which the rest are Species subalternae (as the Logicians phrase it) in their several orders, till they end all in Specie infimâ, even in the lowest of the People. Less comfort can I give them from the Apo∣stle of the Jewes from the words of St. Peter, in which submission is required (as before was said) to every ordinance of man, whether it be unto the King as unto the Supreme, or unto Go∣vernors, as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evill doers, and for the praise of them that do well. Now those which are thus authorised, and sent by Kings to the ends and purposes before mentioned, may very properly be resembled unto Jehosophats Commis∣sioners in the Kingdome of Judah,2 Chron. 17. 7. or the itine∣rary Judges in the Realm of England; and can neither claim nor exercise any other Authority, then what in their Commissions and instructions is assigned unto them. And certainly no King did or will ever grant any such Commission whereby his Vnder-officers and inferior Ma∣gistrates, may challenge any power above him, or exercise any jurisdiction or Authority over him. If any thing in this Text may be thought to favour Calvin in this strange opinion, it is that Kings are said to be , hu∣mana creatura, saith the vulgar Latin, an ordi∣nance of man, as the English reads it; and be∣ing but a Creature of the peoples making, the rest may think themselves as good men as he. "The
Rhemists will have Kings to be called humane creatures, because elected by the people, or holding their Soveraignty by birth and car∣nall propagation, ordained for the wealth, peace and prosperity of the Subjects; to put a difference betwixt that humane Superiority, and the spiritual Rulers and Regiment, gui∣ding and governing the people to an higher end, and instituted by God himself immedi∣ately, Christ having expresly constituted the form of Regiment, used ever since in the Church." Whereunto Dr. Fulk for want of a better doth return this Answer, viz. That though there be great difference between the government of Princes, and Ecclesiastical Governors, yet the Apostle calleth not Princes an humane creation, as though they were not also of Gods Creation (for there is no power but of God) but that the form of their Creation is in mans appointment. All the Gene∣vians generally do so expound it, and it con∣cerns them so to do in point of interesse. The Bishop of that City was their Soveraign Prince, and had jus utrius{que} gladini, as Calvin signified in a Letter to Cardinal Sadolet, till he and all his Clergy were expelled the City in a popular Tumult, Anno 1528. and a new form of Go∣vernment established both in Church and State. So that having laid the foundation of their Com∣mon-wealth in the expulsion of their Prince, and the new model of their Discipline in refusing to have any more Bishop; they found it best for justi∣fying their proceedings at home, and increasing
their Partizans abroad, to maintain a parity of Mi∣nisters in the Church of Christ, and to invest the people and their popular Officers with a chief power in the concernments and affairs of State, even to the deposing of Kings, and disposing of Kingdoms. But for this last they finde no warrant in the Text which we have before us, For first admitting the Translation to be true and ge∣nuine (as indeed it is not) the Roman Empe∣ror, and consequently other Kings and Princes, may be said to be an humane Ordinance, be∣cause their power is most visibly conversant, circa humanas Actiones, about ordering of hu∣mane Actions, and other civill affairs of men, as they were subjects of the Empire, and Mem∣bers of that Body politick, whereof that Em∣peror was head. Secondly, to make soveraign Princes by what name and Title soever called, to be no other then an humane Ordinance, be∣cause they are ordained by the people and of their appointment; must needs create an irre∣concileable difference between St. Peter and St. Paul, by which last the Supreme Powers, whatsoever they be, are called the Ordinance of God. The Powers (saith that Apostle) are or∣dained of God, and therefore he that resisteth the Powers resisteth the Ordinance of God. Upon which words Deodate gives this Glosse or Com∣ment. "That the supreme Powers are called the Ordinance of God, because God is the Author of this Order in the world: and all those who
attain to these Dignities, do so, either by his manifest will and approbation, when the means are lawfull: or by his secret Providence by meer permission or toleration, when they are unlawfull. Now it is fitting that man should approve and tolerate that which God approves and tolerates." But thirdly, I conceive that those words in the Greek Text of St. Peter, viz. , are not so properly tran∣slated as they might have been; and as the same words, , are rendred by the same Translators (somewhat more neer to the Origi∣nal) in another place. For in the 8. chapt. to the Romans vers. 22. we finde them rendring , by the whole Creation (and why not rather every Creature, as both our old Transla∣tion and the Rhemists read it, conform to om∣nis Creatura in the vulgar Latine?) which had they done and kept themselves more near to the Greek Original in St. Peters Text, they either would have rendred it by every humane Crea∣ture, as the Rhemists do; or rather by all Men, or by all Man-kinde, as the words import. And then the meaning will be this, that the Jewes living scattered and disperst in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, and other Provinces of the Empire, were to have their conversation so meek and lowly (for fear of giving scandal to the Gen∣tiles amongst whom they lived) as to submit themselves to all Man-kinde, or rather to every Man (unto every humane Creature, as the Rhe∣mists read it) that was in Authority above, whe∣ther
it were unto the Emperor himself, as their supreme Lord, or to such Legats, Prefects, and Procurators, as were appointed by him for the government of those several Provinces, to the end that they may punish the evil-doers, and in∣courage such as did well, living comformably to the Lawes by which they were governed. Small comfort in this Text, as in any of the rest before, for those popular Officers which Calvin makes the Overseers of the soveraign Prince, and Guardians of the Liberties of the common people. If then there be no Text of Scripture, no warrant from the word of God by which the popular Officers, which Calvin dreams of, are made the Keepers of the Liberties of the Com∣mon people, or vested with the power of op∣posing Kings and soveraign Princes as often as they wantonly insult upon the people, or wil∣fully infringe their Priviledges: I would fain learn how they should come to know that they are vested with such power, or trusted with the defence of the Subjects Liberties (cujus se Dei ordinatione Tutores positos esse norunt) as Calvin plainly saies they do. If they pretend to know it by inspiration, such inspiration cannot be known to any but themselves alone; neither the Prince or people, whom it most concerneth, can take notice of it. Nor can they well assure themselves whether such inspirations come from God or the Devil; the Devil many times insnaring proud ambitious and vain-glorious Men by such
strange Delusions. If they pretend to know it by the Dictate of their private Spirit (the great Diana of Calvin and his followers in expounding Scripture) we are but in the same uncertainties, as we were before. And who can tell whether the private Spirit they pretend unto, and do so much brag of,1 King. 22. 22. may not be such a lying Spirit as was put into the mouthes of the Prophets, when Ahab was to be seduced to his own destruction? Adeo Argumenta ex absurdo petita ineptos ha∣bent exitus, as Lactantius notes it. All I have now to add, is to shew the diffe∣rence between Calvin and his followers, in the propounding of this Doctrine; delivered by Calvin in few words, but Magisterially enough, and with no other Authority then his ipse dixit; enlarged by David Paraeus in his Comment on the 13. chapter to the Romans into divers bran∣ches, and many endevours used by him (as by the rest of Calvins followers,) to finde out Ar∣guments and instances out of several Authors to make good the cause. For which though Cal∣vin scap'd the fire, yet Paraeus could not. Ille Crucem pretium sceleris tulit, hic Diadema. For so it hapned, that one Mr. Knight of Brodegates (now Pembroke Colledge) in Oxford, had preach'd up the Authority of these popular officers in a Sermon before the University, about the be∣ginning of the year 1622. for which being pre∣sently transmitted to the King and Councel, he there ingenuously confessed, that he had bor∣rowed both his Doctrine, and his proofs and in∣stances
from the Book of Paraeus above men∣tioned. Notice whereof being given to the University, the whole Doctrine of Paraeus as to that particular, was drawn into several Proposi∣tions; which in a full and frequent Convoca∣tion held on the 25. of June, 1622. were seve∣rally condemned to be erroneous, scandalous, and destructive of Monarchical Government. Upon which Sentence or determination, the King gave order that as many of those books as could be gotten, should solemnly and publickly be burnt in each of the Universities, and St. Pauls Church-yard, which was done accordingly. An accident much complained of by the Puritan party for a long time after, who looked upon it as the funeral pile of their Hopes and Projects; till by degrees they got fresh courage, carrying on their designs more secretly, by consequence more dangerously then before they did. The terrible effects whereof we have seen and felt in our late Civil Wars and present confusions. But it is time to close this point, and come to a conclusion of the whole Discourse; there be no other Objections that I know of, but what are easily reduced unto those before, or not worth the Answering. 15. Thus have we took a brief Survey of those insinuations, grounds or Principles (call them what you will) which CALVIN hath laid down in his Book of Institutions, for the incouragement of the Subjects to rebellious
courses, and putting them in Arms against their Soveraign, either in case of Tyrannie, Li∣centiousness, or Mal-administration, of what sort soever; by which the Subjects may pre∣tend that they are oppressed either in point of liberty, or in point of property. And we have shewn upon what false and weak foundations he hath raised his building; how much he hath mistook or abused his Authors; but how much more he hath betrayed and abused his Readers. For we have clearly proved, and directly ma∣nifested, out of the best Records and Monu∣ments of the former times, that the Ephori were not instituted in the State of Sparta to oppose the Kings; nor the Tribunes in the State of Rome to oppose the Consuls; nor the De∣marchi in the Common-wealth of Athens to op∣pose the Senate: or if they were, that this could no way serve to advance his purpose of setting up such popular Officers in the Kingdoms of Christen∣dom; those Officers being only found in Aristo∣craties, or Democraties, but never heard or dreampt of in a Monarchical Government. And we have shewn both who they are which con∣stitute the three Estates in all Christian King∣doms; and that there is no Christian Kingdom in which the three Estates convened in Parliament (or by what other name soever they do call them) have any authority either to regulate the person of the Soveraign Prince, or restrain his power, in case he be a Soveraign Prince, and not
meerly titular and conditional; and that it is not to be found in Holy Scripture, that they are or were ordained by God to be the Patrons and Protectors of the Common people, and there∣fore chargeable with no lesse a crime than a most perfidious Dissimulation, should they connive at Kings when they play the Tyrants, or want only abuse that power which the Lord hath given them, to the oppression of their Subjects. In which last points, touching the designation of the three Estates, and the authority pretended to be vested in them, I have carried a more particular eye on this Kingdom of England where those per∣nicious Principles and insinuations which our Au∣thor gives us, have been too readily imbraced, and too eagerly pursued by those of his party and opi∣nion. If herein I have done any service to Su∣preme Authority, my Countrey and some misgui∣ded Zelots of it, I shall have reason to rejoyce in my undertaking. If not, posterity shall not say that Calvins memory was so sacred with me, and his name so venerable, as rather to suffer such a Stumbling-block to be laid in the Subjects way without being censured and removed, than either his authority should be brought in question, or any of his Dictates to a legal tryal. Having been purchased by the Lord at so dear a price, we are to be no longer the Servants of men, or to have the truth of God with respect of persons. I have God to be my Father, and the Church my Mother, and therefore have not only pleaded the Cause of
Kings and Supreme Magistrates who are the De∣puties of God, but added somewhat in behalf of the Church of England, whose Rights and privi∣ledges I have pleaded to my best abilities. The issue and success I refer to him by whom Kings do reign, and who appointed Kings, and other Supreme Magistrates to be nursing Fathers to his Church; that as they do receive authority and power from the hands of God, so they may use the same in the protection and defence of the Church of God: and God, even their own God will give them his Blessing, and save them from the striving of unruly people, whose mouth speaketh proud words, and their right hand is a right hand of iniquity. FINIS.
