L1318A E1019_14 99863712 115923
TREASON ARRAIGNED, In ANSWER to Plain English; BEING A Trayterous, and Phanatique Pamphlet, which was condemned by the Counsel of State, Suppressed by Authority; and the Printer declared against by Proclamation. It is directed to the Lord General Monck, and the Officers of his Army, &c. London, printed in the year, 1660.
An Advertisement to the Reader. TAking notice of a Pestilent and Seditious Pamphlet; Entitled PLAIN EN∣GLISH, &c. which is grown too Publique, not∣withstanding the utmost Care and Prudence of the Counsel of State, and the Magistrates of the City, imployed to suppresse it; I thought it my Duty to unmasque the Designe; to prevent further mischiefs; which might Arise, from the mistake, either of the Scope, or Reasonings of it. I should rather have Printed my Reply, single; and only Quoted, what concerns my Purpose, but for these Reasons. First: That Infamous Paper, is already dis∣persed; and the reprinting of it, with these Re∣marques upon it, I hope, will not Endanger the most partial or weak person, into whose hands it Falls. Next, I suppose it a more Equal, and Impar∣tial way, to subject Both at once; as liable to to a more strict examination. The Declaration (which Hee draws out at length) is neither My Concern, nor Subject. The Text, is all my businesse, and the extent of my Design, is, Honestly to serve my Coun∣try.
To his Excellency the Lord General Monk, and the Officers of the Army under his Commaud. My Lord and Gentlemen, IT is written, The prudent shall keep silence in an evil time; and 'tis like, we also might hold our peace, but that we fear a knife is at the very throat, not only of our and your Liberties▪ but of our persons too. In this condition, we hope it will be no offence, if we cry out to you for help; you that (thr ugh Gods goodness) have helped us so often, and stre∣nuously maintained the same Cause with us, against the return of that Family which pretends to the Government of these Nations. It is the publick interest and yours, that we hitherto fought for, and for which we now plead; therefore we insist upon it with the greater confidence before you, because we are all equally concerned in the good or ill of your transactions: We cannot yet be perswaded, though our fears and jealousies are strong, and the grounds of them many, that you can so lull asleep your Consciences, or forget the publick Interest, and your own, as to be returning back with the multitude to Egypt, or that you should with them be hankering after the Leeks and Onions of our old bondage. Though it were possible you should forget, yet certainly God will not, all the injuries and oppressions done by that Family to his Church and people in these and other Nations: Though the Inscription [Exit Tyrannus] which was fixed over the place where the Statue of the late King formerly stood at the Exchange, hath been blotted out by the Rabble, yet it is written with the Pen of a Diamond in the hearts of many thousands, and will he so hereafter in the adamantine Rolls of Fame and History. No matter then, though the prophane Vul∣gar take a liberty to proclaim him both Saint and Martyr in the midst of there Bon-fires, and their Tipple. All the good fellows were ever at his Devotion, because he was for theirs, and com∣manded it to be observed upon the Sundays. But to the▪end it
may be better known how goood a King, and how great a Saint he was, we have taken the boldness at this instant to offer you an ac∣compt of some part of the transactions during his Reign: & because there are too many in the City who wait the good time to re erect his Statue, we desire in the fist place to present you his Picture, as it was drawn by a good hand, the Parliament, in the year 1647. at which time it was resolved upon the Qustion joyntly by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assmbled, That they would make no further Addresses or Applications to the King, or receive any Message from him. Treason Ar∣raigned, in Answer to Plain English, &c. SOme two dayes since, came to my view, a Bold, Sharp Pamphlet, call'd PLAIN ENGLISH—directed to the GENERAL, and his OFFICERS, &c.— It is a Piece, drawn by no Fool, and it deserves a serious Answer.—By the D sign;—the Subject;—Malice, and the stile; I should suspect it for
a Blot of the same Pen that wrote ICONOCLASTES. It runs foule;—tends to Tumult;—and, not content, Barely to Applaud the Murther of the King, the excrable Au∣thor of it vemits upon his Ashes; with a Pedantique, and Enve∣nom'd scorn, pursuing still his sacred Memory. Betwixt Him, and his Brother Rabshakeh, I think a man may venture to divide the glory of it; It relishes the mixture of their united faculties, and wickednsse. As yet, 'tis true; the Hand is somewhat Doubtfull to us; but the Drift,—Certain: and 'tis as Clear from whence it first mov'd, as to what end it tends. It speaks the Rancour, and the Interest of the Rump; be the Contrivance whose it will; and, be∣yond doubt, It was written by some Mercenary to the Faction; and That, by their Direction, and Appointment. 'Tis too Malicious, for a private Passion; and too Dangerous, for one that writes not, either for Bread, or Life. Take it in gross; 'tis an Alarm to all the Phanatiques in England; couch'd under the specious notion of an Appeal to the General, and his Army, asserting, to all purposes, the Interests; and Justifying the horrid Practices of the Regicide-Party.— It Remonstrates;—Expostulates;—Tempts;—Threatens;—Flatters;—Begs;—Prevari∣cates: and by all Artifices, toward all Humours, it moulds it self into an application suitable:—only upon the Blood, and Family of the late King; it lashes out into an Impious, and Inhumane fury, sufficient to Disgrace, the Sober (in comparison) promoters of his Death; and to Startle their very Consciences, that spilt his Blood with Pleasure. Nor does the Brutish Rebel only quitt the Man, in point of Tendernesse; his Rage against the Royal Line, disturbs his Reason too. (otherwise smooth enough to delude such as are not very well aware of him) Whether it be the Ago∣ny, and Horrour of a Wounded Soul, which thus transports him; or that, in these excesses, he only Prsonates the last Convulsions of a Heart-broken Faction;—It matters not: Thus much we may collect from his distempers; That Rabble is, at this instant, upon a Combination, to Tumultu∣ate the Army, and the People, and such as will not share
the Guilt of their Conspiracy, they labour to engage with∣in the Reach, and Danger of it. That we may better un∣derstand what they Design, wee'll see a little what they say. This Pamphlet speaks the sense of the whole Gang; and throughly Examined, will discover the frame, and the ex∣tent of their lewd Purposes. I look upon't as an Affront to Christianity, and to Rea∣sonable Nature; so scandalous; I vow to God, in Favour meerly of Humanity, I would suppresse it, were no more Copies extant of it: but 'tis too late for That. The Coun∣tries are already Furnish'd; and the Town yet full of them; (the singular, and early care of the Publique Magistrate to hinder it, notwithstanding) so that it rests now, only to lay open the vile Interests of this bloody Faction, and An∣tidote the People against the danger of their Pestilent Infusi∣ons. Let Time produce the Author; (if it be lawfull to Prophane the Light with such a Monster) The Matter only of this Licentious Paper must be my Subject. If wee must never be Quiet, till these People think them∣selves Safe, we must stay, till Divine Justice is dissolved;—till they believe the word, and Power of God, a Fable;—till they can Lay that Devil, Conscience;—and Blot out of the Table of their Memoryes, all their Presumptuous out∣rages, both against Heaven, and Earth;—till they can Quench those Raging Horrours which Exagitate their Souls;—Remove those hideous Fantômes, that (whereso'ere they fly) pursue them, with the Images of those they have mur∣ther'd, Bleeding afresh: and when they think to Turn away their Looks from the Dire object, to the other side, they meet with a Remembrancer, that minds them of their Sacrilege, and Treason, and then they start again, another way; and there, they meet a Sword drawn, to revenge their Perjuries. In fine, their Injuries are of a Large extent, and such, by Consequence, must be their Feares, (while they persist in their Impenitence) In this distresse, rather of Thought, than Danger; of Ter∣rour from within, rather than Violence, without; They do
well, to Implore the General's help, to save their Lives, that would have taken His: especially, obliging him (in surplus) with this additional respect: That they have made him Free of the Fanatiques;—Embarqued him in the same Bottom with Themselves;—and Finally, Involved the Honour, and the Saver of his Country, in common, with the Blemish, and the Pest of all mankind. Say,—MILTON; NEDHAM; either, or both, of you, (or whosoever else)—Say; where this Worthy Person, ever mixt with you? (That is; You,—or those that Employ you, and allow you wages) more, than in order to those very Purposes, to which he still adheres, and from whence, you recede. The Return of that family, which pretends (as this Tum∣bler phrases it) to Govern us; nor Was, nor Is the Questi∣on. The publique Interest, that He fought for, and you swore to;—was the Preserving of our BIRTH-RIGHTS;—the good old LAWS;—his MAJESTIES REGAL AU∣THORITY;—the PRIVILEGES of PARLIAMENT; and—(read the old Declarations) not to maintain a Canting Faction in the Army;—a Py-bald Ministry;—or which amounts to all;—the Residence;—the Errata's of an Honest Parliament. Again, to comply fairly with an Ʋniversal vote;—That, does our Scribler call, forgetting of a publique Interest; and keeping of the Covenant, or an Oath, is, with him, lling of a man's conscience asleep. A desire to be well again, after a Cused sit of the Spleen (and ply'd with steel too) of well-nigh Twenty years continuance,—our demy-Levite,—terms it a Hankering after our old Leeks, and Oyons.—Why Jack, or Mark, or Harry,—or, (in fine) any Body—Every man as he Likes: You're for a Rump; it may be.—I'm for somewhat else. Believe me, I had ather Live poor▪ and Honest; than Hang Rich; and Treacherous:—then give my self a turn in one of the King's old Houses. But— De Gustibus, non est Disputandum.
I'm sorry my first Page is Printed.—I shall be thought a Fool now, for suspecting our Plain English-man, of wit. Something there's in his Vein, like Bottle-ale. Stir it;—It Tumults, Sputters; and at Last, it spends it self in Foam;—but Nourishment, or Comfort, there's none in't.—The Fellow's Jadish, Dull;—out of his Beaten, and Known Rode; but when he comes to raile against the King; he's in his Element. There, he's a Through-pac'd, Egregious villain; and yet a Stumbler; but a false Step or two may be Allow'd him. This Formal Devil;—how great an Honour does he to the Royal family, in his Reviling of it!—The In∣juries, and Oppressions it has done to Church, and People, trou∣ble him sore. The Blotting out of—EXIT TYRAN∣NUS, sticks in his stomach too; but, tho' the Statue's gone, the story shall stand firm; there lyes his Consolation. Audacious Brute, (the Blot, and the Deformity of Humane Race.) During the War, the Nation lay opprest under the Common fate of an Intestine Broyl. The Quarrel was Disputed both with Pens, and Weapons, doubtfully, as to the Vulgar;—among the wiser sort, some steerd their Course by Interest, or Passion; others, resigned themselves, (abstracted from all other thoughts) to what they reckon'd Piety, and Reason. (Thus far the Burthen seems divided.) After this, the King's made a Prisoner; and his Party sunk; now I Demand; who has oppress'd us since; but those that Swore, till then, they fought to save us? If we look back beyond the War, our mischief there was, that we were better fed than Taught. We were Rich, Wanton, and Rebellious. But I begin to waver in my undertaking;—I find I have a Wolf to deal with, not a man; that preys upon the Dead. A Devil!—whose Businesse is to Break the sacred Bonds of Ʋnity, and Order; and to Calumniate vir∣tue. Nor does it serve him; the bare Murther of his Master, (as it does other Beasts of Rapine, that leave the Carkasse, when they have Suck'd the Blood) This wretch must descant, and Rhetoricate upon his Ashes, with an Audacious Petulan∣ry:—Make Providence it self a Complicate; and with a
Comique sawcynesse, Place, or Displace;—in Heaven, or Hell, as his Luxuriant Humour pleases. BRADSHAW; this villain ranks among the Heroes; (and he deserves a Saints place in his Kalender)—a man, of whom we dare not barely hope well; so enormous was his Life, and so Conform, his Obstination in that Lewdnesse, to his Death. Whereas, that glorious Creature; that Dy'd the object of this Monsters Insolence, and Rage;—that Innocently suf∣fered, what that Infamous Pageant-President as vilely Acted;—that with a Primitive patience; Piety; Constancy, and Resignation, endured the Scorns, the Injuries, and Per∣secutions of his own Subjects; and, at the last, received his Death, from their very Hands, in whose behalf he Dy'd. This Saint, and Martyr, (BOTH; beyond Controversie; so far as we can Judge) is by our Charitable Intelligencer Enroll'd in the Black List;—Charged with Indevotion, and Intemperance; so was our Saviour a Wine-bibber, a haunter too of Publicans, and Sinners:—to whose Inimi∣table example, (I speak with Reverence, to God and Truth.) both in his Life, and Sffering, I do believe, the story of our Late Soveraign, bears the nearest Proportion of all o∣thers.—But 'tis amid their Bon-fires, and their Tipple, (this Misereant tells us) that he's Canonized:—and that his Majsty commanded Drinking as a Sunday exer∣cise. The world that knew the King, know this to be a Lye; (but 'tis our Mrurie s Trade;—'tis his Diana to am∣plifie a little for the publique good) 'Tis true, there were some Liberties allowed upon the Sabbath, which being mis∣employed, were counter∣manded. How does this scandal both of Providence, and Society, scape Thunder, or a Dagger! We shall now have the story of our King, and Saint: (he saies) and to usher in the re-erection of his Statue, his Picture first drawn by the PARLIAMENT in 1647. (as our libellos Pamphleter would perswade us  when the Vote passed both by Lords, and Commons, concerning Non-Addresses. I should be tedious to reply upon every par∣ticular in the Declaration he makes use of: But as to
what concerns the needfull, and the proper Ʋindication of his Majesty; together, with those worthy Members, whom this seditious Rump-whelp labours to involve in the same desperat, and exorbitant Proceedings with his ungracious Masters;—In what concerns, I say, their Vindication, I shall be clear and punctual; leaving the Judgement of the Controversie, to the impartial Reader. WE revive this the rather, (says he) because the memory of men being frail, cannot retain all particulars; which is the reason (we fear) why so many formerly engaged against him as high as any, upon conscentious accompts, both Religious and Civil, are staggering and backsliding, and have need of some quick and faithful Monitor to minde them of things past, and make them beware of the present, lest they return with the Rout, and cry, Let us make our selves a King again of that Family; that Family which so cruelly persecuted us and our Brethren, and which still remains engaged by reason of State, and ancient Principles of Enmity and Interest, to plow up the old Furrows upon our backs, and re-deliver our persons and conscien∣ces into the hands of our old Tormenters; and our men of might, and our Counsellours, to become sacrifices to the revenge of an implacable party. March on then, (my Lord and Gen∣tlemen,) for believe it, there is in point of Safety no possiblity of retreat, and much less in point of Consci∣ence or Honor; For, if you respect Conscience, (as we hope you do) lay your hands upon your hearts, and tell us what hope you or we can have, that the reformed Religion and Cause will be protected and maintained by the Son, which was so irreligiously betrayed both at home and abroad by the Father. It may be you do not readily remember these things, nor how much blood was spilt by royal treachery, nor the manifold usurpations and designs by him projected and acted upon our Liber∣ty, the like never done by any Prince before: and for Blood, the Scotish Ministers employed hither Anno 1644. proclaimed and published in Print, That the Late King had spilt more blood than was shed in the ten Heathen Persecutions of the Christians: and the Ministers of London, (as we can
shew you by several Prints of theirs) declared, That satisfacti∣on ought to be had for blood; that he was a man of blood, and not capable of accommodation with the Parliament. We mention not this to upbraid them; for, we reverence their an∣tient Zeal in this particular, and humbly intreat them, as well as your Excellency, and the Officers, and all the good people of these Nations, to observe the forementioned Resolves of the Lords and Commons, which were introductory to that most noble Act of Justice afterwards executed upon the King. And that it may appear to be such, in despite of Ignorance and Envy, we have been bold here to present you in Print that most remarkable Declaration of the Commons assembled in Parliament, in pursuance of the said Resolve of both Houses, wherein they declare the Grounds and Reasons why they passed the Resolves of no further Address; and therein you will see also, how well he deserved to lose his head, and his Family the Kingdom; whose corrupt and irreconcilable interest had been the head and fountain of those Rivers of blood and misery which had flowed so many years about these Nations. TO help the memories of some, that may very well forget the things they never thought of; & to reproach to others, their inconstancy, who, out of good intent at first engaged, and after That, convinced of their Original mistake, upon a better Light, relinquished; there needs no better Monitor, than such a Person, whose Guilt and Desperation, transport him beyond all hopes of mercy;—This man sollicites for his Head, when under the pretext of Conscience, he labours for a Party: and yet methinks he should not need. Alas! hee's but the Rump's Sollicitor, he pleads their Cause, takes their Fee, and vanishes. Impudent Creature, to presume to be afraid; as if a Hangman would disgrace himself to meddle with him! O'h that Family — That Family, puzzles our men of Might, or (as the Droll words it!) our Counsellors, wonderfully. Now do I phasy the Fellow, this Bout, extremely: To
see the Little Agitatour fall upon his Plitiques, betwixt flattery, and sawcynss, Half-Tutor, and Half-Parasite, with one eye up, and t'other down, accost the General.— My Lord, and Gentlemen, march on; (the word of Com∣mand; a Noble Rogue) for believe it, &c.—there's no retreat, he tells them, either in point of safety, conscience, or honour,—and then the Whelp takes another snap at the King: as shamelesly, as senselesly, affirming, that the Reformed Religion, (that is, (as I suppose he means) the Protestant) and Cause, (that is, the Peoples Laws and Liberties,) was irreligiously betrayed by our late Soveraign; who lost his Head in defence of one, and th'other; the Caution he puts in against the Son is of the same alloy, a Person, so indulgent to his people, that out of his particlar Necessities, he yet relieved the English prisoners that were taken in Flanders; although his Enemies; and, in point of Conscience, further, so Tender, that he preserves the Church of England in the Dominions of the King of Spain: and still, his Honour, with his Religion. But let us a little examine his Instan∣ces, for he pretends now to proceed to proofs. The Scotish Ministers (as he tells us) proclaimed, and published in 1644. That the late King had spilt more blood than was shed in the Ten Persecutions of the Christians,—and the Ministers of London declared him a man of Blood, &c.—(That is, the High Priests, and Offi∣cers, cryed out, saying, Crucifie him, crucifie him. (That's the Original.) But to come closer to the Businesse, the Scotish, and the Scotch Ministers, are a clear different thing. Scotish, denotes the Antient Faction of the Na∣tion, (No Favourers of Kings,) and Scotch, relates to their Nativity alone, abstracted from the Party. First, They were Argyle's Creatures, slcted to promote Argyle's designs: So, not the Ministry of Scotland, but a Pack of Scotish Ministers. Next, of no more Authority to the Rump, against the King, than to the Nation, against the Rump, (in whom, they are as much unsatisfied.) The Ministers of London did as much, he sayes. That's
something truly; till we consider what those Ministers were, and by whom, placed, and moulded, for that purpose. Marshall was the prime prson in the Agency betwixt the two Nations;—He, that curs'd Mroz;—He, that was sent Commissioner into Scotland; taught them their Lsson, There, and then returning, taught some of our reputative Divines to sing the same Tune, Here.—This is the Man, that clos'd with Nye, when Presbytery went down; and carried the 4. Bills to the King, at Carisbrook-Castle, for which, they had 500l. apiece. I could tell you of some more of the Gang, that▪ under Question for confederacy with Love: after a due formality of seeking God, delivered, as upon accompt of Inspiration, that Oliver Protectour was the person; and his the Government, of all that ever were, or should be, the most agreeable to God. This is not, to lessen the esteem of Holy Orders; neither to fix a rash, irreverend Censure upon the Ministry: No man reveres the Character of a Churchman more than my self. But 'tis to shew the World, how much our Pamphlet-Merchand is steer'd, by Interest, and Passion, and how little, by Reason, and Truth. The grinning Whelp, now, betwixt snarling, and fawning, would fain perswade the General, and his Officers, (and all the World beside) that the Resolve of Non-Addresses, by the Lords and Commons, was introductive to the Mur∣ther of the King. Murther, I say, that's the Plain English of what he stiles—A most Noble Act of Justice; His Methode lyes through direct Contradictions to the Universal Rules, of Logique, Truth, and Honesty. By this Insinuation, he charges that Exorbitance upon the two Houses, and draws an Inference, from the Impardo∣nable Quality of that Action, to the Necssity and Reason of pursuing it. This, he pretends to make appear, in spight of Ignorance, and nvy, from the Commons Declaration, in persuance of the Resolve of Both Houses, onteyning the Reasons, why no further Address; and thence, proceeds to a Determination upon the Fathers Life, and the Son's In∣heritance;—as positively fixing, upon the King's
Accompt, those Plagues this Nation has Endured; as if the Graceless villain were of Counsel with the Eternal wiedom. I shall observe in order; and First; I'll prove, that the vote of Non-Addrsse, was not properly an Act of the two Houses; or if it were so, that it did not rationally direct to the King's Lie. Secondly. Tat Declaration of the Commons, (SINGLY) declaing the Reasons of the resolve of Both Houses (Jynt∣ly) does not amount either o a Justification, or Intenti∣on of taking the King's Life,—No; not though I should gant the Members Free;—which I cannot; and the Au∣thority Full: which I do not.—To the First.— They were under a force.—Upon a Debate in the Commons House, concerning the Kings Answer to the 4. Bills, presented to him Dec. 24. 1647. and debated; Jan. 3. Commissary Ireton delivered imself after this manner. The King had deny'd safety, and Protection to his people, by denying the 4. Bills; that Subjection to him, was but in lieu of his Protection to his People; this being deny'd, they might well deny any more subjection to him, and settle the Kingdom with∣out him: That is was now expected, after so l ng patience, they should shew their Resolution, and not desert those valiant mn who had engaged for them, beyond all possibility of Retreat, and would never forsake the Parliament, unesse the Parliament forsook them first From hence, naturally results the menace of the Army, in case the Parliament should forsake them; and Ireton understood the Souldjery too well, to mistake them.— As yet; ere's nothing Capital pretended against the King. After some more Debate, Cromwell urged;—that it was now expected, the Parliament should govern, and defend the Kingdom, by their own Power, and Resolutions; and not teach the people any longer, to exp c safety, and Government from an obstinate man, whose heart God had hardened: That those men, who had defnded the Parliament, fom so many dan∣gers, with the expece of their Blood; would defend them here∣in with Fidelity, and Courage, against all Opposition. Teach
them not, by neglecting your own, and the Kingdoms safety, in which their own is Involved, to think themselves betray'd, and left hereafter to the rage, and malice of an irreconcileable enemy, whom they have subdued for your sake; and therefore are likely to find his future Government of them Insupportable; and full∣er of Revenge, than Justice: Nota.—left Despair teach them to séek their safety by some other means than adhe∣ring to you,—who will not stick to your selves; how de∣structive such a Resolution in them will be to you all, I Tremble to think, and leave you to Judge. This Speech, concluded the debate; and the better to Im∣presse his meaning, he laid his hand upon his Sword, at the end of it. If this be not a Force, what is? the Power and Inclination of the Army, being the only moving Arguments to obtain the Vote. The Question was then put, and Carried, for no more Addresses.—But no pretence still that ex∣tends to Life. I shall appeal now to the Declaration it self; to which our Regicidal Babbler refers the world for satisfaction. First, the Sectarians had stol'n a Vote, Jan. 4. to engarrison Whitehall, and the Mewes, (the Lords, not mention'd in the case) their manner of obtaining it, was This. 'Twas Noon; and the Independent Party call'd to Rise. The Presbyterians went their waies to Dinner: the Independents stayed, and did their Businesse. The Lords opposed the vote for non-Addresse; (10. to 10.) but the Engagement of the Army, cast it; who sent a Declaration to the Commons, of thanks for their 4 Votes against the King, engaging to defend them with their Lives, &c.—Is this a Force yet? Soon after this; comes forth a Declaration, and Rea∣sons, &c. Drawn by a Committee, appointed by the Indepen∣dents &c. So that even That too, was a Piece, Contrived by the Designers of our Mischief, and by a Force, Extorted from the Sober rest, that would have Saved us. This ap∣pears, from the Interpose of the Presbyterians, to moderate the Eagernesse of it, upon the debate. The Last 4. lines of the said Declaration will be sufficient to stop the mouth
of any Reasonable Person, as to the point of Life; (even with∣out the Violence; which undenyably produced the Rest.) Af∣ter an Enumeration of diverse Particulars objected against the King, The Declaration concludes Thus. These are some few, of the many Reasons, why we cannot re∣pose any more Trust in him, and have made those former Resolu∣tions; (meaning the 4. Votes, whereof that of non-Address was one) yet we shall use our ut most Endeavours, to settle the present Government, as may best stand with the Peace, and Happinesse of this Kingdom▪ This very Declaration touches not his life; it is not said settle A present Government, but The—; (relating properly to an Amendment, not an Abolition) Considering the Grammar of it; I do not wonder much, at a Complyance, in some Measure, to an Indecency, in order to prevent a Greater Ill, that Threatened Them, and Ʋs: and That, was their design; For when it came at last to the Result of Life, and Death, (as then 'twas evident, it amoun∣ted to no lesse) Those Gentlemen, whom the Author of Plain English would willingly engage, as Complicates;—those Gen∣tlemen, I say, did then oppose themselves, against the Murthe∣rous Faction, and voted for a Treaty, Dev. 4. Upon the 6. they were Imprisoned, and Affronted by the Army for their pains.—When the more moderate Party, was removed, the Rest were left at liberty to consummate the Kingdom's Ru∣ine, and their own Damnation. Come I'll go urther with the angry man;—put case, these Gentlemen had gone yet Forward; and dipp'd as deep as he could wish they had. Frailty is an insepara∣ble from our nature. 'Tis Humane to Transgress;—'Tis Christian to Forgive, and 'tis our Interest to Repent. He that delivers me by Designe, 'though but from that mis▪fortune which he himself engaged me in upon mistake;—he is so sar from any Reason to apprehend my Revenge▪ he ha's a Title to my Kindness: but our Incorrigile MONITOR, sets up his Rest upon a Final, Reprobated, Impenitence. 'Tis the Will, Qualifies the Action. I have been Tedious, out of desire to be Clear: but I shall Hastn, and Contract as much as possible.
Having already proved the Declaration (of the Reasons why no more Addresses) to have been an evident contri∣vance of the Independent Faction, in the very Frame of it; and Publish'd, while the Army stood to Dare, and over-awe the sober Party, that was likely to oppose it; I do not hold my self concerned, in any further notice of the Particulars therein Conteined; and which our Challenger produces, as an unanswerable Eviction, that the Late King, and his Family, deserved Death, and Extirpation. (as, by and by, he tells you)—Yet something shall be said, even to his Quaeres, thence extracted (in due place;) but I must first unvtile him to the People; and that, by laying open the Dilemna he proceeds upon.—He reasons Thus, My Businesse (sayes he to himself) must be to hinder an Agreement with the King. The Presbyterian party (I'm afraid) enclines to't. If he returns, we're Lost: My own Soul tells me, we have sinn'd beyond Remission, and yet I see no way to hinder it neither. The Nation is united a∣gainst us; the Presbyterian abhors us, as much as the Royal Party does; and the Army it self, begins to declare it self our Enemy. What's to be done, must be, both Quick, and Home. These six waies lye before us. First the Army must be wrought into a Tumult. Secondly. The Presbyterian must be (Right, or Wrong,) involved with us in Guilt, and consequently in Danger. They must be made to share in the Blood of the Father, and in the Detestation of the Son, and be possessed, that there can be no saety to Them, but in a Common Interest with our selves To this end, we may forge Letter's from Brussels. Suborn Witnesses to swear the King a Papist, &c. Thirdly. The Cavalier must be perswaded, that the Presbyter only designs to set up for himself; and Argu∣ments drawn from by-past, and mistaken Failings upon promise, to beget a Jealousie. The inconsistency of Episopal, with Presbyterian Principles must be objected, &c. Fourthly All Persons interessed in Estates, got by the War, must be engaged, for sear of losing them. Fifthly. The General himself, must be sollicited to take the Government upon him; Promises urged; no matter
whether true, or false: If this won't do, A lvise him, as a Friend, to have a care of the City; and lid the City look to him. Perplex them Both; We'll confound all the World, rather than perish. Lastly We may publish the Declaration, of the Reasons, for no frther Addresses: and try, if that way, we can either make a Party among themselves, or with the People. We may so bring it in, it shall be dangerous to reply upon, for fear of disliging, and as unsafe, to let alone, for fear of seducing. Here's te Dilmma; It will be an∣swered, or it will not; If it be, 'twill startle the Presbyteri∣an; if otherwise, 'twill puzzle the Pople. I wish our Com∣mon Enemy would go this open way to work. Here's the true State and Method of our Adversaries Thoughts, and Actions. Now to his Quaeres, wherein I shall be tender, how I revive Disputes, either unkind, or unseason∣able; and yet not wanting to my Ʋndertaking, That is, my Ʋndertaking to make evident, that his Fondation is sandy, and the entire Structure composed of rotten Materials.) I'll take his—(what shall I call them?) Suppositions,—Objections, Questions,—(or call them what you will) one by one, and reply upon them in his own Order. Here he begins, WOuld you see how and by whom the Irish Rebellion began, and upon whose score those unparallel'd barbarous Massacres of hundreds of thousands of the Protestants in Ireland, do lye? NO, we would not see Now. We Question not, but you'd be Kind enought to sh w us; and cut our Throats here, just as those▪ Rebels did their Fellow-Subjects there. (For an rsh Rebel, is but the Anagram of an English Panatique.) By whom now, is another Question, and a Harder. Be∣shrew me, 'ti a Pevsh point. Why—the Ish Re∣beion, began, by the Irish Rebels: a the English Rbellion, did by the English Rels. I hope Commoions in Irland are no Miracles; nori it needfull to assign them any other reason, than the Humour of the Peopl?—Yet I'll be
civil to you. I speak my Soul, I do believe, the Irish Catholiques in that Rebellion which you point at, took flame at the Severity they apprehended, from some extra∣ordinary Declarations against them here, previous to their Rebellion. This I must adde further, the King, (for't is at Him▪ our Author's malice strikes) at his Return from Scotland, did earnestly, and particularly recommend the care of Ire∣land to both Houses, in his Speech, Dec. 2d. 1641. upon the 14th. he pressed them once again, to the same purpose; Adding, the great Necessity of Dispatch;—the daily Cries, and Importunityes of the Irish Protestants, and offering all his Power and Interest toward their Relief, in these very Terms. (See the Exact Collections, the 1. and 2. Speeches in the Book.) That nothing may be omitted on my part, I must here take notice of the Bill for pressing of Soldiers▪ now depending among you my Lords, concerning which I here declare, that in case i come so to me, as it may not infringe or diminish my Prerogative, I will pass it. And further, seeing there is a Dispute raised (I be∣ing little beholding to him whosoever at this time began it) concerning the bounds of this antient and undoubted Prerogative, to avoid further debate at this time, I offer, that the Bill may passe with a Salvo jure, both for King and People, leaving such Debates to a time that may better bear it, &c. To conclude, I conjure you by all that is, or can be dear to you or me, that, laying away all Disputes, you go on chearfully & speedily for the reducing of Ireland. By whom, Ireland was tumulted, I do not know; but that it was not by his Majesty, is most evident. Nor is there any Question, but the Massacres there committed, must lie up∣on the score both of the Actors, and Promoters of those crueltyes: who they are, when I know, I'll tell you. WOuld you know who it was that interposed betwixt the Parlia∣ment and the Duke of Buckingham, and would not per∣mit the Proofs to be made against him concerning the death of his own Father?
THis I shall satisfie you in.— A Letter was presented to the House from Thomas Haslerigg (brother to Sir Arthur) which was read; to this Purpose. That there was one Mr. Smalling, a Committee∣man of Leicester-shire, who had been a Deputy-examiner in the star-Chamber, And affirmed, that above twenty years since, there being a sute in star-Chamber, between the Earl of Bristol, Complainant, and the Duke of Buck∣ingham, Defendant; Concerning Physick, presumptu∣ously administred by the said Duke, to King James; the said Smalling took many Depositions therein, and was further proceeding in the Examinations, until a Warrant, signed by the King, was brought him, Commanding him to surcease, and to send him the Depositions alrea∣dy taken: which Smalling did; yet kept notes by him of the principal passages, doubting what further pro∣ceedings might be hereafter in a businesse of such im∣portance. Sir Henry Mildmay moved that Smalling be sent for, and examined upon Oath by the COMMITTEE that penned the said Declaration; but upon motion of the Presbyteri∣ans he was ordered to be examined at the COMMONS∣BAR. Smalling came, produced the Warrant, but no notes▪ so this Chimera vanished. Tertio Caroli, this businesse had been ventilated, and examined against the Duke, and no mention made of Poy∣soning, or Killing King James. It was then only called, An Act of high Presumption, and Dangerous Consequence in the Duke, nor was there then the least Reflection upon KING CHARLES. (See the History of Independency par. 1. p. 74.) WOuld you hear who it was that made so light of Parliaments, killing them as soon as born, and making them a scorn by dissolu∣tion at pleasure; and at length designed, and in fine drew sword against the very Parliamentary Constitution, after he bad by im∣prisonments destroyed several eminent Patriots for their freedome of speech in the Parliament on the behalf of the Publick, and in particular, touching the death of his Father?
NO; it needs not, I can tell you that. 'Twas Cromwel, and the secluding Members. The RUMP; That drew Sword against the very Parliamentary Constution. Tey clap'd up Sir  obert Pye and Major Fincher for but dsiring a  Prliament; on the behalf of the Publi∣que: sending thei Troops abroad to seize, and Threatning (them ee) to  all the Declarers. (That which concern▪ his Maj sti's Father, is spoken to already) WOuld the Scots know who it was that designed them to be the first Subjects of Slavery in Spirituals and Civils who hated their very Nation▪ though the Land of his Nativity; who made a Pacification with them, with a rsabeous in ent to break every Article; and manifested it as son as he returned from Edinburg to London, giving special command to un the said Articles by the hand of the common Hngman, and it was publickly done? I'll tell you that too: 'Twas the old Argyle.—But hold you Sir. Touching the Treacerous Intent, did he tell you his mind?  t I confesse, you are quick-sighted; you could not see things else that have no Being;—as your own Piety, and publique Tenderness;—You have ap∣prov'd your elve, Serhr of Hearts indeed, witnesse your Sacrifies to your MOLOCH (the Good old cause) your Butcheries by Qarterin, and Embowelling poor Wretches, only upon Friolous, and Icongrous Circumstances: sense∣lessely patch'd together by your Ridiculous, and Suborned sons o B lil. Because that your own Party, did resolve, at first to break al Oths; and has been only True, in a Fidelity to Hell, an Wickedss; you make no difficulty to measure others by your Impious selves;—you Talk, and Act at such a Rte, a if men were to be Damn'd upward;—as if the  were a D lsion; Divinity an old wive's Tale; and (seio sl) not halfso much Respect, is paid to the Two Tal of the Dcaloge as to the Orders of your Cff—hos. I shall not rael the Tansction, sequent upon the Pcifiation yo speak of.—But to your next.
WOuld you hear the Cries of the blood of Rochel, and of his own people sacrificed in that Expedition to a forein Inte∣rest, and of all the Protestants in France, for his Barbarous be∣traying of them? THe Rochel Expedition I'm a stranger to; so I suppose are you, that make the Challenge. But if you had told me of Jamaica; or the Sound; I should have under∣stood you. WOuld you cast your eye on past miseries, and recollect the mani∣fold intollerable Oppressions of people both in matter of Estate and Conscience, and compare them with the indulgencies at the same time towards Papists, yea and the designs laid to make use of Papists, to destroy both Parliaments and godly People together? NOw you say something, surely. The manifold in∣tollerable oppression of People in matter of Estate, and Conscience, &c. This I remember perfectly. Your Major-General-Archy was an admirable Form of Government: So was your Rumparchy. Clap a man up, and never let him know his crime, nor his Accuser,—declare a man uncapable of serving in Parliament, for having Bayes in his Window, or a Minc'd-Pye in Christmasse, sequester half the Nation, because they will not swear back and forward; sell Free-born men by Thousands into Planta∣tions; and in fine, beside Excise and other Impositions Arbi∣trary, lay on the comfortable Load of 100000 l. a Month, upon a Begger'd Nation, and at the latter end of the day. (Is this the Oppresson your wise Worship intends?) Now for the matter of Conscience, I can help you out there too. To shorten, let the Oath of Abjuration serve for all You follow this with a sharp charge for making use of Papists. I could retort this, if I thought it valuable; but frankly, in a War, the Subject of the Qusstion is not Religion, but Assistance. Nor do I (tho' I might as well) condemn your Party, (that is, the Rump-men) for the same practise.
WOuld you understand the correspondencies maintained with, and the encouragements given to, the bloody Irish Rebels, for the ffecting his designe; together with the correspondencies and Solicitations setled in forein Countries, to the same purpose, with all the Circumstances evincing the truth? THis is the same thing again, shake Hands, and to the next. WOuld you be informed how often, and with how much solici∣tude the Parliament, notwithstanding all these things, did, for peace sake, in a manner prostitute themselves, and hazard the whole Cause, by appointing Treaty after Treaty, which he never entertained but with intent of treachery, and thereby frustrated all their good intentions and endeavours, before ever they passed the Votes of non-Adresse? Then, we beseech you, read the following Declaration, and be satisfied to the full, whether or no the late King and his Family deserved death and extirpation. I Pr'ethee do not choak us with the venerable Sound of Parliament: I talk to you, and of that Mungrel-mixture you plead for. A Parliament cannot do amisse, (be not too quick now) they may have done Amisse, and the next Session may repeal or mend it. What they did, I don't Question: but what you say, will (as I humbly conceive) admit a Castigation. Look back upon your self; These are your Words—Which he never enter∣teyn'd (Treaty, that is,) but with intent of Treachery, and, thereby frustrated their good Intentions, and Endeavours, before ever they passed the Votes of Non-Address.) At this rate, you ground the Non-Address, upon the Kings Intention of Treachery. A Positive disclaim of your obedience, upon a Possible Dis-ingenuity in your Prince. Come, to cut short. Dare you say, that he promised, and failed? That's Treachery, to Betray a Trust: By this Rule of Pro∣ceeding, had you required his Life, and he refused; you might have taken it: his Crime was only the Non-Conces∣sion of what you demanded; and he gave his Reasons too for that Refusal. Well, but let's come up to the Vote it self.
I have already proved, that it concerns not the secluded Members; and now I shall entreat you to Back my opinion, with a slip of your own Pen. Their honest strictness in the Negative, afterward, and their adhesion to it, through all ex∣tremities, speaks manifestly the Intention of the parly, and that acquirs them. 'Tis your own Argument in your fourth ex∣postulation, you charge his treaty with a treacherous intent, which you infer from a subsequent manifestation of himself by Action. But to dispatch, should I grant all you claim, yet did not the late King and his family, deserve death and extirpation, The premises will not amount to't. Now if you please go on. As for our parts, we very well recount the Series of past trans∣actions, and do remember that in February 1647. when the two Houses of Parliament passed their Resolves of making no further Address, but determined to lay him wholly aside, they never were in a greater state of security and freedom, never passed any thing with greater deliberation; and never the least disturbance or altera∣tion arose in either of the Houses against those Resolves, untill some Persons in the Commons House, otherwise affected, and who by procuring Elections of Persons fit for their turn to serve in Parliament, in vacant places, brought in new men of the Cavalier stamp (as is known) like themselves; and thereby out-balancing the old Patriots, gained the Major Vote of the House; and so with heat, and by design, obtained a revoking of those Re∣solves which had been passed by both Houses in a time of temper, upon most serious Consideration: so that though we shall not take upon us ex absoluto to justisie the interposure of the Souldiery afterwards, and their Exclusion of the Adverse Members (it being a transcendent Act, not to be measured by ordinary Rule, and which nothing can justifie but Supreme necessity) yet this we can truely say in their defence: In Judgement and Conscience there was so indispensible a necessity, that had they not interposed, those Principles and the Concernments of the Com∣monwealth, upon which the aforesaid Resolves of both Houses were founded, had been utterly shipwrackt, and the whole Cause and its Defenders most inevitably have sunk together; seeing the
same heady confidence in treaty was then given to the Father, which too many now encline to allow unto the Son, who were first en∣gaged against them in the War, and held out to the time of the last treaty; whom (of all other men) his party do hate upon that accompt; and, if they had an opportunity, would be sure to make them fall the severest Sacrifices to the Revenge and Memory of his Fath r. THis is already sifed, and a little picking will serve the Turn here. A Cavalier, I find, is onely an Honest man that crosses a Fantan; but the Old Patriots it seems, were the Minor part of the House; and that's enough to entitle the Nation to the Benefit of the Treaty resolved upon. For Sir (if you'l give us leave) we'l be governed by the Major part. It's true, your Supreme necessity is a pretty popular So∣phisme. But, As necessity has no Law, so is it none; nor in any case pleadable against Law, but by the Judges of the Law, which at all hands, is confessed to be the Parliament, and the Major part of the Two Houses in conjunction with the King, have ever denominated That. I must needs take a little pains to correct the Centleman, in his next Fleere upon the Presbyterians. He hangs like a Cock-sparrow upon the aforesaid Resolves of both Houses (which is but an old Trick of a laying Knaves Bastard at an Honest mans door) and then he preaches most Infallible Destructi∣on to the first engagers, whom the King will be sure to sacri∣fice to the Revenge and memory of his Father. This opinion, or rather suggestion of his, opposes all Principles of Honesty, Generosity, and Prudence, which fall within the latitude of the case. Nay, Taking for Gran∣ted, the very entrance upon the War Justifiable. There might be Then a Question, now there's none. They intended onely a Reformation, here's a Dissolution. A liber∣ty was there Designed; here's an Intollerable slavery Imposed, Those quitted, when they saw their error; These, for that very Reason, proceed. There is, in fine, this Difference; one
side would Destroy the King, the other would preserve him These, would Govern without Law, and the other would be governed by Law After all this peremptory rudeness at large; he bethinks himself at last of an Apology to the General; and now the Pageant moves. We urge not these things, with an intent to make the least re∣flection upon your Excellency, and our Brethren the Officers un∣der your command, as if we suspected your sincerity and constancy, after so many plain and and posive Declarations against returning to our old Bondage under that Family which God so wonderful∣ly cast out efore us, and wherein we are confident he, for his own Name and peoples sake, will never more take pleasure: but in regard the old Adversaries behave themselves insolent∣ly and proudly, and publikely give out, the time is coming wherein they shall satisfie their lusts uo us, we thought it convenient to whet your spirits with a repetition of these things, as we have done our own, that the world may see we yet own our Cause; and do believe, that what we have done as Instruments in driving out that Family, we have done in Judgement and Conscience; and that you take a convenient time to let men understand plainly that you also will continue of the same perswasion with us, for as much as there are none of the particulars charged upon the late King in the following Declaration, which would not, with many more, have been proved to his face by a Cloud of Witnesses, if be would have put himself upon tryal, when he was called to an∣swer for his actions. ALas, good Gentleman; you suspect the General? No body can have such a Thought sure: you do but Mind him of his Duty now and then, Refresh his memory, and whet his spirits. He ha's declared himself against returning to our old bondage, under that Family which God so wonderfully cast out before you; But not against the liberty▪ and title of that Person whom God may, no less wonderfully, Bring in, before you: and, I suppose my confidence is better grounded, that the People will never more take pleasure in you; then yours is, that God will take no pleasure in Him; the Nation will as little
endure the Rump, as you the King. But all this while, you Beg the Question, How comes the King to be mentioned? The young man (as your Gravity descends to call him) he's poor, and his Friends, Beggerly; You have the Ballance of pro∣perty on your side, my masters; you're safe enough then. I would advise you now to waite, and not Prejudge Authori∣ty. You're to obey, not to Impose a Government. If you proceed to murmue, and shew your Teeth, when you cannot Bite, 'twill be the worse for you. Indeed, your Good old Pa∣triots will be the Minor vole again of the next Palia∣ment, if you behave not your selves more modstly, the po∣ple will suspect you; for mutinous srvants prove but untoward masters. Monopolies, and some misgovernments were the True Cause, that engaged the well meaning people, in the Quarrel, not extirpation of both Laws and Governors. But if your Adversaries, do (as you say) grow proud and Inso∣lent; in such a case, you may be allowed, to whet your spirits (ae you express your selves, any thing but your knives; you were at that sport once) your Judgement▪ and your conscience we are satisfied in; alas, the difference betwixt yours and ours, is but a Trifle. What we take to be slavvery, you call Freedom.—A Rebel in our Judgement, is a Patri∣ote in yours.—Murther, a Sacrifice; Robbing of Chur∣ches, in your soft opinion, is but unclothing of the Whore; (a thing the Rump's a little given to) we term That sacriledge. One frailty I must needs take notice of among you, for all your talk of Providence, I find, your Arme of Flesh strikes a great stroke in your spiritual conflicts; and when y'are worst∣ed, you'l take eggsfor your mony; and Acquiesce, as well as your neighbors. This I observe to be one Article of your Faith, you argue from Divine Omnipotency, that Providence is ever on the stronger side. Suppose the Gentlemen of the Back side, should look on for a Fit now; the Reyal Family (you say) God cast out before us: Who casts out these? But to make all sure, you press the General, and his Officers to de∣clare., that they'l continue of the same perswasion with you. (This perseverance, I confess, is a main point) you should do well
to leave a note, where they may find you; for you're a little variable, and they're a little shy of medling with those that are givn to change. You're possibly, this day, resolved for a Republick; tenext, for a Protector; by and by, a Counsell of Officers, and then, a Committee of Safety. Come, come, Gentlemen, the Generall will be just, without your Coun∣sels; and steady, in despight of all your Arguments. Speak on. Give us leave (we beseech you) to add one thing more, which we had almost forgotten, to shew the adnesse of those men that cancelled the Votes of Non-Address, and would have brought back the late King by the Isle of Wigh-Treaty, and would now (is they might have their wills) bring in his Son by the like, viz. that at the very time when that Treaty was on foot, though this young man, who was then at Sea in the revolted Ships, declared all to be null which should be agreed on by his Father; yet, hand over head, in they would have had him, as others would now restore the Son upon the very same termes which he so positively declared himself an enemy to in his Fathers dayes. Good God! what a spirit of slumber hach sised such men, who were once deeply engaged with us in the Common Cause, As for your Excellencie, far be it from us to entertain any suspition concerning you, supposing you must needs have upon your heart the true interest of Religion, and your own too; and how much it is concerned in keeping out of that Family, whose restitution we believe God will not now permit unto any Designers, seeing he hath from time to time so signally blasted all former undertakings. As to what concerns Religion, you know what hath bin their Education and Dependncy abroad and should they return, 'tis obvious, all other parties would be put upon their Guard to defend them∣selves against him and his Clergie at home; and so all sorts of religious Parties, being constrained to combine for mutual preservation and liberty, the War will soon be re∣newed upon the point where it at first began.
WHat pitty 'twould have been, this Gentleman should have forgot a thing that never was, the King (indeed) sent an express to the City, the coppy whereof was carried to the House, by the Sheriffs, and some of the Common-Coun ell: 3. Aug. 1647. But not a syllable of what he men∣tions in it; nor any thing that way tending, yet was it eaerly debated, in Terminis, that the Price should be Declared a Rbell, and a Traytour. Among other Reasons, why it was laid by, one was,—the Covenant; a second, was This, It would not do well; to vote the Prince a Traytour, the same day, that messengers were sent to invite the King his Father to a Treaty. The clamorous puppy might bethink himself of bet∣ter Language; especially Addressing to an Eminent Person. The madness of those men (he calls it) that cancell'd the votes of non-Addresses, and would have sav'd the King, &c.—If all were mad that would have sav'd That King, or that love This, we should not find many sober Persons, in the Kingdom. This Fellow keeps so much stirr to cleer his Party of any jealousie, upon his Excellency, that he most evidently creates, and discovers one. How comes Religion now, To trouble our Atheistique Saints! These Reprobates have vio∣lent taken the Father's life, and thrown the Son out of his Right and Dominions; exposing him to the charity of For∣reign Princes for a subsistence: and after this; his Education abroad, is made an Argument by this Brute, against his Re∣turn, where will he be next now? As to your own interest in the station where God hath placed you, 'tis well known what the private sence and opinion of that Party is concerning your Excellency, because you have been an Instrument in keeping Scotland many years with so great vigilance and prudence, free from the attempts of that irreconcileable Ene∣my. Admit such a thing were possible, which some fancie, that you should be the man that would put the Crown again upon the
head of that Family; is it not plain what fate (setting aside all other Considerations) you might expect from a seeming reconciled Enemy, and a King too? it being the guise of Kings (as the Hi∣storians from innumerable Examples do observe) ever to recom∣pence with hate their most meritorious Servants; making no dif∣ference in rturn, betwixt the highest Obligation, and the greatest Injury. The examples are so frequent in our own Chronicles, as well as forreign, that he who runs may read it; and 'tis not proper here to recite them. JNdeed he's hard put to't, to make the danger out from the King, to the Generall, in case he should restore him. If there were nothing ee in't, 'twere enough, to make him Dear to the King, and to his Party, that he hates you. Do not Deceive your selves: He'll be a scourge to the Phana∣tiques, and every soul that loves either Piety, or Peace will assist him. Do not mistake me nither. God forbid that all such as have either been misled by cunning practises; or else transported by necessities, to seek a livelyhood by unlawfull means. God forbid (I say) that all without Distinction, should be marked with that Infamous Brand: No, I intend it onely of that Frantique crew, that preclude mercy, by Despising it: and persecute the Truth with a Determinate Malevolence and spite: But note, the man begins to soften. Alas, (Sirs) 'tis not an Army that shall secure you, nor the pow∣er of the Militia that can secure our ancient Senators, (if any who have been engaged can be so fond as to think of security) for, let the Yong Man come in with freedom to encounter both Army and Militia with the hare title of King, and actuall possession of the Throne, the eyes of Army and Militia will soon be dazeled with the splendour of that Gay Thing, and fall down and wor∣ship at the sight and hope of the Kingdoms of this world, and the glory of them; and then all Bonds of Agreement (if any be) will prove but Rushes.
Oh, for God and his peoples sake, yea, and for the City of Londons sake, whom Charles the Father branded in his Pa∣pers with the Character of Disloyall and Rebellious City, (though at that time most renowned in her actings se an end to the expectations of malicious enemies, and staggering fiens, by clear∣ing up your selves, that we may see you in the light, vigorously asseting the good Cause of these Nations: yea, for the sake of Par∣liaments we ask it: and we doubt i not at your hand, seeing the people are not like to be brought to contend any more for Parlia∣ments, if after so long a Contest he should gain an pportunity of improving a possession of the Crown to an usurpation over the Priviledges and Majesty of Parliaments. THis Thing, I'll lay my life, belongs to the Rump; it is so much concern'd in the behalf of our Ancient Senatours. truly I'm half of his mind, in what he sayes last. That is, I do believe, his Majesty would be made welcome; But for faithless; nothing but an Abjuring, Perjur'd villain would suspect him. See how that supple slave, is come about, now: how Arrantly the Rogue Beggs: Oh! for God, and his People's sake, and for the City of Londons sake. (I am in earnest; I must laugh before I can write on.) Might not this fellow be laid hold of, upon the statute against sturdy Beggers, and lashed, he has absolutely turn'd a piece of one of the Rump▪Ballads into Prose. Nay my Lord; (cries the Brewers clerk) good my Lord for the love of God; Consider us and your self; this poor Nation, and that Tyrant Abroad; Don't leave us: but George gives him▪ ashrug, instead of a nod.
Come hang your self, Beg right, here's your true me∣thod of Begging.—Oh for Tom. Scots sake; for Haslerigs sake, for Robinson, Holland, Mildmay, Mounson, Corbet, Atkins, Van, Livesey, Skippon, Milton, Tichbourn, Ireton, Gourden, Lechmore, Blagrave, Bare-bones, Nedhams sake, and to conclude; for all the rest of our Impenitent Brethrens sakes, Help a company of poor Rebellious Devils; that only for Murthering their Prince, destroying three Glorious Nati∣ons, Breaking the Bonds of Faith both with God and Men, Trampling upon Religion, and Laws; exercising an Abso∣lute▪Tyranny over their fellow Subjects—Endeavouring yet once more to engage their Native Country in Blood;—to Alienate the Honest Souldjery from their Obedience, and in sine for Playing the Devil in Gods name; are now in dan∣ger to Lose the Reward of all their virtues;—The Possessi∣ons which they have acquired by violence, by a Malignant, and desperate design of Peace, and Settlement. This is the State of your Condition, and this should be the Form of your Application. Once more, and he bids you Farewell. BƲt (my Lord and Gentlemen) leaving these things which touch only upon your worldly Interests and Concernments, we are hold to say, (though the Jealousies of weaker Brethren be great and many) we believe our selves to be sure of you, because we have your Souls as well as your personal interests at pawn for your fidelity to the Publick. We remember your Declaration sent frm Scotland to the Churches, and other Declarations at t same time. We might mind you, if it were needfull, how you have called God to witness, That the ground of your late un∣dertaking in Scotland was, The vindication of the Liber∣ties of the People, with the protection and encourage∣mens of the Godly and the Faithfull therein, &c. and that you have no intention or purposes to return to our old Bondage; but that the Providence of God having made us free at the cost of so much blood, you will never be found so unfaithfull to God and his People▪ as to lose so glorious a Cause; but do resolve, with Gods
assistance, to endeavour a maintainiug of our dear-purcha∣sed Liberties bot Spiritual and Civil. But seeing these Declarations made before God, Angels and Men, (as your selves have said) do so much concern your Souls in the observa∣tion of them, that they cannot but be much upon your hearts; there∣fore we meion them, not as doubting you, or endeavouring to perswade you, but to ease our own minds, and to comfort the hearts of our Brethren, who have need to be comforted: And do wait for a good time when your Excellency shall break forth, and more visibly appear (through all the Clouds of Fear and Jealousie) a Defence and Protection (through the goodnesse of God) to all his people that fear him in these Nations; and so their hearts uni∣versally will return unto you, in assurance whereof, and that you will be very much confirmed and encouraged after the reading of this Declaration, We remain, (My LORD), Your Excellencies most faith∣full Friends and Servants in the Common Cause. March 22. 1659. STill I perceive you're sure; and yet for your weak Brethren sake, yon mind his Excellency of a Pawn he has ingaged for his Fidelity to the Publique (only his Soul) in a Declaration, before God, Angels, and Men: that he hath no intent to return to his old Bondage. Why you Impudent sots; does a Confederacie with a Ped∣dling, little, Sniv'lling Faction, that would subvert Order, and Government, amount to a Fidelity to the publique? or does th avoiding the Old Bondage you keep such a Coyle with, Im∣ply the setting up a New, and more Tyrannical Impostion. In fine; the mention of the King, proceeds from your own Guilt, and Fears, that have so much abused im. The General meddles not at all, to Impose upon us: but only stands betwixt Authority, and Violence. His Excellency refers all to the Appointment of such Persons as the People shall abuse, to Act in their behalf, and cannot in Honour, fide with
a Party of Jugglers, that only call themselves onr Represen∣tatives, and we disclaime. This is enough said to convince you and the World, where the Abuse lies; Now, having eased your minds, (in your own Language) You may go ease yur Bodies too; for I dismisse you; and all's but giving of the Rump a Purge. Cursed is he that removeth away his Neighbours Land-mark. FINIS.
