N395 E422_14 99864265 161387
Loyalty speakes Truth: OR, A CONFERENCE of the Grand MERCVRIES, Pragmaticus, Melancholicus, and Elenticus, Concerning the present condition of his Majesty, and the proceedings of this blessed Parliament. 1648 Jan: 10th.—1647 PRagmaticus, How now man, how doe you looke, like a man had set an errant from Limbo Patrum, or beene crush'd betweene the gates of Death of late: whence is the apparition of your countenance so fearfull unto me, what unheard-of calamity hath so much prevented the hopes of your future health, that you seeme to be as it were both a∣live and dead together. Melanch. Health Pragmaticus how can that be expected, when all things are in so desperate a state of Dis∣ease that the world may seem distempered with a continuall Phle∣botomie. Pragm. The world man, thats nothing to you, nor me:
But what newes there whence you came of late, at London, is there any thing there that is cause of your pensivenesse. Mel. Yes verily, there & here, and every where. Prag. Why, what's that. Mel. Why if this be not a subject of grief, I know not what is: I meane, first, to see all Supremacy and Majesty dishonoured, and sit lamented; la∣monting I should have said, among the captivated of the times; to see all Magistracy neglected and trampled under foot, by those, that are wel-wishers to none but themselves; to see what Divisions, o∣pen contradictions, clancular devises, and subtle underminings whereby to extirpate all freedome, and by the force of contiuall working designes, to blow up the very foundation of Liberty and lawfull Priviledges. O strange cruelty! O unheard of impiety; more Monsters in nature now, then Counsellors in Court or wise∣men at Westminster (except those only that doe us good) some cry no King no King; and intimate as much by their deportment, that they would all faine weare Crownes (and be Kings) on their own heads so long as they weare them: These having by their new-born power (which is nothing else, but the curtain-drawing of a coming Chaos) made obscure the glory of radiant Titans desire, that Phae∣ton also may take notice, if hee dare re-assume the Charior, hee is like to be dismounted if they can doe it, and they set the world on fire againe; for if hee be so bold to come among them, he must dreame of a Kingdom, as little as Saul did, when hee went to seeke his fathers Asses. But some againe there are, which run as farre on another extream and cry, no Parliament, no Parliament, and would expell all such Authority as they doe their ghostly Father with Cru∣cifixes and Holy-water; These are so inveterate, that although they many times use as many Benedictions, to drive away the Divell, as Pope Ioane did in Sanctification of that young Cardinall in her wombe; yet can they be very well content with his company while they curse the Parliament, with Bell, book, and candle. Surely they thinke they are as bad, as that concaved company of Red-headed Crocadiles; and to speake the truth (but onely because they are ve∣ry devout) the States have melted so many of their Tapers into Commissions, and on the wickes thereof, have made such Matches
on their side that by this time, they may have learned to pray for them by Day-light. These are ours and the Kingdomes enemies; and the other Friends, neither to Parliament nor Army: and if all parts ill-affected (I meane in the Body politique) with such distem∣pers, nay gangreen'd with such Diseases, and no Physician, no cure; no remedy probable, or probably conceivable, unto what prodegies, and growth in miseries on our side may our enemies persevere a∣gainst us. Elenticus. The more Miserable is our condition; truth it is which you have now spoken: wee have a seeming Peace, and in this peace, there is so cruell warring, by differences in judge∣ment, of actions past, opinions concerning Religion, and hopes of what shall bee the cunning events of things; that it may rather seeme a cessation of Armes, eyther to mollisie our hearts, or else a respiration only; that our Enemies, nay our selves may take breath to bee more cruell hereafter, and study to be more inhumane one towards another; and Melancholicus, although you have given such a summary demonstration of our Condition, lesse then which by a great deale, is too, too sufficient, to make a people more then ordinarily miserable; yet there are many consequences ortive, from our great Distractions and sad differences, which lye upon us as burthens insufferable, more then the generall state, or our particu∣lars are able to beare, without sinking under them: Truly what Peace can wee expect, or what amendment of these things, so long as the Whoredomes of Iezabell remaine; so long as Pride can vaunt in our streers, without so much as a check for its Selfishnesse, as if it were (as it is indeed) independent upon all vertue (because nothing to doe therewith) claime the Superiority of the greatest and highest Places to her selfe; neither is shee now (as formerly) content with Temporall preferment only (but because the House is devided against it selfe, steps in, and attempts Ecclesiasticall also; and being most of all Independent, she matters not much, whether Lawne-sleeves, or long Beards, or both, bee the rest of her Atten∣dants; nay, what Peace can wee expect, so long as Covetousnesse it selfe must be for the most part the Regulator of all things; and because it hath an aptitude to keepe what it hath got, it must bee
made Collector of the publique treasure; Commissary to the Ar∣my, and Chaire-man; or chiefe, in almost every Committee, and being growne proud, in that shee is a Parliament mans compa∣nion, it being in her power, shee hath made her eldest daughter Extortion, a Sequestrator also; and because the Court should bee more free from lavish Expences (then formerly, whereby to no∣rish Vice) the royall Revenues are (by her) employed, to use more profitable to the Kingdome; and hence it is, that the King∣dome is so full of congested riches, men have enough and to lay up, and to buy lands besides, to take opportunity for goods bargines themselves; though contrary to the Ordinance of Parliament, yea to buy the goods, and Chattells, of Delinquents, to set the estates of Malignants, for the States profit, to Farme them, at casie rates; and because custome hath changed this course, into the nature, of Com∣mittee men, they can judiciously (I can deeme it, no lesse, then prudence) winke, at each others deviation from the Ordinance which commands that no Committee-man, or any belonging to any Committee-man▪ should have the use, of any sequestra∣tions for their own profit, and so they drive a fine trade out, and want nothing, but only, that rusticke Pan would be pleased to grant them, as hee did Midas, to have what they could wish for his ridiculus judgement, but yet, it may be, Apollo may be angry with them▪ and clap, a paire of Asses eares, hornes, upon their heads; if once reeds would growe in the Committee chamber that would be knowen too: but only that I believe the Deanery will not goe down, so soone, as the leaden steeple, if all be true as is reported, what did you heare Melancholicus, concerning that businesse. Mel. I heard that there was an Order for the pulling of it down; and that it should part of it, be emplyed to repaire the City stock, which was empaired, by your Cavaliers by so voluntary concession of moneys contributing the same, to these that were the Kingdomes, and our enemies. Prag. Cavaliers? who are the Kingdomes enemies now I pray you, now poore Cavaliers trouble you not. Elenticus. Verily the cause of the comming of Gods judge∣ments upon a people is sin only; and we had warre sent upon
us as, a judgement for sin, yet we repent not truely; those that we called Cavaliers (this I think) were in∣struments of Gods wrath to scourge us then: and it is much to be feared, we have manifested so little thankfulnesse to∣wards God for mercies past, and not regarded his great Deliverances, that except a sudden repentance, God will find him another Servant, and us another Enemy to exe∣cure his judgement upon us; and therefore I desire that the Spirit of bitternesse should cease to remaine among us, and then wee might live to see our Land flourish, in Peace and Truth once againe. Prag. Yes, but hearke you, doe you thinke if the Ca∣valiers had got the better, wee should not have beene in a better condition then we are now. Mel. Truly I thinke if the Papists had got the better▪ Gods people would have gone all to fire and fagot; and although our condition bee at this time very hard in respect of Taxes and imposures, which the necessity of the State may seeme to require, yet seem happy (if so be the moneys so collected, were put to a right use, no question we should have a settled peace ere long) in relarion to what we might have suffered. Prag. Taxes; yea marry Taxes indeed, when the Earle was here, then here was come lend money to bring the King to London; but now they have him, they meane not that he shall come there; and then they had the Publike Faith, for their money, but that shall be all I warrant you, and then there was Contribution, as long as men were able to pay it: and after that came Excise, and the new found pollings, but I heard the other day, that the Excise was down? what? did you here of it.
Melanch. It is not downe, but stronger up then ever, onely there bee not so many Commissioners as they were. Prag. Why? Mel. I know not. Prag. Who are ut now. Mel. There is Mr. Vincent out. Prag. Why how comes that to passe, he was the best of them all, and if a man could bee ho∣nest in such a place, hee was an honest man (I thinke) and I thinke he had the love of the Countrey more then any, J am sure he had of the City; if hee's gone out, it was because hee would goe out. Elenticus, I heard him say hee would not stay in with such Partners. Prag. Hee was the chiefest of them all▪ I thinke. Elent. Nay, Mr. Coilier was first in Commission if I am not mistaken. Prag. Collier, hee was but a bom-basted Taylor, he sate hum drum alwayes, when I went to pay my money, and did scarce so much as say Bee to a Goose; I knew him a good while since and his wife too, and her Father the Thatcher. Mel. Truly that makes things in that case they bee, when men meddle with that▪ they know not what belongs unto, as the Proverbe is, Set a Sow to play on a Fiddle. There is Mr. Writer, and Carelesse, in with him still, but Mr. Freeston is out. Elent. Hee out, why there is Mr. Writer, it's true, hee was ill spoken of, when Rainsbo∣rough men came first into Towne; but I thinke he is an in∣different honest man, and a great suffering man; and 'tis fit such men should bee employed in such places, if some must; but only that hee cannot find his braines sometimes, when hee hath need of them. Prag. But they say, Carelesse is in Commission before Writer. Elent. How comes that to passe; Carelesse, is but a fellow of a servile Condition, start up I know not how in these times, when all honest men were rather loosers then savers; and the truth is, I know the mans Conditions so well, that for his Severity, he should better bee a Hang-man. (nay pardon me now, I am too grosse, hee is a States Officer) I meane, an Executor of ju∣stice; for I am sure, hee knowes to whip a Begger well e∣nough since he was Constable; and for want of a Beadle did
it himselfe: what doe you laugh at▪ Prag. Ile tell you what at, a pretty comparison, as there was one made▪ of one of our Committee men the other day; which was, that as hee said he read of one Tyresiss, whom the gods being angry withall, transformed from a Man to a Woman, at length when Iupiter and Iuno fell at variance, whether was more prone to lust, a Man or Woman, they chose this Tyresias to decide the matter, because hee had knowne the nature of both kinds: So, if a man aske me, whether is the honester man, a Cavaliere or a Roundhead, I shall bid goe and aske Carelesse; because hee hath been of both sorts. Mel. Such men are not fit for the Publique service, however crept in. Elent. Nay, what a slavery are wee in, when such men shall not onely rule, but raigne over us: Slavery (I) none but such fooles, as wee be would endure it. Mel. J will tell you what we shall doe, wee will Petition Adem Nash; that when hee speaketh nex in the House, it would please his worship to make knowne to the Houses, that there, a sort of Men, which having already taken away the munificentiall parts of our City, are now also, about to demolish, the Spirituall ha∣bitations of our Soules, and have long since extirpated their out-workes of defence (our Ministers) insomuch, that on last Sabboth, there was not one Sermon in the whole City, but at the Colledge only, because that is the next way to heaven, which they will teach us now after Christmasse so perfect, that wee shall not need the leaden Steeple for the first step; there∣fore that to bee cumulated into a legion of Angels, for a con∣tinuall conduct of the City thither, and the reliefe of the Poore, according to their Charity: Further, that there is not so small estimation of affection among us▪ as to bee bought and sold, by a Committee of partiall Iudges, and yet hold our peace; Therefore, wee desire that it may be Orde∣red, that we may have a honester Committee▪ or better Round-heads: And also that the collection of Excise, bee somewhat regulated; for when wee bring our moneys to
the Office, there is a fellow lookes so bigge upon us, that we dare not, for his eares, displease him, for feare of a Hocus, Pocus. Pragmat. Nay, let us begge too, that no Citizen Cavaliere, shall bee ever an enfranchized Round-head, ex∣cept hee voluntarily forfeit his Eares to the Pillory, at seaven or eight eares end, according to the growth of the same, and that whereas it hath beene a great propagation to the good of this City, and much accommodation in necessity, that a good number of Horses, bee alwayes kept ready and well look't to; it is desired, that it bee so still, otherwise the generation of Asses, which now ride upon us, will so in∣grease and multiply, that their eares, may be taken for hornes, among— FINIS.
