N878 E60_14 99871815 155327
A DECLARATION AND SVMMONS Sent by the Earl of Newcastle, to the Town of Manchester, to lay down their Arms. With the Resolute ANSWER of the Commanders in chief, and Souldiers in MANCHESTER, To spend their blood for the honour of the King, the Protestant Religion, and Priviledges of Parliament, against the Papists and Malignants how under his Lordships command. Imprimatur, John White. London, Printed for Peter Cole, and are to be sold at the Glove in Conhill. July 15. 1643.
A Declaration and Summons sent by the Earl of Newcastle, to the Town of Manchester to lay downe their Armes, &c. I Presume you are not ignorant of the successe it hath pleased Almighty God to give unto His Majesties Army under my Command, and the great de∣sire J have to avoyd the effusion of Chri∣stian bloud, which moves me before J pro∣ceed any further towards you, to make you an offer of His Majesties Grace and Mercy, if you will submit your selves,
lay downe your Armes, so unjustly taken up in contempt of the Lawes of this Kingdome, and immediately returne to your due Allegiance, His Majesty is gratiously pleased to authorize me, to re∣ceive you into His Favour and Prote∣ction, which J am as willing to do, as to inforce your obedience; if you will refuse J cannot but wonder, while you fight a∣gainst the King and His Authority, you should so boldly offer to Professe your selves for King and Parliament, and most ignominiously scandalize this Army with the Title of Papists, when we ven∣ture our Lives and Fortunes for the true Protestant Religion established in this Kingdome: Be no longer deceived, for the bloud that shall be shed in this quar∣rell will assuredly fall on your own heads; J have no other ends in this, but to let you
see your error, if you please; for my con∣dition is such, that I need not Court you; Jf not, let me receive your answers by this Messenger, and you may expect to find little favour, (if you force my nature) but such as is due to so high Contemners of His Majesties Grace and Favour, now offered to you by W: NEWCASTLE. Bradford. 5. July. 1643.
Manchesters Answer. Right Honorable; IT hath been ever since the first fo∣menting of the unhappy differences in this Kingdom, and so, shall be our principall care and endeavour to pre∣serve the true Protestant Religion by Law established in this Realm, the Ho∣nour of the King in all Regall Rights, and Prerogatives, and Priviledges of Parliament, and the true and Native Liberties, and Priviledges of the Sub∣ject by Law established; And then it is not to be wondred at, that having been oppress'd by Papists, and other Malig∣nants, we have by defensive Arms, la∣boured
to repell such as by colour of His Majesties Commission, have en∣deavoured to overthrow Religion, His Majesties Regall Rights, and Honour, with all the immunities of this King∣dom, in the preservation whereof, His Majesties noble Progenitors have so long and honourably flourished; By which we hope it is apparent to all in∣different, judicious, and religious peo∣ple, that we have not put our selves out of His Majesties protection, nor cannot possibly enter into our understanding, that the true Protestant Religion can∣not be intended to be defended by so great a company of Papists, as have been, and now are in Arms under such protection; Nor the Propriety of the Subject, by so many Aliens, and other Malefactors as daily resort unto them;
And we could wish so honorable a per∣son as your self might be seperated, and freed from protecting such Delin∣quents. Sir, we are nothing dismayed at your force, but hope that God, who hath been our protector hitherto, will so di∣rect our just Army, that we shall be a∣ble to return the violence intended, into their bosomes that shall assay the prose∣cution of it, which shall be the endea∣vour of His Majesties most Humble and Obedient Subjects. Rochdale, 7. July, 1643. FINIS.
