P3987 E452_23 99863268 115458
IRENARCHES REDIVIVƲS. OR, A briefe Collection of sundry usefull and necessary Statutes and Petitions in PARLIA∣MENT (not hitherto published in Print, but extant onely in the Parliament Rolls) concerning the Necessity, Ʋtility, Institution, Qualification, Ju∣risdiction, Office, Commission, Oath, and against the causlesse, clandestine dis-commissioning of JUSTICES OF PEACE; fit to be publikely known and observed in these reforming times. With some short Deductions from them; and a touch of the Antiguity and Instituti∣on of Assertors and Justices of Peace in other forraign Kingdomes. TOGETHER With a full Refutation of Sir Edward Cooks assertion, and the commonly received Erronious opini∣on, of a Difference between Ordinances and Acts of PARLIAMENT in former AGES; here cleerly ma∣nifested to be then but one and the same in all re∣spects, and in point of the threefold Assent. Published for the common good, By William Prynne of Lincolns-Inne, Esq. EXODUS 18. 21, 22. Thou shalt provide out of all the people, able men, such as feare God, men of truth, hating covetousnesse, and place such over them, to be Ru∣lers of thousands, and Rulers of hundreds, and Rulers of fifties, and Rulers of tens; and let them judge them at all times. JOSH. 24. 25. So Joshua made a Covenant with the people that day, and set them a STATUTE and an ORDINANCE in Sechem. LONDON: Printed for Michael Spark at the Bible in Green-Arbor, 1648.
To the READER. COurteous Reader, I here present thee with a briefe collection of some concealed usefull Records, Petitions and Acts of Parlia∣ment (not hitherto Printed, and almost quite buried in oblivion) concerning Justices of the Peace, not altoge∣ther unworthy thy knowledge and considerati∣on; together with some deductions from them, and a concise Refutation of Sir 4. Instit. p. 25. Edward Cookes and others received mistaken difference be∣tween Acts and Ordinances of Parliament in preceding Ages; who neither knew nor made any such distinction between them, as is now belee∣ved. My sole ayme and intention in reviving and publishing them, is, thy information, and the common good and settlement, which ignorant or wilfull mistaks have much interrupted. If thou receive any New light or benefit by them, give God the glory, and let the Author onely enjoy
thy favourable acceptance of this weake pub∣licke service for thine and his Countries wel∣fare, to which he hath devoted most of his time and studies. And so much the rather, to excite and encourage others (especially Inne, of Court Gentlemen, whose industry and study of the Records, Laws & Statuts of the Realm, is much declined of late yeers) to apply their minds and studies principally, not to meer private gain∣full lucubrations, but to subjects of most pub∣like concernment, and best advantage to the Republike; to prevent the introducing of Ty∣ranny, Anarchy, Arbitrary Government, or any destructive Encroachments upon the peoples Liberties & our Lawes, in this present or sue∣ceeding ages, by any Powers whatsoever; which will inevitably creepe in upon us by degrees, if the study of the Records & Laws of the Realm be either discontinued, neglected, obstructed; or the ordinary course of Law and Justice alte∣red or interrupted, by any new arbitrary Or∣dinances or proceedings before new-erected Committees, which our Ancestors in former Parliaments never heard of, nor transmitted to posterity. Farewell.
Irenarches Redivivus. OR, A brief COLLECTION, &c. THE institution of Justices of Peace in eve∣ry County and City of the Realm, being (as Sir 4. Instit c. 31. p. 170. Edward Cook asserts) such a form of subordinate Government, as no part of the Christian world hath the like, if it be duly ex∣ecuted; I conceived it neither unseasonable, nor unprofitable, to publish to the world some Records, Acts and Petitions of Parlia∣ment, concerning the Nomination, Constitution, Jurisdiction, Com∣mission, Office, Oath, and against the undue & arbitrary dislocation of Justices of the Peace, not hitherto published in print by any who have written of this subject, with some brief observati∣ons thereupon, necessary for our present times, which pre∣tend so much to an exact reformation of all corruptions both in Church and State. What Lawes have been made in this our Realm, for the punishment of Violaters and infriners of the Peace, before the Conquest, you may read in the Lambord Ar∣chaion, & Hi∣re.  c. 2. 3. Spelmani Conc p. 182. 183. 68. 69 370 373. 374 Lawes of King Ine, cap. 6. 46. in the Lawes of King Alured, cap. 5, 21, 34, 36. and others; What care forreign Princes and States have anciently taken to preserve the peace of their Kingdoms, to punish Ma∣lefactors
and Disturbers of it, and by what penalties and Officers, those who please may inform themselves by per∣using Capitularia Caroli & Ludovici, Imp. lib. 1. cap. 61. lib. 2. cap. 11, 12, &c. lib. 3. cap. 1, 4, 22, 23, 25, 26, 27, 44, to 51. Addit. Lud. 4 Tit. 26. & 3 Tit. 15, 63. See Frederi∣cus Lindebro∣gus, Codex legū Antiquarum. Leges Wisigothorum, lib. 2, 6, 7, 8, 9. Leges Burgundiorum, Lex 9, 10, 11, 12, 25, 26, 27, 33, 37, 41, 70, 71, 80, 89. Legis Burgundiorum Additamen∣tum primum, Tit. 4, 5, 6, 7, 10. Leges Salicae, Tit. 2. to 69. Leges Alemannorum, c. 40. to 99. Leges Bajuvariorum, Tit. 2, 7, to 19. Leges Ripuariorum, c. 1, to 55. Leges Saxonum, Tit. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 11, 15. Leges Angliorum, Tit. 1, to 11, 14, 16. Leges Frisionum, Tit. 1, 4, 5. 12, 13, 19, 20, 21. & Adtidio Sapientum, cap. 1, to 9. Leges Longobardorum, lib. 1. lib. 2. cap. 46, 58. Constitutionum Sicularum, lib. 1. cap. 1, 9, to 30, 37, 41. lib. 2. cap. 1, to 8. lib. 3. cap. 37, to 80. which for brevity sake, I can but mention: Onely I cannot pretermit, how I finde the very Title and Office of an Assertor, or Justice of the Peace, thus expressed and described among the ancient Lawes of the Wi∣sigoths, (first composed by King Theodoricus about the yeer of our Lord 437.) Fredericus Lindobrogus Codex Legum Antiquarum, p. 19 35. lib. 2. cap. 16. Omnium negotiorum causas ita judices habeant deputatas, ut & criminalia, & cetera negotia termi∣nandi sit illis concessa licentia. PACIS AUTEM AS∣SERTORES, non aliàs derimant causas, nist quas illis Regia deputaverit ordinandi potestas. PACIS AUTEM AS∣SERTORES SUNT, qui sola faciendae pacis intentione Re∣gali sola destinantur auctoritate. And cap. 26. Quoniam negotiorum remedia multimodae diversitatis compendio gaudent, ideo Dux, Comes, Vicarius, PACIS ASSERTOR, Tyuphadus, Millenari∣us, Centenarius, Decanus, Defensor, Numerarius, & qui ex Regia jussione, aut etiam ex consensu partium judices in negotiis eligun∣tur, sive cujuscunque ordinis omnino persona, cui debitè judicare conceditur, ita omnes in quantum judicandi potestatem acceperint JUDICIS NOMINE CENSEANTUR EX LEGE; ut sicut judicii acceperint jura, ita & Legum sustineant five commoda, sive dampna. By which it is apparent, that Justices and Assertors of the Peace were in ancient times a speciall and peculiar Office among the Wisigoths, authorized by Commis∣sions from their Kings, to hear and determine matters of the
Peace, according to the Lawes; and that they were comprized un∣der, and honoured with the Title of Judges, by the Lawes of that Nation. To which I shall further adde, that among the Fred. brogus.  Legum. pa: 704 &c. Siculan or Neopolitan Lawes, compiled by the Emperour Frede∣rick the second, about the yeer of our Lord 1221. Constitutionum Sicularum. l. 1; Tit. 8. De cultu Pacis, & Generali Pace in regno ser∣vanda. I meet with Justiciarii Regionum, Justices of Peace ap∣pointed in every County, who were to preserve the peace of the Kingdom, in all and singular parts of that Realm, to whom all com∣plaints of breach of the peace, violence and crimes were to be made. And Tit. 41. De Officio JUSTITIARIATUS, I read both the Title, Office and Commission of these Justices thus set forth, almost in paralel terms with our Commissions of the Peace at this very day. Justiciarii nomen & normam jus & justjtiam contulerunt, quibus quantò magis in nomine sunt affines, tanto eorum veri & solliciti de∣bent esse cultores. Hinc est quod ipsorum judiciis causae capitales max∣imè reservantur, & quod ipsorum officium debet esse gratuitum, nec ipsum licet alicui pretii venalitate mercari: Quae igitur ad ipsorum cognitionem pertinent, praedecessorum nostrorum assisiis comprehensa, apertius diffinimus: Latrocinia scilicet magna, furta, fracturae do∣morum, insultus excogitati, incendia, incisiones arborum fructifera∣rum & vitium, vis mulieribus illata, duella, crimina Majestatis, ar∣ma moluta, defensae impositae & contemptae aliis vel pro aliis ab eisdem, & generaliter omnia, de quibus convicti poenam sui corporis, vel mu∣tilationem membrorum sustinere deberent. Magnum autem furtum ac∣cepimus, ultra viginti angustales, etiamst civiliter de furto ipso aga∣tur; ut etiam tamen de quantitate minori coram justiciario ad corpo∣ralem poenam criminaliter possit accusatio intentari, &c. Tit. 43. This Oath is prescribed both to the chief Justice and Justices of Provinces of inferiour rank, when they took their Places. Ʋt Deum & Justitiam babendo prae oculis, Ʋnicuique justitiam faci∣ant fine fraude; & quàm citius poterini, litigantes expedire curabunt. And Tit. 48, 49, 50, 51, 52. we have a description, what per∣sons those Justices ougot to be, how and when they were to ride their Circuits, keep their Sessions, and make generall Inquiries throughout their severall Provinces and parts of Provinces, of Malefactors, per∣sons
of ill life and conversation, and how to proceed and punish them af∣ter presentments and conviction: much like to the proceedings of See Scapnlae Lexicon, pag. 1770. our Justices of the Peace, and Oyer and Terminer here in England. Besides, I read in the ancient Author Aeschines, of an , or Pacis Custos, a Keeper or Justice of Peace, which it seems was an Office even among the ancient Grecians. All which none of our Writers of Justices of the Peace having for∣merly observed, I thought not impertinent briefly to touch for their greater honour and encouragement. When Justices of Peace were first instituted in England, is not much materiall: 4. Instit. c. 31 p. 176. Sir Edward Cook informs us, that in Ester Term, 6 E. 1. Coram Rege; was the first institution of Justices for the conservatiō of the Peace: others deem them more ancient, and many Daltons Ju∣stice of Peace. Spelmanni Glossarium, p. 407. Minshews Dictionary. think they were first of all appointed by the Sta∣tute of 1 E. 3. Parl. 2. cap. 16. or 18 E. 3. c. 2. I shall not debate the poynt, but proceed to what I intend. In the Parliament of 6 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 5, 6. Sir Jeoffry le Scroop, in the presence of the King, Prelates, Lords and Com∣mons, by the Kings command, declared, That this Parliament was called as well to redresse the breach of the Law and Peace, as for the King's going to the Holy Land; for which end he desired their councell and advice: Whereupon the Bishops and Pro∣ctors of the Clergy went by themselves, and the Earls, Ba∣rons and other great men by themselves, to consult therein: After which the Bishops and Proctors of the Clergy return∣ed this Answer, That it did not properly appertain to them to give any councell in matters of Peace, and to prescribe punishments for Ma∣lefactors. The Earls, Barons and other great men returning afterwards; answered all to the King by the mouth of Bea∣mont, That they think the best course to preserve the Peace is, That cer∣tain Justices should be constituted in every County, and have power to appoint in every Parish certain men with the Constables, for the ap∣prehending of Malefactors, and for the levying of bue and cry after them. Which things being thus ordained by the Earls, Ba∣rons and other great men, and read before the King, Pre∣lates, Knights of Counties, and the Commons, were pleasing to them all: And it was likewise assented and agreed by the King,
Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other great men, and likewise by the Knights of Shires, and Commons in Parliamenc, that a sentence of Ex∣communication, then read and approved, should be published in every Church throughout the Realm, To excommunicate all breakers of the Peace, and all such as should defend and receive them, or be privy thereto. In the Parliament of 8 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 5. (not printed) it was enacted, that Justices of the one Bench and of the other, Justices of Assize, and Justices of the PEACE in every County, shall enquire and determine of false Jurors and Maintainers: And the King by his Letters Patents hath charged all Archbishops and Bishops weekly to pronounce in every Parish an excom∣munication against all such Offenders. In the Parliament Rolls of 17 E. 3. there are these notable Acts of Parliament, and Petitions concerning Justices of the Peace, their necessity, authority, commission, &c. never yet published in print to my knowledge. Num. 10. Item, it is to be remembred, that on Friday the se∣cond day of May, our Lord the King, the said Prelates, Earls and Barons, and other great men, and the Commons came into the white Chamber, and there the Chancellour proposed on the behalf of our Lord the King, how the King upon his return out of Brittain, had understood, That divers oppressions and grievances had been done to his people of England, as well in his absence as in his presence, and that the Law of the Land was not at all so well maintained as it ought, because of divers Impeachments and maintenances made in divers manners. And how the King desired Soveraignly, That the Law should have its equall course between the poor and the rich, and that it should be held and maintained in its right course without impeachment: wherefore our Lord the King would have their councell and advice, How such impeachment and vicious maintenance might be best removed, and the Law best kept and held in its right course, in such sort, as it might be equall to the poor and to the rich. And upon this, were the said Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other great men charged by themselves, and the Therefore the Houses were then se∣verall, and their consul∣tations too. Commons by themselves, to treat and aduise, and to re∣port their advice on Saturday next ensuing: At which day the
Knights of the Counties, and the other Commons delivered their advice in form as followeth. Num. 11. Most excellent and most honourable Lord, the people of your Commonalty recommend themselves to you obediently, and thank you here openly, as much as their meannesse will suffer, for that so tenderly you undertake to main∣tain the peace and the quiet of your people: and it seems to them, that it will be a good and sure thing, for the chastisement of evil, and sal∣vation and ayde of good people, that certain Justices should be chosen now at this Parliament, by assent of the great men, and of the Commons; and that the said Justices shall be sworn now at this Parliament be∣fore the Peers of the Land, and the Commons, and in their Sessions (per eugyn ne nul home ne soit susduit) that no man may be sedu∣ced (or over-reached) by craft (mes mesnes per deiu & bone foy) but treated by due and good faith, and the good Laws in these times used to hear and determine felonies, trespasses, conspiracies, consederacies and evil maintenance: and that Commissions may be made to the Justices so chosen, to go to the Counties where it shall be Ou miestra serra. best (or needfullest) and that the parts of their Commissions aforesaid shall be shewen to the Peeres of the Land (who have the Lawes under you to maintain;) and to the Commons, before that the Commissions be sealed, or in any point used: and if they shall advise, that this thing shall be pleasing to God, and to the honour and the salvation of your people, in maintenance of other Lawes made at other Parliaments before these times, your poore Commons, if you please to grant it, do thereto agree. And it seemes to the said Commons that all other things may be sufficiently ordered or determined in the Kings Bench, Common Pleas, and before Justi∣ces of Assise, so as delayes not covenable may be (aggregez) redressed (or removed) now in this Parliament by Statute. But because that it was advised to our Lord the King, and to the Prelates and great men, who were neere him in his Parliament, that it was convenient more expresly to make mention of the Articles of which the Justices who shall be assigned in the Counties, ought, for the cause aforesaid, to inquire, they redelivered to the Knights and Commons aforesaid, some Articles, which were ordained by the Prelates and great men themselves, for them to advise of, and give their assent; the which Articles ensue in forme underwritten.
It seemes good that Justices shall be assigned to inquire, heare, and determine the points underwritten for the profit of the Realme, and for keeping the Peace, and maintaining the Law. First, to inquire of all manners of Felonies, and Trespasses done against the Peace. Item, of all manner of Conspiracies, Confederacies, Champerties, Ambodexters, of maintainers of Malefactors, and of false quarrels, and of all other falsities done in deceit of the Law. Item, to inquire of all chatles of felons and fugitives belonging to the King, after tbe yeere, &c. and to whom they are delivered, and for what value, and whether they be worth more or lesse; and to cause the said Chattles to be levied to the use of the King. Item, of Wools, Woolfels and Hides, and other Merchandizes cu∣stomable, not customed nor cocketted, nor well weighed or conveyed out of the realme of England. Item, of false money brought within the Realme. Item, of Wools bought within the County of Notingham, and of those who have (mesnez) carried away their proper Wools in anothers name, contrary to the Defence and Ordinances in the Parlia∣ment stile of those times, were nothing else but Sta∣tutes and Acts of parliament. See 11 E 3. c. 1. 14 E. 3 c. 21. 18 E. 3. c. 3 Stat. 2. Ordinances made concern∣ing it. Item, of Arms, Victuals, and other Goods and Merchandizes car∣ried to the enemies of Scotland and others. Item, of those who were Collectors of the Ninths, and collected more, which they have not answered to the King. Item, of those who were assigned of Commission for the businesses of the King and the Realm, and take gifts, and let the said businesss pe∣rish, in deceit of the King, and of the people. Item, of Assessors and Collectors of Wools, and their Ʋnder-Colle∣ctors, Clerks and Deputies, who have not at all answered to the King that which they have received: and also of those who collect the good Wools, and sell them, and buy others (feables) that are worse for to deliver to the King; and also of those which take money in lieu of Wools, and buy feable (or course) Wools of lesse price, for to deliver to the King, and the remnant of the said monies retain to their proper use. Item, of Customers, Searchers, Controllers, and of all other Mini∣sters of the King, how they have carried themselves in their Offices. Item, of those who take Fees, Rents or Pensions of Malefactors for
to maintain and avow them in their misdoings, there where they hold not Lands nor Goods of them, for which they ought to pay such rents, as well in Wales as in England. Item, of those who take people, and carry away and detain them till they have made a ransom at their will. Item, of those who by force or menace disturb the Justices of our Lord the King, and all other Ministers going through the Country in their Sessions, so that they cannot do right, nor the people follow their right. The which Articles being seen and examined by the said Commons, they assented, That good and loyall Justices should be assigned to hear and determine those things contained in these Articles, for the profit of our Lord the King and his people. Item, to enquire of Lands and Tenements amortized by religious people or others, against the form of the Statute made, without license, if they have purchased nothing more then that which is contained In their license, or of greater value, and also of the Tenements which are held of the King in chief. Ibidem n. 41. Item, pray the said Commons, That it would please our Lord the King to ordain convenient wages for the Iustices assigned in divers Counties, so as tbey may not endeavour to take any thing of those who have businesse before them. Answ. It pleaseth the King that it shall be so, and the Chancellour and Treasurer shall ordain a convenient sum for them, by which they may do it. Ibid. n. 42. Item, pray the said Commons, that no Sheriff nor Steward of great men, who have franchizes, shall be associated to the Iustices which shall be now chosen to hear and determine fellonies and trespasses, and other poynts ordained and assented, nor Iustices of Goal∣delivery; but lawfull people of the County, and of good fame shall be as∣sociated to them: and that the same Iustices which shall be chosen, shall be sworn, That they will use their Commission without hardship or cru∣elty for to please the King, but also as it shall be most pleasing to God, and agreeable to good Law and good faith, and that their Sessions shall be ordained in seisons out of August, and hay-making, in ease of the Commons. Ans. It pleaseth the King, that no Sheriff shall be henceforth a Iustice,
but that such shall be who know and will do the Law, and that people of the Country of good fame shall be associated to them, and not others. 20 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 20. Item, the Commons Petition, That in every County there be ordained Keepers of the Peace of the most sufficient of the Counties, and that they may have power to enquire and determine Felonies and Trespasses committed contrary to the Peace, since the last passage of our Lord the King beyond the Sea. Answ. As to the keeping of the Peace; let there be good people and covenable assigned for to keep the Peace: and as to the Oyer and Termi∣ner, the King will assign wise and sufficient men, who have knowledge of the Law, according to the agreement in the last Parliament. In the Parliament of 21 E. 3. n. 70. I meet with this Pe∣tition of the Commons. Most honourable and most redoubted Soveraign: Whereas in this Parliament, your Commons were charged to advise you, how the Peace of this Land might be best kept. To which it was answered; That in every County there should be chosen by men of the County, Justices, of which, two should be of the greatest men, and two Knights, and two men of Law, of the most valiant, and most loyall of the said County; and there where there shall be need, more shall be assigned, or fewer, if there be cause; and that they shall have full power by Commis∣sion out of the Chancery, to hear and determine Felonies, Trespasses and other poynts touching the keeping of the Peace of every County, who are abiding in the said Counties, who may better know, and to the greater ease and lesse grievance of the County, punish the felons and trespassers then other Justices who are strangers, and that known Trebastos should not run, as at another time was assented in Parliament, for that they were all to the destruction and undoing of the people, and to very little or no amendment of the Law, or of the Peace, or punishment of Felons and Trespassers. In the Parliament of 28 E. 3. Rot. Parl. n. 17. there is this Petition of the Commons, turned into an Act of Parliament by the King's answer thereunto, with the Lords consent. To our Lord the King, pray the Commons, That the Guar∣dians of the Peace may be of the most loyall and sufficient men of the Counties, residing in the said Counties, and not in forraign places, and of the Justices of Labourers in like manner; and that no Justice may
be assigned by Commission, if he be not sufficient of estate and condition to answer to the King and to the people: and that the names of the Ju∣stices of Labourers may be viewed and examined by the Chancellour and Treasurer, and Justices of the one Bench and the other, and in pre∣sence of the Knights of the Shires; and those who are covenable shall re∣main for such number as is necessary according to the greatnesse of the County; and in the place of those who shall be put out, let others be named by the said Knights, WHICH SHALL NOT AT ALL BE PUT OUT WITHOUT SPE∣CIALL COMMAND OF THE KING, OR REASONABLE CAUSE TESTIFIED BY Nota. THEIR COMPANIONS. And that the said Justices shall be charged to sit (or keep their Sessions) at least four dayes in the yeer, or more if there be occasion; and that they shall make good ex∣ecution of the Statutes already made, and that the Guardians of the Peace, and the Justices of Labourers may be both one there where it may well be done. Answ. As for the former Petition, it is reasonable, and therefore our Lord the King willeth that it be granted. 36 E. 3. n. 29. The Commons Petition, That the Justices of Peace may have reasonable wages ordained them, as the Kings Chancellour and Treasurer shall think fit: and that the said Justices may have power to enquire as well of Victual∣lers, Regraters, Forestallers within Cities, Towns and Bur∣roughs, and elswhere, as of Servants, Labourers and Ar∣tificers. Answ. The King will command to the Chancellour and Treasurer his will hereupon. 37 E. 3. in the Parliament Roll, n. 19. there is this Petition and Answer: Item, May it please our Lord the King to grant to the Knights of Shires, Cities and Burroughs which are come to this Parliament, power to choose people to be Justices of Labourers and Artificers, and keepers of the Peace, and that the same persons so chosen MAY NOT BE REMO∣VED BY ANY SUGGESTION, TO PUT Nota. OTHERS IN THEIR PLACES who are lesse sufficient.
Answ. Let them cause convenient persons to be named now in this Parliament, and the King will assign those whom he shall please. 50 E. 3. Rot. Parl. n. 67. Item, The Commons pray, That whereas the Justices of Peace are often assigned by brocage of Maintainers of the Country, who commit great out-rage by their maintainance to poor people of the Country, and are common maintainers of these misdoings: The Commons sup∣plicate, That the said Justices may be named in every County by the Lords and Knights of the Counties in Parliament, and that they shall be sworn before the Counsell of the King in the same manner as other people are; AND THAT THEY SHALL NOT BE REMOVED Nota. WITHOUT ASSENT OF PARLIAMENT, which thing will turn to the great profit of the King: and that convenient wages may be assigned to the said Justices to keep their Sessions, for without wages they have no care to keep their Sessions, which is a great losse to the King. Answ. They shall be named by the King and his continuall Coun∣sell; and as to wages, the King will advise. In the Parliament of 2 R. 2. held at Westminster, pars prima, n. 41. I finde this Act not printed: Item, the Commons shew, That whereas divers Sheriffs of Counties are divers times assigned by Commission of our Lord the King, to be Justices of Peace in the same Counties where they are Sheriffs, do oftentimes hold their Sessions of the Peace for to indite many people of felonies, and of other trespasses, for this purpose, to take of the indited outragious mainprizes and fines, to the great de∣struction (or impoverishing) and oppression of the people: that thereupon it would please our most gracious King and his Counsell so to ordain, that no man during the time that he shall be Sheriff, shall at all be ordained a Justice of Peace in the same County whereof he is Sheriff, in amendment of the mischiefs aforesaid. Answ. Le Roy le voet: The King willeth it. So that there was a Statute in point long before 1 Mariae, Sess. 2. c. 8. which enacts the like. In the same Parliament, n. 48. Item, the Commons pray, That
in every County of England there may be ordained fix or eight Justices of the Peace, whereof two shall be skilfull of the Law; and that they shall be firmly charged by our Lord the King and his Counsell, to keep their Sessions four times a yeer at least, according to the Statutes: and that all the Servants, Victuallers, Labourers and Artificers that shall be attainted before them of Excesse, and which shall make a fine for their trespasse, that their fine shall not be lesse then their Excesse, but more if there be cauie, by the discretion of the Justices; so to punish them, and by all other wayes as the Statutes which have been made concerning them purport; And that every one of the Justices for the time that they shall be present at any one of the Sessions, shall have wages of our Lord the King, for every day a certain sum for their Sessions, to be paid by the hands of the Sheriffs where they shall be Justices, out of the issues of their Baily-wicks; and that the Justices may have freely Writs for their Fees under seal out of the Chancery to the Sheriffs, for to pay their Wages aforesaid: And the Sheriffs may also have Writs out of the Chancery to the Barons of the Exchequer, to allow them such payments upon their accompt: That none shall be associated to the aforesaid Justices by Writ out of the Chancery, nor other manner: And that the said Justices, Sheriffs, Lords of Man∣nours, Constables and Bailiffs in every County, may have power to attach and arrest in their Baily-wicks, all those va∣grants who are strong of body to serve and labour, according to the Statute; and if they refuse to serve, that they shall be committed to the next Goal, to continue in prison untill they will justifie themselves, according as the Statute hath ordained: and that a Statute may be made in this Parliament to endure perpetually, from the feast of Saint Michael next to come, and that at the same time Proclamation may be made by the Sheriff in every Market-town throughout the Realm, of the force of this Statute, so that the said Servants, Victu∣allers, Artificers and Labourers, may withdraw themselvers from their outragious prises (or wages) if they will, or other∣wise, the said Commons shall be in short time destroyed and
undone for ever: And that the said Justices may be chosen by the advice of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, of the most valiant and discreet of every County, who may and will continually entend this Office. Answ. The King by advice of his Counsell, will cause to be or∣dained a reasonable number of good & sufficient Iustices, in every coun∣ty of England, having consideration to the quantities of the counties: and wils, THAT THEY SHALL NOT BE RE∣MOVED, Nota. nor others associated to them, without assent of the Counsell: And as to the penalties to be ordained, there are already or∣dained sufficient penalties by the Statutes before these times; which penalties and Statutes the King wils that they shall be put in due exe∣cution. And as to the Wages of the Justices, two or three of the Iusti∣ces which shall attend the Sessions for the profit of the King and of his people, shall have the sixt part of the profits proceeding from their Estreats, untill the next Parliament. In the Parliament of 2 R. 2. held at Gloucester, n. 50 Item, pray the Commons, because that Commissions to keep the peace in every County, are directed to the Lords of the County, who cannot attend at their Sessions, and assign and associate unto them others who are poor, & not so sufficient, who may ocupy their Office in their absence, who retain with them the Inditements taken of Malefactors, without sending their precepts to any Sheriffs, to apprehend such persons indited; by reason whereof the Malefactors of the County are more encouraged to do amisse, who ride in great routs as well by day as by night, making affrayes, and marching against people in their houses or elswhere, and beat and wound, and sometimes kill and maim the poor Commons of the Land: that it would please, that such poor and insufficient Justices may be removed, and that the most sufficient and valiant in the County, may be assigned in their Places, who may and will justifie and make redresse of the misdoings of such Malefactors, their maintainers, coadiu∣ters, fosterers, receivers and abettors, in maintainance of the common Law of the Land, and salvation of the common people aforesaid.
Answ. The Chancellour, Treasurer, and others of the Counsell of the King, shall cause to be ordained the most sufficient men of every County to be Commissioners in such case. The same Parliament, n. 62. Ittm, The Commons pray, that whereas for the common profit of the Realm, before these times, it is ordained, and by divers Statutes in divers Parlia∣ments affirmed, that certain Justices of the Peace, and for to justifie Labourers, Victuallers and Artificers, shall be assigned in all Counties, and keep their Sessions so often, as shall be best for the punishment of Malefactors, Victuallers, Labourers and Artificers; which Justices do nothing in many Counties, for that the wages are withdrawn from such Justices, to the damage of the King, as of the fines and amercements, where∣by Malefactors are more audacious, Labourers outragious in their wages, Victuallers more dear in vent of their Victuals, and Artificers in their degree; hereupon that it would please, that all the Statutes aforesaid may be duly executed, to the chastisement of the said Malefactors, Labourers, Victuallers and Artificers; and further, that wages may be assigned to the said Justices for their Sessions, and that sufficient and wise Justices may be assigned in every County, to perform the ex∣ecution aforesaid, so often as shall be best. Answ. Let two or three of the Justices who have held their Sessi∣ons for the profit of the King and his people, have the sixt part of the profits proceeding from their estreats for one yeer onely. In the Parliament of 3 R. 2. Rot. Parl. n. 38, 39, 40, 41▪ I finde these notable Acts and Records touching Justices of the Peace, never yet printed to my knowledge, though as necessary and usefull to be known, as all, or any other printed Acts concerning them. Numb. 38. Item, That there may be added to the Commis∣sion of the Justices of the Peace, the points ensuing. First, That they may have power to enquire and make execution of the Statutes of Purveyors. Item, That they may enquire and determine of Extortions, Confederacies and Maintainers of Quarrels (or suits) and to determine of Larcenies noto∣riously known, and of Murders, and people slain by malice prepense, without attending the comming of the Justices of
Assize, and that the Statute lately made of those who give li∣veries of Hats, and other liveries, to cause maintainance, be duly executed, according to the effect thereof. Item, to en∣quire of all those who ride with great routs, in affray of the Peace, to do evil; and likewise of all those who lye in wait to kill, rob or maim people; and of all those, who upon any of the said Trespasses shall be indited, and thereupon convi∣cted, that they shall forfeit their Goods and Chattels to the King, and be imprisoned for a yeer and one day; and if they have no Chattels, that they shall be imprisoned for two yeers, without being let to mainprize or Bail, or other man∣ner whatsoever, without speciall command of the King; and that then upon their deliverance, they shall find surety sufficient upon a certain pein, for their good behaviour to∣wards the King and his people. Answ. The King willeth and commands by assent of the Lords temporall, that they shall have such power as they had by the last Com∣mission; that they shall have speciall power to hear and determine con∣cerning the death of a man, and of Extortions, and of those who ride armed, or with force. and in routs beyond the Peace, and in affray of the people; and of those who lye in wait for people to maim or kill them, and of those who use Hats or other liveries, to incite by confederacy, or to make maintainance against the defence and form of the Statutes and Statutes and Ordinances of Parliament were then both one. Ordinances heretofore made. Provided alwayes, that in difficulties concerning Extortions, one of the King's Justices of the one Bench or other, or of the Justices assigned to take Assizes, at least, shall be pre¦sent before they proceed to judgement in this behalf. And as to the for∣feiture and penalties demanded, the King will be advised: But he willeth, that the Lawes before used in such case, be put in due execu∣tion. And it is to be remembred, that the Prelates and the Clergy made their Protestation in this Parliament expresly, upon this new grant, to hear and determine Extortions; that it is not as yet passed, neither shall ever passe by their as∣sent or will, to the blemishing of the liberty of holy Church, nor otherwise would they give their assent, unlesse it might be done in times to come, as it hath been duly done and used before this times. To which was replied by our Lord the King; That
the King neither for their Protestation, nor other their Nota. words in this behalf, would forbear to make his Justices in this case, and in all others to do as they had used to do in times past, and as he is bound to do by vertue of his Oath made at his Coronation. Numb. 39. Item, That the Justices assigned for to keep the Peace, shall keep their Sessions according to the Statute, and that every Justice shall have for his Wages, for every day that they hold their Sessions, half a Mark, and their Clerk two shillings, out of the fines and amercements, as well within franchize as without, arising in their Sessions; and that the Justices upon the Articles aforesaid, may be chosen by the Lords and Knights of Shires in this present Parliament; that is to say, eight persons at the most, of the most sufficient Knights and Es∣quires Nota. in every County, of which two shall be skilfull in the Law, without making See 12 R. 2. c. 10. accord∣ing Lerewith. any association to them hereafter by any way: And that the same Justices at every quarter of the yeer, shall cause to be delivered to the Sheriffs of their Counties, their Estreats of Fines, Issues and Amercements above-named by Indenture; and that the said Sheriffs may have warrant by Writ to pay the said Justices their foresaid Wages from Session to Session, taking acquitances to the said Sheriffs under the seal of the said Justices: for the wch due allowance shall be made to the said Sheriffs in the Exchequer upon their accompt: and that the other part of the said Indenture, sealed under the seals of the said Justices and Sheriffs, shall be sent into the Exche∣quer, for to charge the Sheriff to Ievy that which shall be arrear above the Wages aforesaid, to the use of our Lord the King: And that Proclamation may be made of the Statutes and Ordinances and Statutes then were one and the same. Ordinances aforesaid, twice every yeer, at the comming of the Justices of Assize into the Country; and in case there be no comming of the said Justices into the Country or that it be delayed, so as the Assizes do not hold, that then Procla∣mation shall be made of the said Statutes and Both joyned together as one. Ordinances at the fullest County-Court that shall be held; and in Towns, Fairs and Markets, as it shall seem best unto the said Justices.
Answ. As to the wages of the said Justices, it is assented, that a Knight shall take four shillings, an Esquire two shillings, and their Clerk one shilling, for every day which they shall hold their Sessions onely, out of the issues of the said Esireates, in the form as is demand∣ed: and the said Justices shall hold their Sessions four times a yeer in every County, and every time two or three dayes together, according as the County is greater or smaller, and according as the said Justices shall have businesse before them; so as these their quarter Sessions shall be holden every yeer, throughout all and every part of every County, but not more often then is aforesaid, unlesse there be necessary cause, which requires more hasty remedy: And the King our Lord willeth, that the Sheriffs of every County shall be commanded to make the said Proclamation in full County at the command of the said Justices, once or twice in a yeer: And as to the Indentures and manner of paying of the Wages aforesaid, it pleaseth the King that it be done in manner as is demanded: And as concerning the number and names of the said Justices delivered before in Parliament in writing, the King our Lord will advise: And as to this, that the same Justices may have the said power to hear and determine the death of a man, and the other things aforesaid: Let them be sworn to do every one right, in such manner as the Justices of the King are on their part sworn and make oath. After which I find, Num. 40. A Declaration made upon the Power given to Justices of the Peace, of which there is a certain Act enrolled in the Roll of the Parliament, An. 3. (in form as followeth.) And it is to be remembred, that in Easter Term next after the end of this Parliament, the Lords temporall, assembled at Westminster in a great Counsell there held, caused there again to be read before them the enrolment of the An Ordi∣nance and Act of Parliament was then the same thing. Ordi∣nance made this Parliament, touching the power of the Justices of the Peace, in the presence of the Lord Despaign, the Chancellour, Treasurer, and of all the Justices; and there the said Lords temporall, made a Declaration of the power of Justices of Peace aforesaid; for they there said, that their intent was in the said Parliament, although it was not cleerly enrolled at that time, that among other Articles and Points, the same Lustices of the Peace should have power to hear and determine all man∣ner
of Extoritions, as well at the suit of the King, as of the party; and of certain other Articles comprized in the said power, they should likewise make a Declaration; and thereupon there was a certain Note made of the Commission, by advice of all the Justices of our Lord the King, as well of the one Bench as of the other there present; and this Note being read in the said Counsell before them, they all assented to the said Note, and it pleased them well, that it should passe the Seal of the King under that form, and so were the Commissions made, ensealed, and sent to every County of England in like manner, with a writ directed to the Sheriff of every County, to take the Oaths of the Commissioners, well and lawfully to use their Commission, and to do right to every person, as well to the poor as to the rich, according to the form of the Cedule inclosed in every of the said Writs; of which Writs and Cedule, which were likewise made by advice of the King's Counsell, and the Note of the Commission aforesaid, the Terms or Copies ensue, word for word. The Commission of the PEACE agreed upon in PARLIAMENT. REX dilectis & fidelibus suis, A, B, C, D, &c. salutem. Sci∣atis quod assignavimus vos conjunctim & divisim ad Pacem no∣stram, necnon ad Statuta apud Winton. North. & Westm. pro conservatione Pacis ejusdem edita, in omnibus & singulis in Com. H. tam infra libertates quam extra custodiend. & custodiri faciend. & ad omnes illos quos contra formam Statutorum praedict. delinquentes in∣veneritis castigand. & puniend. prout secundum formam Statutorum eo∣rundem fuerit faciend. & ad omnes qui aliquibus de populo nostro de corporibus suis, vel de incēdio domorum suarum minas fecerint, ad suffi∣cientem securitatem de pace & bono gestu suo erga Nos & populum no∣strum inveniend. coram vobis venire; & si hujusmodi securitatem in∣venire recusaverint, tunc eos in prisonis nostris quousque bujusmodi se∣curitatem invenerint salvo custodiri faciend. Assignavimus etiam vos, quatuor, tres, vel duos vestrum Iusticiarios nostros ad inquirendum
per sacramentum proborum & legalium hominum in Com. praedicto, tam infra libertates quam extra, per quos rei veritas melius sciri pote∣rit, de quibuscunque latrociniis notoriè vel aperiè, ac Mahemiis, & ho∣minum interfectionibus per insidias, vel per maliciam precogitatam, ac murdris, ac aliis feloniis, transgressionibus, forstallariis, regratoriis & extortionibus in Com. praedicto per quoscunque & qualitercunque factis five perpetrat is, & quae exnunc ibidem fieri continget; & eti∣am de omnibus illis qui in Conventiculis contra pacem nostram & in perturbationem populi nostri vi armata erint, vel equitaverint, seu exnuncire vel equitare presumpserint; ac etiam de hiis qui in insidiis ad gentem nostram mahemiand. vel interficiend. jacuerint, & exnunc jacere presumpserint, ac etiam de hiis qui capitiis & alia librata de unita secta per confederationem & per manutenentia contra defensio∣onem ac formam Ordinances and Statutes both one. Ordinationum & Statutorum inde ante haec tempo∣ra factorum usi fuerunt, ac aliis bujusmodi librata imposternm utenti∣bus; ac etiam de Hostellariis & aliis qui in abusu mensur arum & pon∣derum, ac in venditione victualium, ac etiam de quibuscunque Opera∣riis, Artificibus, Servitoribus, Hostellariis & aliis qui contra for∣mam Ordinances here coupled together with Acts, as one and the same. Ordinationum & Statutorum pro communi utilitate Regni no∣stri Angliae de hujusmodi Operariis, Artificibus, Servitoribus, Ho∣stellariis & aliis inde factorum, delinquerint vel attemptaverint in Com. praedicto, vel exnunc delinquere vel attemptare presumpserint: & ed processus versus omnes quos de feloniis bujusmodi contigerit in∣dictari quousque capiantur, reddantur vel utlagantur faciend. & ad la∣trocinia, mahemia, interfectiones & murdra praedicta, ac ea omnia & singula quae per hujnsmodi conventicula contra pacem nostram & in perturbationem populi nostri, & etiam ea quae per bujusmodi insidias ad gentem nostram mahemiend. vel interficiend, & ea etiam per usum bujusmodi capiciarum & aliarum libratarum per confederationem & per manutenentia sicut praedictum est attemptata fuerint & attemptari contigerit, ac transgressiones & forstallarias praedictas ad fectam no∣stoam tantum, ac extortiones & regratorias praedictas, ac omnia alia quae per huju modi Hostellarios & alios in abusu mensurarum & pon∣derum ac in venditione victualium, & omnia alia quae per hujusmodi Operarios, Artifices & Servitores contra formam Ordinances still coupled with, and put before Statutes Ordinationum Sta∣intorum praedictorum, seu in enervationem earundem in aliqua prae∣sumpta vel attemptata fuerint, tam ad sectam nostram quàm aliorum
quorumcunque coram vobis pro nobis vel pro seipsis conqueri vel pro∣sequi volentium, audiend. & termidand. & ad eosdem Operarios, Ar∣tifices & Servitores pér fines, Redemptiones & Amercimenta, & a∣lio modo pro delictis suis prout ante Ordinationem de punitione corpo∣rali hujusmodi Operariis, Artificibus, & servitoribus pro delictis suis exhibend. factum fieri consuevit, castigand. & puniend. secundum legem & consuetudinem Regni nostri Angliae, ac formam Ordinances and Statutes still conjoyn∣ed as one. Ordinatio∣num & Statutorum praedictorum. Proviso semper, quod si cosus diffi∣cultatis super determinationem extortionum hujusmodi coram vobis evenire contigerit, quod adjudicium inde nisi in praesentia unius Justi∣ciariorum nostrorum de uno vel de altero Banco, aut Justic. nostrorum ad Assi, as in Com. praedicto capiend. assignat, coram vobis minimè proceda∣tur. Assignavimus etiam vos, quatuor, tres & duos vestrum, quorum al∣terum vestrum praefati A. & B. unum esse volumus, Iusticiarios nostros ad felonias praedictas quarum determinatio superius declarata non ex∣istit, ac omnia processus & indictamenta, felonias & transstressiones, forstallarias, regratarias & alia praedicta tangentia coram vobis prae∣fati A. & sociis vestris nuper custodibus Pacis nostrae & Iusticiariis nostris ad hujusmodi felonias & transgressiones in Com. praedicto au∣diend. & terminand. assignat, facta quae nondum terminata existunt, inspiciend & debito fine terminand. secundum legem & consuetudinem praedictas, ac formam Ordinances and Statutes still coupled together. Ordinationum & Statutorum praedictorum. Et ideo vobis & cuilibet vestrum mandamus, quod circa custodiam Pacis & Statutorum praedictorum diligenter intendatis, & ad certos diem & loca quos vos quinque, quatuor, tres vel duo vestrum ad hoc provide∣ritis, inquisitiones super praemissa facere, & praemissa omnia & singu∣la audiatis, & terminatis, ac modo debito & effectualiter expleatis in forma supradicta; facturi inde quod ad justitiam pertinet secundum legem & consuetudinem Regni nostri Angliae salvis nobis Amerciamen∣tis & aliis inde spectantibus: mandavimus enim Vicecomiti nostro Com-praedicti, quod ad certos diem & loca quos vos quinque, quatuor, tres, vel duo vestrum ei scire fac. venire fac. coram uobis quinque, &c. & duobus vestrum, tot & tales probos & legales Homines de Balliva sua tàm infra libertates quam extra, per quos rei ueritas in praemissis melius sciri poterit & inquiri, & insuper vobis & cuilibet vestrum super salva custodia Pacts, & Ordinances, yea, Ordinan∣ces and Sta∣tutes in former clauses, are here called Statutes only, which proves them to be but one and the same. Statutorum praedictorum intendat, & pareat quando & prout per vos vel aliquem vestrum fuerit super hoc ex¦parte
nostra rationabiliter praemunitus; & vos praefatus A. ad certos dies & loca per vos & dictos socios vestros super hoc praefigend-processus & indictamenta praedicta coram vobis & praedictis sociis vestris veni∣re fac. & ea inspiciatis, & debito fine terminatis, sicut praedictum est. In cujus &c. Teste Rege apud West. 26. die Maii. Per ipsum Regem & Consilium. The COMMISSION for administring the Oath to Justices of Peace. REX Vicecomiti, &c. Salutem: Quasdam literas nostras Pa∣tentes per quas certos Legeos nostros ad Pacem nostram in Com∣tuo conservand. & ad quaedam alia in eisdem literis contenta faciend. & exequend. assignavimus, tibi mittimus per praesentium portatorem. Mandantes districtius quo poterinius injungendo, quod statim visis prae∣sentibus quibuscunque dilatione & excusatione postpositis, tot personas de eodem sic per nos assignatas quot inde infra Ballivam tuam invenire poteris ad certos diem & locum eis per te ad hoc in prox. statuend. & praefigend. coram te sine dilatione venire fac. & capto Sacramento eo∣rundem juxta formam cujusdam cedulae praesentibus inclusae eisdem. sic juratis literas nostras praedictas liberari facias indilate; dicens & in∣jungens eisdem ex parte nostra quod ipsi non permittant, sicut non est intentionis nostrae, nec omnino volumus quod aliquis dictorum sic assig∣natorum se inde in aliquo intromittat, seu auctoritatem in hac parte virtute literarum praedictarum habeat aliqualem, nec vadia ad hoc or∣dinata accipiat, seu ei ut Justic. nostro tu vel aliquis alius intendens sis aut sit quovis modo, nisi prius ad hoc juratus fuerit in forma prae∣dicta. Et qualiter praesens mandatum nostrum fueris executus, ac de nominibus coram te sic juratorum Nos in Cancellaria nostra cum ea ce∣leritate qua fieri poterit sub sigillo tuo districtè & apertè certificando. It a quod pro captione sacramentorum aliorum sic assignatorum si qui remanserint non jurati debitè prout convenit ordinare poterimus, & hoc sicut gravem indignationem nostram evitare volueris nullatenus ommittas. Teste Rege apud Westm. 27. die Maii.
The OATH of a Justice of Peace. YOƲ shall swear, that well and lawfully you shall serve the King, in the Office of a Guardian of the Peace, and of a Justice of Arti∣ficers, Labourers, Weights and Measures, and to hear and determine the wrongs and grievances done to the King and to his people, and of all other things whatsoever, comprized more fully in the Commission to you and other your companions made, according to your skill and pow∣er: You shall do full right to all, as well to the poor as the rich, neither for honour, favour, friendship, nor estate of any person, nor for benefit given or promised, or which may or shall be done to you in times to come, nor otherwise by art or engine whatsoever, shall you deny, respit or de∣lay right to any against reason, nor contrary to the Lawes, Statutes, Ordinances and Statutes the same. Ordinances and Customs aforesaid: & the Counsel of the King touch∣ing those who shall be indicted before you, you shall conceal, and also shall compell the Juries and Enquests to conceal it on their part law∣fully; and all the Records and Proces which shall be made before you, you shall cause to be put in sure and good custedy, and the estreats of Fines and Americiaments, and other Profits which unto the King appertain, you shall cause entirely to be put in writing indented from time to time, whereof one part you shall cause to be delivered to the Sheriffe of the County, and the other part you shall cause to be sent safely into the King's Exchequer, for to charge the Sheriff there upon his accompt; and all the Writs which shall come to you under the King's great Seal, you shall serve, and cause to be executed without delay; and that you shall not take nor receive any Clerk unto you for to write or keep the Records and Proces aforesaid, if be be not first sworn before you, to keep the King's councell, and to do and perform well and lawfully on his part whatsoever belongeth to his Office and Degree in this behalf. So God me ayd and his Saints. To these I shall adde, 21 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 4. where the King, upon the Petition of the Commons against divers extortions and grievances done to the people by Colleciors of Wools, and of other Taxes and Tallages, to the great destruction of the people, whereof they pray remedy for God's sake. Gives this Answer: The King is pleased, that those who shall be assigned Justices of the Peace, and to en∣quire
of false Monies, shall likewise enquire of the things contained in this Article, and shall do right concerning the things which are therein contained. In the Parliament of 29 E. 3. n. 19. Item, Whereas it was lately ordained by Statute, that there shall be one Measure, and one Weight throughout the Land; that is to say, the King's Standard, that the Justices of Labourers in all the Counties may have power to hear and determine, and punish those who come against this Statute. To which the King answered: Let the Statute thereof made, be held and kept in all poynts, so as covenable and sage Justices may be assigned at what time it shall be best, to enquire, hear, and determine upon the point: and that these Justices, nor the Iustices of Labourers, shall not make Deputies under them; nor that no Sheriff, Coronor, nor none of their Ministers, shall henceforth be assigned Iustices in no Commission. Numb. 20. Item, Whereas before these times, divers Commis∣sions have been made to Sheriffs, Constables of Castles, and to Keepers of Goals and Prisons, to enquire of Trespasse, Felonies, and other Ar∣ticles for which the people are imprisonable; by colour of which Com∣missions, the said Sheriffs, Constables and Keepers, feign inditements, and that the people are indited before them, and they take the people and imprison them, untill they have made fines to the said keepers of Goals and of Prisons for is have suit, also to the Sheriffs for to be bail∣ed, to the great dammage of the Commons; wherefore they pray, that no Sheriff, nor no man who hath the keeping of Prisons, may be put in∣to such Commissions. The Answer. As to the first poynt of this Pe∣tition, our Lord the King wilieth that it shall be done. Numb. 21. Item, Pray tho Commons, that whereas the Justices assigned to enquire of divers Felonies, Confederacies, Conspirators and Maintainers of quarrels, of which points the said Iustices judge (molt reddement) over-hastily in grievance of the Commons: that it would please our Lord the King and his Counsell, that the poynts of Confede∣racies, Conspiracies and Maintainers, may be declared. The an∣swer. Our Lord the King willeth, that none shall be judged nor punish∣ed for Confederacy, but there where the Statute thereof made, speaketh expresly, upon the poynts contained in the said Statute. 47 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 26. Item, the Commons pray, that the Statute of Labourers and Artificers made in full Parliament be exe∣cuted
four times for a yeer to come: and that the Justices of Peace as well as the Justices of Labourers, may be removed, in case that any will complain of them, for the profit of the King, and of the Commons. To which is answered; The King willeth it. 50 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 83. To our most excellent and most redoubt∣ed Lord the King, and his Counsell, sheweth, the poor Commons of the Land, that because the Sheriffs and Ʋnder-Sheriffs, and Keepers of Goals are now, and of long time have been Justices of Peace, and often times cause loyall people of the Country to be indicted before them through malice and envy, for to reap their own gain, as for to make a fine for the entry into the Goal, afterward for suit of prison, and after that for Bail, and afterwards for to have an enquest procured for to save their lives, and when they are released, to make a fine to the Goalers for their Irons, and after for their issuing out of the Gate; whereof they pray remedy: that therefore it would please your most ex∣cellent Lordship, for God's sake, and as a work of charity, to ordain, that from this day forwards no Sheriff, nor under-Sheriff, nor Keepers Note. of Goals, shall be a Iustice of Peace, nor no Commission directed to them in their County but in their proper Office. To which was answer∣ed: That it pleased well the King. There are some 8 E. 3 n. 2, 4, 6. 13 E. 3. par 1. n. 10. other Acts and Petitions of Parlia∣ment concerning Justices of Peace besides these here cited, exant in the Parliament Rolls, but being of lesser moment then, and for the most part agreeing in substance with the former, I shall pretermit them; with other unprinted Lawes and Petitions concerning Justices of Assize, Oyer and Termi∣ner, as 22 E. 3. n. 6. 25 E. 3. n. 11. 2 R. 2. Parl. 1. n. 35. 6 R. 2. Parl. 1. n. 38, 39, 40, 41. 50 E. 3. n. 65, 69, 213. 25 E. 3. Parl. 1. 8 E. 3. n. 6, 10. 29 E. 3. n. 27, 28. rot. Parl. n. 17. 10 R. 2. n. 12. 6 R. 2. n. 41, 48. Only from the premised Acts and Records, I shall briefly deduce these observations and conclusions. First, that the institution of discreet, valiant, able and active Justices of Peace in every County of the Realm, in the judgement of our ancient Princes, Nobles, Peers, Knights and Commons assembled in Parliament, hath been alwayes resolved and enacted to be the most probable, prevalent and succesfull means, to suppresse all publike Malefactors of all
sorts; to reform and redresse all publike oppressions, grie∣vances, disorders and mischiefs in the Common-wealth; to settle all distractions, and to restore and preserve the peace and tranquility of the Kingdom. Secondly, that Justices of the peace in former times have frequently been nominated and appointed by the Knights, Commons and Lords in Parliament, by the Kings assent, as well as by the King, his Counsel, Chancellour and Treasurer; that such Parliamentary nominations and elections have usu∣ally been best, and most beneficiall to the Common-wealth, and that the constituting of able and active Justices of Peace hath been one principall end of ancient Parliaments con∣vening. Thirdly, that none are fit to be Justices of Peace but such as are both 18 E. 3. c. 2 34 E. 3. c. 1. 2 H 5 c. 1. 18 . 6. c. 11. See. Exod. 18. 21. discreet and valiant, and somewhat skilfull in the Laws of the Land, which they are both to execute, main∣tain, and be regulated by in all their proceedings, as well as landed and wealthy; wisdom and discretion without 2 Chron. 19. 11. Ezr. 10. 4. Jsh. 1. 7. 1 Chron. 22. 13 courage; courage without wisdom and discretion; wis∣dom, discretion and courage, without knowledge of and in the Lawes, which must regulate all these; and all, or each of these without some competency of Estare, to keep men from corruption, 18 H. 6. c. 11 2 R. 2. n. 50. bribery, oppression and basenesse, being unable singly of themselves to qualifie any man to be an exact Justice: but when they all concenter in one, that man (if really en∣dowed with the grace and Exod. 18. 21 2 Sam 23 3. 2 Chron. 19 7. fear of God) and no other, will prove a compleat Justice, and such a one as these Statutes and Petitions require. Fourthly, that no Sheriff, under Sheriff, Coroner, Keeper of a Goal or Prison, Retainer or Servant to great men, or person of mean fortune and quality (disabled by the foreci∣ted Petitions and Statutes upon very good grounds) ought to be put into Commissions of the Peace (whiles they conti∣tinue such) to prevent extortion, bribery and oppression of the People. Fiftly, that Justices of the Peace once put into Com∣mission, especially by publike nomination of the Knights
and Commons of Counties in Parliament, ought not to be removed, nor put out of Commission upon any private sug∣gestions whatsoever, without speciall command of the King or his Counsell, and that upon See 4 H. 7. c. 12 8 H. 6. n. 69. just grounds, or some reall misdemeanour or reasonable cause duly proved and testified by their companions and fellow-Justices; it being against all the rules and principles of Justice, Law, Honour, Conscience, the expresse known fundamentall Lawes and Statutes of the Realm, and the highest kinde of arbitrary Tyranny, to put any Gentleman out of Commission upon malicions clande∣stine surmises behinde his back, without ever hearing or summoning him to vindicate his own innocency, or make his just defence against such clandestine unsatisfactory infor∣mations; though a thing too commonly practized by un∣worthy, malicious, self-ended spirits, even in these reform∣ing times, which so much declaim against arbitrary Govern∣ment: And in these and other Statutes and Petitions, I finde onely these causes of uncommissioning and outing any Ju∣stices of Peace: First, 13 R. 2. c. 7. 2 H. 5. c. 1. par. 2. 18 H. 6. c. 11. inability and insufficiency in point of skill, wisdom, discretion, courage, knowledge of the Law, or Estate: Secondly, 28 H 6. c. 11 corruption, misdemeanour or 4 H. 7. c. 12. negligence in the discharge of this publike office of trust: Thirdly, 13 R. 2. c. 7. 8 R. 2. Dors. Claus. n. 5. Co. 4 Instit. p. 176 Retienorship, or particular engagements to great persons, which may overbyas Justices to oppresse and injure the people, to pleasure those Grandees on whom they have their chief dependance: Fourthly, 1 R. 2. n. 89. 51 E. 3. n. 59. age or infirmity of bo∣dy to discharge this trust: Fiftly, 2 H. 5. c. 4. 2 H. 5. Parl. 2. c. 1. 1 Mariae, c. 8. Sess. o. 2. removing from, non-re∣fidence in, or being made Sheriff, Goaler, &c. of the County where they are in Commission: & therefore if any man be in∣directly put forth of Commission without any such just cau∣ses as these, or the like, Some learned men conceive, a Writ of Restitution lyes upon a motion in the King's Bench, to the Chancellour or Commissioners of the great Seal, to put him into the Commission of the Peace again, in case they re∣fuse to do it voluntarily, as well as against a See Sir James Baggs Case, Co. 11. Rep. 93, &c. and Master Estwicks case 23. Car. B. R. Major or Corpo∣ration, disfranchising or putting any Major, Alderman, Free-man or Common-Councell man out of his Place or Office, without a just and
legall cause, there being the self-same reason, and so the self-same Law for both. Sixtly, that Justices of the Peace may sometimes be put into, and sometimes thrust out of Commission by corrupt and sinister means and false suggestions, and that such an abuse is worthy the serious consideration and reformation of a Parliament. Seventhly, that honest and able 18 E. 3. c. 2, 34. 6 E. 3. c. 1. 13 R. 2. c. 7. 2 H. 5. c. 4. 18 H. 6. c. 11. 8 E. 3. n. 2. Lawyers in the judge∣ment of our Ancestors, and ancient Parliaments, are the fit∣test men to be Justices of Peace. Eightly, that though Justices of Peace ought not to be Mercenary, yet the not allowing of them competent 14 R. 2. c. 11. wages to defray their extraordinary expences, especially at generall Quarter Sessions, hath been a great occasion of inducing them to be slack and negligent in the diligent and zealous execution of Justice, and attending at the Sessions. Ninthly, that the power and jurisdiction of Justices of the Peace since their first institution, hath been much enlarged by sundry new Acts of Parliament and Commissions; and that the greater authority they have given them, the more are they enabled to promote the Republicks peace and happi∣nesse. Tenthly, that no Justice of Peace ought to act as a Justice before he be actually sworn; and that the Justices of the King's Bench and Common-Pleas, and Justices of the Peace took anciently one and the self-same Oath. Eleventhly, that the form and substance of the Commissi∣ons of the Peace, and Oath of Justices of the Peace, were ori∣ginally ordained by consent in Parliament. Twelftly, that Bishops in former times were great coun∣tenancers of 8 E. 3. n. 9. 15 E. 3. n. 24. 46 E. 3. n. 36. 50 E. 3. n 75. Extortion, which they would not have Justices of Peace to hear and determine; and that an Act of Parlia∣ment is See 20 E. 3. n 35. 38. 7 H. 8 Kelway 1 84. 8 7 R. 2. c. 12. 20 E. 3. c 9. Cromptons Ju∣risdiction of Courts, . 19. good and valid, though all the Bishops (whiles Mem¦bers) protested against it, as null and voyd. Lastly, that Ordinances and Acts of Parliament, were anciently both one in substance, and used promiscuously one for another, and were made by joynt consent both of the
King, Lords and Commons in Parliament, and therefore Ordinances of Parliament bound the Subjects as really, as far and long as Statutes, as well after Parliaments ended, as du∣ring the Sessions wherein they were made: Which is evident by the premises, by most Prologues to our printed Statutes at large from King Edward the third, to Edward the sixt, by some hundreds of printed Acts and Statutes, by this clause of the Writ for the election of Knights and Burgesses; Ad fa∣ciendum & consentiendum his quae tunc ibi de communi consilio Reg∣ni nostri (favente Deo) contigerit ORDINARI, (from which word Ordinari, this title of Ordinance was derived:) and by the Rols of Parliament, wch make expresse mention of Ordinan∣ces of Parliament as all one with Acts and Statutes, as 15 E. 3. n. 15, 17 E. 3. n. 8. 21 E. 3. n. 8, 16. 27 E. 3. n. 1. Rotulus Or∣dinationum, 20 E. 3. n. 12, 13. 28 E. 3. n. 10, 16, 55. 37 E. 3. n. 12, 38. 40 E. 3. n. 11. 50 E. 3. n. 10, 12, 13, 75, 79, 34, 110, 186. 51 E. 3. n. 11, 47, 82. 1 R. 2. n. 56. 2 R. 2. n. 46. 2 H. 4. n. 104, 106. with sundry others, and the Year-books of 39 E. 3. 7. & 8 H. 4. 12, 13. Indeed I find 4 Instit. p. 25 Sir Edw. Cook putting this difference between an Act of Parliament, and an Ordinances; that an Ordinance wanteth the threefold consent (which an Act alwayes hath) and is ordained by one or two of them: which he endeauours to prove by 25 E. 3. n. 16, &c. 37 E. 3. n. 39. 1 R. 2. n. 56, &c. to which he might have added, 27 E. 3. n. 19. But under his favour, these Records will neither prove nor warrant his difference: for first, there was the consent of the King, Lords and Commons to the Ordinance concerning Apparell, 37 E. 3. n. 38, & 39. which was commanded to be strictly executed as a Law, till the next Parliament: So as this Record is point-blank against him in that very thing for which he cites it: and his first Record of 25 E. 3. n. 16, &c. hath not one sillable in it concerning Ordinances of Parliament, or to warrant any difference be∣twen Acts and Ordinances, for which he quotes it, which is cleerly refuted by this notably Record of 50 E. 3. n. 47. where The Commons Petition the King, That NO STATƲTE NOR
ORDINANCE may be made or granted at the Petition of the Clergie, without assent of the Commons; and that the Commons shall not be bound by any of the Clergies constitutions, made without their assent; for they will not be obliged to their Therefore the threefold assent was then neces∣sary to Ordi∣nances as well as Statutes. STATUTES NOR ORDINANCES made against their assent. Se¦condly, the King's consent was to all the Presidents he cites, and no Ordinance nor President is produced by him▪ of any Ordinance made by the Lords or Commons joyntly or se∣verally, without the King's consent thereto. Thirdly, 27 E. 3. n. 19. puts a difference between Ordinances of Parliament, and Sir Edward Cook mistakes an Ordinance of State for an Ordinance of Parliament, which had al∣ways the three fold asut. Ordinances of State, made by the King and his privy Counsell alone, without the Lords and Commons assent; the one being to be entred in the Parliament Rolls, as bind∣ing Laws, the other not. Fourthly, all that 1 R. 2. n. 56. proves, is but this, That the Kings sole answers to the Cōmons Peti∣tions (especially without the Lords concurrent assent) makes them See 21 E. 3. n. 43, 46, 47, 52. no Acts of Parliament, but meerly Ordinances of State, AS SOME AFFIRMED. Whereupon the Commons prayed, That their Petitions, to which King Edward the third in his Parliament held the 50th yeer of his reign, gave this an∣swer, Le Roy le Voet; might be turned into into Acts. But it no wayes proves, that Acts and Ordinances of Parliament are different things, and not one and the same, since our Parlia∣ments in all Ages have resolved the contrary. This I shall undeniably manifest by our printed Statutes at large, which every man may peruse, because some may deem it a dange∣rous paradox in this innovating and erring Age. That Sta∣tutes, Acts and Ordinances of Parliament are all one, is evi∣dent. First, by the printed Prologues and preambles to most of our Statutes and Acts of Parliament. I shall begin with the Preamble to the Statute of Marlbridge made in the two and fiftieth yeer of King Henry the third. In the yeer of grace 1267. in the two and fiftieth yeer of the reign of King Henry, son of King John, in the Ʋias of Saint Martin; for the better estate of this Realm ef England, and for the more speedy administration of justice, as belongeth to the Office of a King; the more discreet men of the Realm being called together,
AS WELL OF THE HIGHER AS OF THE LOWER ESTATE; it was provided, AGREED AND ORDAINED, That whereas the Realm of England of late had been disquieted with manifold troubles and dissentions, for reformation whereof, STATUTES AND LAWES be most necessary, whereby the peace and tranquility of the people must be conserved; wherein the King intending to devise convenient remedy, hath made these ACTS, ORDINANCES AND STATUTES underwritten, which he willeth TO BE OBSERVED FOR EVERMORE FIRMLY AND INVIOLABLY OF ALL HIS SUB∣JECTS, as well high as low. Then follow twenty nine Statutes, continuing yet in force, all ushered in with this generall Preamble: from which I shall observe, First, that Acts, Ordinances and Statutes were all one and the same, and used as Synonumaes in that Age. Secondly, that they were all equally provided, agreed and ordained by the King, and the more discreet men of the Realm called toge∣ther, as well of the higher as of the lower estate: therefore Ordinances then, as well as Acts and Statutes, had the three∣fold assent, and the King's as well as the Lords and Com∣mons concurrence, not the assent only of one or two of them. Thirdly, that those Acts which are termed Statutes and Laws right necessary, in the former clause of this Preamble, are called Acts, Ordinances and Statutes in the later. Fourthly, that Ordinances then, were to be observed for evermore sirmly and inviolably of all Subjects, as well high as low; and not meer temporary Lawes expiring with the uery Sessi∣ons that made them, or before; and obliging some, but not others, as most new Ordinances now do. Which had Sir Ed∣ward Cook observed in his 2 Instit. p. 101, 102. Comentary on this very Preface and Statute, it is probable he would have retracted his mistaken difference, between Statutes, Acts and Ordinances of Parlia∣ment, which hath seduced others, as well in point of practice as opinion. In 50 E. 3. we have this generall Preamble to the printed
Acts of Parliament, and Statutes then made. By assent of the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and others assembled at the Parlia∣ment, holden at Westminster, at the fifteenth of Saint Hillary, the yeer of the reign of our sovereign Lord the King, that now is, of Eng∣land, the fiftieth: the same our soveraign Lord the King much desi∣ring, that the Peace of his Land be well kept, &c. hath for so much made and established certain ORDINANCES, &c. which ORDINANCES he will that, to the honour of God, and of the Church, and quietnesse of his people, they be firmly kept and holden in all points. These Statutes (being eight in number) are onely termed Ordinances in this Prologue, though Statutes in the Title; and close to, Thus endeth the Statutes, &c. The generall printed Preambles to the severall Acts and Statutes made in the Parliaments of 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 9, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 20, and 21 Rich. 11. run all in this form and words; Our Soveraign Lord the King, at his Parliament holden at Westminster, &c. of the assent of the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Ba∣rons, and other great men, and of the Commons of this Realm, sum∣moned to the said Parliament, hath ORDAINED and esta∣blished in the said Parliament, for the quietnesse of his people, &c. the STATUTES AND ORDINANCES following, perpetually to endure in his said Realm: Or, hath done to be made cer∣tain ORDINANCES AND STABLISHMENTS for the common profit of the Realm, in form following. The Preambles to the severall printed Statutes made in the 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, and 9 yeers of King Henry the fourth, and 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, and 9 yeers of King Henry the fifth, use these expressions: At the Parliament holden at Westminster, &c. Our Soveraign Lord the King, by assent of the Prelates, Dukes, Earls and Barons, and at the speciall instance and request of the Commons, assem∣bled at this present Parliament, hath done to be ORDAINED and established certain STATUTES AND ORDI∣NANCES: Or, divers ORDINANCES AND STATUTES, in form following. The printed Preambles to the respective Statutes, made in 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11 14, 18, 20, 23, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33 of King Henry the sixt: In 1, 3, 4, 8, 12, 17, 22 of King Ed∣ward
the fourth: In 1 of Richard the third; in 1, 3, 4, 11, 12, 19 of King Henry the seventh: and in 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 14, 23 of King Henry the eight, run all in the like form of words, coupling Ordinances and Statutes alwayes together as one: In 24 H. 8. this generall usuall Preamble was altered into this new modle: Acts made in the Session of this present Parlia∣ment, &c. and from that Parliament till this present, this an∣cient usuall Preamble hath been discontinued and omitted in our printed Statutes. Secondly, I shall manifest Statutes, Acts and Ordinances of Parliament to be one and the same, by sundry printed Acts of Parliament which couple them together, and use them promiscuously for one and the same, as the forecited generall Preambles do. 13 E. 1. the Statute of Merchants: The King and his Counsell at his Parliament holden at Acton Burnell, hath ordained these establishments; which ORDINANCES and establishments, the King commandeth they shall be firmly kept and ob∣served throughout his Realm of England and Ireland: 37 E. 3. c. 1. That the great Charter, and Charter of the Forrest, and the STA∣TUTES AND ORDINANCES made in the times past, be holden and kept, and duly executed, according to the form and effect of them: 38 E. 3. parl. 1. c. 10. The STATUTES AND OR∣DINANCES thereupon made, shall stand in force: 42 E. 3. c. 6. The Statute and ORDINANCE made for Labourers and Artifi∣cers, &c. 1 R. 2. c. 5, 7. It is ordained, that all STATUTES AND ORDINANCES made before this time, &c. be holden and firmly kept i all poynts. It is ordained and assented, that the Statutes and ORDINANCES made in such case before this time, be kept and duly executed. 5 R. 2. parl. 1. c. 1. 6 R. 2. parl. 1. c. 1. 7 R. 2. c. 2. 8 R. 2. c. 1. 9 R. 2. c. 1. 13 R. 2. c. 1, 8. 14 R. 2. c. 11. 15 R. 2. c. 1. 1 H. 4. c. 1. 2 H. 4. c. 1. 4 H. 4. c. 1, 16. 7 H. 4. c. 1. 9 H. 4. c. 1. 11 H. 4. c. 5. and 4 H. 5. c. 1. do all thus couple Ordinances and Statutes together as one: It is ordained and accorded, &c. That the great Charter, and the Charter of the Forrest, and ALL OTHER GOOD STATUTES AND ORDINANCES before this time made, and not yet repealed, be firmly observed in all their Articles, and put in due execution, accord∣ing
to the effect of the same. All these Statutes giving the title both of an Ordinance and Statute to Magna Charta, the Char∣ter of the Forrest, and to all other Statutes formerly made, cleerly resolve, Statutes and Ordinances to be both one. So 6 R. 2. parl. 1. c. 10. Any Statutes, Ordinances, &c. had or made to the contrary notwithstanding. 7 R. 2. c. 11. Divers Ordinances and Statutes of Fishers of London, and other Victuallers were made, &c. The same Ordinances and Statutes, &c. c. 13. The Statutes and Or∣dinances aforesaid. 11 R. 2. c. 8. Any Statute, Ordinance, &c. twice. 13 R. 2. c. 7. That the said Justices be sworn to keep and put in execution all the Statutes and Ordinances, touching their Offices. c. 8. Statutes and Ordinances, twice: c. 9. As in the great Charter and all other good Statutes and Ordinances thereof made is more plainly con∣tained, &c. As hath been another time ordained by Statute. So in 14 R. 2. c. 11. 17 R. 2. c. 3. 21 R. 2. c. 12. 1 H. 4. c. 2, 9. 2 H. 4. c. 4. 2 H. 4. c. 9, 17. 4 H. 4. c. 3, 16. 9 H. 4. c. 8. 13 H. 4. c. 3, 6. 9 H. 5. parl. 2. c. 1. 1 H. 6. c. 2. 3 H. 6. c. 5. 6 H. 6. c. 5, 8, 9, 17. 14 H. 6. c. 6. 20 H. 6. c. 8. 23 H. 6. c. 2. 31 H. 6. c. 7. 39 H. 6. c. 2. 3 E. 4. c. 5. 4 E. 4. c. 1, 6, 7. 7 E. 4. c. 1. 14 E. 4. c. 4. 17 E. 4. c. 1, 6, 7. 22 E. 4. c. 1. 1 H. 7. c. 7, 8, 9. 4 H. 7. c. 1, 12, 21, 22. 7 H. 7. c. 3. 11 H. 7. c. 3, 4, 7, 8, 16. 19 H. 7. c. 13, 22, 23: we have the like conjunction of Ordinances and Statutes, Statutes and Ordinances, Ordinance and Statute, which couple and use them still promiscuously as one: By the Statutes of 8 H. 6. c. 5. 18 H. 6. c. 11. 12 E. 4. c. 6. 4 H. 7. c. 1. The Commissio∣ners of Sewers are authorized to make Lawes, Statutes and Ordinan∣ces: In 15 H. 6. c. 6. 23 H. 6. c. 4. 7 E. 4. c. 1. 19 H. 7. c. 7. We read of Ordinances, Rules and Statutes made by Fraternities, Corporations and Companies; in which they are used reciprocal∣ly as one and the same: And as in all these Acts; so in divers others in King Henry the eighth, Edward the sixth, Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth and King James (which for brevity I omit) we finde the like. Therefore by all these numerous evidences, it is cleer and undeniable, that in all former Par∣liaments and Ages, Statutes, Acts, and Ordinances, were alwayes judged, reputed one and the same, not divers,
and made by the selfe-same authority and assent. Thirdly, I shall make this most apparent by sundry Statutes in print, which expresly stile both generall Acts of Parliament, and particular Statutes, ORDINANCES, AN OR∣DINANCE, THIS ORDINANCE: and yet call them likewise Statutes, this Statute, a Statute, the Statute, an Act of Parliament, &c. and likewise stile Ordinances, Statutes, Acts of Parliament, &c. For this you may peruse at leasure the Statute of Marlbridge 52. H. 3. c. 8. If it be found that the Sheriffe delive∣reth any contrary to this ORDINANCE, he shall be grievously amerced therefore, 13. E. 1. The Statutes of Merchants forecited 27. E. 1. An ORDINANCE of purchasing Liberties, 33. E. 1. An ORDINANCE of Enquests: and An ORDI∣NANCE of the Forrest, 34. E. 1. An ORDINANCE of measuring Lands. An Ordinance for Bakers, Brewers, &c. An Ordinance for Measures, 14. E. 3. Parliament 1. c. 5. this ORDI∣NANCE, c. 9. Against this ORDINANCE, thrice, c. 12. This ORDINANCE, c. 19. This Stablishment. This ORDINANCE, 15. E. 3. Parl. 1. c. 3. The Ordinance 18. E. 3. c. 4. This Ordinance twice c. 6 The said Ordinance, 23. E. 3. c. 8. 25. E. 3. Par. 1. c. 4, 6, 8. Par. 4. c. 20. 27 E. 3. P. 2. c. 7, 14, 21. This Ordinance. These Ordinances often, 27 E. 3. Par. 3. The Ordinance of the fees of the Mayor and Constable of the Staple. 28. E. 3. c. 10. 13. This Ordinance: All the Ordinances made in the great Councell at West∣minster, &c. shall be firmely holden and kept FOR A STA∣TVTE TO ENDVRE FOR EVER, 31. E. 3. Par∣liam. 1. c. 7. Against the Ordinances: Parl. 2. c. 2. This Ordinance. These Ordinances: Parl. 3. The Ordinance of Fish, 34. E. 3. c. 21. Ʋpon the Ordinance of the Staple it was ordained, &c. 36. E. 3. c. 4. 13. 15. This Ordinance: It is Ordained, that this ORDINANCE and STATVTE of Pleading begin and hold place, &c. 37. E. 3. c. 1, 3, 5, 6, 12, 13, 14, 15, 19. This Ordinance, often. 38. E. 3. Parl. 1. c. 2, 7. The said Ordinance, often: then, Statute or OR∣DINANCE, Parl. 2. c. 2, 4, 5. Ordinances; good Ordinan∣ces: This Ordinance, &c. sundry times, 42. E. 3. c. 8. This Or∣dinance shall held place, 43. E. 3. c. 2, 4. This Ordinance: Wee command thee, that thou doe the said ORDINANCES to be
cryed and published in the Cities, &c. 2. R. 2. Parl. 1. c. 1. Against this Ordinance: Against this Statute, 3. R. 2. Parl. 1. c. 3. This Ordi∣nance: twice, 5. R. 2. Parl. 1. c. 3. Any thing forfeited against this Ordinance, c. 4. Which Ordinanee shall be duely kept and put in exe∣cution. This Ordinance of Wines shall begin to hold place as soone, &c. Against the forme of these Ordinances of Wines, 6. R. 2. Parl. 1. c. 2. The said Ordinance (First) The said Statute (afterwards) c. 11. The Ordinance, c. 13. No man shall henceforth ride in Har∣neis within this Realm, contrary to the Statute of Northampton. After, that bear Harneis contrary to the Statutes & Ordinances afore∣said, c. 16. That these Ordinances be duly kept, &c. This Ordinance, 13 R. 2. c, 9. Ordinance oft, c. 11. That this Ordinance begin to hold place, 15 R. 2. c. 8, 12. This Ordinance, &c. 16 R. 2. c. 6. This Ordinance, 17 R. 2. c. 7. Ordinance, 21 R. 2. c. 18. A convenient Ordinance, 21 R. 2. c. 20. To repeal the Statutes or Ordinances (first, and then) Statutes and Ordinances, 1 H. 4. c. 7. This STATUTE OR ORDINANCE shall begin, c. 8. This Ordi∣nance and Statute shall hold place, &c. c. 9. Many other Statutes and Ordinances, &c. By force of the Ordinance and Statute aforesaid, c. 10. Ordained by Staiute, c. 15. This Ordinance (twice) 2 H. 4. c. 15. The said Ordinance and Statute, c. 22. The same Ordinance, The said Ordinance, The Ordinances aforesaid, 4 H. 4. c. 17. This Statute and Ordinance shall hold place for ever: To hold, keep, observe and preserve the Statute and Ordinance aforesaid, c. 18. This Ordi∣nance, 6 H. 4. c. 4. The said Ordinance (thrice) 13 H. 4. c. 2, 3. Statute or Ordinance, This Statute, The same Ordinance, The said Statutes and Ordinances be very profitable, &c. That the said Statutes be holden and kept, c. 6. The Statutes and Ordinances, &c. That the same Statutes he firmly holden and kept, &c. c. 7. Any Article or Or∣dinance, 1 H. 5. c. 2. The Statutes made, &c. That the said Statutes and Ordinances be surely holden and kept, &c. c. 5. This Ordinance shall begin, c. 7. The said Ordinance, The said Ordinances (four times) c. 9. The ancient Ordinances, and the Statutes: The Ordi∣nances aforesaid: This Ordinance and Statute (twice) Which Or∣dinances, Good Ordinances (four times) 2 H. 5. c. 4. Ordinances and Statutes (eight times) And all other good Statutes, c. 6. This Ordinance (five times) c 8. Like Ordinances, &c. c. 9. This Or∣nance
shall stand in force, 2 H. 5. parl. 2. c. 6. The same Ordinance (twice) 3 H. 5. parl. 2. c. 2. This Ordinance, c. 4. The same Or∣cinance, c. 8. This Ordinance, 4 H. 5. c. 4. That this Ordinance hold place: An Ordinance made in 5 H. 5. concerning Attorneys, 7 H. 5. The Statute made at Westminster concerning Appeals, hath in the body of it, This Ordinance, This present Ordinance: then fol∣lowes, Do this Statute and Ordinance to be proclaimed, &c. To be certified of the said Statute and Ordinance, 8 H. 5. c. 3. This last Ordinance shall begin, 9 H. 5. c. 2. This Ordinance (twice) c. 3. An Ordinance, This Ordinance (thrice) c. 4. This Ordinance, c. 8. That this Ordinance endure, 9 H. 5. parl. 2. c. 9. All the Ordinan∣ces aforesaid, 1 H. 6. c. 1, 2. Statute and Ordinance, Statutes and Ordinances made, c. 3. The Ordinance, 2 H. 6. c. 2. This Ordi∣nance, c. 7. That this Ordinance and Statute hold place, c. 8. In the same Ordinance excepted; The said Ordinance, c. 11. This Ordinance (twice) c. 14. The Ordinance; The said Ordinances, 4 H. 6. c. 1. This Ordinance, c. 2. This Ordinance shall endure till the Parliament; Which Ordinance is determined, &c. Hath ordained, that the said Ordinance made the said fourth yeer, shall stand as a Statute and Law effectuall and available in all points to all persons, &c. Shall have any benefit of the same Ordinance, c. 3. Which Ordinance should endure, &c. That the said Statute, &c. shall hold force as a Statute available and effectuall in Law to endure for ever, c. 5. Any Ordinance, 6 H. 6. c. 1. This Ordinance, c. 2. This Ordinance or Statute, c. 3. The same Ordinance; A thing ordained by Statute; This Ordinance, 8 H 6. c. 2. The said King of Denmark against the See 1 H. 8. c. 1. Ordinance, &c. c. 3. The said Ordinance; By Ordinance shall have power to do, ordain and execute the Statutes, Ordinances, &c. c. 4. Statutes and Ordinances (six times) and then, The contrary of the said Ordinances, &c. Against the form of the said Statutes, c. 5. This Ordinance (twice) c. 6. Statutes and Ordinances; then, This Ordinance (thrice) c. 7. The Ordinances, c. 9. Statutes and Ordinances; The said Statute and other Statutes, c. 10. This Ordinance, c. 13. That this Statute shall endure, &c. Then followes, Comprized in this present Ordi∣nance, &c. Have any benefit of the same Ordinance, c. 14. The same Ordinance shall stand in its force, &c. The said Statutes, &c. The said Statute shall now be kept, &c. c. 17. Ordained by divers Statutes
and Ordinances, &c. This Ordinance (twice) c. 18. The Ordinance and Appointment, c. 25. Any Statute or Ordinance, c. 29. The first Ordinance (five times) The last Statute; The last Statute and Ordi∣nance, 9 H. 6. c. 2. That Ordinance; The said Ordinance, c. 3. This present Ordinance, c. 4. This Ordinance, c. 7. This Ordinancc, c. 9. This Ordinance, 11 H. 6. c. 5. This Ordinance (twice) c. 7. This Ordinance (thrice) c. 8. The Statutes and Ordinances made of Mea∣sures; The said Ordinances and Statutes (twice) then, The said Statutes and Ordinances (twice) Willeth the same Statutes and Or∣dinances to be holden and kept; Hath ordained that the said Statutes be proclaimed and put in due execution: Then it followes, To put all the Statutes and Ordinances in due execution, according to the form and effect of the said Statutes and Ordinances: Then, To execute all the Statutes abovesaid, (twice) c. 13. The good Ordinance and Sta∣tute; According to the Ordinance: c. 14. Against the form of the said Statutes: Then followes, Against the Ordinance abovesaid: c. 15. This Ordinance: 14 H. 6. c. 6. The said Statute and Ordinance: c. 7. This Ordinance: c. 8. Whereas it was declared and ordained by a Statute, &c. Forasmuch as before the said Ordinance, &c. The said Statute, &c. (thrice) 15 H. 6. c. 2. This Ordinance: 18 H. 6. c. 4. This Act and Ordinance (thrice) and then, This Provision and Ordinance: c. 7. The said Statute: then, Which good Statute and Ordinance: next, The said Statute (twice) c. 9. Any Statute or Ordinance: This Statute and Ordinance shall begin, &c. And that Proclamation be thereof made, &c. Incontinently after this Ordinance: To the intent, that Merchant Aliens may have knowledge of the said Ordinance: c. 11. This Ordinance: c. 13, & 14. It was ordained, &c. This Ordinance shall stand in force till the next Parliament, &c. Which Statute by decease of the said King, by opinion of some, is expi∣red, &c. That the said Ordinance shall be and abide an effectuall and avaylable Statute and Ordinance in Law, perpetually to endure: c. 14 This Ordinance (thrice) c. 15. This Ordinance (three times) c. 16. This Ordinance: 20 H. 6. c. 1. This Ordinance: c. 2. This Ordinance (twice) c. 3. This Ordinance: c. 4. This Ordinance: c. 5. This Ordinance: The Statute and Ordinance aforesaid: c. 7. This Ordinance: c. 8. This Ordinance (thrice) then, This Ordi∣nance among other Statutes of Purveyors, &c. Shall be sent to the
Sheriffs of every County, to proclaim and deliver the said Statutes and Ordinances: c. 10. This Ordinance (twice) c. 11. It was ordain∣ed by the Statute made, &c. Forasmuch as before the said Ordinance, &c. then, The said Statute: And that this Ordinance, &c. c. 12. The Ordinance of Partition (twice) 23 H. 6. c. 2. The said Statutes from henceforth shall be duly kept, &c. That he shall take nothing of the people, contrary to the said Ordinances: then, Contrary to the said Statutes (thrice) next, Contrary to the said Statutes and Ordinan∣ces: then, Execution of the said Ordinances: after, That these Sta∣tutes and Ordinances: c. 3. This Ordinance: c. 4. The said Ordi∣nance (twice) c. 6. All other Ordinances: This Ordinance: then, This Statute: after, The Statute and Ordinance aforesaid: c. 7. This Ordinance: c. 10. These Ordinances: after, This Ordinance (twice) c. 11. This Act and Ordinance shall begin: c. 14. This Ordinance shall begin, &c. Provided alwayes, that by this Act, &c. 27 H. 6. c. 1. A certain Ordinance: then, Concerning this Act: after, this Ordinance to endure, &c. c. 2. this Act: then, this Sta∣tute: next, this Ordinance: after, this Act: then, Contrary to the Ordinance of this Statute: next, this Act (twice) after, this Or∣dinance; this Grant or Ordinance (twice) then, this Ordinance (twice) c. 3. this Ordinance (twice) c. 4. the said Ordinance: c. 5. this Ordinance (twice) 28 H. 6. c. 1. A certain Ordinance: then, this Ordinance, &c. (six times) c. 2. The Ordinance: c. 3. this Ordinance (twice) c. 4. this Ordinance (twice) 29 H. 6. c. 2. Endamaged by this Act: And that this Ordinance shall begin, &c. then, Contrary to this Statute: 31 H. 6. c. 3. this Ordinance: 33 H. 6. c. 1. the said Ordinance: c. 6. the said Ordinance: c. 7. this Ordinance (thrice) 39 H. 6. c. 1. Acts, Statutes and Ordi∣nances (twice) 1 E. 4. c. 2. this present Ordinance: then, Pro∣vided that this Act: after, that this Act and Ordinance: next, And that this Ordinance: 3 E. 4. c. 1. By this Ordinance: afterwards, that this present Act and Ordinance: c. 3. this Ordinance (twice) c. 4. this Ordinance or Statute: after, this Ordinance nor Act, nor none other Ordinance or Act made: c. 4. Ordinances and Statutes: then, Statutes and Ordinances: after, Contrary to this Ordinance: next, Provided, that this Statute: then, Nor that this Ordinance: Notwithstanding this Ordinance: after, Within this Statute: and
in the close, that this Ordinance: 4 E. 4. c. 1. this Ordinance (twice) then, the Statutes and Ordinances made before this time: after, that these Statutes and Ordinances, and other Statutes and Or∣dinances made before this time: next, Any other Act or Ordinance: then, Not according to this Act: c. 2. this Ordinance (twice) af∣terwards termed, this Act (twice) 4 E. 4. c. 5. Forasmuch as a certain Declaration and Ordinance, in form of a Statute, evermore to endure, were of late made by the Duke of Burgony, &c. Which said Declaration and Ordinance (twice) next, the Statute made against it, is stiled, this Ordinance (four times) then, that this Act, nor none other Act, Statute nor Ordinance, made or to be made (twice) c. 7. the like. In 7 E. 4. c. 1. 2, 3, 4. 12 E. 4. c. 3, 9. 14 E. 4. c. 1, 24. 17. E. 4. c. 1, 4, 6. 22 E. 4. c. 2. 1 R. 2. c. 6, 10, 13. 1 H. 7. c. 2, 5, 8, 9. 9 H. 7. c. 2, 4, 8, 9, 11, 21, 22. 7 H. 7. c. 2, 5. 11 H. 7. c. 1, 4, 8. 19 H. 7. c. 4, 22, 23. and in sundry other Statutes of King Henry the eighth, Edward the sixth, Queen Marys Queen Eli∣zabeth, King James (which for brevity I forbear to cite,) we have the like connection of Statutes, Acts and Ordinances, and interchangeable stiling of Acts and Statutes, Ordinan∣ces; and of Ordinances, Acts, Statutes, Lawes, &c. 31 E. 3. Parl. 2. c. 3. 34 E. 3. c. 20. 5 R. 2. Parl. 2. c. 11. 2 H. 4. Parl. 2 c. 4. 3 H. 7. c. 3. we read of Ordinances to be made by the Chancellour, Treasurer and King's Councell; or by the King and Barons of the Exchequer by authority of Parliament, to stand as binding Lawes; and of Ordinances made by the Goldsmiths, and by the Major of London, without, and against Law; and 15 H. 6. c. 6. 23 H. 6. c. 4. 7 E. 4. c. 1. 19 H. 7. c. 7. we read of Ordinances and Lawes made by Fraternities and Corporations; none of all which are any Ordinances of Parliament: but it is undeniable by these and all the fore∣cited Statutes, that an Ordinance of Parliament, in the opi∣nion, resolution, stile & judgement of all these See 46 E. 3. n. 13, 14. 21 E 3. n. 6, 18, 37, 60. 5 H. 4. n.  45. ancient Par∣liaments before these our dayes, was all one with an Act of Parliament, Law, Statute; and that these were used recipro∣cally one for another; for what is called an Ordinance in one clause or line, is stiled an Act or Statute, or both of them, in another; and what is called a Law, a Statute, or Act of
Parliament in one place, is termed an Ordinance, or an Act and Ordinance, a Statute and Ordinance, in another, &c. as the premises abundantly manifest; therefore there was here∣tofore no diversity at all between an Act or Ordinance of Parliament, but they were both one and the same; ever made by the same concurrent assent of King Lords and Commons, by the opinion, resolution of all these forecited Parliaments, Statutes 39 E. 3. 7. 8 H. 4. 12, 13, 14, 20. 9 H. 4. 1. Br. Parl. 11. and of our Judges too. Fourthly, this is undeniable by the manner of penning and enacting our Statutes and Acts of Parliament, in all Ages, in these very termes: It is ORDAINED; Be it OR∣DAINED; It is provided, agreed and ORDAINED; It is as∣sented and ORDAINED; It is, or, be it ORDAINED; It is, or be it ORDAINED and established; The King with the as∣sent, &c. hath ordained: For which you may consult at leisure, the forecited Preambles to most of our Statutes, 3 E. 1. c. 48 7 E. 1. the Statute of Mortmain, 13 E. 1. the Statute of Acton Burnell, 13 E. 1. c. 8, to 16, 33, 36, 38, 39, 41, 46, 48, 13 E. 1. the Statute of Merchants, 18 E. 1. c. 1. 27 E. 1. c. 1, 2, 3, 4. of Fines, 27 E. 1. A Statute for persons appealed, 21 E. 1. Ar∣ticuli super Chartas, the preamble, &c. 1, 2, 3, 11, 20. 30 E. 1. the new Statute of Quo Warranto, 34 E. 1. the Statute of Join∣tenants, 9 E. 2. the Statute of Sheriffs, 15 E. 2. the Statute of Carlile, 18 E. 2. the Statute of Prizes, 1 E. 3. c. 1. 2 E. 3. the preamble, &c. 2, 5, 6, 8, 12. 4 E. 3. c. 2, 15. 9 E. 3. c. 4. & parl. 2. preamble, 10 E. 3. parl. 1. preamble, 18 E. 3. parl. 2. c. 6. 20 E. 3. preamble, c. 4, 5, 6. 21 E. 3. c. 1, 8. 25 E. 3. parl. 1. preamble, &c. 1. parl. 3. c. 2. parl. 4. c. 2. parl. 5. preamble, c. 2, 18. & parl. 6, & 7. 27 E. 3. prologue, & parl. 2. preamble, &c. 3, 7, 8, 9, 11, 14, 21, 22, 24, 25, 27, 28. 28 E. 3. preamble, c. 7, 8, 10, 11, 13. 31 E. c. 5, 6, 7, 10, 15. & parl. 2. preamble, &c. 2, 3. parl. 3. the Ordinance for Fish, 34 E. 3. the prologue, c. 21. 36 E. 3. c. 2, 4, to 16. 37 E. 3. preamble, &c. 1, to 20. 38 E 3. parl. 1. preamble &c. 2, 6, 10, 11. parl. 2. c. 2, 4, 5. 42 E. 3. c. 3, 9, 11. 43 E. 3. c. 1, 2, 3, 4. 45. E. 3. c. 1, 2, 3. 50 E. 3. c. 1, 7, 8. 1 R. 2. preamble, &c. 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 12, 15. 2 R. 2. stat. 1. c. 2, 3, 5, 6, 7. parl. 2. c. 3. 3 R. 2. parl. 1. c. 1, 2, 3. parl. 2. c. 1. parl. 1. c. 6, 7, to 16. parl 2. c. 5.
6 R. 2. parl. 1. c. 3, 6, to 13. parl. 2. c. 3. 7 R. 2. c. 4, to 17. 8 R. 2. c. 2, 3. 10 R. 2. c. 1. 11 R. 2. c. 6, to 12. 12 R. 2. c. 2, 3, 5, 8, 9, 10, 14, 16. 13 R. 3 preamble, &c. 1, 4, to 20. 13 R. 2. parl. 2. c. 2, 3. 14 R. 2. preamble, &c. 11. 15 R. 2. preamble, &c. 3, 4, 6, 8. 12. 16 R. 2. preamble, c. 1, 3, 5, 6. 17 R. 2. preamble, c. 2, 5, 9. 20 R. 2. preamble, c. 1, 5. 21 R. 2. c. 2, to 21. 1 H. 4. c. 5, to 20. 2 H. 4. c. 1, to 25. 4 H. 4. c. 2, to 35. 5 H. 4. c. 2, to 15. 6 H. 4. c. 1, 2, 3, 4. 6 H. 4. c. 2, to 18. 9 H. 4. c. 2, to 8. 11 H. 4. c. 1, to 9. 13 H. 4. c. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 1 H. 5. c. 1, to 11. 2 H. 5. c. 1, to 10. 3 H. 5. parl. 2. c. 3, to 9. 4 H. 5. c. 4, 5, 6. 8 H. 5. c. 2, 3. 9 H. 5. c. 2, 3, to 13. 9 H. 5. Parl. 2. c. 1, 2, 7, 9, 10. 1 H. 6. c. 1, to 6. 2 H. 6. c. 2, to 15. 3 H. 6. c. 1, to 6 4 H 6. c. 2, 3, 6. 6 H. 6. c. 1, to 6. 8 H. 6. c. 1, to 30. 9 H. 6. c. 2, to 11. 10 H. 6. c. 2, to 8. And to cite no more in so plain a case, almost every Statute since 10 H. 6. till this very day, retains this very form of words: It is, or, Be it or∣dained, &c. from whence the word Ordinance is derived: And therefore Acts and Ordinances of Parliament in proper speech and use must necessarily be one and the same, the word So Ordina∣tum est per Cu∣riam, is the u∣suall form of entries in most Courts of Re∣cord. ORDINARI, and no other word of enacting Laws but it, being used and inserted into the very Writs of Electi∣ons and Summons to the Parliament, as I have formerly obser∣ved, the cause it is so frequent and still retained in our Sta∣tutes and Acts of Parliament till this very day. Finally, if all these authorities and reasons from our own printed Statutes, be not sufficient to prove Statutes and Or∣dinances of Parliament in all former times, both one and the same, I shall unanswerably evince and cleer it by divine Au∣thorities, out of the unerring word of truth, which resolves AN ORDINANCE, LAW STATUTE to be all one, couples ORDINANCES AND LAWES usually together as one, takes them promiscuously one for another; and useth the word ORDAIN, as the proper term in enacting divine, as well as humane Lawes, as these  Texts will manifest; which those who desire satisfaction herein, may peruse at their leisure: Exodus 12. 14, 24, 43. chap. 13. 10. chap. 15. 25 chap. 18. 20. Leviticus 18. 3, 4, 30. chap. 22. 9. Numbers 9. 12, 14 chap. 10. 8. chap. 15. 15. chap. 18. 8. chap. 19. 2. Joshua 24. 25. 1, am.
30. 25. 2 Chron. 2. 4. chap. 33. 8. chap. 35. 13, 25. 2 Kings 17. 34, 37 Ezra 3. 10. Nehemiah 9. 32. Job 38. 33. Psalm 99. 7. & 119. 91 Isaiah 24. 5. chap. 52. 8. chap. 58. 2. Jeremiah 31. 35, 36. chap. 33. 25 Ezekiel 11. 20. chap. 43. 11, 18. chap. 44. 5. chap. 45. 14. chap. 46. 14 Malachi 3. 7, 14. Luke 1. 6. Romanes 13. 2. 1 Cor. 11. 2. Ephestans 2. 15. Colossians 2. 14, 20. Hebrews 9. 1, 10. 1 Peter 2. 13. Numbers 28. 6. 1 Kings 12. 32, 33. 2 Chron. 23. 18. Esther 9. 27. Psalm 81 5. Daniel 2. 24. Acts 16. 4. Romanes 7. 10. chap. 13. 1. Galathians 3. 19. 1 Cor. 7. 17. Hebrews 9. 6. compared together. I have taken thus much pains (in an untrodden path) to prove Statutes, Acts and Ordinances of Parliament to be al∣ways anciently & really one and the self-same, made by con∣sent of the King, Lords and Commons joyntly, not of Lords and Commons alone without the King, or by King & Com∣mons without the Lords, not any wayes to invalid or im∣peach any late good and absolutely necessary Ordinances of Parliament, which the exegences of our unhappy distracted times have enforced the houses to passe without the King's consent (being absent from, and in Arms against them) for their own and the See my So∣veraign Power of Parliaments and Kingdoms Kingdoms preservation, or any Ordinan∣ces for the necessary reformation or punishment of any gene∣rall grievances or abuses, according to Law, or preventing any publike mischiefs in a regular manner, by way of Decla∣ration, or assisting of the common Law: Salus populi & Reipub∣licae, being suprema Lex, and extraordinary Remedies to be prescribed by the Houses in such extraordinary cases and exi∣gencies, when ordinary can finde no place at all; but for these ensuing reasons. First, to refute the commonly received errour of these times, and of some pretended Grandees of the Law, That Acts and Ordinances of Parliament in former ages, were distinct and diffe∣rent things, not one and the same; and that the royall assent was then held onely necessary to Acts, but not to Ordinances of Parliament: for which there is not any one single pregnant convincing presi∣dent extant to my knowledge, in any Parliament Rolls or printed Acts: which errour hath been principally propaga∣ted by Sir Edw. Cooks venerable authority and assertion, in his
4 Instit. p. 25. whose misallegations and mistakes are too fre∣quently embraced for Oracles of truth for want of due ex∣amination. Secondly, to abate the excessive fees now taken by Officers in both Houses of Parliament for private Ordinances, as high (or higher) for the most part, as the ancient or late Fees for private Acts of Parliament, which had the Royall assent; a great grievance and oppression to the Subject, generally com∣plained of, fit to be examined and redressed in these reform∣ing times, when private Ordinances and exactions for them are so frequent, without any president in former Parliaments to warrant such new excessive Fees. Thirdly, to perswade and induce the Members of both Houses of Parliament, not to multiply these new kind of Parliamentary Ordinances (destitute of Royall assent, and the peoples generall approbation in full Parliament) to the impeachment or infringement of any ancient Ordinances still in force, the Statutes or common Law of the Realm, the invasion of the peoples undoubted Liberties, Rights or Pro∣prieties, which they have so long fought for, and dearly pur∣chafed with the expence of so much treasure and blood, or to the inveagling of the consciences of Judges or Lawyers, con∣trary to their Oaths and Duties. Fourthly, to advise both Houses to turn all their former and future necessary, usefull Ordinances into Acts of Par∣liament, and to presse the King's Royall assent to them in their expected approaching personall Treaty with his Maje∣sty, for the greater indemnity and security of those who have acted on, or received, or enjoy any monies, lands, offices or emoluments by them, to avoyd all questions and scruples in succeeding Parliaments and Ages. Fiftly, to admonish Committees of all sorts, not to rack or strain any new Ordinances wanting the threefold assent, (especially such as are penall) beyond their Letter, or true in∣tention, to the Subjects oppression, who had many times no legall notice of them; an intlerable common grievance, contrary to the ordinary rules of justice, and the Houses pri∣mitive
purposes, on whom sundry Committees and their under-Officers extravagancies in this kind, have drawn much hatred and scandall; the sad effects whereof begin now visi∣bly to appear in the late insurrections and distempers of the people in sundry Counties, and hatred of Committee-men, which will hardly be cordially pacified or allayed, but by the speedy suppression of all such arbitrary, lawlesse Committees and Officers, and calling them to a strict and just accompt both for their receipts, disbursments, and malicious, vindi∣ctive, injurious actions, to the publike prejudice, and the peoples generall grievance, oppression and discontent. Sixtly, to induce the Houses of Parliament to conform all their future new Ordinances, and the execution of them, as neer as possible, to the forms and rules of Law; and to be very carefull of setting up any such new Ordinances (without in∣evitable necessity, and generall inconveniences of dangerous sequell) to repeal, controle, or give checkmate to the funda∣mentall known Lawes and Statutes of the Realm, or stop the current of the common Law, and publike justice: it being an abuse, a usurpation of very dangerous and pernicious conse∣quence, contrary to many Declarations and Remonstrances of both Houses, and the very tenour of the solemn League and Covenant; wherein they have solemnly engaged all three Kingdoms: The bitter fruits of such destructive Ordinances we may chance to taste of, and bewail, when it is too late; such arbitrary and illegall Ordinances wanting pure mettal, as well as the Royall impresse, will in conclusion but be∣tray, endanger the Coyners of them, and be branded, rejected for counterfeit Coyn, when brought unto the test. Liberavi animam meam. I shall adde no more, but recommend these brief Collections to Gods blessing, and the unprejudiced Read∣ers kind acceptation. FINIS. ERRATA. Page 2. line 12. read Additio. p. 14. l. 4. Item. p. 16. l. 17. Justices. p. 19. l. 9. ierint. p. 20. l. 2. terminand. l. 16. transgressiones. p. 21. l. 33. omittas. p. 2. l. 30. n. 54. p. 28. l. 35. notable.
