w2450 42475286 151456
By the King, A PROCLAMATION. WILLIAM R. WHereas by a Statute made in the Iwenty seventh Year of the Reign of the late Oueen Elizabeth, it is, amongst other things, Enacted, That if any of the Subjects of this Kingdom (not being a Iesuit, Seminary Priest, or other such Priest, Deacon or Religious or Ecclesiastical Person, Ordained or Professed by any Authority or Iurisdiction, Derived, Challenged, or Pre∣tended from the See of Rome) shall be of, or brought up in any College of Iesuits or Seminary Erected or Ordained in any Parts beyond the Seas, and shall not, within Six Months next after Proclamation in that behalf to be made in the City of London, under the Great Seal of England, return into this Kingdom, and thereupon, within Two Days after such Return, before the Bishop of the Diocese, or Two Iustices of the Peace of the County where he shall Arrive, Submit himself to the Kings Majesty and his Laws, and take the Oath of Supremacy, That then every such Person (which shall other∣wise return, come into, or be in this Realm) for such Offence of Returning or being in this Realm, without Submission, as aforesaid, shall be adjudged a Traytor, and Suffer loss, and Forfeit as in Case f High Treason. And whereas by divers other Statutes of this Realm great Penalties are inflicted, is well upon the Persons Bred up in Foreign Seminaries, as upon their Parents, Guardians and Friends, who shall send them thither, or shall send any Relief or Maintenance to them there. And whereas His Majesty hath been Informed, That many of His Subjects of this Kingdom do Live in, and are daily Conveyed into Foreign Seminaries, where they are Brought up, and are Educated in Romish Superstition, to The great Detriment of this Kingdom; His Majesty doth therefore by His Royal Proclamation (with the Advice of His Privy Council) strictly Charge and Command all His Subjects of this Kingdom, who are in foreign Seminaries, That they do with all speed return into this His Kingdom; and doth likewise Com∣mand and Require the respective Parents and Guardians to take the most effectual Care for such their re∣turn. And His Majesty doth hereby strictly Prohibit and Forbid all and every His Subjects of this King∣dom whatsoever, for the time to come, from going to, or residing in any of the said Seminaries; and doth Likewise Prohibit and Forbid all and every His Subjects to send any Relef or Maintenance to any of His Subjects or others, who now are, or shall hereafter be, or reside in any Foreign Seminary: To all which His Majesty doth expect all due Obedience, letting the Offenders to the contrary know, That they hall not only Incur His high Displeasure, but be Proceeded against (for their respective Offences) accord∣ing to the utmost Severity of Law. Given at Our Court at Kensington, the Eleventh Day of Febrnary, 1699. In the Eleventh Year of Our Reign. God save the King. LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb, deceas'd, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1699.
