Y106B 47683592 173047
The Young-man put to his Dumps: being a Gallant Discourse on May-day last, between two witty Lovers. Here in this Song you may behold and see, A Gallant Girl obtain'd by Wit and Honesty; All you that hear this Song, and mark it but aright, May say true Love's worth Gold, and breeds much more delight. To a Pleasant new Tune, called, The Lovers delight, or, The Cambridge Horn. LAte in the Country as I abroad was walking, all in a meadow gréen I heard two lovers talking With kisses sweet the young-man her saluted, then I drew near to hear what they disputed. Then I drew near to hear what they disputed. Young-man. Fair Maid, quoth he, this merry May morning, present one smile to me, and be no longer scorning, Him who had vow'd to be thy own for ever, O say but to me, our loves shall never sever. O say, &c. Maid. Indeed Sir, quoth she, it is a misty moning, But I would have you know I always hated scorn∣ing, And as for love, as yet I mean to smother▪ I know not one as yet, I love better than another. I know not, &c. Man. True love, sweet-heartd he, if e're you chance to know it, It cannot smothered be, but at last you'l shew it: The first time that I saw by swéet & comly carriage I ever since desired that we were joyn'd in marriage I ever, &c. Maid. Love Sir qd. she, s like a Fishers Angle, which oft hath golden ais lly maidens to entan∣gle, And cunningly call out by young-mens false inventi∣ons then marriage they'l preent when 'tis not their intentions▪ Then marriage &c. Man. O'tis so my dear, true Love is like a Fountain, which casts out water clear, out of a rocky mountain Whose stream for to stop, you'l say it is a wonder, likewise 'tis s strange to cleare the rocks in sunder Likewise, &c. Such is my love to thee and shall be ever, No unconstant thoughts, or fickle mind shall sever My hert from thee which always shall be bringing Fountains clear and fresh which from true Love is springing. Fountains clear, &c. Maid. Your comparison, saith she, I must confess is witty, To stop the stream of true love it were a pitty, But your heart you compare indeed to rocky moun∣tains For stony oft they are, & cast out several fountains. For stony, &c. As from some fountain several streems are running so many feigned loves you oft have by your cunning, 'Tis hard inéed to pierce your flinty hearts asunder And stop our ickle streams it is a wonder. And stop, &c. Man. Fie, fie, sweet-heart, your wit doth over-match me, No words can impart, but presently you catch me: You maidens now each day, do grow so coy & witty, let young-men beg & pray you'l take of them no pitty Let young-men, &c. Maid. Fie away for shame, you young-men can dissemble, Your wits are ripe, your tongues are quick & nimble Indéed you'l beg & crouch sometime to get your ple∣sure, Then leave us in the lurch, and we may repent at leisure. Then leave, &c. Man. I must confess dear love, there's many are so minded but if thou wouldst prove my constancy thou'lt find it Do thou but once command, through danger I will enter, And for to gain thy love through an Army would I venture. And for, &c. Sweetheart i'd have you know I never could dissem∣ble, & my complements are slow, my tongue was never nimble. 'tis none but faithful love that makes me come un∣to thée, It is not for thy wealth, but for thy vertue that I love thee. It is not, &c. With that a ush of May this lovely Maid esyed, Neer to a bank of Time, whereto she quickly ied: Down she plucks the May which was both green & tender. And up she pluckt the Time, with her pretty arm so slender. And up, &c. she stuck the bush of May in the time, & did present it, Vnto this young-man, which was soon discontented Here Sir, quoth she, if that you will be eased, Read but this riddle, sir, perhaps you may be pleased: Read but, &c. Young man. He took it from her hand and receiv'd it as a token, Then in a dump did stand, & never a word was spoken Blushing then at last, he modestly replied, Your Riddle I can read love and shall not be denyed: Your riddle, &c. This May uck in Time, which is to me presenting, Shew that I may in time gain your love with swéet contenting which if I may, ile stay your time & lesure No time i'le think too long, so at last I gain the trea∣sure. No time, &c. He took her by the hand, & lovingly they walked, being ty'd in cupids bands, most amorously they talk∣ed they on each other smil'd, with interchanging kisses O 'tis pitty time beguil'd such lovers of their blisses O 'tis pitty, &c. Perhaps sweet Sir, you by your Riddle reading, May think you gained me by little or no perswading Which if you did 'tis yet at my pleasure, I am not bound to you yet, but you must stay my leisure I am not, &c. Then let this heart, which in this brest lies panting No happiness e're see, but let joys be ever wanting, If e're I think an evil thought of thee, Let mirth be banisht quite, & sorrow wait upon me. Then let mirth, &c. If it be so, quoth she, thou bearst such true affection, Hereafter i'le agree to be ruled by thy direction, No friend shall sever or break our loves in sunder, For loyal loving hearts will be the worlds wonder. For loyal, &c. the time that late was mine to thee shall be presented All that I have is thine then rest thy self contented, Thy gallant wit, thy modesty and carriage, Hath won my heart, we will be joyn'd in marriage. Hath won, &c. Young-man. He took her at her word, and modestly replyed, Short time I will afford, long time shall be denied, This being the first of May our hearts being joyn'd & wedded, Before the 5 day in wedlock we'l be bedded, Before, &c. five hundred pounds 'tis said with this maiden he ob∣tain'd, on marriage day was paid which by his wit he gain'd Although no means he had she never a whit repented He was a gallant Lad, and she was well contented. He was, &c. Now all you pretty maids that live in town or City, the author you perswades to learn from this his ditty If a youngman you love, look not then for his treasure For if he honest prove, in him is wealth and pleasure. For if, &c. you young-men i'le perswade likewise to hear my mo∣tion If you affect a maid regard not then her portion, Hang ten pounds, give me the lass that loves me, If a constant wife thou'st found, no joys on earth above thée If a, &c. Young-men & maids that lately went a maying▪ if you mark the nightingale, one tune he's alway play∣ing Iug, jug, jug, sweet is all the note she singeth, As when faithful lovers meet no double tongues they bringeth As when, &c. All you pretty Maids that are civil in your carriage, This song is sent to you to be wary in your marri∣age, Try before you trust, be careful in consenting, When you are bound obey you must, for there is no re∣repenting. When you, &c. FINIS. London, Printed for VV▪ Thackeray, T. Passinger, and VV. VVhitwoods
