J107 R178824 52211853 175706
THE JACOBITE's New Creed, Containing the ARTICLES OF THEIR FAITH, AND Doctrine of Salvation, AS Now Preach'd and Practised, &c. Licensed according to Order. London, Printed for E. Golding, 1693.
The Jacobite Creed: ntaining the Articles of their Faith, &c▪ . WHat is thy Name? s. JACOBITE. Qu. Who gave thee that Name? Ans. My Godfathers and Godmothers at Father re's Font, wherein I was made a Member of ther-Militant, the Child of Vengeance, and an eritor of the Kingdom of Babylon. Qu. What did those Godfathers and Godmothers  for you? Ans. They promis'd and vow'd three things in my me. First, That I should renounce the Devil and is Works, Heresie and Law: The Pomps and ities of this Wicked World, Coronation Oaths, British Honour, and all the sinful Lusts of the h, Liberty and Property. Secondly, That I should eve in all the Articles of the Alcoran, the Faith of great Colleagues and Allies, And Thirdly, That  ould keep Lewis and Mahomet's holy Will and mand, and walk in the same a Monsieur and a Sulman all the days of my Life. Qu. Dost thou not think that thou art bound to be∣, and to do as they have promised for thee? ns. Yes verily, and by St. Ignatius Help, so I
will, and I heartily thank our Father at Mecca, and our Mother at the Vatican, that they have called me to this State of Salvation through the Heroe of France, our Champion and Saviour, and I pray unto Mainte∣non to secure me his Grace, that I may continue in the same all the Days of my Life. Qu. What is the Corner Stone of our Faith? Ans. Transubstantiation. That great and miraculous Transmutation of Principles and Ele¦ments, that does any thing, and every thing, even to the wonderful Conversion of Lewis and J—s int Saints and Innocents. Qu. How many Sacraments are there? An. Seven. Qu. Which are they? An. The two first as I learnt them in my Heretic Cathechism, the latter only a little more famous  Our Church, as having had the Honour by th great Monarch of France to be once taken as a sma Oath That he wou'd never invade FLANDER and ready upon Occasion, to give us the same Secu∣rity he will never Hurt ENGLAND. Qu. What are the other Five? Ans. 3d. Confirmation. The miraculous Co¦veyance of Blessings down upon us, from the Han of his late Reverence of Ely, or some other such ¦piscopal Benediction, as a Seal of our Jacobite Cov¦nant. 4th. Matrimony. That great conjoyning Kno to the incorporating of one Flesh and one Bone; suc as the Sacred Conjugal Ʋnion of the Crescent and th Cross in our present Consummation of Jacobite H¦nour.
5th. Pennance. Our Rueful Lamentations for our Glory departed, in the 7 Penitential Psalms set to our Neck-verse Tune. 6th. Orders. The Sacred Investiture of the ever Holy Furr (whither White, Black, or Grey) of the Bellweathers of our Jacobite Flock. 7th. Extream Vnction. That pretious Oyl or Spikenard applyed to the Feet of our departing Saints as their preparatory Embalment; such as was ad∣ministred to our sickening and gasping Jacobite Cause at the Ingress of the late Revolution. Qu. How many are the Theological Virtues? Ans. Three, Faith, Hope, and Charity. Faith, Our unshaken Relyance and Confidence in the Wonders that shall be done for us; such as our constant Belief that the ever shining Glory of France is ordain'd for the Founder and Foundation of our Jacobite Israel, whose Fiery Pillar shall go be∣fore us to the Promised Land. Hope, Our earnest Expectation in the next happy Descent upon us to see it accomplished. And Charity (the last and greatest of the Three) Our Obligations and Duty of paying our kindest and gratefullest Acknowledgements in that blest Day, to all our Patrons and Benefactors Champions or Assi∣stants in that great Work; such as the generous Do∣nations of Abby-Lands and Heretick Estates to those indefatigable Labourers in our great Harvest, whe∣ther our dear Teagues and Rapparees, or by what other Titles dignified or distinguisht, or where-ever at present dispers'd and scatter'd upon the melancholy Face of the Earth.
Qu. How many are the Merits of Good Works? Ans. Three, Fasting, Prayer, and Alms-Deeds. Qu. What is the Duty of Fasting? Ans. Our abstemious self-denial of pampering Flesh-pots, for Crabs and Lobsters, Codsheads and Shrimps, Caveare and Sturgeon, and the rest of our mortifying Abstinentials. Qu. What is the Duty of Prayer? Ans. Prayer is Twofold, Petition and Thanksgiving. Our Petitioning Duty is offering up our devout Supplications to some Divinity or Saint, for a sup∣ply of our daily Wants; such as our pious Ejacula∣tions to St. Mahomet, for the Relief of Belgrade; and to St. Loyala, for the taking of Charleroy. Our Thansgiving Duty is the hearty Return of our highest Acknowledgements for all the signal Mercies and Providences received, such as the Ashes of Spire, Wormes, Frankendal, Heigdlebergh, &c. or otherwise, for the Famous Examples and Patterns of our Devotion and Piety, whether the Saints now Living, as St. Levaleer, St. Montespagne, &c. or the Martyrs and Confessors departed, as St. Faux, St. Coleman, St. Ruth and his Dragoons, of ever fra∣grant Memory. Qu. What is the Merit of Alms-deeds? Ans. The free and generous opening of our Hands and Hearts to the consciencious abdicating Militants, whether modestly retrencht and retired from a Scarf and a Commission, to a Tap or a Coffee-Pot; or o∣therwise,
the hungry Itinerants of the Park and Temple Walks. Qu. How many are the Deadly Sins? Ans. They are Seven. The First, Pride. Qu. What is the Virtue recommended, and Duty enjoyn'd thee to avoid falling into that Sin? Ans. Humility. We must not be exalted nor puffed up with any Earthly Glory, such as the pre∣sent Establishment of Rights and Laws, Justice, and Equity, &c. but with all Resignation wait the great Lodowickean Deliverer to knock off those loath'd and detested Williamite Shackles and Manacles. Qu. What is the second deadly Sin, and the Vir∣tue required? &c. Ans. Covetuousness. We must not Lust or Desire, Hanker, or Long for the House or Vineyard of our Neighbour, excepting the Spoyls of the Ae∣gyptians, those of our Heretick Foes and Enemies. Qu. The Third? Ans. Luxury. We must keep our Carnal Bodies Chast and undefiled, within the due Limits and Re∣strictions of our Holy Mother Church, that is, from the Waste upwards, according to the great Exam∣ples of our Piety and Champions of our Faith, Lewis and J—s of ever Illustrious Continency. Qu. The Fourth? Ans. Gluttony. We must forbear all Riot and Gorging, especially not only considering the Morta∣lity and Abdication of so many Festival Patrons and Benefactors; but that the late Granaries of Maud∣lin, the Eleemosynaries of Sommerset-Cloisters, the
Brent-Office of the Temple, the Teauge-Purse at Whitehall, and all the rest of our once fair Showers of Manna, and Windows of Heaven, are now stopt and shut up against us. Qu. The Fifth. Ans. Envy. We must suppress all Indignation and Malice (durus hic Sermo) nor cast a Repining Look (a very hard Chapter) and behold, but not mix with the Williamite Pollutions; see their Fourth and Fifth of November Illuminations, and the rest of our Jacobite Eye-Sores, without a Grin or a Murmur, as waiting for a more glorious Jubilee of our own, when our great Mene, Tekel, shall be writ upon their Walls, by the Gallican Pen of Steele. Qu. The Sixth? Ans. Anger. We must Bellow no more at the Williamite Insults over us, but attend with all the most Christian Patience, till our Gallican Reformer shall mend our Scutcheon, root out the Den of our Passants and Rampants, but especially that Jacobite Abomination the Roarer of Belgia, and soften our whole Field into a Garden of his own planted Lillies. Qu. The Seventh? Ans. Sloth. We must neither Dream nor Sleep in the Work upon our Hands, but wait and watch ready Booted and Spurred, for the first Trump of our new Lillyburlero to mount for our Deliverance. FINIS.
