L2015 R202052 52612426 179497
S. GEORGE woodcut of Saint George and the Dragon
THE Life and Death of the Famous Champion of ENGLAND, S. GEORGE. woodcut of Saint George and the Dragon Printed for F. Coles, T. Vere, and W. Gilbertson.
THE Life and Death of the Famous Champion of ENGLAND, S. George. IN the Famous City of Co∣ventry, situated neer unto the heart of the Kingdome of England. Lord Albert had a stately and sumptu∣ous Palace accomodated with all those other varieties and delights which might satisfie the generous disposi∣tion of so noble a person. He was lineally decended from a Noble Family, and a man of an undaunted and unconquered spirit,
in-somuch that whosoever beheld him could not chuse but conclude him to be what he séemed a Noble Péer of Englands Realm. He was also highly honoured of the King, who bestowed his only Daughter on him for his wife, these two were the worthy Parents of this most Noble, Famous, and Victorious Champion S. George. He was born a Champion, for no soo∣ner had nature brought him into the world but he proved an unfortunate Champion, his birth causing her death who gave him life: which sad and heavy chance was agrée∣able to a former Dream which his Lady Mother apprehended, who dreamed often for many nights together before the time of her delivery, yt she brought forth a Dra∣gon into the world, that should be the death of her that bare him: which constant dream caused some destruction in the distressed Lady, insomuch yt she could not be quiet un∣till she had revealed and publisht it unto her Lord, & withall requested him to con∣sult with these Sages and Wisemen then living, what her dream might pretend? her loving Lord unwilling to deny any request that she should make, did post hast unto the Oracle and requested an interpretatio
of the dream, and to be informed what should happen upon the birth of this child; The Oracle willingly entertained his Pe∣tition, and returned an Answer in this manner. A Brave young Son to thee is born; Victorious shall he be, and scorn His prouder Foes the world that sees Mst needs applaud his victories: A Dragon that shall split in twain, His Mothers womb with extream pain, For she shall dye, but he shall live, And many victories acchieve: Return you may from whence you came For I have published his fame. Lord Alber having heard this Report from the Oracle, departed very heavy, and full of grief. for the hearing of his belo∣ved Ladies death, was as full of grief un∣to him, as the news of his son could be of joy: but no sooner had he set footing againe within his own Palace, but found the Ora∣cles report to be too true, for though he had a son, yet he lost his wife. Vpon the brest of this son. Nature had Pictured the lively image of a Dragon, & his right hand a bloo∣dy
Crosse and on his left legge a Golden Garter, whom Lord Albert his Father named George. No cost was spared for his Education, nether was Nature defective in bestow∣ing on him Strength and Courage, in so much that he was the onely Champion of those times, and never faild of carrying away the Prize at Tilts and Turna∣ments, he quel'd Savage men, subdued Monsters, overcame Gyants, Slaughter∣ed Beasts, accomplished many unheard of and almost uncredible Acts, who when he had lived many dayes, and got many Vi∣ctories, was at last conquered by Death, whose Death was much deplored both by Kings and people. The last valiant Act of his, which crownd both himself, and his other most Noble en∣terprizes with deserved honour was his killing that horrid Egyptian Dragon, who greedy of humane blood, could not be satis∣fied untill he had devoured all the Virgins in Egypt. Thus did the Dragons fury daily make one or other childless, so that there was but one Virgin left, only Sabrian the Prin∣ces, and nly Daughter to the King,
who hearing that the Monsters fury would not be appeased so long as she was living, willing so frée her Comitry, and that it might be safe, voluntarily and willingly casts her self as a prey to that unmercifull Monster. But S. George being at the same time in Egypt, and hearing the sad spéeches, and observing the mournfull carriage of the Egyptians, because it was Sabrians turn to be delivered, resolves to hazard himself, and either be the Dragons destruction to frée the Lady and her Coun∣try, or to lose his life. The horrid aspect of the Monster struck S. George with terrour and amazement, but being of an undaunted spirit he ven∣tures the encounter, and directs his tried and well proved Launce against his well proved sides, but all too little or no pur∣pose, for that being not to be pierced, S George was almost quite out of hope to wound his craly sloes, till at the last it so fortuned that S George struck the Dra∣gon on the back, and whilst the Monster was opening his jaws to cast a venomous flood of deadly poyson upon the Knight, S. George letting no opportunity slip, strikes his Iavelin down his throat, who
was not to be pierced in any other part. By which brave act the Lady was saved, the Countrey freed; the Monster slain; and St. George deservedly honoured of all, as you may see more at large in this ancient, proper, and approved Ditty.
THE Worthy Deeds of St. GEORGE of England, and how he married the Kings Daughter of Aegrpt, whom he delivered from death. The tune is, Qu en Dido. OF Hectors deeds did Homer sing. and of the Sack of stately Troy What grief fair Hellin did him bring which was Sir Paris only joy: And by my Pen I will recite S. George's Déeds an English Knight. Against the Sarazens full rude, fought he full long and many a day Where many Gyants he subdu'd in honour of the Christian way: And after many advantures past To Aegypt Land he came at last, And as the Story plain doth tell, within that Country there did rest A dreadfull Dragon fierce and fell. whereby they were full sore oppest: Who by his poysoned breath each day Did many of the City slay.
The grief whereof did grow so great, throughout the limits of the Land. That they their Wise-men did intreat to shew their cunning out of hand. what way they might this Dragon destroy That did their Country so annoy. The Wise-men all before the King, framed this matter incontinent The Dragon none to death might bring, by any means they might invent, His skin more hard then brass was found That sword or spear can pierce or wound. When this the people understood, they cryed out most pitiously. The Dragons breath infected their blood that they each day in heaps did dye, Amongst them such a plague it bred The living scarce could bury the dead. No means there were as they did find, to appease the Dragons rage, But by a Virgin pure and kind, whereby they might his fury swage, Each ay he would a Maiden eat, For to allay his hunger great, This thing by art the Wise men found, which truly must observed be, Wherefore throughout the City round
a Virgin pure of good degree, Was by the Kings Commission still Took up to serve the Dragons will. Thus did the Dragon every day, a Maiden of the Town devour, Till all the maidens were worn away, and none were left that instant hour: Saving the Kings fair daughter bright Her Fathers only hearts delight. Then came the Officers to the King, the heavy message to declare, Which did his heart with sorrow sting she is (quoth he) my Kingdoms heir, O set us all be poysoned here Ere she should dye that is my dear. Then rose the people presently, and to the King in rage they went, Who said his daughter dear should dye; the Dragons poyson to prevent: Our daughters allare dead (quoth they) And have been made the Dragons prey. And by their blood we have been blest and thou hast sav'd thy life thereby, And now in justice it doth rest for us thy daughter so shall dye: O save my Daughter (said the King) And let me feel the Dragons sting.
Then fell fair Sabrine on her knées and to her Father then did say, O Father strive not thus for me, but let me be the Dragons prey; It may be for my sake alone, This plague upon the Land was thrown, 'Tis better I should dye, she said, then all your Subjecte perish quite, Perhaps the Dragon here was laid, for my offence to work his spight: And after that he hath suckt my gore Your Land shall féel she grief no more What hast thou done my daughter dear for to deserve this heavy scourge? It is my fault as may appear, which makes the gods our state to grudge Then ought I dye to stint the strife, And to preserve thy happy life. Like Mad men then the people cry'd, thy death can do to us no good Our safety only doth abide, to make thy Daughter Dragons food: Loe hre I am, I come, quoth she Therefore do what you will with me. Nay stay dear Daughter quoth the Quen and as you are a Virgin bright, That hath for vertue famous béen,
so let me cloath thée all in white And crown thy head with flowers swéet. And Ornament for Virgins méet, And when she was attyred so, according to her Mothers mind, Vnto the stake then did she goe: to which they did the Virgin bind, Who being bound to stake and thrall, Who said fare well unto them all, Farewell dear Father (then quoth she) and my swéet Mother méek and mild Take thou no thought nor wéep for me for you may have another Child: Here for my Countries good Ile dye, Which I receive most willingly.
The King & Queen with all their train, with weeping eyes went then their way, And let their Doughter there remain, to be the hungry Dragons prey: But as she did there weeping lye, Behold S. George came riding by. And seeing there a Lady bright, fast tyed to a stake that day. Most like unto a valiant Knight streight unto her did take his way, Tell me sweet Maiden then quoth he, What person thus auseth thee? And loe by Christ his Crosse I vow, which hee is figured on my brest, I will revenge it on his brow and break my Launce upon his Chest And speaking thus whereas he stood, The Dragon issued out of the wood. This Lady that did first espy the dreadful Dragon coming so, Vnto S. George aloud did cry, and willed him away to go, Here comes that cursed Fiend, quoth she That soon will make an end of me. S. George then looking round about the fiery Dragon soon espy'd. And like a Knight of courage stout,
against him he did fiercely ride, And with such blows he did him greet, That he fell under his horses feet. For with his Lance that was so strong as he came gaping in his face, In at his mouth he thrust it along, the which could pierce no other place: And here within the Ladies view. This mighty Dragon strait he slew.
The savout of his poysoned breath could do this Christian Knight no harm. Thus did he save the Lady from death, and home he led her by the arm; Which when King Ptolomy did see, There was much mirth and melody. When as the famous Knight S. George had slain the Dragon in the field, And brought the Lady to the Court, whose sight with joy their hearts then fild He in the Egyptian Court had staid, Till he most falsly was betray'd. The Lady Sabrine lov'd him well, he counted her his only joy, But when their love was open known, it turn'd to Georges great annoy: The Morocco King was in the Court, Who to the Orchard did resort Dayly to take the pleasant Air, for pleasure sake he us'd to walk Vnder a wall where oft he heard S. George with Lady Sabrine talk: Their love he revealed to the King, Which to S. George great wo did bring. These Kings together did devise to make this Christian Knight away, With Letters him Ambassador
they sent him strait to Persia; And wrote to the Sophy him o kill, And trayterously his blood to spill. Thus they for good did him reward with evil, and most subtilly By much vile means to work his death, to work his death most cruelly: While he in Persia aode, He quite destroy'd each Idol god. Which being done he strait was cast into a dungeon dark and deep, Where when he thought upon his wrongs he bitterly did wail and wee: Yet like a Knight of courage stout, Forth of that dungeon be got out. And in the night three Horse-keepers this valiant Lnight by power slew, Although he fasted many a day, and then away from thence he flew On the best Steed the Sophy had, Which when he knew he was full mad. Then into Christendome he came, and met a Gyant by the way, With whom in combate he did fight most valiantly a Summers day: Who yet for all his Bats of steel, Was forc'd the stin of death to feel.
From or fly doom this valiant Knight with hands of warlike Souldiers past, Vowing upon those Heathen Lands to work revenge; which at the last, Ere thrice thrée years were gone & spent, He did unto his great content. Save only Aegypt Land he spar'd for Sabine bright her only sake, And ere his rage e did suppresse, he meant a tryal kind to make: Ptolomy did know his strength in field; And unto him did kindly yield. Then he the Morocco King did kill, and took fair Sabrine to his wife, And after that contentedly with her S. George did lead her life: Who by the vertue of her chain Did yet a Virgin pure remain. Toward England then S. George did bring this gallant Lady Sabrine bright An Eunuch also came with them, in whom the Lady took delight: None but these fom Aegypt came, Now let me print S. Georges name. Whn they were in the Forrest great, the La did desire to rest, And then S George to kill a Déer
to feed thereon did think it best; Lest Sabrine with the Eunuch there, Whilst he did go and kill a Deer. The mean time in his absence came two hungry Lyons fierce and fell; And tore the Eunuch presently, in pieces small the truth to tell; Down by the Lady then they laid, Whereby it seem'd she was a Maid. But when S. George from hunting came and did behold this heavy chance, Yet for his lovely Virgins sake, his courage then he did advance, And came into the Lyons sight, Who ran at him with all their might. But he being no whit dismaid, but like a stout and valiant Knight, Did kill the hungry Lyons both within the Lady Sabrines sight: But all this while sad and demure, She stood most like a Virgin pure. Then when S. George did surely know this Lady was a Virgin true, His doleful thoughts that ere were dump began most firmly to renew; He set her on a Palfcy Steed, and towards England came with spéed.
Where he arrived in short space unto his Fathers dwelling-place, Wherein with his dear Love he liv'd when Fortune did his Nuptial grace. They many years of Ioy did see, And led their lives at Coventry. FINIS:
woodcut of St. George
woodcut of merry-making minstrels
