p3365 99884793 183340
Flora's Farewel: Or, The Shepherds Love Passion Song. Wherein he doth greatly Complain Because his Love was spent in vain. To a Delicate Tune; Or, A thousnd tmes my love commend. FLora farewel, I needs must go, for if with thee I longer stay, Thine eyes prevail over me so, I shall grow blind and loose my way. Fame of thy beauty and thy Fame, to seek for love me hither brought, But when in thee I found no truth, it was no boot for me to stay. Now im ingag'd by word and Oath, a servant to anothers will, Yet for thy sake would forgo both, wouldst thou be sure to love me still. But what assurance can I have, of thee who seeing my abuse, In that which Love desires to crave, may leave me with a just excuse. For thou must say, 'twas not thy fault, tht thou didst so unconstant prove, Thou wert by mine example caught, to break thy Oath and leave thy Love. No Flora, no, I will recall the former words which I have spoke, And thou shalt have no cause at all, to hamper me in Cupids Yoak. But since thy Honour is to range, and that thou bear'st a wavering mind, Like to the Moon with thee il'e change. and turn I can with every wind. Hence forth blind fancy i'le remove, and cast all sorrow from my heart, Young men to dye for doting love, I hold it but a foolish part. The second part to the same Tune. Why should I to one love be bound, and fix my thoughts on none but thee When as a thousand may be found, that's far more fair and fit for me. Though I am but a Shepherd swain, my mind to me doth comfort bring, Feeding my flock upon a plain, I triumph like a petty King. No Female Rat shall me deceive, nor catch me by a crafty wild, Though I do love, yet I can leave, and will no longer be beguil'd. Flora, once more, farewel adieu, I so conclude my Passion song: To thy next love see that thou prove true, for thou hast done me double wrong. Fair Flora's Answer to the Shep∣herds Song, VVherein she shows that he hath done the wrong FYE Shepherd, fye thou are to blame, to rail against me in this sort, Thou dost digrace a Sweet-hearts name, to give thy Love & false report. There was a Proverb used of old, and now I find it is no lye, One tale is good till another's told, she that loves most is least set by. A brief Description I will tell, of thy favour, love and flattery; And how at first thou didst excel, with cunning tricks and pollicy. But O that flattering tongue of thine, and tempting eye fought to entice, And to ensnare the heart of mine, and bring me in fools Paradice. VVhen thou at first began to VVooe, and with thy skill my patience try'd; You thought there was no more to do, but presently to up and ride. Thou said'st that I was fair and bright, and fitting for thy Marriage Bed; Thou fed'st my fancy with delight, thinking to have my Maiden-head: But when thou saw'st thou could'st not get the jem that thou distrest to have, By company thou didst refrain, like to a false dissembling Knave. Where by I answered thus and said, to shun the cause of further strife; I would contain my self a Maid, until such time I was made a wife. And since you my mind have crost, you may bestow you as you will, Shepherd farewel, there's nothing lost, I am resolv'd to say so still. Blind Cupid with his wounding Dart, could never make me sorrow feel, I'le not lay that unto my heart. as others shake off with their heel. Printed for A. Milbourn, W. Onley, and T. Thackeray, at the Angel in Duck-Lane
