S1627 52528935 178987
monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms A PROCLAMATION Anent Beggers. WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great-Britain, France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, To,  Macers of Our Privy Council. Messen∣gers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, Conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute, Greeting; Forasmuchas, the Intent and Design of Our Proclamation, of the Date the eleventh day of August, one thousand six hundred and ninety two Years; Requiring all Beggers within this Kingdom, forthwith to repair to their several Paroches, with all diligence, hath been much disappointed and frustrate by the uncertainty of the Paroches where the saids respective Beggers have been born; and for want of suitable Provision, made by the Heretors and Magistrates of the respective Paroches, where the saids Beggers have been born, or had their last seven years Residence: For Remeed whereof, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, strictly Require and Command, all the Beggers within this Kingdom, immediately to repair to the several Paroches where they were born, and where the Paroch or place of their Birth is not certain, or distinctly known; that they repair to the Paroches where they last resided for the space of seven years together, and to keep the ordinary high-ways to the several Paroches of their Birth, or last seven years Residence, and so soon as they come to the saids respective Paroches, to present themselves to the Heretors and Elders; and where Paroches are Vacant, and have no Elders, to the Heretors alone; Whom We with Advice forsaid Require and Command, to make the Provisions necessary for the saids Beggers, and to list their Names amongst the Poor of the Paroch, that they may be Lodged and Intertained ac∣cordingly: With Certification to all who shall be found begging after the second Tuesday of September next, they shall be seazed as Vagabounds, Imprisoned, and fed with Bread and Water for a Month, or till they be sent home to the respective Paroch of their Birth, or last seven years Residence, in manner mentioned in our said former Proclamation. And We with Advice foresaid, Require and Command the Magistrates of our Burghs Royal, to meet, and stent themselves conform to such Order and Custom used and wont in laying on Stents, Annuities, or other publick Burdens, in the respective Burghs, as may be most effectual to reach all the Inhabitants: and the Heretors of the several vacant Paroches, likewise to meet and Stent themselves, for the Maintenance of their said respective Poor, and to appoint the In-gathering, Up-lifting, and applying of the same for the uses foresaids: Sicklike, and in the same manner, as the Heretors and Elders are appointed by our said former Proclamation; and all the Ministers and Heretors are hereby required to give timeous Intimation to the Sheriff of the Shire, if any Paroch or person shall fail in performance of this Christian Duty, in hail or in part; and the Sheriff or Sheriff-deput, are hereby required to call the Delinquents before them, without any delay; and if guilty to Fine them in double of the Quota, which the Minister or Heretors shall attest to be wanting, and to cause poynd for the same immedi∣atly. And further, for preventing of any question that may arise betwixt the Heretors and Kirk-Session, in the several Paroches of this Kingdom, about the Quota of the Collections at the Church-doors, and otherwise to be made by the said Session, to be payed in to the Heretors for the end foresaid: We do hereby with Advice foresaid, determine the same to be the half of the said Collections, and Or∣daines the said Kirk-Session, to pay in the same from time to time to the saids Heretors, or any to be by them appointed accordingly. And We with Advice foresaid, Declare and Ordain Our said former Proclamation to stand in full force and vigour, in the hail Heads, Points, and Articles thereof, and Ordains the same to be put to Execution with all Diligence, in so far as the same is not hereby altered or innovat. And to the effect, Our VVill and Pleasure in the Premisses may be known. OUR VVILL IS, and VVe charge you strictly, and Command, that incontenent these our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-crosses of the whole remanent Head-burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries within this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority, make open Proclamation of the Premisses, that none may pretend Ignorance, and Ordains these presents to be Printed. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the twenty ninth day of August, and of Our Reign the fifth year, 1693. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. In Supplimentum Signeti. GILB. ELIOT. Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD save King VVilliam and Queen Mary. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most Excellent Majesties, Anno Dom. 1693.
