S868B 53981564 180319
The DECLARATION of Charles Duke of Sconberg, Lieutenant-General to His Majesty of Great Britain, and Collonel of His First Regiment of English Guards; to the Inhabitants of Dauphine. AS the Violences which France has exercised upon all its Neighbours, ought to make the Subjects of that Kingdom fear, that if the Allies should enter into his Estates, they would take a Vengeance proportionable to the Wrongs which they have suffered from him: We think it is our duty to inform them of the good Intentions of the King our Master towards them. The World knows, that he has been forc'd to take Arms, because his Estates in Burgundy were unjustly seized by the King of France, His Principality of Orange was sack'd, and all his Subjects oppress'd: These Injuries have also been attend∣ed with the most base and unworthy Circumstances, that the Fury of his Enemies could suggest: endeavouring to out him of all that was due to him by Birth or Succession, for the present, or in times to come: For this cause he was forc'd to take Arms to recover what was his own, and he intends to imploy them for the preservation of all men, in the possession of their Estates and Rights. This is the end for which he has sent me into France; and his only intention is, to establish the Nobility, Parliaments, and People, in their Ancient Lustre, and the Towns and Provinces in their Priviledges. He knows, that the Nobility has been troden under foot, that the Parliaments have no Authority, that the Peo∣ple have been ruin'd, by Taxes; But now if the Nobility, the Parliaments, and the People, do not abandon their own Interest, and neglect this Opportunity, the King, my Master, will see the General Estates of France established; the Gen∣try secured in the enjoyment of those Priviledges which belong unto their Birth; and will restore unto their Parliaments their Ancient Lustre and Authori∣ty; and deliver the Oppressed People from their Devouring Taxes. The King, my Master, having taken Arms for no other end, but to maintain the Rights of others, as well as his own, there is no reason for his Enemies to pre∣tend, That this is a War of Religion; which is design'd for no other end, but to kindle in the People a false Zeal, the laying of a snare for their Credulity, that they may be enabled to make them spend the last drop of their Blood in this Quar∣rel. The Clergy, however, are not to be taken by such gross Impostures; the Causes and True Authors of this War being well known unto them. But, however, I de∣clare unto the Clergy, of what Dignity soever they be, that the King, my Master, will take them all into his Protection; and that their Priviledges and Estates shall be ex∣actly preserved; That he will exemplarily punish all those which shall do them any Injury; and that there shall not be any Change brought upon them, with respect to the Roman Catholick Religion. Yet forasmuch as the Kings of England are Gua∣rantees for the Edict of Nants, the Peace of Montpelier, and many other Treaties of that Nature, the King, my Master, believes himself to be obliged to maintain that Guaranty, and to cause the said Edict to be Established. All good French men ought to Aid Him in this, because that Edict was the Great Work of Henry the Fourth, whose Wisdom and Memory is so dear unto them. The Roman Ca∣tholicks who have had the Generosity to look with Compassion upon the Suffe∣rings of the Protestants, will without doubt, take pleasure to see them Re-esta∣blished. It is also hop'd, that the Gentlemen of the Clergy, having now made serious Reflections thereupon, will be well content therewith; and by a Wise and Christian Conduct, testifie, That they had no part in the Violation of the said Edict, and all the Cruelties which have followed upon it. And all those which shall Joyn with us, shall receive those Recompenses and Marks of Distinction, as their Services shall Deserve, and which we shal be able to give them. But on the contrary, All those which shall be so far from Aiding us, as to Joyn with the Oppressors of their Country, can expect nothing but the Severities of a Military Execution. And we declare to all those that will live in Peace at Home, That they shall have no Injury done them as to their Lives or Fortunes. At Amrun, Aug. 29. 1692. Licensed, EDMƲND BOHƲN. Edinburgh, Re-printed in the Year 1692.
