T1981A 99886990 181654
THREE Alamode SONGS. OR, VVIT and FANCY REVIVED. The Ladies Delight. 1 MY lodging is one the cold ground, And very hard is my fare: But that which troubles me much is, The unkindnesse of my deare? But Still I crye come turne love, And I Prethey love turne to me. For thou art the lad that I long'd for. And alasse what remedy. 2 I'le Crowne thee with garlands of straw then, And marry thee with a rush ring: My frosen hopes shall thaw then, And merrily will I sing: O turne to me my deare love. And I preathee love turne to me For thy love is the thing that above can, Procure my liberty. 3 But if thou will harden thy heart still, And be deafe to my pitifull mone. Then I must indure the smart still: And tumble in straw alone. Yet still I cry oh turne love, Oh turne from thy cruill-ties; For thou art the man that alone art The cause of my miseries. The Jovial Hector. 1 HOw happy and free is Plunder, When we care not for Iove nor his Thunder? Having entred a Town, The lasses go down, And to their O're-comers lie under Then why should we study to love and look pale And make long addresses to what will grow stale? 2 If her fingers be soft, long and slender, When once we have made her to render, She will handle a Flute Better far than a Lute, And make what was ha-rd to grow te-nder. Then why should we study to love, and look pale And make long addresses to what will grow stale? 3 When the Houses with flashes do glitter, We can sever our sweets from the bitter, And in that bright night We can take our delight, And no Dam'sel shall scape but we'le hit her. Then why should we study to love, and look pale And make long addresses to what will grow stale? The Loving Shepard. 1 AMarillis told her Swain, Amarillis told her Swain That in love he should be plain And not think to deceive her. Still he protested on his truth That he would never leave her. 2 If thou do'st keep thy vow quoth she, And that thou ne'r Do'st leave me, There's ne'r a Swain in all this plain That ever shall come neare thee For Garlands and enbroyder'd Scrips, For I do love thee dearly. 3 But Colin if thou change thy love But Colin if thou change thy love A Tygresse then I'le to thee prove If e're thou dost come near me. Amarilis fear not that, For I do love thee dearly. FINIS.
