N1142A R224260 [ocm]64551407 184672
¶ This most precious Balsome is made in manner like a Plaister for every ones conveniency, because they may carry it about with them wheresoever they please, and it is also made hard, because if it were liquid, it would bee great Inconvenience to carry it. The Remedies of the said Balsome. 1. FOr a Scald-Head, let all the Haire be shaved off very well, as neere the skin as is possi∣ble, afterwards let it be spread upon a peice of Linnen or thin skin and bee layd upon the Sore, leaving it for two dayes, afterwards change the Plaister three or foure times, observing that every time the Haire must be shaven away, and the putrifaction taken away, washing it well with a little water, wherein hath been boyled, Rosemary, Sage, and Cpporas together, or with Ʋrine, Vinegar, or Verjuyce, according to your discretion, and then it will be cured whole and sound without any paine; observing also that the Patient be well purged after hee is Cured, or else the Disease will come againe. 2. It is good for all kinds of Impostumes which breed in the Throat, although they are rotten and corrupted, and if it be possible you may let downe  Tent, because the corruption will be the sooner forced to come out, and it will heale the better, dressing it Morning and Evening, and hereof J have made experience on divers persons, who have such diseases fifteen or 20. yeares, and it is also good for any Imposthume or disease that commeth in the Head. 3. It is excellent against the little Pimples which come in the Face, and for other Ʋlcers and Sores which come in the Nose, putting in a Tent of the said Balsome. 4 For all sorts of Diseases which breed on the Lips. 5 For any Fall or Bruise in any part of the body applying the said Balsome. 6 For all diseases of the Breast, which are corrupted and putrified, it takes away the griefe and heales. 7 It is very good to purge Issues, and takes away the ill savour, and abates the carnosity, and takes away all inflamation. 8 For the Fellons which breed on the fingers or hands, which are ripe, corrupted and cankred, dressing them evening and morning it will presently heale them. 9 For all Wounds old and corrupted, caused by any meanes what∣soever, they are presently healed with the said Balsome, washing them with Sacke, and drying them well afterwards. 10 For all Venemous diseases which come on the body, as the Plague and the Carbuncle, you must presently scarifie them as deep as is possile according to the place where they are, or else with fire, which will be lesse pain and more speedy, and dresse them morning and evening. 11 For all sorts of Vlcers which come upon the Privities, so soone as they are seen to come out, apply the aforesaid balsome, and it will cure them at two or 3. times. But if the Ulcers have gone from part to part, or have eaten a piece of the flesh, take Plantane-water and Rose-water and a little Coperas at your discretion, and wash it evening and morning, gently laying thereon the said Balsome, upon a fine piece of linnen, ob∣serving that it is very necessary to purge for deep Ulcers. 12 And it is also good for all Swellings which happen in the same part and in the Cods, with the scab or itch. 13 And for all other diseases which grow in the Yard, as Inflama∣tions or little Pimples, or any carnosity or other sores, take a thick Lute string, or a long thick cord, according as you please, which can goe into the bladder where the disease is, warming the said Balsome a little, and with the same anoint the said cord over, wetting the same with Plantane-water or Rose-water, because they may not cleave to the fingers putting it into the yard, because so it will draw forth all the putrifaction, and open the chanell through which the Urine passeth. 14 There are two sorts of Impostumes which usually swell in the Groyne, one great without, and thick, and when it is very great, it must be cut, and afterwards, make a Tent dip't in the said Balsome, and dresse it therewith, keeping it open as much as is possible, because it may purge out the corruption. 15 The other hath no corruption, but only a little water and it comes not forth, therefore for this use the said Balsome is to draw out the said poyson, but you must first purge well, otherwise you shall have the shedding of haires or the French-pox. 16 For sore Legs, spread the said Balsome upon it, on very thin lea∣ther or linnen, which will draw out all the corruption, putrifaction and paine, and will heale it. This Balsome hath cured divers very aged men, which otherwise should have had their legs cut off. 17 For Kibe-heels, apply it to them upon thin leather, and it pre∣sently takes away the paine, and cures them. 18 For Womans diseases, and for Vlcers which come forth and may be seene and dressed, apply it in thin plaisters as in other diseases, and wash them after the same manner as abovesaid. I have a Pow∣der to take a∣way the pains of the Head. It is good for the Falling. sicknesse. And also very good for the paine in the Teeth. I have another sort of Powder to keepe the Teeth white & from spoyling. I will help any Vlcer within the mouth. I have also an∣other Water to take away the Morphew and Freckles in the face. I have likewise a Water very good for sore Eyes, that will preserve thm cleane. I have a very rare thng for to cure helch or Scab. With divers other cures &c. For within the nature, take wax and put it to melt in a skillet, and afterwards put it in cold water, take a long ribbon according as you please, and of this wax make a long Tent in fashion of a thick candle, according to the largenesse of the nature which may touch the disease within, afterwards take this Balsome and melt it, and anoint the said Tent all over therewith, and when it is cold; put it in and bind it with a rowler, in such a manner that it cannot come out, and so you may go on horsebacke or in a Coach without any trouble, dressing it Evening and morning, washing and making the said Tent cleane, and laying on it the said Balsome as aforesaid, and in this manner all Ulcers, Inflama∣tions, Itchings, and all sorts of diseases which are within are cured; and this J have written because honest women, rather then they will let it be seen, will dye in great misery, and thus may they have cure and heale themselves. 19 It is very good for all sorts of bitings of venemous creatures. 20 Also, when there is in the flesh, Glasse, or thornes, or yron, or Bullet, or any other things, apply it thereupon, and it will will draw it out, and take away the paine. 21 For the Emorroids, take fresh butter, without salt, as much of Balsome or a little more, and beat them together in a cleane morter, and thereof make an oyntment, and apply it within or without where the disease is, and it will Woke the same effect wih Linseed oyle; or Rape oyle, dissolved together in forme of an oyntment, and this oynt∣ment made with Linseed oyle, or Rape oyle is very good for shrunke sinewes. 22 It is excellent for all sorts of Burnings or Scaldings, because it presently takes away the paine, and heales them. And where there is no disease it causeth no alteration, though it lye a long time upon it. 23 It is very good for Cornes, spreading the same upon leather, or some linnen cloath, leaving it two dayes and two nights thereon, and when you take it off, scrape the Corne, and in using the same three or 4 times, it will be well. And if any thing happen to the nailes by growing in the flesh, this Balsome will soften it that you may cut or pull it out at your pleasure, or any Vlcer or Gangrene whatsoever. 24 Lastly, This precious, Balsome keepes good for ever, and is never putrified, and this is the reall truth, as appeares by many experi∣ences made by nay selfe and others; and this J can justifie before God and man. By License from the PARLIAMENT, and Lord FAIRFAX Generall. For the Proofes hereof, are the chiefe Doctors of England, Doctor Mayearne, Doctor Lister, Doctor Beeton, Doctor Moore, Doct. Turner, Doct. Cadman, Doct. Williams, Doct. Loyd. The Professor hereof dwelleth on the back-side of Drury-lane in Stanhop-street, next doore to the golden Crosse-Kyes, in Clare-street. You shall find him at home in the Morning before Nine of the clock, in the Afternoone at two or three. FRANCIS NICOLS, an Jtalian.
