P3710 R213793 [ocm]80923413 191967
A Proposal tending to the advancement of Learning by an unburdensome and practicable encourage∣ment of the Press. WHEREAS several Persons eminent for their Learning and Condition, have frequently and earnestly desired the Undertakers for the Press in Oxford to set upon the Edition of the Greek and Latin Fathers, and other Classical Books, in History, Philology, Mathematics &c. which are some of them out of Print, or sold at great rates; and some unfaithfully or negligently put out, of which thing the Specimen begun by Dr James as to what concerns the Fathers is a sufficient proof, and of what emprovements even in the Text, Classical books are capable, the late edition of Archimedes his Arenarius, and other Greek and Latin Authors in this place (if others were wanting) are a competent evidence: the said Undertakers have endeavoured to justifie their readiness to serve the public, and answer the desires of the friends of Learning, to the utmost herein; and to that end have furnisht themselves with Types and Letters of all kinds, and whatsoever is necessary to the uses of an Imprimery: and also with no smal charge and pains have made preparation by them∣selves and friends for several considerable works, such as Annotations on all the Books of the Holy Scrip∣tures. The Coptic Gospels and Liturgies. The ancient Saxon Homilies and Liturgie. The old Latin Writers of the English History hitherto not extant. The Life of King Alfred, giving a full account of the expul∣sion of the Danes, and establishment of the Saxon Monarchy. A Geographical, Philosophical, and Historical survey of the County of Oxford. Johannes Antiochenus. The Greek Mathematicians. Josephus and others. But having not the advantage by Trade and Exchange to dispose of their Books when Printed; and Booksellers thinking it not to be their interest to preferr and forward the Sale of any Book, beside their own and fellow Traders; no Edition of the said Undertakers, of a just Volume, or large Book will ever be sold by them; and consequently it will be impossible to support the charge of such an attemt and carry it on with vigor and success. To all which it has bin replied by diverse of the before mentioned favorers of the concerns of Learn∣ing, That in this Nation there are certainly five hundred of the Nobility, Gentry, Lawiers, Physicians, and Clergy, who would alwaies be gratified by a fair and accurate Edition of any solid Classical Book, whether Oriental, Greek, Latin, or Modern; and would not fail to be buyers of it, which would com∣petently secure the charge of an Impression; so that nothing but the want of proposal and correspon∣dence, hinders the progress of so useful and honourable a designe; which without hazard or burthen to any Person, would in a short time fix in our Nation the manufacture of Printing in its perfection, with the consequential advantages of Trade; and restore to the world those Monuments of Antiquity, whereof some are in hazard to be lost; others not likely to be reprinted, unless happily in little Forms and Letters, which visibly is the fate of the Greek and Latine Historians, and other Classical Books at this time. The aforesaid Undertakers for the Press upon consideration of the premises, to satisfie the desires of those Worthy Persons who have exprest their concern in this affair; and also to Vindicate themselves from being wanting to their Trust, and the interests of Learning, do hereby publickly declare; That whatever Book shall be desired to be publisht, of whatsoever Subject or Language, upon the assurance that when tis finisht 500 Copies will be taken off, shall be Printed on such Paper and Letter, and with such collation of Copies, review and translation of the Text, illustration by Notes, and diligent Corre∣ction of the Press, as shall be satisfactory to any judicious Reader; and then be set at a reasonable and equal price, printed with the Book. And whereas the design of Dr James is particularly recommended to the said Undertakers, that after a diligent collation of the Text, with those many excellent MS. Copies wherewith they are furnisht, and also the several printed Editions, they would begin with St Cyprian for the Latin Fathers; and for the Greek in one fair Volume Greek and Latin with S. Clement, Ignatius, Polycarp, Athenagoras, Tatian, Justin M. they hereby signifie their ready assent herein; and so soon as they shall understand that the aforesaid Books, or either of them, or any other will be acceptable to the before mentioned
number of Persons, will without delay set upon the Work, and will afterward go on to such Authors from time to time, as shall desired, and esteemed useful for the Interest of Learning, and the Honor of the Nation. To which end the present proposal is printed, and all persons that approve thereof and will be concerned therein, are desired to signify their pleasures at the foot of the said proposal.
