R585AA R182519 [ocm]80923460 191977
REASONS that Milled-Sheet-Lead is Better and Cheaper than Cast-Sheet-Lead for all Ʋses whatsoever. Milled Lead pro∣ved to be better than Cast Lead.1. THE thickness of the Plumbers most usual Covering for Buildings hath of late been of a Size, pretended to be 8 or 9 l. to the Foot-square, sometimes 7 l. though formerly from 10 to 12, was the usual thickness; pretended is said, because truly so, it never was, nor can be, being Cast upon a Superficial Plain of Sand, made, smoothed, and strook by Hand, always subject to Errour, more or less, according to the skill and care of the Workman. 2. This Inequality is of great moment to the goodness of the Covering; (though it be not much regarded, if the Square-measure come near the Size desired in the weight of the whole Sheet:) For if the Sun be the cause of the drawing, cockling, and cracking of a Lead-Covering, (as some think they alledge with great disadvantage to the Milled Lead) then the Beams thereof falling with equal force upon an unequal Body, must necessarily draw the weaker or thinner parts more than the stronger, and consequently be one chief cause of the Cast-Lead-Coverings more early decay, though there are many more Causes that contribute to it, which the Milled Lead is not liable to, viz. Its Roughness, Sand-holes, and Blow-holes, which are contracted in the Body of the Lead in Casting, and not discoverable to the Customer, as not appearing in the Superficies thereof, but the Mill discovering the same in working, these faults cannot pass in a Milled Sheet. 3. So that although these defects are (some or all) constant in Cast-Lead, yet if the Cast-sheet could be made exactly equal to the thinnest part thereof, it must be granted a more durable and better Covering, than that which is thicker in one place than in another. And that all Cast-Lead is more or less so, none will deny. But how great this Inequality is, is left to the Inspection and Observa∣tion of indifferent Men, who will rarely meet with a Sheet of Cast-Lead, that (the Burr on the Edge being cut off, or any one part of the Sheet cut and compared with some other part of the same Sheet) is not apparently unequal, when as a Pound or two in a Foot-Square is hardly discernable by the Eye in the Sizes abovementioned. 4. Wherefore Milled Lead being exactly even, and of a Size equal to the thinnest part of Cast-Lead, must be allowed to be a better Covering in that respect only, though there are many other Advantages in Milled Lead in respect of its Solidity, Smoothness, Beauty, Lightness of Covering, &c. For this Lead being first Cast above 40 l. to the Foot, and drawn down to the several sizes, dis∣covers all Blow-holes and other faults in Casting when they happen, and must render the Milled Lead sound and more solid, as well as smooth and equal. Milled Lead pro∣ved to be cheaper than Cast Lead.5. As the Milled Lead is thus proved to be a better Covering, so is it demon∣stratively much a cheaper, though the Companies Rates were higher than they are, as may appear upon Inspection of the Table, calculated to avoid the trouble of Computation,Present Prices. Per Hund. The thicker sort from 5 l. upwards at—16 s. Middle sort from 5 l. to near 3. at—17 s. Thinner sort from about 3 l. and all un∣der at—18 s. But at the Stilyard and Westminster 6 d. more for smaller quantities. and the uncertain Guesses Men usually make in matters of this kind. For it being evident that Milled Lead which is more Solid, Smooth as Glass, and ex∣actly equal, must be better than Cast Lead, some certain and undeniable degree, how much it is better, with regard to price goodness and plain, the same quantity will cover, ought to be agreed to for Computation sake; and if the least dispropor∣tion in the Sizes, that can be granted, be in favour of the Milled Lead, at the Price the Company sells it, every Man is left to his own reason to consider from this Ta∣ble how much a greater disproportion may reasonably be admitted, than that which makes the present Prices equal. For Example: Let us suppose Milled Lead of 6 l. to the Foot, to be but as good as Cast Lead of 8 l. (Though 9 l. may very well be admitted by any one that will but impartially observe the great inequality of Cast Lead Coverings, which he will often find to be much above a third part thinner in one place than in another.) Then by the Table, if the Plumbers Price be 14 s. per Hund. the Milled Lead ought to be 18 s. 8 d. per Hund. If 13 s. the Milled Lead should be 17 s. 4 d. and if but 12 s. 6 d. the Milled Lead ought yet to be 16 s. 8 d. per Hund. which if Sold for 16 s. it is plain enough that Milled Lead is cheaper than Cast Lead, which was to be proved. The TABLE.   Lib. per Foot Square.   Lib. per Foot Square.   Plumbers Rates per Hund. Weight.           12 s. 6 d. 13 s. 0 d. 13 s. 6 d. 14 s. 0 d. If Milled Lead of 4 be al∣lowed to be as good as Cast Lead of 5 Then accor∣ding to the Plumbers Rates above, the Milled Lead price per Hund. weight ought to be, viz. 15 7½ 16 3 16 10½ 17 6 6 18 9 19 6 20 3 21 0 7 21 10½ 22 9 23 7½ 24 6 5 6 15 0 15 7¼ 16 2½ 16 9 7 17 6 18 2½ 18 11 19 7½ 8 20 0 20 2½ 21 0 22 5 6 7 14 7 15 2 15 9 16 4 8 16 8 17 4 18 0 18 8 9 18 9 19 6 20 3 21 0 7 8 14 3½ 14 10¼ 15 5 16 0 9 16 1 16 8½ 17 4¼ 18 0 10 17 10¼ 18 7 19 3½ 20 0 6. And because it is objected by some (out of Interest, Prejudice, or Ignorance in the Goodness thereof) that the Milled Lead is thin, and will be drawn, or crackt, and cockled by the Sun, and soon wear out, and decay by trampling, or walk ng there∣on, without due consideration what thickness may well be allowed, and yet make it a better and a cheaper Covering than Cast Lead, and how little occasion there is for such trampling or walking on the Top of an House, or the real danger the Lead is in thereby the Boards and Platform being equal and even as it ought to be in any Lead Covering that is well laid)  this Company will be obli∣ged to keep any Covering that shall be laid with their Lead of bween 5 l. and 6 l to the Foot-Square in good and constant repair, from any cracking, leaking, or damage (that shall happen to such Covering from the heat of the Sun, or any such walking or trampling) occasiond by the thinness or de ect in the Lead it self, during a Lease of 41 Years at the Rate or 5 s. per Annum for all Coverings under 100 l. Value, and 10 s. per Cent. per Annum for a above, the same being first laid by their own Plumber, or such other as they shall approve. 7. As to the Objection that some make, (out of Prejudice, or want o Consideration) that the Cast Lead-Covering being heavier, will yield more than the Milled Lead, when both come to be ripped off; Let us suppose the Coverings should equally last (which ye is not to be expected from their different Goodness) a Lease of 4. Years, and then being taken off, the old Cast Lead should yield 120 l. and the old Milled Lead but 100 l. which is 6 to 5 a proportion aily to be admitted, as may be seen by the Table;  When the present Value of 20 l. to be paid 41 Years hence, is computed, it will not appear worth the notice in the Covering of 100 l. Value. Some of the many Ʋses that are and may be made of the several Sizes of Milled Lead. 1. THAT Sheets of Milled Lead may be had of the usual breadth between 3 or 4 Foo, and above twice as long as they can be Cast, o great use for saving Drips and complying with the Length of Co∣verings, from whence and the many other Advantages and Price considred with the Charge and defects of other Coverings, the use of this may appear more cheap and practicable than those which are often out of Repair; for if the Advantage of the Rooms, (the Garrets being as good as the rest) the Beauty of the Building, the pleasure and usefulness of a Platform, and the lightness of the Covering (all which augment the Value and Rent of the House) be duly computed, it may appear that the encreased Value will much more than Recompence the encreased Charge. 2. That the thinner sort of Milled Lead is of excellent Use, and cheap to line Brewers Backs, Milk-Trays, Coffins, Wooden Cisterns, or Boxes for the Preservation of divers sorts of Goods for Foreign Voyages, as Corn, Meal, Gunpowder, &c. Which was Experimented by the late Earl of Carlisle, when he went Governour of Jamaica, the Corn and Meal being preserved Sweet in those Boxes, which afterwards served him for Cisterns, whilst the same sort in Cask was Musty, and the Gunpowder of a Sixth part more force upon Tryal, than the same sort carried in Barrels, as was certified by his Lordship, Sir Henry Morgan and others. Also for lining of Walls for the preservation of Hangings and Pictures, from the damage they receive by moisture and Salt Peter therein, or for Painting thereon, or on Signs or Sign Posts covered therewith. Also this thin Lead laid upon a thin Coat of Clay, and covered with the same, will secure vaults under Streets, Yards, or Gardens very Cheap and Tight against Rain or Waer soaking through, which such Vaults are always liable too. 3. This Lead, of a suitable thickness so smooth and equal, must needs be more neat and plyable to wrap Dead Corps in, and Coffins lined, or covered with the thinner sort between 2 and 3 Pound to the Foot, or on both sides, (which then will preserve the Board, and make it a more neat, lighter and as tight and durable a Lead Coffin as a great deal dearer one Cast) and may be afforded cheaper than a good ordinary Elm Coffin with Hinges. 4. The thickest Sizes of 10, 12 or 14 pound to the Foot being more solid and exactly smooth and equal, must be much better than Cast Lead for Dyers Fatts, Copperas Works, &c. REASONS that Milled Lead is a more durable, better and cheaper Sheathing for Ships against the Worm than Boards, besides many other Advantages in the use thereof for Furnaces, Scuppers, Bread-rooms, &c. Lead-Sheathing proved to be bet∣ter than Wood-Sheathing.1. IT is evident the Worm cannot Eat through Metal, and that above Twenty of His Majesties Ships having been Sheathed with Milled Lead, the Sheathing kept their sides, 7, 8, 10 Years and more, free from the Worm, (which was the first and true intent of Sheathing Ships) till they were stript to repair the Plank, Calking, Iron Work, &c. and not for any defect in the Sheathing at last, greatly to the Preservation of their Hulls, and His Majesties Profit; Nevertheless by complaint (of Men Interested, or Ignorant o the true Cause) that the Lead Sheathing did mightily destroy the Rudder-Irons, Bolts, &c. to the great Damage, and Hazard of the Ship at Sea, concurring with differences then newly arisen amogst the Partner themselves, this way of Sheathing hath for sometime been neglected and discountenanced in the Navy,  after all former Objections, (as to Dearness, Sailing, Fouling, and Difficulty in Cleansing Galling by Cables, and Rubbing off on Ground) were fully answered to the advantage of the Lead-Sheathing, and His late Majesties full Approbation, as well in respect of Cheapness as the Effectual Preservation of His Ships against the Worm, declared by Himself at the Admiralty Board, and by the then Lords of the Admiralty signified by their Letter to the then Commissioners of the Navy, with direction to Sheath no otherwise for the future, without express order from that Board.  But how Groundless this last complaint hath been too plainly appears to be disputed: For if Lead-Sheathing be the cause of the Rudder-Irons greater decay, then all Ships Sheathed with Lead, to which equal Accidents of time in Voyages, or lying in Salt-Water do happen, must necessarily have their Rudder-Irons decay equally; but it is evident from their own shewing in the in∣stances they bring from the Rudder-Irons decay in 8 of the said Ships, that every one differs considerably in the times of decay from other and at several times each one from it self, one lasting sometimes Twice or Thrice as long as another; So that it is very unreasonable to charge Lead-Sheathing which is always the same, to be the Cause of such different effects, but rather to charge the guilt of this different decay upon the different Goodness and Composition of the Iron, difference in Fire, time and labour in Welding, Working, &c. For this being impossible to be equal, it must produce Iron-Work o very unequal Goodness, which seems to be the true Cause of such unequal decays; and upon impartial enquiry, this decay in the Iron-Work will appear always to have been common and un∣constant in all Ships, whether Sheathed either way, or not Sheathed at all. However, if this charge were true against the Lead-Sheathing, Capping the Bolts (the same as in Wood-Sheathing) but carefully they are preserved, and a new set of Rudder-Irons always in store to shift in any Voyage if there be occasion, will be a very little charge to be mentioned, where so many and so great advantages otherwise accrue. Lead-Sheathing proved to be cheaper than Wood-Sheathing.2. The first charg f bringing on this Lead-Sheathing is much about the same of a Streights, and not half so much as an East-India Sheathing. The Graving which may be saved in the time the Lead-Sheath∣ing may lie on, (the which will never need stripping but to repair the Hull) may amount to as much Money as the Sheathing cost at first, and when it shall be stript the Sheathing being Metal will yield its Va∣lue to Melt down again. But the Wood Sheathing will be great charge in Graving, besides the hazard of Fire in briming, last but a Voyage or two, and when stript is worth little or nothing, Demonstrations plain enough that the Lead-Sheathing with regard to the time it may last, costs nothing in comparison of Wood-Sheathing: Besides there are many other considerable advantages in Lead-Sheathing, viz. 1. The Sheathing being smoother and lying on thinner,Many other Ad∣vantages by Lead-Sheathing. the Ship must Sail better. 2. By using the long scrubbing Brushes which are provided to keep her clean but once in two or three months as oppor∣tunity offers, the Ship may keep longer at Sea, and need not put so often into Harbour as formerly to Grave, Wash and Tallow. 3. The smalness of the Nails no damage to the Plank when stript, whereas the great Nail holes of a Wood-sheathing which requires spyling up, must somewhat weaken the Plank, and render the Ship not so fit for future service without Sheathing. 4. This way of Sheathing being with Materials of the King's own Dominions, can never be wanting; whereas the most essential parts of Wood-sheathing being of Foreign growth, they are many times by reason of Wars not to be had at all, or at Prices much exceeding the ordinary Rates; and the Consumption of our own Product being a publick Benefit, Lead-sheathing ought the rather to be encouraged. Houses covered with Milled Lead.ANy one may receive satisfaction of the Beauty and Goodness of this Covering for Houses upon view of several this way done divers years since, viz. The Lord Crews at the Corner of Greek-street in Sohoe-Square, Mr. Graydons in Pall-Mall, the Lady Franklins over against Mans Coffee-house at Charing-Cross, two Platforms under the great Sun-Dyal in Scotland-yard, Mr. Foxes in Arundel Buildings, Dr. Chamberlains in Essex-street, Aldermanbury Steeple, Mr. Martins in Rood-lane, where being also a Covering of Cast Lead, they may be compared together. Also for Brewers Backs at Captain Masons Brewhouse by Wapping Old Stairs, Mr. Symbals Brewhouse at Battersea, Mr. Trasilians Stillhouse at Deptford, Mr. Sanders at Tocting, and divers others, too many to be inserted. Patterns to be seen.This Milled Lead of any size may be had at the Lead-Mill at Deptford, at Mr. Edmond Hemings House in Campion-Lane near the Stll-yard, and at Mr. Cowlys a Tobacco-Shop over against Lindsey-House in the Old Palace, Westminster. Patterns are also left at the Temple-Coffee House, at the Crown and Cushon at Hyde-Park Corner, and the Carpenters Arms in Tyburn-Road b St. Giles Pound Carpenters. And at these Ironmongers Shops, viz. at Mr. Paul Winkles in the Pall-Mall, at the Dripping-Pan in St. James Market, the White-Hart at Drury-Lane-end in the Straud, Mr. Humfrys in Fetter-Lane, at Captain Walkers by Newgate, at Mr. Hayes in Woodstreet, at Mr. Fincher's in Gracious-street, at the Kings-Head at White-Chappel-Bars, and at Mr. Gores a Slopseller at llngsgate. The said Mr. Hemings hath nvented away with this Lead to make Flower Pots for Houses, Balconies or Gardens, very neat, light, durable and cheap, of whom any one may receive further satisfaction. Mr. Ha e a Partner, the Companies Agent, may be spoken with by any one that has occasion at Lurenes Coffee-House in Freemans-Court by the Old Exchange in Cornhil every Tuesday and Friday from Twelve a Clock to Two, where Patterns may be seen.
