T1161C R185132 [ocm]69648967 185109
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROICT royal English blazon, surmounted by a crown and flanked by the English lion and Scottish unicorn blazon with the Hapsburg double-headed eagle, surmounted by a crown the Sun in Splendor, an English heraldic device the Hapsburg double-headed eagle the Sun in Splendor, an English heraldic device By His Majesties License, and Special Approbation. OF THE True Orvietan, or Antidote. EXperimented before His Majesty in White-Hall, by Cor∣nelius a Tilbury, and also upon the publick Stage, by taking sixty grains of Poyson, and curing himself by the said Antidote; whereupon his Majesty, in testi∣mony of his approbation thereof, was pleased to cause the said Cornelius a Tilbury to be sworn His Majesties Chyrurgeon in ordinary. The VERTUES of the TRƲE ORVIETAN. THis ORVIETAN is very good to expel all sorts of Poy∣son, by taking the quantity of a Nutmeg in some warm milk or broth, and it will immediately expel the poyson out of the body, either by Vomiting, Sweating, Stool, or Ʋrine; the said ORVIETAN being taken three or four times one after ano∣ther, until the poyson be expelled; then a small cup of fat broth must be taken with an ounce of Conserve of Roses, and you will be quite rid of the poyson. 2. If any person be bitten by a Viper, Mad Dog, or other Venomous creature, he must immediately take the quantity of a Nutmeg in Wine, then lay open the place of the bite, my ma∣king of an incision, and extract the Venomous blood, then apply the ORVIETAN as a plaister upon the same place, and keep the party from sleeping twelve hours, and by Gods blessing he will be cured. 3. This Medicine cureth, and is a great preservative against the Plague; you must take the quantity of a Nutmeg in Wine every morning; and if you be infected with the plague, twice the quantity; then let the Patient be covered up warm till he sweats, and the pestilence will be driven out, and the party cu∣red insensibly. 4. This ORVIETAN is also good against all Distempers proceeding from a weak stomach, by taking the quantity of Nutmeg in the morning, fasting two hours after it, and in the Evening two hours after Supper. It fortifies the Natural heat, causes digestion, and cures the pain in the stomach, stinking breath, dry coughs, palpitation of the heart, short breath, and all distempers occasioned by the stomach. It keeps the Vapours from ascending to the brain, which often∣times occasion very grievous pains in the head, and prevents defluxions upon the lungs.
5. This ORVIETAN is very good for several distempers, that happen to men at Sea, as pain in the stomach, faintness and vomiting; it prevents bursten bellies, and such like accidents. It must be used in the manner as in the fourth Article. It is good against all Pestilential Fevers and Agues, either at Sea, or on Land, by taking the quantity of a Nutmeg in Oyl, melt∣ed butter, or any other Cordial Water, or in warm beer. As soon as the Fit comes, the Patient must be cover'd till he swears, and the dose must be repeated as often as the sit comes, until he be cured. 6. If any children get Fevers by the Small pox, or Measles, give them the quantity of half a Nutmeg in some Cordial∣water, or Wine, and cover them warm till they sweat, to drive out the Small pox or Measles. It is also very good for such as are troubled with Worms, and Hard bellies, and are there∣fore hindred from Growing, by giving them a small quantity of it in beer till they are cured. 7. This ORVIETAN being taken to the quantity of a Nutmeg in warm Wine or broth, cures the great pain of the belly, occasioned by the Cholick, cold Wind, and also the pain in the side. 8. It is also good for Women in Labour, by taking the quantity of a Nutmeg in some Cinnamon-water; it hastens the birth, strengthens both Mother and Child. It is also good a∣gainst Vapours, and the Fits of the Mother. 9. It is very good for the Murrain, and other distempers, as pains in the belly of Horses, Oxen, or Sheep; and a very Soveraign Remedy, by giving them the quantity of an ounce in a pint of warm Wine, and cover them well; and for smaller beasts, half the quantity; this is good too, if they were bit by mad Dogs, or other Venomous creatures; and it cureth ma∣ny other distempers, too tedious to be inserted. And this Orvietan will keep good ten years and more, if it be kept in a place that is not too hot, nor too cold; and if it should dry a little, it may be made good again, by mixing with it some Syrrup of Roses. They also cure these several Infirmities and Defects following. 1. IF any person be troubled with Films or Catarrhs in thier eyes, if the Apple of the eye be not hurt, they can re∣store them to their sight presently; they also cure by Me∣dicines in a short space, any Pearls or blood in the Eyes, or overgrown flesh. 2. They will cure and recover such as are troubled with the Stone in the Kidneys or bladder, by cutting, or by particular Medicines; they can also take Stones out of the Kidneys or blad∣der of Women and Maids, per dilatationem, without cutting. 3. They cure all manner of bursten people, both Men and and Women, young and old, by rare medicines, and artificial Trusses, in a short time, without any let; but as to such as have been of long continuance, they can cure them by a fine Manual Operation, so as they shall in ten days time be perfectly cured. 4. They cut and cure Hair lips in six days, the Cancer in the breasts, and other parts of the body: the Noli me tangere, and such like Diseases, in a short time; they can artificially cut the Polepum in the Nose; they cure Weakness in the Limbs, and dexterously cut all Carnosities or Swellings. 5. And they having travelled through the chiefest and most fa∣mous Countries of Europe, have learned and experienced the safest and most approved ways of curing all Venereal and soul Diseases practised in each Countrey, and have brought over with them excellent and peculiar Remedies, not vnlgarly known, for that dangerous distemper, the symptoms of which follow. If any have got the POK, or any of its symptomes, as virulent Gonorrhea, with Running of the Reins, and pain in making Water, Ulcers in the throat, mouth, nose, or Ʋrethra, Carnosity, Inflamations, Swellings, Soreness, Phymosis, Para∣phymosis, Christaline, Hemorrboids, Swellings and Buboes in the Groin, Pains in the Head. Arms, Shoulders, and Legs, with Nodes, Knots, or Exostosis on the Head and Shin-bones, with Pustles, Tetters, Ringworms, or breaking out of the whole body, &c. which if not cured, becomes Consumptive, Hecti∣cal, and ends in the Grave (few persons have all these Pocky symptoms, its enough to have one or two of them). This Disease hath several and various accidents, and fellows, that attend it, but in substance there is but two kinds; One that setleth it self in the blood, and other humours of our bodies. The other that is in the very marrow of the bones. To know the distinction, it is not for every Practitioner, but for him that hath cured thousands and thousands, as he can shew the Testimonials of several great persons in several parts of the World. How many hath he cured, that having had a Running too soon stopped, were turned to the POX, and could find no Re∣medy? How many that had not taken two hours of rest in their beds from ten and more years, by reason of the violent pains in the head, arms, shoulders, shin-bones, hath he cured? and (were it not for privacy and civilities sake) could mention the names of hundreds in this Bill. This is sufficient for such as love their health; and such as have been tampering with other Physicians, I shall certainly reduce to their former health, although they have been sweat∣ed and lanched by other Doctors: I shall give you remedy by pleasant medicines, that you your self shall wonder at it; some perchance may say these are but words, but I shall confirm them by actions. We could mention also many other effects and operations that we have done, but for brevity sake, and not to trouble the Reader too much, we have omitted them, being you may have our advice at all times for nothing, and be informed of many Cures more, not mentioned here; as can be attested by Eminent persons that we have cured, which were left by others. Neglect not your own health, since God hath been pleased to send a means, now being the best time of the year. And if any one cannot come, let him but send his true Water or Urine, and we shall give our judgment to the best of the skill where∣with God hath endued us. 6. They can fortifie the cold Nature of men and women; and have a rare Art to cure such as cannot Hold their water; they can also cure women that are troubled with Falling-fits, and Vapours. 7. They have a rare Art of curing Deafness, if curable. 8. They can restore to perfect health such as are troubled with Vomiting, Cholick, Rising of the Vapours, Pain in the Milt, Stitches in the Side, and all Scorbutick Distempers, which they cure in a very short time. 9. If any persons be troubled with the Toothach, they can cure them; and take out any Teeth or Warts without pain. They can also put in Artificial Teeth in the Upper or Under Jaw. They Lodge in Russel Street in Covent-Garden, within Two Doors of the Piazza's, near their Stage, at the sign of the Clock; where you see the Kings-Arms over the Balcony. They are privately to be spoken with from Eight of the Clock in the Morning till Ten at night. I could wish you to take care, that you come to my own Lodging in Russel Street, for fear you mistake.
