575 S100174 99836025 176665
THE GROVND OF THE CATHOLIKE AND ROMAN RELIGION IN THE WORD OF GOD. With the Antiquity and Continuance therof, throughout all Kingdomes and Ages. COLLECTED Out of diuers Conferences, Discourses, and Disputes, which M. Patricke Anderson of the Society of IESVS, had at seuerall tymes, with sundry Bishops and Ministers of Scotland, at his last imprisonment in Edenburgh, for the Catholike Faith, in the yeares of our Lord 1620. and 1621. Sent vnto an Honourable Personage, by the Compyler, and Prisoner himselfe. The first Part, or Introduction. Philip. 1. Vers. 12. & 13. And I will haue you know, Brethren, that the thinges about me, are come to the more furtherance of the Ghospell: so that my bandes were made manifest in all the Court &c. Permissu Superiorum, Anno M.DC.XXIII.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE REVEREND, VVISE, AND GRAVE LORDS of his Maiesties priuy Counsell of Scotland. MAny & iust are the consideratiōs (No∣ble, Graue, Wise, and Learned) which haue induced me to dedicate these Works of M. Patrick Anderson to your Lordships. First because one of his Disputes (which was an happy dispute for me, & diuers others) was made before some of your Honours. Secondly because the order & methode which he hath kept in these Works, is euery day practised in your sessiō house of Scotlād, for in Law-matters you giue place in your sessiō house to the Confession of the party. And truly the parties owne acknowledgment of his offence is a sufficient proof amongst all Nations. Heere your Lord∣ships shal see in like māner how the very Protestants thē∣selues auow, that in the Catholike Roman Church & Religion, Saluation vndoubtedly is to be found 2. If you make great accōpt of faithfull & honest witnesses in proofe of maters in Law, you shall find likewyse alledged faith∣fully
in the first, second, third, fourth, & insuing Ages the ancient and holy Fathers, euery one in his owne Age & Century giuing ful and cleer testimony for vs Catholiks against the Ministry; which holy Fathers did not forsee a∣ny debats amongst vs;Aug. duers. Iu∣an. Pelag.  1. prope nem & l.  cap. 17. Nor yet were angry neither at you, nor at vs (sayth S. Augustine:) What they aue found in the Church, that they haue held; they haue taught that wch they haue learned; & what they haue receaued from their Forfathers they haue deliuered to vs their posterity. 3. If Priority of pos∣session be of any regard (as questionles it is) among you, it is heer plentifully set down, that we Catholiks are first in possession, & that it is but a few yeares since we Ca∣tholiks of these three Kingdome were thrust out, by the Ministers, of our former rightfull, and so long continued possession of fifteen hundreth yeares; and condemned by those who had no power, authority, nor commission to accuse or condemne vs; not so much as hauing our accu∣sers before vs, nor place to defend vs 4. If Prescription be a matter of great Importance in proofe amongst you, you shal then heere find our Catholike Religiō, for which we now suffer in Scotland, England, & Ireland, deduced frō the tyme of the Apostles, from Age to Age, to these our very dayes, giuing in further proof that the Protestant & Puritan Ministers, who (against all Law hauing bereft vs of our prescription & possession) haue been condem∣ned in all Ages, by the Church of God then apparent, as manifest Heretiques, in the persons of the Arians, Pelagi∣ans, Nouatians, Waldenses, Albigenses &c. 5. If cōtinual clayme be a sufficiciēt way amongst you to preserue right & title, it is more then euidēt that our Catholike Pastours haue beene euermore waking to preserue out right, and Religion, as the Prophet fortold thus:Esa. 62 6. Vpon thy walles O Hierusalem haue I set watch men, all the day & all the night
for euer they shall not be silent. But your Protestant Church hath (to the contrary) been so farre from performing the like, that it hath been inuisible, latent, and vnknowne to the world the space of fifteen hūdreth yeares.In his Treatise vpon the reuelation Gods rue Church (sayth M. Napper) most certainly aboad so long la∣tent and inuisible 6. If whē the letter of the law being foūd in some cases doubtful, ought (cōforme to your coustome in Scotlād) to be interpreted according to the ansvverable pratise of ensuing tymes; you shall in like maner find heer the doubtfull letter of the Scriptur, and obscure sayings of the Fathers made plaine on our part, by the answerable practise of all succeding tymes & ages. 7. If the iudgment and resoltion of most Ancient & wyse Iudges and Presidents giuen in former Ages in your countrey, be authentical or of credit in your Session house; heer then you shall see the graue and wholsome Iudgments giuen for vs Catholiks by the most famous, learned and holy Iudges & Presidēts of all Kingdoms & Ages for these 1500. yeares, cōdēning the Puritan, & the Protestāt Ministry of manifest Heresy and Errour, in the persons of Aerius, Vigilantius, Nouatus & such other Heretiks. Finally, if the Ministers would free thēselues (cōtrary to all Law) from all these precedēt proofes and Iudgments, appealing to the only written Law, & to the expresse word of God (as they do, & must needs do,) first it is easie to be seen by the ensuing Trea∣tises; That all the Ministers togeather shall not, or cannot shew, no not one debatable point of their Religion, to be conteyned in the expresse word. 2. They shall not be able to improue any debatable point of our Religion as being against the expresse word. 3. It is shewed that they haue falsified and corrupted the word of God miserably & ig∣norātly, making it therby not the word of God, but their owne word, & inuention.
By al which it appeareth sufficiētly, that our Catholike Faith & Religion (for the which now presently we suffer persecution in Scotland) is that selfesame Religion, and Faith wherunto our Scotish Nation was, aboue fourteen hundreth yeares since, confessedly first conuerted: That religion also which euen then, so longe since, and now is professed throughout the Christian world: That Religion also, which was then confirmed to vs, and other Na∣tions from heauen with the testimony of vndoubted mi∣racles: That religion which hath founded your ancient Municipall Lawes, Courts of Iudgement, erected & buil∣ded your most famous Churches of Elgene, of Murray, Glasco, Paslay, S. Giles in Edenburgh, Holyrood-house, the Chaunry of Rosse, and many others: That Religion finally which hath erected your Bishops Seas, Religious houses, and Abbayes, Colledges, Vniuersities, and many other knowne Royall monuments of Piety, in your most Noble, and ancient Kingdome of Scotland. To the reading therfore of these insuing Parts & Trea∣tises, I earnestly and humbly exhort your Lordships, e∣uen by the infinit multitude of benefits which God hath bestowed vpon yow, by the pretious Bloud of Christ who hath redeemed vs all, by the tēder care of your own saluation, and by whatsoeuer els is sacred and holy; to the which end I will continue my dayly prayers to God, and remaine alwaies, Your Lordships most humble Seruant. M. I. L.
The Preface to the Christian Reader. IT is, Christian Reader, the ancient and iust complaint of our holy, & wise Forefathers, that Man of his weakens affect the knowledge of certayne forraine, childish and fruitlesse thinges, & not to apply earnestly his mind to the Consideration of that Punctum vnde pendet Aeternitas, of that wherupon eternall saluation relyeth, which is only the true Fayth & Religion. The consideration of the subtill course of the seas, of the per∣petuall motion of Planets, of the inestimable riches of the whole mate∣riall world is but beggery, and misery in respect of the diligent search and consideration of the true Church & Religion. What Monarch had euer such Embassadours as are the fiue senses of man? Or such Solicitors as are his desires? or such Executioners as are his passiōs? or such a Lord Steward of his house as is Reason? or such a Secretary of State as his dis∣cretion? or such a Treasurer as is his memory? or such a president or cō∣mander as is his Will? all which inuiteth him to imploy whatsoeuer be hath in earnest, graue, & wise Consideration, to find out the true religi∣on, out of the which there is nothing but eternall misery & damnation. Those Creature which want reason go towards their end, through a meere naturall Inclination, which is, as if they were moued by another & not by thēselues, because they consider not the reason of their end, & that eyther to an end apprehended, as it hapneth in the case of beasts, or not apprehended, as it is with inanimate creatures, which want all kind of knowledge & Consideration. But man who is not a meere materiall creature as others are, but is spirituall & immortall, as he hath a more eleuated & noble end; so also must he needs haue a more noble means, for the reaching & arriuing to so excellent an end, which is only Consideration. Since then Consideration in it selfe is so noble & excellent a thing in man, I haue set downe heer of set purpose the meanes to attayne to the true Religion, & the Grounds therof by way of Consideration. For as in matters of great consequence & moment, Consideration speciall should be imployed; the finding of the true Religion being a matter aboue all others of moment and great consequence, I could not vse a fitter means o attayne so noble a treasure, as is that, wherupon relyeth our eternall saluatiō. To this nd I haue set down in this first Part & Treatise twen∣ty foure Considerations, wherby it shalbe easy to the vnpassionate & in∣different Reader, to find out, by the grace of God, the true Church and Religion.
Of set purpose I haue omitted to requite some Minister his bitte words in my behalfe, his Paradoxes, Vntruths, Impertinencyes, Para∣logismes, Ignorance, Immodesty, Folly, & Scurrility specifyed in a mis∣construed letter of his vnworthy to be refuted, known well to such as best know me, not to be so much subiect to such bitternes and insultatiō of speach, which non parit victoria laudem, not intending to encounter him in the lik stile with maledictum pro maledicto, leauing that as heredi∣tary to such a Puritan Minister: my wordes shall still beseeme my selfe, shal haue modesty & truth for their characters, they shall offēd no chast eares, and shall not proceed of any like blacke Hypocondriall humour, giuing alwaies this, as a Caueat to such a Minister — —Capere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua. Yet if once againe I be stirred vp by such men to obserue & keep legem talionis, let them thanke themselues, who, without any occasion offered, do prouoke me against my nature & inclination paribus concurrere telis: Yet in such a requytall I shall euer obserue the admonition of the Co∣micke Ne quid nimis, to shoot rather too short thē too far at such rouers, knowing well such sharpnes in wordes to be the whetstone of dissenti∣on, by which mens myndes are soone moued but hardly reconciled: wishing alwayes that such a Minister should not haue forgot that rule of S. Ambrose:l. . de offic. c. 24. Veritatis (sayth this Father) ea est regula, vt nihil faci∣as commendandi tui causa, quo minor alius fiat, that is the rule of truth, that you do nothing in your own commendation, wherby another may be abased. The painted wordes of such men, their lyes & vntruthes serue to no other end, then to make the simpler sort to swallow down more gre∣dily their poysoned pills: of these thrids is the Net wouen, which cat∣cheth so many of the weaker people, much like as S. Hierome sayth of the web of spiders, that catcheth weak flyes, & by birds & beasts is bro∣ken asūder. TheEp. d Cipr. presb. Heretiks, saith he, weaue a spiders web, whih is able to catch little & light creatures, as flyes, gnats, or the like, but by others of more strength is broken in peeces. The light & more simple sort in the Church are deceaued by their errors, whē as they cānot seduce such as are strōg in the truth of fayth. Such Ministers are not conuinced (saithser. 66. in Cātica. S. Bernard) by reasons, because they vnderstand them not, nor amended by authorities, because they regard them not, nor mooued by persuasions, because they are subuerted: nec rationibus conuincuntur, quia non intelligunt: nec auctoritatibus cor∣riguntur, quia non recipiunt: nec flectuntur suasionibus, quia subuersi sunt. But let vs come to the matter in hand, my selfe resting alwayes, Thy humble seruant, P. A. S. I.
THE GROVND OF THE CATHOLIKE AND ROMAN RELGION IN THE WORD OF GOD. VVith the Antiquity & Continuance thereof throughout all Kingdomes & Ages. The First Consideration. That true Fayth is absolutely necessary to saluation: and that it must be only one Fayth. WHOSOEVER hath a true desire to please God, and an earnest care to saue his owne soule (which should be the chiefest desire, and care of euery good Christian,) he must resolue and settle himselfe in a sound beliefe of matters of fayth, holding it for a most assured ground, That there is a fayth, which whosoeuer wanteth cannot please God, nor consequently be saued; according to the saying of S. Paul:Heb. 11. v. 6. Without Fayth it is impossible to please God. Which saying S. Augustine confirmeth:Augu. serm. 12. de tempore. It is certayne (sayth he) that none can come to true happines, except he please God, and that none can please God but by fayth: for faith is the foundation of all good thinges, fayth is the beginning of mans saluation:
without faith none came come to the fellowship of the children of God: because without it, neither in this world doth any mā obteine the grace of iustification, neyther in the next world shall he possesse eternall life. This Fayth so absolutly necessary, must only be one, as S. Paul saith:Ephes. 4. v. 5. There is but one Lord, one baptisme, & one faith: Yea,Leo ser. 4. in nati∣uit. Dom. except it be one it is not fayth. This fayth is that,Iraeu. lib. 1. c. 3. which the Church spread ouer the whole world, doth diligently keep, as du elling in one, house, and doth beleeue in one like maner al points of fayth, as hauing one soule, and one heart, and doth preache, and teach, and deliuer by tradition thse things after one manner, as pos∣sessing one mouh: for albeyt there be diuers and different languages in the world, yet the vertue of tradition is the same. By which wordes it is playne, not only that there is but one fayth, but also how it is sayd to be one: which might seeme not to be one, cōsidering there are so many points, which we be∣leeue by our Faith, and so many seuerall men who haue in them this faith; yet it ceaseth not to be one, because the whole Church belieueth those points in a like manner: neyther the beliefe of one man differeth from the beliefe of another; neyther the beliefe of the Catholikes of France, Spaine, Italy, Germany, Flāders, of the Indians, of Scotlād, England, & Ireland, differ in any essential point of Religiō. Contrary the Puritane Ministers excommunicate and wholly condemne the Protestant Ministers of Scotland, for receauing of the ceremonies of England. Heare the ve∣ry words of the Puritane Ministers against Protestant Mi∣nisters:Dange∣rous positi∣ons lib. 2 c. 9. & 13. The Protestant Ministers haue imbraced that doctrine which is a hotch-potch of Christ and Antichrist, of God and the di∣uell; and such a Minister may iustly suspect himselfe to be a halting Neutrall, who seeketh nothing but like a greedy dog to fill his owne paunche, a desperate and forlorne Atheist, of a cursed, vncircumcised generation. Heare I pray thee (gentle reader) what the Puri∣tan Ministers say of the Protestants in general:Dange∣rous positi∣ons lib. 2. c. 9. & 11. Gilby. p. 29 The Pro∣testants prescript forme of prayer and seruice is all full of corruption; in all the order of their seruice, there is no edification but confusion, and many things in the Communion booke are contrary and agaynst the word of God. They put no difference betwixt truth and falsehood, betwixt Christ and Antichrist, betwixt God and the diuell. Their
Clergy are an Antichristian swynish rable, enemies of the Gospel, Beel∣zebub of Canterbury the chiefe of the diuels. And M. Bernard a famous Minister in England enobleth the Protestant Mi∣nisters with these glorious titles:Ber∣nard Mi∣nister of Worsop in his book of the Se∣paristes Schisme. pag. 71. Ministers of the Church of England are Aegyptian Enchanters, limmes of the diuell, Sicophants, Angells of hell. Now what the Protestants say of the Puritan Ministers in M. Iohn Caluin his person, is easie to be seene by two famous Protestants: the first Franciscus Stancarus who writeth thus:Fran∣ciscus Stā∣carus lib. 4. contra Cal∣uin. n. 4. Beware o Christian Reader, and chiefly all you Ministers, beware of Caluins bugges, specially of the Articles of the Trinity, Incarnatiō &c. for they contein impious doctrine, & Arriā Blasphemies.Lib. 2. art. 9. The. Caluin. fol. 72. Schlusselburge sayth worse of the Puritan Ministers, is worse may be sayd. Whereby it is easie to be seene that there is no vnity of sayth amongst the Protestants & Puritans, yea in essentiall poynts of Religion, since the one condemneth the other so horribly. The second Consideration. That this one Fayth, must needes be infallible and entiere. THis one Fayth, without which we cannot be saued, must be infallible and most certaine. This is cleare, be∣cause, Fayth is that Credit, or inward assent of mind, which we giue to that which God hath reuealed vnto vs, by meanes of the preaching or teaching of the true Church. For as S. Chrysostome saith:Chrys. Hom. 12. in ep. ad Heb. It cannot be called fayth, vnles a man be more certayne of those things which are not seene, then of those things which are seene. And a∣gayne:Hom. 83. in Mat. We cannot be deceaued by Gods wordes, but our sense is most easily deceaued. Seeing then our Fayth is grounded on the word of God, reuealed to vs by Iesus-Christ our Lord, speaking by the mouth of the Church, as he sayth himselfe,Luk. 10 v. 16. He that beareth you, heareth me; we ought to receaue the word of Fayth, preached by the true Church, not as the word of man, but as it is truly the word of God, and con∣sequently we must accompt it a thing most certayne & ab∣solutly infallible. Which doctrine should be well remarked as the only ground of true Religion, yea the infallible way
to discerne the true Religion from the false. The infallibi∣lity therfore, which I require in true fayth is the highest degree of certainty, excluding not only actual & deliberate doubt (for vndeliberate doubt taketh not away fayth) but also possibility of deliberate doubt, or feare of being decea∣ued, which infallible assurance all faithful Christians haue, so long as they haue fayth. This infallible faith must be entiere, whole, and sound in all points; neyther is it sufficient to belieue stedfastly some points, misbelieuing, or obstinatly not belieuing som other, or any one: because euery point of doctrine, yea eue∣ry word that God hath reuealed, and by his Church propo∣ned to vs to be belieued, must vnder paine of damnation be belieued: forMatth. 2. v. 9. Mark. 16. v. 16. He that shall not belieue, shall be condēned. And S. Iohn saith:Iohn. 3. v. 18. He that belieueth not, is already iudged. For not to belieue any one poynt whatsoeuer, which God by re∣uealing of it testifieth to be true, and which by his Church he hath commaūded vs to belieue, must needs be damnable as being a notable iniury to Gods verity, & a great disobe∣dience to his will. But all essential poynts of fayth are thus testifyed by God, and commanded to be belieued, other∣wise they be not points of fayth, but opinion or some other kind of knowledge. Therefore all essentiall poynts of faith vnder payne of damnation must be belieued, I meane ey∣ther expresly or implicitly, it being not necessary to vnder∣stand and know in particular euery thing which we be∣lieue. The third Consideration. That there must be some meanes prouided by Almighty God, by which all sorts of men may learne this Fayth, which is necessary to saluation: & what conditions are requisite therto. AS this one, infallible, and entiere fayth is necessary to saluation in all sorts of men, as well vnlearned al lear∣ned: so we must say that Almighty God,Tim. 2. v. 4. who would haue all men to be saued, and to come to the knowledge of the truth, hath
prouided some Rule and meanes wherby euery man in all questions and doubts of fayth, may be infallibly instructed and taught what is to be holden for the true fayth: and that the only cause why any man misseth of the true faith, is ey∣ther because he doth not seeke out, and find this rule and meanes, or hauing found it, he will not vse it, and in all poynts submit himselfe to it, as the nature of diuine fayth, and the duty of euery Christian bindeth him to do. To this purpose sayth S. Augustine:Aug. de vtilis. crdendi. If Gods Prouidence rule & go∣uerne humane matters, we may not despayre, but that there is a cer∣tayne authority appointed by the same God, vpon which staying our selues, as vpon a sure step, we may be lifted vp to God: which lif∣ting vp to God is first begun by true fayth: for the finding of which, God hath prouided a certayne authority and meanes, wherby men may come to the knowledge of the diuine mysteryes of fayth. This rule and meanes to find out the true fayth neces∣sary to saluation, must haue the propertyes following. 1. It must be certayne and infallible, for otherwise it cannot be a sufficient foundation wherevpon we should build our fayth, which is absolutly infallible. 2. It must be easy and playne to be knowen of all men, for if to any one sort it could not be knowen, or not certaynly knowen, it could not be to them a rule or meanes wherby they might direct themselues to the certayne knowledge of the true fayth. 3. It must be vniuersal, that it may not only make vs to know certainly what is the true fayth in some points, but absolut∣ly in all points of fayth. Otherwise it were not a sufficient meanes, wherby we might attayne to an entiere & whole fayth, which absolutly is necessary. 4. It must be continual, and neuer interrupted to the end of the world: for euen as fayth, and the Church do alwaies endure and continue, so must also the ground of fayth, seeing that nothing can con∣sist without this foundation and ground. 5. It must be vn∣changeable, for otherwise truth would somtymes perish, and there would arise some errour against fayth, seeing that nothing can endure and consist, except it haue sufficient ground and foundation.
The fourth Consideration. That the Scripture, or expresse written Word alone, cannot be this Rule of Fayth. THat the expresse written Word alone is not the rule of our fayth, is euident, because it wanteth perpetuall duration and continuance. For it began first vnder the old Law in Moyses time, so that before Moyses for the space of two thousand yeares, there was both true beleuers and a true Church, & yet the writtē Word was not in like māner in the new Law which the Apostles began to wryte some yeares after they had receaued the holy Ghost. So as it is cleer, that the Christian faith doth not necessarily & wholy depend vpon the Scripture & written Word of God only. As for the English translated Bibles, they cannot be the only ground and rule of Faith. First, because they are not infallible, for neyther were they written in this language immediatly, neither were the translatours therof assisted by the holy Spirit infallibly: for the ministers themselues con∣fesse, that in their translation they might erre, being men. Sith therfore the translatours as being but men, may erre, how can a simple vnlearned man be infallibly sure that this particular translation which he hath, doth not erre? Secondly, the English Bibles cannot be the rule of faith because they are obscure and hard to be vnderstood, at least by vnlearned men, who cannot read them: and therefore they can not be a sufficient rule to instruct all men, in all points of fayth. For vnlearned men must needs be saued, but they cannot be saued without an entiere and infallible faith, which they cānot haue without some rule or meanes meet for their capacity to teach them the same, which rule in no wise can be the English Bibles, seeing they cannot read, much lesse vnderstand the same. Yea the learnedst men cannot by only reading the Scriptures in whatsoeuer language be infallibly sure that they rightly vnderstand them: for whilst they vnderstand one way, perhaps they
ought to vnderstood another way: and that which they vnderstand plainly and litterally, ought perhaps to be vn∣derstood figuratiuely and mystically: and contrary, that which they vnderstand figuratiuely, ought perhaps to be vnderstood playnly and properly. Seeing then, that expo∣sitions are diuers, according to the diuers opinions of men, how shall any man be sure, which is the right exposition, hauing nothing to assure him, but his owne sense and rea∣son, which is vncertayne and fallible, and therefore can∣not be this rule of fayth, which we search for. Thirdly, the English or Scottish Bibles cannot be the Rule of Fayth, because they are not vniuersall, that is to say, able absolutly to resolue all doubts and questions, which either haue bene, are presently, or may herafter come in Controuersy: for there be diuers questions and doubtes moued now a dayes, and those also touching very substan∣tiall matters, which are not expressely set downe, nor de∣termined by only Scripture. For where haue we any Scri∣pture sufficient to proue, that al those, & only those bookes which Catholikes or Puritās hold for Scripture, are indeed Gods Word, & true Scripture? This we shall not find set downe in any part of Scripture. So as it is euident that the English Bibles cannot be the infallible rule of our Faith. Finally because the ignorant who doe not vnderstand the Greeke and Hebrew, connot discerne infallibly whe∣ther the English Bible be well translated or no; yea many Ministers, not being skillfull in the said Greeke & Hebrew languages, cannot be infallibly sure of the English transla∣tion. Some obiect that place of S. Paul,Tim. 3. v. 16. All Scripture is gi∣uen by inspiration of God, and is proffitable for doctrine, for reproofe, for correction, for instruction in righteousnes, that the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished vnto all good workes. But it proueth nothing for them. Because it sayth not, that the Scripture is alone sufficient to instruct a man to perfection, but that it is profitable for this purpose. For there is a great difference betwixt a thing that is proffitable, and a thing that is fully and only sufficient. For example, Stones and
Timber be profitable to the building of a house, yet they are not of thēselues fully & only sufficient to build a house, for the hand of a skilfull workeman to prepare them, and set them together in order, is also required. The fifth Consideration. That neyther naturall Wit; nor Learning, or Consequences drawen out of the Word of God, can be the Rule of Fayth. THat no naturall Wit, or Learning, or necessary Con∣sequences drawen out of the Bible, eyther of one man or of any company of men (only as they are learned men, and not infallibly assisted by the holy Spirit of God) can be this rule of faith, is manifest. Because all their consequences wit, and learning, be they neuer so exquisite and rare, are humane, naturall, and fallible; and therfore cannot be a sufficient foundation, whereupon to build a diuine and in∣fallible Faith; seing it can haue no more certainty, then the wit & learning of man, who proponeth it, which is subiect both to deceaue, and be deceaued; according to the saying of the Apostle,Rom. 3. v. 4. All men are lyars. Therefore the beliefe which is only grounded vpon the bare word, consequen∣ces, and learning of man, is subiect to falshood, neyther can be a true and Christian Fayth, which alwayes is most certayne and infallible. Besides, this Rule of Fayth must be able to propose to vs infallibly, not only the letters, and sense that seeme true to vs, but the very true sense of Gods Word intended by the holy Ghost, who is the author of this Word. Other∣wise it cannot be a sufficient meanes to breed in vs, an in∣fallible Christian Fayth and beliefe, which is only groun∣ded vpon the true sense intended by Almighty-God, who is the speaker of this Word. But no man, nor company of men can by their naturall Wit, consequences, and learning tell infallibly what is the true intended sense of Gods Word, For as S. Paul sayth,1. Cor. 2. v. 16. Who hath knowen the sense of our Lord? And Againe:1. Cor. 2. v. 11. Those things which are of God, no mā hath knowen
but the Spirit of God. And therefore that knowledge which the Apostle himselfe had of diuine matters, came not from an naturall wit of man, but (as he playnly affirmeth) from the spirit of God: God hath reuealed to vs, (sayth he) by his Spirit. Therfore we may well conclude that no one man, nor no one company of men, without the assistance of Gods spirit, can be the rule of fayth, eyther by inter∣preting Scripture, or by gathering consequences out of the same. The sixt Consideration. That the priuate Spirit of euery Minister, is not the Ground or Rule of Fayth. NO priuate man who persuadeth himselfe to be parti∣cularly instructed by the Spirit (as the most part of our inspired Puritans doe) can be this rule of fayth, in so farre forth as he belieueth, or teacheth contrary to the generall doctrine of the Catholike Church. First, because S. Paul sayth:Gal. 1. v. 9. If any man preach to yow any other Ghospell, then that which yee haue receaued, let him be accursed. Secondly, because the rule of Fayth must be infallible, such as this priuat spirit is not. For whosoeuer vaunteth himselfe to haue this Spirit, is not infallibly sure that he hath the same in particular, much lesse can assure others in points of Faith: for it is impossible for him to proue by any passage of Scripture an infallible assurance that he is taught by the holy Spirit, neyther by naturall reason can the same be verified. For albeyt he find in himselfe extraordinary motions, illuminations, feelings, and such like (of which those high spirited Brethren do much boast,) yet neyther by Scripture, nor reason, can he infallibly conclude, that those motions are of God, because the Scripture most plain∣ly affirmeth,1. Cor. 11. v. 14. That the diuell doth change himselfe into an An∣gell of light. Wherfore S. Iohn, as it would seeme, forseeing these spirituall Puritanes, that were to come in these later dayes, forbiddeth vs,Iohn. 4. v. 1. To belieue euery Spirit, but to try the
Spirits whether they be of God or no. Neyther can any man, try∣ing the Spirit by his owne priuate iudgement, or by any in∣ward motions, incontinently affirme, that it is the Spirit of God, because this his tryall is subiect to errour: for our iudgements are easily deceaued, and the diuel can cunning∣ly couer himselfe vnder the shape of a good Angell, & co∣lour his wicked designes vnder pretense of good,1. Pet. 5. v. 8. Going about like a roaring lyon seeking whome he may deuoure. Wherfore the safest way were to try these Spirits by the touchestone of the true Pastours of the Catholike Church, who may say with S. Paul,1. Cor. 2. v. 11. We are not ignorant of the cogitations of Sathan. And who may also say with S. Iohn,1 Iohn 4. v. 6. We are of God, he that knoweth God, heareth vs, he that is not of God, doth not heare vs. In this we know the Spirit of truth, and the Spirit of errour. Now if men will not admit this manner of trying and discerning the Spirit of truth, from the Spirit of errour, but wil trust to their owne iudgement alone in this matter they may be sure that in their thoughts they worship the Angell of darknes, insteed of the Angell of light, which doing will be the cause of their endles damnation. Thirdly, this priuate Spirit cannot be the rule of faith, because it is variable & vnconstant, & is subiect to errour: first in euery person and company of men in particular; for our Aduersaries themselues confesse that they may erre, & experience teacheth vs, that they oftentymes change their opinions, teaching whyles one thing, whiles another ac∣cording to their owne fantasie. Secondly, it is manifestly subiect to errour, seeing that all men challenge this Spirit. For if a man were bound to belieue all those that affirme themselus to haue the Spirit, of necessity he would belieue infinite contradictions. For the Lutherans, Caluinists, Brownists, Puritanes and the rest of that holy band, all af∣firme that they haue this Spirit, notwithstanding the great difference that is betwixt them, shewes that they haue not all the same selfe Spirit. For there is but one holy Spirit, the Spirit of truth, which whilest euery one chalenges to himselfe, he doeth great iniury to the Church of God, to whom the infallible assistance of holy Spirit was promised,
and not to euery one in particular. Neyther is there any of those new spirited Gospellers that can shew any good rea∣son, why they rather haue the true Spirit, then their neigh∣bours. But suppose one could assure himselfe, that he were taught by Gods Spirit immediatly what is the true fayth in all points, in such sort, that he could erre in none, (as it is not the māner of God to teach men immediatly by himself alone, or by an Angell, forRom. 10. v. 17. fayth cometh by hearing, & is to be requiredMalac. 2. v. 7. at the mouth of the Priests, and is to be learned of Pastors and Doctours, whome God hath appoynted in his Church, of purpose to instruct vs, and to continue vs in the true fayth:) Suppose I say one could assuredly per∣suade himselfe to be immediatly taught of God what is the truth in al points, how should he giue assurance to others that he is thus taught, specially when he teacheth contrary to the Catholike Church, which by playne promises and testimonies of Scripture we know to be taught of God? What arguments should he vse against others, that sayes they haue the same Spirit? It may be he wil alledg that general promise of ScriptureMatth. 7. v. 8. Euery man that seeketh, receaueth. He will say, that hauing sought earnestly for the true Spirit, he hath infallibly re∣ceaued the same. But I answere, that this promise of our Sauiour is to be vnderstood in this manner: Euery mā that seeketh things lawfull to be sought, in due time and place, and according to the pleasure of God, & profitable to their owne saluation, receaueth the same. Otherwise it cometh to passe that, as S. Iames sayth,Iames 4. v. 3. They aske and receaue not, because they aske wrongly. So that to haue sought this Spirit in prayer, is no sure signe to haue obteyned the same, seeing that there is no heretike, but he will affirme, that he hath sought for, yea and therefore obteyned the spirit: albeyt by the contraryeties betwixt him and his brethren it is ma∣nifest, that eyther he, or they, or both must be destitute of the true Spirit: For1. Cor. 14. v. 13. God is not the author of contention, but of peace. What assurāce then can we haue that their new Gospellers and Fathers of new opinions haue the true spirit? Forsooth they will giue you a marke or token as vncertayne, and dif∣ficile
to be known, as the Spirit it selfe. Yee may be assured say they, that they haue the true Spirit, who preach nothing but the pure written word of God, euer still, for euery poynt of doctrine, alledging Scripture. But this their marke cannot be sufficient; for first, insteed of Scripture they bring forth their own translations in many places corrupted, and subiect to errour as translated by men. Secōdly, albeit they did alwayes alledge the true words of Scripture, yet they are not certayne that at all times, & in all points of doctrine they alledge them rightly. For as S. Peter sayth;1. Pet. 3. v. 16. The vnlearned & vnstable (such as most part of our Puritans be) wrest the Scriptures, to their owne damnation. And S. Augustine:Aug. lib. 3. de ba∣ptis. cont. Donat. c. 19. A carnall and sensuall mynd turneth all the mysteries and words of holy bookes vnto his owne imaginations and fansies. Whereupon it cometh to passe, as the same S. Augustin saith,Augu. ep. 122. That all he∣retikes that admit the authority of Scriptures, seeme to themselues to follow only Scripture, when in the meane tyme they follow their owne errours. And as they seeme to themselues to follow only the Scriptures, when they follow their owne errours, so they may seeme (specially to simple people, and those who being seduced by them, wholy build their beliefe vpon them) to preach nothing but Scripture, when indeed they preach their owne erroneous opinions, coloured & painted with words of Scripture: for such is the māner of new vp∣start preachers, to confirme their errours with words of Scripture, eyther falsly translated, or els falsly applyed. So the diuell for his purpose falsly applyed the words of the Prophet Dauid,Math. 4. v. 6. against our blessed Sauiour, as S. Matthew testifieth. Wherefore there is no reason whereby we may be as∣sured that such men haue the Spirit of God: but we may find many reasons to conuince them that they haue not this Spirit; yea the only particularity and priuatnesse of their Spirit is sufficient to mooue to suspect it, & to assure vs that it is not the Spirit of truth. For as S. Augustin sayth:Augu. lib. 12. cōf. c. 25. Whosoeuer he be that challengeth to himselfe priuatly, that which God hath proposed publickly to be enioyed of all, and taketh to himselfe that which is common to all, he is driuen from the common to his own
particular, that is to say, from verity to falshood and lyes. Seeing then this Spirit is so vncertaine, it is good for all those who desire their owne saluation, to vse the counsell of S. Pe∣ter saying,2. Pet. 2. v. 17. Yee therfore beloued, seeing yee know these thinges before, beware least yee also being led away with the errour of the wic∣ked, fall from your owne stedfastnesse: For all those that vaunt themselues of this Spirit, are no other then licentious Liber∣tines, who2. Pet. 2. v. 19. Whiles they promise liberty to others, they them∣selues are the seruants of corruption; for whom it had bene better not to haue known the way of righteousnes, then after they haue known it, to turn from the holy cōmandments, which were deliuered to them. It may also mooue vs to suspect this Spirit when we see euery one to boast of the same. For as S. Hierome sayth of the Scripture, so may we say of the Spirit, which euery Minister so boasteth of:Hier. in Ep. ad Paulinum. This the pratling old wife vaūteth her∣selfe to haue, this the doating old man ascribeth to himselfe, this the clattering sophist laboureth to persuade, finally this only Spirit by eue∣ry sort is arrogātly challenged. Which in our Countrey most eui∣dently appeareth by the first vnordered preachers of this fifth Euangell. Such spirituall inspired brethren were Paul Mephen Baker, William Harlaw Tailour, William Aird Maison, Iohn Cayrus skinner. I omit Iohn Knox a renegate priest, Wil∣liam Willoks, and Mayster Iohn Craig Apostata Fryars, who as they were somewhat more learned then the fornamed craftemen (yet nothing in comparison of the holy Catho∣like Church, whose belly like venemous vipers they la∣boured violently to rent in peeces,) so they were also in their assertions and opinions more impudent and shame∣lesse,2. Tim. 1. v. 5. hauing only an outward forme and shape of godlynes, but in their life and doctrine, denying the power and vertue thereof. The seauenth Consideration. That the Doctrine and teaching of the true Church, is the Rule of Fayth. HItherto we haue shewed what is not the Rule of Faith; it remayneth that we shew what is the Rule
of fayth according to the properties required in the sayd Rule. We proue then, that this Rule of Fayth can be no other, then the doctrine, and teaching of the true Church, or company of the true faythfull of Christ. Because if our Sauiour Christ hath promised to any company of men, the presence of himselfe, who it truth it selfe, and the assistance of his holy Spirit, of purpose to instruct and teach them al truth, giuing withall peculiar charge and commission to them to teach all nations, and to preach to euery creature; giuing also warrant to all men that they may safely heare them; giuing also Commaundement, whereby he bindeth all, to do in al things according to their saying; and threat∣ning greatly those who will not heare and belieue them: Then certaynly the doctrine and teaching of those men is in all poynts most true, and such as may well be proposed to all sorts, as an assured ground, wherupon they may sa∣fely build an infallible Christian fayth. For looke what our Sauiour Christ hath promised, must needs be perfor∣med, & whatsoeuer he warranteth or commaundeth, may safely, and without danger of errour be done, nay of ne∣cessity must be done, specially when he threatneth those that will not do it: and consequently if he haue promised to send his holy Spirit, to teach any company of men all truth, it is not to be doubted, but that he sendeth this his holy Spirit, and by him teacheth them all truth: and sith the teaching of this Spirit is infallible, we are not to doubt but that this company is in all points infallibly taught the truth. If also our Sauiour gaue warrant & commandement, that they should teach vs, & that we should heare thē, & do in al things according to their saying: we may not likewise doubt, but that they shalbe able to teach all sorts of men, in all points, the infallible truth; and that all sorts of men may, if they will, learne of that company, what is in all points to be belieued. For otherwise by this generall com∣mandement of hearing them, and doing according to their saying, we should be sometymes bound to heare and be∣lieue an vntruth, and to do that which were not vpright
and good, which without blasphemy to Christs verity and goodnesse, can no wise be taught. But so it is that our Sauiour hath promised, giuen com∣mission, warranted, commanded, and threatned in man∣ner aforesayd: Therfore we cannot doubt but there is a cer∣tayne company (the which is called the true Church of Christ, which both is in all points of fayth infallibly taught by the holy spirit, and is likewise to teach all sorts of men in all points of Fayth, what is the infallible truth; and ther∣fore the teaching of this company may well be assigned & proposed to all men, as a sufficient Rule of Fayth, and as a ufficient meanes to instruct all, in all matters of Fayth. Now, let vs proue euery part of this conclusion out of the written word of God. And first, that our Sauiour pro∣mised his owne presence to this company of men, called the Church of God, is euident by these most playne words:Math. 28. v. 20. I am with you (sayth he) all dayes, euen to the end of the world. That he promised the holy Ghost to the same company of men, is testified thus:Iohn. 14. v. 16. I will aske my Father, and he will giue you another Comforter, the Spirit of truth, that he may remayne with you for euer, he shall teach you all things. And againe:Iohn 16 v. 13. When that Spirit of truth shall teach you all truth. The charge & commission is thus set down:Math. 18. v. 19. Mark. 16. v. 15. Going, teach all nations, and preach the Gospell to euery creature. The warrāt is in S. Luke:Luk 10 v. 16. He that heareth you, heareth me. The commaundement is ex∣presse in S. Matthew:Math. 23. v. 2. The Scribes and Pharisies sit in Moyses seat, whatsoeuer therfore they shall say to you, do you. Out of which words we may gather that we are bound in all points, to do according to the doctrine of the Prelates of the Catho∣like Church: yea although it should happen, that their ly∣ues were not laudable, but bad. For although our Sauiour in this place, doth only in expresse words make mention of the chayre of Moyses, in which the Priests of the old Law did sit; yet he is to be vnderstood to speake also of the chayre of S. Peter, in which the Priests of the new Law do succeed. Because we may rather thinke that our Sauiour intended in his doctrine to giue Rules to the Priests and people of his new Law, which was presently to beginne,
and to continue, till the worlds end; then only to giue documents to those of the old Law, which were shortly to cease. And this to be the true sense of that place, S. Au∣gustin testifyeth:Aug. ep. 165. Into that order of Bishops which is deryued frō S. Peter vnto Anastasius, who now sitteth vpon the same chaire, although some Traytour had crept in, in those tymes, he should no∣thing hurt the Church and innocent Christians, for whome our Lord prouiding, sayth, What they say, do, what they do, do not. The threats that our Sauiour vseth against them that will not heare his Church are these,Luk. 10. v. 16. He that despiseth you despiseth me. And agayne:Math. 18. v. 17. He that will not heare the Church, account him as an Ethnick and publican. Finally after he had giuen charge & commission to preach the Gospell, he pronounceth this threat against those that will not belieue:Mark. 10 v. 6. He that will not belieue, shall be damned. By these testimonies it is euident that it appertayneth to the Church to instruct vs in all points of Fayth, and that of it we ought to learne in all matters of Religion, what is the infallible truth; and consequently it is manifest, that the doctrine of this Church is the rule of Fayth. Worthily ther∣fore doth S. Paul call this Church,1. Tim. 3. v. 15. The pillar and ground of truth: For the foundation of any building, hath two offices, one to vphold the building, another to strengh∣then it, both which the Apostle attributeth to the Church, when he calleth it, The pillar and ground of truth. Therfore I conclude, that neither the writtē Word alone, nor consequences drawen out of the same, nor naturall wit, and learning, nor the priuate Spirit, nor any thinge els, except only the teaching of the true Church of Christ, is the ordinary meanes which God hath prouided, wherby all men may learne that one, infallible, entiere Faith, which is necessary to saluation.
The eight Consideration. That this Church, or Company of men must alwayes continue. THat this Church, whose doctrine is the rule of our Fayth, must euer continue without interruption to the worlds end, is proued by these words:Math. 28. v. 20. I will be with you all dayes, euen till the end of the world. And agayne speaking of the Church:Matth. 16. v. 18. The gates of hell shall not preuayle against it. For how is it true that the gates of hell shall not preuayle, if they haue preuayled so much, as vtterly to abolish the Church, or at least to banish it quite out of the world for along space? Of this Church it is sayd:Psal. 48 v. 8. God hath establish∣ed it for euer, according as S. Augustine expoundeth: & the Prophet Daniel calleth it, a kingdomeDaniel. which shall not be broken in peeces, for euer: and S. Luke:Luk. . v. 33. There shalbe no end of his kingdome. By which it is manifest that the true Church of Christ was not only to continue, for foure or fiue hun∣dreth yeares, but for euer vnto the worlds end. The ninth Consideration. That this Church, or Company of men, must be Visible. THis is proued first, because the Church is Christs bo∣dy: but the body of Christ was visible, for the Apo∣stle spake to visible men when he sayd:1. Cor. 12. v. 7. Yee are the body of Christ. Moreouer we are made the body of Christ by bap∣tisme and the reccauing of our Lords body, as the Apostle testifieth. Also in this body of Christ, there are doctours & Pastours vntill the Consumation of Saintes, vntill we meet with Christ, but such persons are also visible. The buil∣ding also of the Church is visible, the consumatiō of Saints is visible, the worke of ministry is visible, which the Apo∣stle sayth shall continue vntill the coming of Christ. Secondly, this Church is the Kingdome of Christ, but euery kingdom comprehendeth in it a visible company of
subiects that obey one king. Hence it is that Ieremy sayth:Ierem. 33. v. 32. Euen as the starres of heauen cannot be numbred, and the sands of the sea measured; so will I multiply the seed of my seruant Dauid, and the Leuits my seruants: but such and so great a multitude of men cannot be inuisible. In like manner the Prophet I say describing the sayd kingdome of Christ, and the coue∣nant of God with it, sayth thus:Isa. 61. v. 8. I will make a perpetuall league with them, and their seed shall be knowen in all nations, and their of-spring in the midst of people; all that shall see them, shal know them, because this is the seed that God hath blessed. Where he saith manifestly, that all nations, euen the Infidels, assoone as they shall behold and see the Church, they shall easely know her, by the benefits of God bestowed vpon her. This kingdom also is cōpared to the Sunne & full Moone which are very visible planets, and easy to be seene of all men. Thirdly, the Church is a Citty which is scituate vpon high mountayne, which is placed vpon the top of Moun∣taynes, the which our Lord will strengthen for euer, whereof Christ himselfe sayth:Math. 5. v. 14. A Citty placed vpon a Moun∣tayne cannot be hid. Christ therefore hath made this Church not to hide it, but that it might be cleere & manifest. Wher∣fore S. Augustin sayth:Augu. tom. 9. in ep. Ioan tract. 2. What more shall I say, but that they are blind who doe not see so great a Mountayne, who shut their eyes agaynst a candle placed vpon a candlestick. Fourthly, if the Church were inuisible, in vayne should we say in our beliefe, I belieue the Catholike, or vniuer∣sall Church: for if the Church be vniuersal & spread abroad ouer the whole world, she cannot be but very visible as also we shalbe forced to deny another article of our beliefe; to wit, The Communion of Saints, vnlesse the sayd Saints be visi∣ble & manifest one to another, seeing that this Communiō, as the Apostle saith, consisteth in the continual help, which one mēber maketh to another; but help cannot be made to one that is not visible. Therfore the Church and Commu∣nion of Saints must be visible. Fifthly, our Sauiour hath ordained this Church to be the light of the world, according as he sayth:Math. 5. v. 14. Yee are the light of the world: and to be a rule or meanes wherby all men, at
all times, may come to the knowledg of that one infallible & entiere fayth, which is necessary to saluation. But how can it be the light of the world, if it be inuisible? How can it be a meanes wherby men shall know the truth, if it cannot be seeene nor knowne? If we say it fayled, we must then also say, that all that tyme men wanted sufficient meanes to attayne to the knowledge of the truth, and so were desti∣tute of the true way to come to their saluation: which if it were true, of necessity it would follow that God should haue permitted men to be destitute of meanes necessary to their saluation, and so suffred them to be damned, contra∣ry to the saying of holy Scripture:1. Tim. 2. v. 4. God would haue all men saued, and to come to the knowledge of the truth. Wherefore to verify that God would haue all men saued, we must needes say that he hath prouided a necessary meanes for all men, by which they may come to the knowledge of true fayth, and therby to saluation: which meanes is a visible Church, of which they must heare & learne the true fayth. Therfore the Church must alwayes be visible. Sixtly, if the vniuersall Church of Christ should for any space be inuisible, it should for that space cease to pro∣fesse outwardly that fayth, which in hart it did belieue: for if it did outwardly professe, it would haue bene visible; if it did not professe, then hell gates did preuayle against it, con∣trary to Christs owne promise. Seauenthly, if the Church were inuisible, we could not fulfill the commandment of Christ, wherin he sayd:Math. 18. v. 17. Tell the Church. For how can we tell the Church any thing, if we know not how, nor where to find it? Neither if by chāce we did meet it, could we know it, to be the Church. Eightly, it is certayne that once the true Church of Christ was visible, to wit, when it began first in Hierusa∣lem in the Apostles and Disciples of our Sauiour, and in that number, which by their preaching was conuerted to the Christian Fayth. But there can no reason be shewed why it should be visible then, and not euer since. Ninthly, the chiefe ground and reason why the Puri∣tanes hold the Church to be inuisible is, because they ima∣gine
the Church to consist only of the elect, or only of the good: But this ground is false, as appeareth by the name of the Church, in greeke , which signifieth, not a com∣pany of the elect or chosen, but a company that is called: so that in it are both good and bad, for as our Sauiour sayth:Matth 20 v. 16. Math. 3. v 11. Matth. 22 v. 10. Matth. 13 v. 47. Matth. 25. v. 1. Many are called bu few are chosen. Therefore the Church is cōpared to a floore wherein wheat and chaffe is mixt: to a mariage feast, to which came good and bad: to a net wher∣in are gathered all sorts of fish both good and bad: Final∣ly to ten virgins, wherof fiue were foolish, and excluded from the heauenly mariage. As for testimonies of the Fathers, there is nothing more plainly expressed by them, thē this visibility of the Church. I will only alledge one or two exemples, remitting the cu∣rious Reader to search further in the sayd Fathers works. S. Chrysostome saythhrys. in cap. 8 Isaia. It is more easy that the Sunne should be ex∣tinguished, then that the Church should be obscured. To whome agreeth S. Augustin:Augu. lib. 3. con ep. Parm. c. 4. The Church (sayth he) being built vpon a Mountayne, cannot be hid. The tenth Consideration. How we should discerne and know, which is the visible Church of Christ. HItherto I haue shewed that no other thing els is, or can be the Rule of Fayth, but the doctrine of Christs Church, which must continue alwayes, and euer be visi∣ble. It resteth that I shew how this true Church shall be discerned and knowen, from false and hereticall compa∣nyes, which falsly vsurpe the title & name of the Church; who notwithstanding do in no wise pertayne to the true Church, being only couered with the name of Christians. The way then to find out this Church is first to set downe, which be the certayne markes whereby the true Church is knowen; next to examine, to what company those marks doe agree. It is therfore to be noted. First, that a true mark cannot
be common to many, but must agree only to the thinge whereof it is the marke. Secondly, it must be more euidēt and easy to be knowen, then the thing which it signifieth. Wherfore, when we will assigne some good markes, by which all sorts of men may in some sort discerne which particular company of men is the true Church: we must haue speciall regard to assigne those things which in some manner may be apparent to all sorts of men, since all sorts of men haue need to seeke out, & according to their capaci∣ty discerne which is the true Church. We must also assigne those things, which are known to agree to the true Church at this tyme, and to no other company, but that which is the true Church, to the intent, that a man seeing all those things, which be assigned as markes, to agree to any com∣pany, he may straightwayes conclude, that company to be the true Church: as on the contrary side, if he perceaue ey∣ther all, or any of them to be wanting in any company, he may be sure, that that company is not the true Church. The eleuenth Consideration. That the marks of the Church which the Puritanes giue, are not the true markes of the Church. THe markes assigned by the Puritanes to discerne and know the true Church, are two. True Fayth or the preaching of the word, and the right vse of the Sacramēts, which are no sufficient marks, by which the true Church may be knowen, but rather are meanes to beguyle the sim∣ple, knowing well that they can easily turne all the Sacra∣ments and words of holy Scripture vnto their owne fan∣tasticall, opinions. These I say, are not true marks. For first, by the true Fayth and preaching of the word, they eyther meane true doctrine in some points or els in all. If they meane true doctrine in some points only, it is no good marke: For heretiks teach the truth in some points. Ther∣fore it is not proper only to the Church, and so can be no marke therof. If they meane true doctrine in all points, it is
not sufficient, because it wanteth the second condition, to wit, it is not easy to be knowne, because it would re∣quire a very learned man to examine if that doctrine were true in all points, as also that he were assisted with the in∣fallible assurance of Gods Spirit, least in his examination and tryall of his doctrine he should erre. As for the Sacra∣ments, it is very hard for a man of himselfe to iudge which vse of Sacraments is right, if he be not first taught by the Church. Therfore it is necessary before he know the right vse of the Sacraments, that he know the Church, which is more easy to find out, as being that direct way wherof Isay speaketh:Isa. 35. v. 8. This shall be to you a direct way, so that euen fooles may not erre in it. Secondly, their two markes are not sufficient. Because when we seek for the true Church, we seek it principally to the end, that by it, as by necessary and infallible meanes, we may heare and learne of it the true Faith in all points, which otherwise in it selfe is hidden and obscure, accor∣ding to that saying of S. Paul:1. Cor. 2. v. 14. The sensuall man doth not per∣ceaue those things which are of the Spirit of God. For sith none by the only power of naturall wit, can obteyne the superna∣turall knowledge of diuine mysteries which we belieue by our Fayth, neyther doth the Spirit of God now adayes or∣dinarily instruct any man in the knowledge of true Fayth immediatly by himselfe, or by an Angell sent from hea∣uen: we must needes if we will haue true Fayth, seek it by that meanes that God hath ordayned: which meanes is no other then the teaching of the true Church, according to S. Paul his saying:Rom 10. v. 14. How shall they belieue him whome they haue not heard? How shall they heare without a preacher? How shall they preach vnles they be sent? Therfore the true Church, which only hath preachers truly sent of God, must first be found out, that by it we may heare and know which is the true Fayth. Therfore this marke of Faith is no wise sufficient to discerne the true Church by, yea rather contrary, the true Church is a marke wherby we may know the true Fayth. Thirdly, true Fayth is included in the true Church, & as it were inclosed in her belly, as S. Augustine sayth:
Aug. in Psal. 57. Truth remayneth in the belly of the Church, from which whosoe∣uer is separate must needs speake false. Therfore, like as if a man had gold in his belly, we must first find the man, before we can come to see the gold it selfe; so we must first by other markes find out the true Church, which hath the gold of true Fayth hidden in her belly, before we come to see to gold of true Fayth it self; sith specially we cannot see it, vnlesse she open her mouth and deliuer it vnto vs; neyther can we certaynly know it to be true, and not coū∣terfayte, but by giuing credit to her testimony of it, accor∣ding to the saying of S. Augustine:Augu. lib. con. ep. Fund. c. 5. I would not belieue the Ghospell it selfe, except I were moued therto by the authority of the Church. For if we had not the authority of the Church, how should we be infallibly sure that there were any gospell at all? Or how should we haue knowen that some books are Gospell and others not? Fourthly, if the true doctrine of Fayth in all particular poynts must be first knowen, as a marke wherby to know the true Church: then (contrary to that which before we proued) the authority of the Church should not be a neces∣sary meanes wherby men must come to the knowledge of the true Fayth. For if before we come to know which is the true Church, we must by other meanes haue knowne which is the true Fayth: what need is there for to find out true Fayth which already we haue, to bring in the authori∣ty of the true Church? Fifthly, if before we giue absolute and full credit to the true Church, we must examine and iudge whether euery particular point of doctrine which it holdeth, be the truth, with authority or liberty to accept only that which we like or which seemeth in our conceyt right and conformable to Scripture, and to reiect whatsoeuer we mislike, or which in our priuate iudgement seemeth not so right and confor∣mable, then we make our selues examiners and iudges ouer the Church, and consequently we preferre our lyking or dislyking, our iudgement of the interpretation and sense of Scriptures, before the iudgement of the Church of God. But it is absurd both in reason and Religion to preferre one
priuate mans iudgement, to the iudgement and sentence of the whole Church of God, which is a company of men for the most part vertuous, wise & learned, & which vndoub∣tedly hath the holy Spirit to guide them in all truth, not suf∣fering them to erre. But some man will say, that the Scripture forbiddeth vs to belieue euery Spirit, but to try the Spirits if they be of God, therfore we must examine the Spirit of the Church, by examining in particular the doctrine thereof. I answere, that in that place of Scripture, it is not meant, that it apper∣teineth to euery man to try all Spirits, but generally the Scripture warneh the Church, not to accept of euery one that boasteth himselfe to haue the Spirit, and willeth those Spirits to be tryed: not that euery simple and vnlearned man should take vpon him to try them, but that those of the Church, to whome it apperteyneth to try Spirits, should do the same, to wit the Doctours & Pastours which God hath placed in his Church, to the end we may not be caried away with euery wind of Doctrine, & that we may not be lyke litle ones, wandring with euery blast of those that boast themselues to be particularly taught by the Spirit. So that this trying of Spirits, is only meant of those Spirits, of which men may well doubt whether they be of God or no, and then this tryall belōgeth to the Pastours of the true Church. But when it is certayne that the Spirit is of God, we neyther need nor ought doubtfully to examine, or pre∣sumptuously iudge of it; but submitting obediently the iud∣gement of our owne sense and reason, we must belieue the teaching of it in euery point. Now we haue sufficiētly pro∣ued before out of the writtē word, that the Spirit of the true visible Church is of God: Therfore our only care should be to seeke out those markes by which all men may know, which particular company of men is the true Church of Christ, whose doctrine we neither need, nor lawfully may examine in doubtfull manner, but must obediently and vndoubtedly in all points belieue, as the only assured and infallible truth, which is to be belieued by Christians.
The twelueth Consideration. That the marks of the Church are foure, to wit, One, Holy, Ca∣tholike, and Apostolike: and first of Vnity. NOw hauing shewed the properties of a true marke, & token by which the true Church is knowen, from al false and hereticall Congregations; as also in the prece∣dent consideration hauing proued euidently and clearly, that the markes assigned by Protestants and Puritanes, are not sufficient to discerne the true Church among so many sects and opinions; It remayneth, that I proue the foure marks assigned by the Catholike Roman Church, to be good and sufficient, and only to apperteyne to the sayd Roman Church, and no wise to any hereticall Congrega∣tion. That there must be manifest markes wherby the true Church must be knowen, the holy Scripture it selfe most manifestly declareth in these wordes:The Con∣fession of Fayth of the Huge∣nots in France ar. 5. Their seed shalbe knowen to the nations, and their of-spring in the midst of people: all that shall see them, shall know them, because they are that seed which our Lord hath blessed: As if he would say, the true Church shall haue such manifest marks, that it shalbe easy for euery one to know it. The true markes then of the true Church are foure, to wit, One, Holy, Catholike, and Apostolike: which markes are set downe in the Nicene Creed which the Protestants them∣selues admitte. And first that the true Church of God must be One, the Scripture clearly sheweth:Cant. 6. v 8. My Doue is one: and our Sauiour calleth his Churchohn 10 v 16. One sheepfold: and S. Paul calleth it,ohn 10 v 16. One body. This vnity our Sauiour did pray for and vndoubtedly for his reuerence was heard,Rom. 1. v. 5. Iohn. 17. v. 20. Neyther pray I for those alone, but for them also which shall be∣leeue in me through their word, that they al may be one, as thou Father art in me & I in thee, that they also may be one in vs. Which request the Scripture sheweth he obteyned when it maketh men∣tion that,Act. 4. v. 3. the multitude of them that beleeued were of one hear,
and one soule. This vnity S. Peter recōmendeth to vs saying:1. Pet. 3. v. 8. Be yee all of one mynd, hauing compassion one of another. There is a threefold vnity preached in the Church of Christ. First an vnity of all the members with Christ, who is the supreme head of the Church, which is wrought by Fayth; wherevpon it followeth, that the members of the Church so vnited together, must haue only one Fayth, ac∣cording to the saying of the Apostle:Ephes. 4. v. 5. There is one Lord, one Baptisme, one Fayth. Secondly, there is an Vnity of the members among themselues, which vnity whosoeuer brea∣keth is a Schismatike, euē as he who breaketh the first vnity is an Heretike. This vnity our Sauiour affirmeth to be a speciall token wherby to know his Church, when he saith:Iohn 13. v. 35. In this shall all men know that yow are my Disciples, if you loue one another. Thirdly, there is an vnity betwixt the faythfull people and their Pastours by obedience, which whosoeuer breaketh, is also a Schismatike. This vnity the Apostle commandeth to be kept, when he sayth:Heb. 13. v. 17. Obey your Pre∣lates and be subiect to them. That this vnity is a true marke, is euident, because it hath the two properties of a true marke. First, It is euident to all men: For if there be disagreement in doctrine, it is easi∣ly perceaued, if there be contentions betwixt the people and their Pastors, it is easily heard of. Secondly, it is pro∣per only to the true Church, because (as Tertullian well obserueth:)Tertul. de praeser. All heresies are found to differ in many things from their first founders; and heretiks among themselues do differ, while euery one taketh vpon him to fashion the Fayth which he rceaued, ac∣cording to his owne pleasure, euen as the first inuentour thereof did make the same according his fansie. The thirteenth Consideration. Of the second Marke of the true Church, which is Holynesse. THis title is attributed to the Church by S. Paul:1. Cor. 3. v. 17. The Church of God is holy, which you are: & S. Peter calleth the
Church:2. Pet. 2. v. 9. A holy nation. By which it is not meant, that there are none in this company but those which be holy: for the Apostle sheweth, that in the same true Church, and amongst the said company1. Cor. 5 v. 1. There is plainly Fornication heard of, yea such as the like is not euen among Heathens. Yea therfore the Church is compared to a Net, wherein are gathered both good and bad fishes; to a floore wherein wheat and chaffe is mixt, to a field wherein wheat and darnell groweth, as in the ninth Consideration before is declared. But this title of Holinesse is giuen properly to the true Church, because this company which is called the Church is dedicated to God, and the profession and doctrine thereof withdraweth men from all vice, and instructeth them in all vertue; and the holy Sacraments, as conducts of grace, worke in vs true and inward holynesse. This marke so confirmed by Scripture, hath the two propertyes assigned to a true marke; for first there is no man but he may cleerly see the good workes, holy doctrine, good lyfe, & miracles of some of Gods seruants. For our Sa∣uiour promised,Mark. 16. v. 17. That those that belieue, these signes shall follow thē; in my name they shal cast out diuels, they shal speak with new ton∣gues, they shal take vp serpents, & if they drink any deadly thing, it shal not hurt them, they shall lay hands on the sicke, and they shall recouer: All which are visible signes; and as they were promised by our Sauiour, so a little after his ascension they were most faythfully performed by some members of the Church, as in the Acts of the Apostles manifestly appeareth. Secondly this marke of holinesse is only proper to the Church of GodEphes. 5. v. 26. For which Christ gaue himself, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water, by the word, that he might present it to himselfe a glorious Church, not hauing spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish. Whereas the Apostle calleth Heretiks,2. Tim. 3. v. 3. Vnholy, louers of pleasures more then louers of God, hauing a forme of godlynes but denying the power ther∣of. Which is easy to be seene in the Heretiks of our tyme.
The fourteenth Consideration. Of the third marke of the Church, which is Catholike, or Vniuersall. THe third marke of the Church is, that it is Catholike, or Vniuersall, aswell in tyme & place, as in points of do∣ctrine. And first that the Church is vniuersall in tyme, and continueth perpetually, is sufficiently proued out of the Scriptures cited aboue in the eight Consideration. Second∣ly, that the Church is vniuersall in place, is expresly set downe in the Bible:Psal. 22 v. 17. All the bounds of the earth shalbe conuer∣ted vnto our Lord. And agayne:Psal. 72. v. 8. His dominion shalbe also from sea to sea, and from he riuer to the ends of the earth. And our Sa∣uiour sayth:Luk. 24 v. 46. That it was needfull that he should suffer and ryse agayne from the dead the third day, and that pennance and remission of sinnes should be preached in his name throughout all nations, begin∣ning at Hierusalem. Thirdly, it is manifest that the true Church is vniuersall, in respect of Doctrine, holding vniuersally in all ages and in all countreys the selfe same points of doctrine (as the Centuries following witnes lar∣gely) without interruption or change, which from the Apostles partly by word and partly by writing it receaued, according to the commaundement of S. Paul:2. Thes. 2. v. 14. Hold the traditions which you haue learned eyther by word, or by our Epistle. Which commaundement S. Augustine declareth to haue bene obserued by the Catholike Pastours of the primitiue Church, for thus he sayth:Augu. lib. 1. con. Iulius. whatsoeuer they foūd in the Church that they held, whatsoeuer they learned that they taught, whatsoeuer they receaued of their Fathers that they deliuered to vs their children. The contrary whereof is verified of all Heretiks, and specially of the Puritanes and Protestants of Scotland, for their Congregation is not vniuersall in tyme, because they are new come.Matth. 13. v. 25. For first the true doctrine was plāted, euen as the good seed was sowen in the field, and afterward the darnell, that is false doctrine, was ouersowen by the ene∣my of Gods Church. And S. Paul hauing taught the Ephe∣sians
the true doctrine of Fayth, sayd, that after his depar∣ture, He knew that rauenous wolues wold enter in among them,Actes 20. v. 25. Matth. 24. v. 23. not sparing the flock; and, that amongst themselues there would aryse men speaking peruerse things, that they might lead away disciples af∣ter them. Neyther is the Protestants Congregation vniuer∣sall in respect of place. For it is proper to all heretiks to say, Heere is Christ, there is Christ, that is to say, Christ is only truly preached in this Countrey of Scotland, or that coun∣trey of England; and therfore our Sauiour fortold vs of them, and commanded vs not to belieue them. For as S Augustin sayth:Augu. lib. 4. de Symbol. c. 10. Whatsoeuer hereticall company sitteth in cor∣ners (that is to say in a few particuler Prouinces of the world) is a Concubine, not a Matrone: that is, she is not the spouse of Christ, nor the lawful mother of Gods children. And this vniuersality is assigned by the sayd S. Augustin as a proper token to discerne true Christian Religion from heresy:Ang. lib. de vnit. Eccles. c. 3. For heresies are not found (sayth he) in many nations, where the Church is (as in Spayne and Italy,) but the Church, which is in all places, is found euen in those natiōs where heresies are (as in Scot∣land, England, and Ireland.) Neyther doe the Protestants and Puritanes hold vniuersally one manner and forme of doctrine, chopping and changing, adding and detracting continually some thinges perteyning to the substance of doctrine. This marke hath the two propertyes perteyning to a true marke: first it is euident and cleare, euer to be seene in the Church of God, because that which is in all places and at all tymes, cannot he hid from the eyes of al men. Second∣ly, it is only proper to the Church: for heresies and false opiniōs endure only for short tyme, neither are they spread through the whole world, but only in particular kingdoms and Prouinces thereof.
The fifteenth Consideration. Of the fourth Marke, that the true Church is Apostolicall. THe fourth and last marke is, that the Church of God is Apostolicall. So witnesseth S. Paul:Ephes. 2. v. 19. You are not strangers & forreiners, but cittizēs of the Saints, & the houshold chil∣dren of God, built vpon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Iesus-Christ himselfe being the corner stone. For the Apostles wēt frō Citty to Citty planting Churchs & preaching the word of God, as in the Acts of the Apostles is clearly expressed. The which also S. Paul testifieth of himselfe, and by his Epistles written to diuers nations euidently appeareth. As for the Protestants, they are not able to shew of their opi∣niō any one Apostolike man, who did perseuere in the do∣ctrine & place of the Apostles: as by the contraryes here∣after following appeareth. This marke also is euident and cleare to be seene by the succession of Pastours in Gods Church. For except this con∣tinuall succession were, the true Church of God should al∣together perish, all honour of God should be ouerthrowen, and no way should remayne for men to know the true and perfect way to their saluation. This marke is only proper to the true Church, for all heresies and new-fangled opi∣nions are forced to acknowledg some particular author and beginner, of whom it did both receaue their first begining, and also the name. So we see Lutherans named from Lu∣ther, Caluinists from Caluin &c. For as Vincentius Lyri∣nensis sayth:Vincēt Lyrinens. aduers. ha. There was neuer any heresy yet arose, but vnder a certayne particular name, in a particular place, & certayne time. And this is a way to discern the true Church frō the false.Hieron. cont. Luci∣fer. in fine. Whersoeuer thou hearest (sayth S. Hierome) those that are called Christians not to be named from Iesus-Christ our Lord, but from some particular person, as Marcionists, Valentinians, (Caluinists, Lu∣therans) know thou most certainly, that the Church of Christ is not there, but the Synagogue of Antichrist.
The sixteenth Consideration. A particular application of the foresayd markes of the Church to the Catholike, Apostolike and Roman Church, and to the Prote∣stants Congregation; and first of the marke Vnity. IT is most manifest that the Protestants Congregation is not the true Church of Christ, because the true and pro∣per marks aboue rehearsed do in no wise agree vnto it. As by the contrary the Roman Church is proued to be the on∣ly true Church, because in it only are to be found the sayd markes. First then it is cleere, that the Protestants Church can in no wise be called One, such as the true Church should be. For in the Protestants Church there is no vnity im mat∣ters of Fayth, as fully in the first Consideration is declared; it being very hard to find three of them in all points of one mynd and opinion. Neyther haue they any meanes to end their controuersies, and to returne to vnity and continue therein. For while they admit no rule of Fayth, but only the Bible, which euery one according to his fantasie doth expound, not submitting themselues to any one superiour guyded by the holy ghost to the end that all occasion of cō∣trouersies & diuision may be taken away: while, I say, they do thus, it is impossible that they should all agree in one Fayth and beliefe. Contrarywise, the Roman Church is alwayes One, ne∣uer changing any poynt of Doctrine, contrary to that which from the beginning it did belieue. Yea if at any time any controuersy cōcerning any point of Doctrine do arise, the same is easily ended, in respect that the Roman Church doth acknowledge one chiefe Pastour, appointed for that end by our Sauiour Christ Iesus, who commaunded all Christians to obey the same Church. This difference there∣fore may be assigned betwixt the Roman Church, and all heretikes Congregations, that the Roman Church, isCyp. lib. 1. epist. 3. A people ioyned to their Priest, and a flock cleauing to their Pastour, wheme whilest it heareth, it is not possible but that it should hold fast
the vnity of Fayth. Wheras Heretikes are not vnited amongst themselues, but rather contrary one to another, not consi∣dering,Cypriā loco citato. That in the Church of God there is one Priest (as S. Cyprian faith) and one iudge for the time, in Christs steed. The seauenteenth Consideration. That the Roman Church only, is Holy. THe second marke to wit of Holynesse, can no wise be applyed to the Protestants Congregation. For first there is no holynesse of life among them:Luther in postilla sup. Euāg. dom. 1. Ad∣uent. The most part of them, by Luthers owne testimony, being more wicked more reuengefull, more couetous, more vnmercifull, more vnmodest, and vnruly then when they were papists. As for their Doctrine, it leadeth men wholly to liberty and loosnes of life, comman∣ding men to breake fasting-daies prescribed by the Church, to cast away Confession of sinnes to a Priest, to neglect good workes; teaching that Gods commaundements can∣not be kept, that the perfectest worke that a man doth is sinne, that all sins are equall; which blasphemous poynts together with innumerable others, which for breuityes sake I do omit, do mak a man to cast away all care of auoi∣ding sinne and vice, so that we may iudge of the Prote∣stants, conforme to their fruite, according to the saying of our Sauiour:Math. 7. v. 16. By their fruites yee shall know them, for a good tree bringeth forth good fruit, but a corrupted tree cannot bring forth good fruit. As for the Roman Church, it cannot be denyed, but in it some sinfull folks are mixt with the good, as in the ninth Consideration is aboundantly declared. Yet betwixt the sinfull in the Roman Church, and those among Heretiks, there are two differences. The first is, that there are none among Heretikes which may truely be called Holy, from whome, as from the better part, their congregation may be named Holy. For albeyt we find some among them who absteyne from sinnes most apparent to the eyes of man, as stealing, swearing, and such lyke, and who do exercise some
morall workes, as giuing of almes, liuing temperatly and moderatly &c. Yet those are not sufficient signes of Holinesse, because the same, & much more was practised by the heathē Philosophers, and did proceed rather of naturall wit, and learning, then of charity and deuotion, in which true ho∣lynesse doth consist: For as S. Paul sayth:1. Cor. 13. v. 3. Although a man bestow all his goods to feed the poore, and giue his body to be burned, yet not hauing Charity it should profit him nothing. Which Chari∣ty must proceed1. Tim. 1. v. 5. out of a pure heart, and good conscience, & an vnfained Faith. Which things because they are inwaid, are ve∣ry hard to be knowē, except it please God to reueale them by miracle, or some other certayne way to vs. But hertofore it hath not bene heard that Luther or Caluin, or any of their followers confirmed by miracles their fayned holynesse, but rather it pleased God, by giuing euil successe to their en∣terprises, to shew that in thē there was no holinesse. Wheras in the Roman Church God hath euer giuen testimony by miracles, of the Fayth and holynesse of diuers Professours thereof, as the Protestants of Scotland must needes confesse of sundry of our holy Kings, as King Malcolme Kenmor, Queene Margaret, King William, King Dauid, and of others as S. Mongo, S. Ninian, S. Serfe, S. Padie, S. Columbane, S. Baldred, S. Patrike, whose miracles and holynesse of lyfe to this day are with one assent acknowledged in Scoland. The second difference bewixt the bad Catholiks & best Protestants is, that the Protestant Doctrine doth lead the Protestants to all sort of liberty, as is notorious by the grounds of their Religion: wheras the Roman Fayth both expresly forbiddeth all vice, and prescribeth Lawes con∣trary to liberty and loosnes of life, and conteyneth most soueraygne meanes, to incite and mooue men to all perfect vertue and holynesse of life. So that those which be sinfull in the Roman Church, cannot in any sort ascribe their sins to any defect or want of the doctrine of the Church; but rather to their owne frailty or malice, contrary to the teach∣ing of the Church, and sometymes contrary to their owne conscience and knowledge. Wherof it followeth, that albeyt there be some sinfull
men in the Roman Church, yet it may well be called Holy because the doctrine which it professeth, directeth & lead∣eth men to all holynesse, many of the professours thereof being most manifestly knowen to haue excelled in piety and good workes, whome God also of his infinite bounty hath vouchsafed to declare, by manifold and cleare miracles to haue bene holy. The eighteenth Consideration. That the Roman Church only, is Catholike. THis Title in no wise can be applyed vnto the Prote∣stant Congregation, for it is not Catholike, neyther in time, in place, nor in doctrine. First for tyme, it is confes∣sed by themselues that Luther was the first preacher therof. Neyther can the Protestants shew by any good testimony, any one man or company, that did professe and belieue in all points those opinions, which since Luthers reuolt from the Catholike Church, they haue professed. Secondly for place, it is not vniuersall, for as before Luther and Caluin the Protestant Religion was not, so now presently there is no kingdome or nation that maketh wholly profession of Protestancy. Not England, wherein there are diuers Pu∣ritans, many of the Family of Loue, many Atheists, and of no Religion. Not Scotland, wherein likewise there be ma∣ny Puritans, yea many of the Bishops are Puritans in their hart, and likewyse many Atheists. Thirdly, for doctrine, it is not vniuersall, because their whole doctrine consisteth of negatiues, in denying diuers points which haue beene generally belieued in all former ages, as Purgatory praying to Saints, and such lyke: for which cause the Puritanes thinke the Protestant Pastours to be Antichristian Mini∣sters, by reason that Antichrist shall conteyne in his name 666. which number is wholly conteyned in the word , I deny: the Protestants Religion not being any other thing then a heap of denials. Whereas on the contrairy side, the Roman Church
may only take vnto it selfe as proper & peculiar, the name of Catholike, both in tyme and place, it hauing been first planted and preached by the Apostles through the whole world, & so still visibly vntill these our dayes hath endu∣red, and shall to the end of the world continue. And also hauing euer in all places, where there be any Christians, some visible professours of the same. As also it is vniuersall in doctrine, teaching in all points the selfe same doctrine which by lineall succession of Pastours it hath receaued from Christ and his Apostles. Wherefore let the Prote∣stants who affirme that Christs Church hath erred, let them I say, shew in what age, vnder what Pope, by what way, with what violence and force, with what increase did a strange Religion ouerflow Rome, and the whole world? What speaches or rumors there were? What tumultes and troubles, what lamentations did such a nouelty breed? Was all the rest of the world asleepe, when Rome, the head seat of the Empire, and mother Citty of Christians did forge and make vp new Sacraments, a new sacrifice, a new doctrine of Fayth and Religion? Was there no histo∣ry-writer neyther Latin nor Greeke, neyther far nor neer, who would, if not playnly, yet at least obscurely mak some mention in writing of such a notable euent, as this should haue beene, if it had fallen out? We find mutations of king∣domes, deaths of Princes, changing of Lawes, alterati∣ons of Commonwelthes, and the very least introductions of any new thing saythfully to haue beene obserued, and committed to writing by those who at that tyme lyued: But as for this mutation of Religion in the Romā Chuch, which the Protestants so maliciously obiect to couer only the newfandglednes of their yesterday-Religion, I find no mention therof at all: I find no history writer of England, Scotland, France, or any other kingdome, whoeuer did make mention before Luther, of Protestants or Protesant Religion, or of any one man who before Luther made profession of such a Religion.
The ninteenth Consideration. That the Roman Church only, is Apostolike. THe fourth and last marke of the true Church is, that it should be Apostolike, which marke cannot be found in the Protestant Congregation, but by the contrary they shew euidently, that they are not Apostolike, when as they are forced to acknowledg some other beginner and Father of their Fayth then Christ and his Apostles, to wit, Luther and Caluin, whome they in no wise can proue to haue suc∣ceeded lawfully to Christ and his Apostles; neither to haue bene sent to teach this new doctrine by any lawfull Bish∣op or Pastor of Christs Church. Which Luther himselfe not only confesseth, but braggeth thereof:Luther in epist. ad Argent. tom. 7. We dare glory and bragge in this (sayth he) that Christ was first publish∣ed by vs. And Melancthon speaking of his maister Lu∣ther, sayth:Melāct praef. in tom. 1. Lutheri. God by him restored the Gospell vnto vs. For which bragging and bosting it may be sayd of him, as Op∣tatus sayd of Victor the first Bishop of the Donatists;Optat. cōt. Parm. That he was a sonne without a Father, a disciple without a mai∣ster. As for the Roman Church, there is and euer hath bene in it a continuall succession of Bishops without interrupt∣tion, since the tyme of the Apostles, as hereafter I shall set down and proue, which succession as a most forcible argu∣ment the holy Fathers vsed against all heretiks. So Irenaeus:Iran. 3. cap. 3 By shewing the tradition from the Apostles, & the Faith cōming to vs by succession of Bishops, we confound all them who any way through euill flattering of themselues, or vainglory, or through peruerse opinion do collect otherwise then they ought. And S. Augustin:Aug. cont. ep. Fundem. cap. 4. The suc∣cession of Priests from the very seat of Peter the Apostle, to whome our Lord commended his sheep to be fed, vntill this present Bishop, doth hold me in the Catholike Church. Wherefore we may say to the Protestants, that which S. Augustine sayd to the Donatists:Augu. in Psal. ōt. part. Don. Number the Priests from the seat it selfe of Peter, and behold in that order of Fathers who they were that succeeded to others. And
with Irenaeus:Iraen. lib. 3. c. 3. By this orderly succession of Bishops, the tradi∣tion of Apostles hath come to vs, and it is a most full demonstration that the Fayth which from the Apostles is confirmed euen till now, is one and the same. It is euident then by the examination of the foure marks aboue written, that the Roman Church is the only true Church of Christ, whose doctrine is the infallibly rule of Christian Fayth; and the Protestants Congregation is nothing els but a company without a head, whose opi∣nions consist in denying the doctrine professed by the Church of Christ, without interruption this sixteene hun∣dred yeares. The twentith Consideration. That out of the Roman Catholike Church there is no participation of the merits of the Passion, and precious Bloud of Christ Iesus, and consequently no Saluation. SVndry of the most learned Protestants considering with themselues without passion, the holynes, antiquity, suc∣cession, vnity of fayth, miracles, and the infinite multi∣tude of most holy and famous persons, of Kings, Princes, & others of all sorts, who haue liued and dyed in the Catho∣like and Roman Church, auow constantly, that the Ro∣man Catholikes may worke assuredly their saluation, re∣mayning Papists & Catholikes. So writeth D. Couell:In his defence of M. Hooker pag. 68. We gladly acknowledg thē of Rome to be of the family of Iesus Christ &c. The same auoweth M. Hooker saying:In his Ecclesiasti∣call Policy lib. 3. sect. 1. p. 130. The Church of Rome is of the family of Iesus-Christ, a part of the house of God, a lymme of the visible Church of Christ. The same sayth D. Bar∣row:In his foure Ser∣mons and two questi∣ons, ser. 3. The learned writers acknowledge the Church of Rome to be the Church of God. The same affirmeth George Cassander:Lib. de officio pj viri pag. 14. The Church of Rome is to be reuerenced, as being the true Church and temple of God. In lyke sort M. Moreton a prime Prote∣stant affirmeth:In his treatise of th King∣dome of Is∣rael, and of the Church p 94. That Papists are to be accompted the Church of God, because they do hold the foundation of the Ghospell, which is Fayth in Christ Iesus, sonne of God and Sauiour of the world. Final∣ly
D. Couell affirmeth in playne termes:In his late treatise to the Ar∣chbishop of Canterb. That those that lyne and dye in the Church of Rome are saued. Yet notwithstan∣ding this constant doctrine of the most learned Protestāts, the Parliamentary Protestants of Scotland, England and Ireland persecute the Catholikes euen to death, not for any zeale of their owne Religion, but rather to take hold of the goods, landes and possessions of the poore Catholikes. The most learned sort then of the Protestants auow constant∣ly, that the Papists and the Catholikes remayning constant in their owne Religion shall be saued. Now it resteth to shew that there is no saluation out of this Catholike and Roman Church, as witnesseth the word of God by the Prophets Ioel and Isaias:Ioel 2. v. 32. (g) In Mount Sion, and in Ierusalem shalbe saluation (which word, Saluation, the Ministers in their corrupted Bibles haue taken away) as our Lord hath sayd, and in the residue whome our Lord shall cal. (k) The nation and kingdome that shall not serue thee,Isa. 60 v. 12. shall perish. For the which cause, the Church of God is called, the Citty of refuge, the sanctuary of God, the spirituall seed, and of-spring of Abraham, the Father of the faithfull, the spouse of God, out of which whosoeuer eateth the Paschall Lābe, is a prophane per∣son, and stranger from the merits of Christ. The Church lyke∣wyse is called the Arke of Noe; out of the which there was nothing but death and perdition, saith Gaudentius, whose words are:Tract. 2. de lect. Euang. It is manifest that all men of those tymes perished, excepting only such as deserued to be found within the Arke, bearing a type or figure of the Church: for in lyke manner they cannot be sa∣ued who are separated from the Apostolike fayth & Catholike Church. Lykewise the Church of God is called the body of Christ, to signify that no man can enioy the benefit of lye and salua∣tion, vnles he be a member of this mysticall body. So S. Augustine:Aug. epist. 50. ad Bonif. prop finē The Caholike Church only is the body of Christ, whereof he is head: out of this body the holy Ghost quikneh no man &c. Therfore he that will haue the holy Ghost, let him beware he re∣mayne not out of the Church; let him beware he ener not faynedly in∣to it. And agayne:De vni∣tat. Eccles. c. 16. To saluation it selfe, and to eternall lyfe no man arriueth, but he that hath Christ his head But no man can haue Christ his head, rules he be in his body, which is the Church. Con∣forme
to this doctrine of S. Augustine the Church is called the Mother of the faythfull, because none can receaue lyfe ex∣cept he be conceaued in her wombe: which gaue occasion to ancient S. Cyprian to say:De fim plic. Prael. No man can haue God for his Father, vnles he haue the Church for his Mother. Which sentence hath bene famous amongst all the auncient Fathers vntill this our age. The Church is called the kingdome of Christ: out of which whosoeuer be, are rebels and traytours to God. True it is, that sundry heretikes Protestants and Puritanes may lead a good morall lyfe to the eye of man, giue some almes to the poore, be ciuill in conuersation, read the Bi∣ble, haue the Sacrament of Baptisme, sing the Psalmes, yet being out of the Church, there is no saluatiō for them saith S. Augustin:Tom. 7. conc. ad plebem de Emerita post med Out of the Catholike Church a man may haue all things except saluation, he may haue orders, he may haue Sacramēts, he may sing Alleluia, he may answere Amen, he may haue the Ghos∣pell, he may haue and preach the fayth in the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost, but he can by no meanes ob∣teyne saluation, but in the Catholike Church. Which doctrine of S. Augustin, hath euer bene in the Church of God an es∣sentiall point of Religion, yea as an infallible doctrine it was auowed, sworne and subscribed to by the three Estates of Scotland:In the Parlament holden at Edēburgh anno 1560. Out of the which Kirke there is neyther lyfe nor eternall felicity, and therfore we vtterly abhorre the blasphemy of thē who affirme, that men who lyue according to equity and iustice shall be saued, what Religion that euer they haue professed. The Gene∣rall Councell of Lateran auerreth the same to be a poynt of saluation:Conc. Later. cā. 1. There is one vniuersall Church of the faythfull, out of the which no man is saued. The reason of this doctrine is, the secret will of God, who did send his sonne Christ Iesus into the world to erect and build one Church, one Fayth, one Religion, one chosen company, which he hath purchased with his precious blood; for the which he delyuered him∣selue to sanctify her with the lauer of water. In this only Church he hath appointed Apostles, Prophets, and Do∣ctours to the end of the world: to this only Church he gi∣ueth his Spirit, promiseth his assistance, imparteth his grace and spirituall gifts: wherfore whosoeuer is deuided, or se∣parated
from this Church, is wholly bereft or Gods celesti∣all comfort, as witnesseth the Ministers of Scotland them∣selues in playne termes:In the articles of Fayth. 16. Sonday. No man can receaue forgiuenes of his sinnes vntill he be ioined in the fellowship of Gods people & Church, and so continue in the vnity of Christs body euer to the end, lyke a trew member of his Church. Wherefore I conclude, that whosoeuer liueth and dyeth out of the Catholike Church, not hauing any ve of the Sacraments thereof, of the true word of God preached therein, of the good workes and prayers proce∣ding from the members thereof, cannot iustly hope for a∣ny saluation, yea rather maketh himselfe guilty of eternall Damnation. The twentith one Consideration. That euery man cannot be saued, of whatsoeuer Religion he make profession. THere be many Libertines in Scotland, England, and Ireland, & elswhere who do thinke foolishly that eue∣ry man may be saued in any kind of Religion: which o∣pinion as it is most false and erroneous, so is it most foolish and dangerous, bringing a man thereby to acknowledge no Religion at all, which is the way & path to Atheisme. The reason wherfore this opinion is most erroneous and false is, because in euery act of Fayth, we must not only regard what we doe belieue, but also (and that principally) vpon what ground and motiue we belieue it, or what is the reason of our beliefe. For of what kind the motiue, or reason of our beliefe is, of the same kynd is our Fayth, be∣liefe, & Religion. So that if the ground, motiue, or reason (called Ratio formalis Fidei) wherfore we beleeue any thing, be most certayne and infallible, our Fayth lykewise is cer∣tayne and infallible: if it be vncertayne, our Fayth also is vncertayne, fallible and subiect to errour, and consequēt∣ly not a diuine, but a humane Fayth. As for example: The Turke beleeueth, that there is one God, Creator of all things, because he is so taught by his Alcoran, which he
thinketh (being persuaded by the inward Spirit, sayth he) to be written by the Spirit of God. But his fayth (albeyt he belieue that which is true) relyeth, and is grounded vpon a deceitfull reason and motiue, that is, vpon his Alcoran or false Bible, by the force whereof he is moued to belieue many false and blasphemous things, as, That there are not three persons in the Blessed Trinity, that Christ is inferi∣our to Mahomet, & many such: wherfore that fayth of his by reason of the foundation and motiue is deceitful and er∣roneous, leading a man to eternall damnation. Euen so the Protestants belieue:Act. 2. v. 27. That Christ his soule was put in the graue:Heb. 5. v. 7. That Christ feared the paynes of hell; and many such heads of Religion, because they find (say they) those heads of Religion in the Bible translated by their owne Ministers, whome they must auow to haue erred in the translation thereof, and consequently must needes auow not to be the infallible word of God. For asmuch then as this their fayth relyeth vpon a deceitfull ground and mo∣tiue, that is, vpon their corrupted Bible, not vpon an in∣fallible and sure ground, it cannot be diuine but humane Fayth. Hence I inferre this argument. That Fayth which relyeth vpon a false foundation and ground (albeyt it be∣lieue somethings which are true) cannot be sufficient to sal∣uation or diuine Fayth. But the Fayth and Religion of sundry sectes and heresies of other ages, and of this our cor∣rupted age relyeth vpon a false foundation. Ergo, they can∣not be sufficient to saluation. As for example. The yeare of our Lord two hundreth,Epip hani∣us lib. de mens. & pond. there were certaine Heretikes called Symmachians who be∣lieued the blessed Trinity, the true Messias, receaued the Scripture, and the Bible as the word of God, exponing it alwayes according to their owne fansie and priuat Spirit, but because they denyed or misbeleeued the day of the v∣niuersall iudgement, they were condemned as Heretykes by the Church of God. Because the ground and motiue of their Religion was not in effect the Word of God, but the word of God interpreted according to their owne fansie & & Imagination. Likewise the Valesians, Nouatians, Angeliques,
Apostoliques receaued the Scripture as the word of God, ex∣poning the same according to their owne fansie, to proue therby their heresies and errours; yet because the ground & last resolution of their Religiō was not in the true word of God, but rather in their owne fansie and imagination, a∣gainst the consent of the vniuersall Church, they were condemned by the auncient Fathers, as Heretikes & mem∣bers of the Diuell. Euen so it is with our Protestants, who belieue not the word of God, as it is precisely the word of God, but as it is viciously translated by the Ministers, and as it is erroneously explicated conforme to their owne fansie, and against the consent of the vniuersall Church of God, which hath bene these sixteene hūdreth yeares; which do∣ctrine I will mak more manifest by this argument. Those who belieue many heads of Religion which are not conteyned in the expresse word of God, and misbelieue other heads of Religion, which are con∣teyned in the expresse word of God; are not grounded in their beliefe vpon the only expresse word of God, or are not moued to belieue or mis∣belieue by the authority of the expresse word of God only, as it is mani∣fest: But thus belieue the Ministers of Scotland and England. Ergo. I proue the Minor. The Ministers belieue. 1. That there be only two Sacraments. 2. That the supper of the Lord should be receaued with kneeling. 3. That the best worke a man can do, conteineth deadly sinne. 4. That children may be saued without Baptisme &c. Which are no wise cōteyned in the expresse word of God: yet they misbelieue these heads of the Catholik Religiō. 1.Matth. 26. v. 26. This is my body which is giuen for you. 2.1. Iohn. 2. v. 3. He that sayth I know him and keepeth not his commaundments, is a lyar, and the truth is not in him. 3.Iames 2. v. 24. Yee see then how that through workes a man is iustified, & not by Fayth only. And many such sentences which are conteyned in the ex∣presse words of the Bible. Ergo, the Ministers are not moued to belieue or misbelieue by reasō of the authority of the ex∣presse word of God only, (otherwise they would belieue all alyke) but because they are so persuaded in their consci∣ence to belieue the one, and misbelieue the other, and in a word, because it pleaseth them to belieue the one, and not the other.
Of the which doctrine I inferre. First that the last resolution of the Protestant Religion is in one of these two grounds; first they belieue this or that to be a poynt of fayth because they find it (say they) in their corrupted Bible (thogh they shall neuer be able to proue any debarable poynt out of the expresse word of the Bible) belieuing neuerthelesse many other things which are not conteyned expressely in their owne corrupted Bible, but it cannot be a sincere faith which is groūded vpon such a corrupted Bible. 2. They be∣lieue this or that head of Religion, not because it is contey∣ned in the word of God expressely, otherwise they would belieue all therin conteyned alyke, but because it pleaseth them to expone the expresse word of God to their fansie, and iudgement, which they call the inward persuasion of the ho∣ly Ghost; the which is the last Rendeuous, and resolution of the Protestants Religion, as the Hugenots in France wit∣nesse plainly in their confession of Fayth:In the confession of Fayth of the Huge∣nots in France. ar∣tic. 4. Nous cognoissons ces liures estre Canoniques, & regle de nostre foy, non pas tant par le commun accord, & consentement de l' Eglise, que par le tesmoignage & persuasion interieur du S. Esprit, qui nous les fait discerner d'auec les autres liures Ecclesiastiques. That is: we acknowledg these books to be Canonicall and the rule of our Fayth, not in regard of the com∣mon agreement and consent of the Kirke, but rather in regard of the testimony and persuasion of the holy Ghost, who maketh vs to discerne these from other Ecclesiasticall books. The same teach the Mini∣sters of our Iland in their articles of Fayth, where the Mi∣nister asketh:In the articles of Fayth set down in the Scots Cate∣chisme. 45. Sunday. M. How must we vse this Word, to haue this profit by it? C. We must receaue it being perfectly persuaded thereof in our conscience, as of an vndoubted truth sent downe from heauen. Wher∣fore if yee aske of a Minister why he belieueth the prophe∣sy of Ieremy to be Canonicall, and the bookes of the Ma∣chabees not to be? he must needs answere at last after much idle talke: Because the inward persuasion of the holy Ghost doth thus persuade me, though the common consent of the vniuersall Church be against me. If yee aske of a Minister why doth he interpret and translate those plaine wordes of the Bible:Act. 2. v. 27. Thou shalt not leaue my soule in hell, contrary to the Church of God, and all the holy Fathers? he will answere at last, if yee vrge
him, because the inward persuasion of the Spirit doth thus persuade him. What is this I pray yow, but abhominable & manifest heresy, the selfe same fashion which all heretikes euer vsed, and in a word the doctrine of the deuills, preached vnder the pretext of the word of God, by the Ministers, of whom S. Paul fortold:1. Tim. 4. v. 1. In the last dayes there shall some depart from the Fayth, attending to the Spirit of errour, and doctrine of deuills. Secondly I inferre, that though the Protestants agree in some poynts of Religion with vs Catholikes, yet their fayth is not diuine and infallible, but rather humane, falli∣ble and diuerse from ours, euen as the Donatists heretykes, sayth S. Augustine, beleeued one God with the Catholi∣kes, belieued in the same Christ, they had the same Gospell, song the lyke psalmes &c. yet because they erred in one, they erred in all;Aug. in explic. psal. 54. In those (sayth S. Augustin) they are with me, and yet not altogeher wi  me, in schisme not with me, in heresy not with me, in many things with me, in a few not with me, by rea∣son of those few wherby they were not with me, the many could not help them, in which they were with me. The which few things wherein the Donatists distented from the Catholikes were some vnwritten Traditions, sayth the same S. Augustine:Devni∣tat. Eccles. c. 10. This neyther you, nor I do read in expresse words &c. Yet be∣cause the Church of God beleeuing those vnwritten tra∣ditions, & the Donatists refusing to beleeue the same, they were condemned as heretikes, as witnesseth the same holy Father:Lib. 1. nc. Cres∣on. c. 33. Although no example of this mater be found in holy Scri∣ptures, yet do we follow in this the truth of the Scriptures, when we do that which is agreable to the vniuersall Church, commended vnto vs by the authority of the same Scriptures. And againe:b. 11. de Bapt. cont. Don. & lib. 5. c. 4. The A∣postles haue commanded nothing concerning this matter: But the cu∣stome which was alledged agaynst S. Cyprian is to be thought to haue descended from their tradition, as diuers other things haue done which the vniuersall Church doth obserue, and are therfore with great rea∣son belieued to haue bene commanded by the Apostles, although they be not written. The reason of this is, because the true Fayth must needes be one and the same, in all the faythfull; for truth is one, vniforme and constant: falsity and errour is various, discordant, and changeable; and the reason wher∣fore
Fayth must be full and entiere, is the infallible autho∣rity of God, vpon whose testimony we belieue, which au∣thority being once suspected or doubted of in any poynt of Religion, be it neuer of so small importance, the like doubt and suspition may creep into others, & consequently shake the foundation of Christian Religion. Wherby it is euidēt, that the Ministers belieuing some articles of faith according to their fansie, and not belieuing others, belieue not at all, as wisely disputeth Tertullian agaynst Valentine the he∣retike, saying:De pre∣script. Some things of the law and Prophets Valen∣tine approueth, some things he disalloweth, that is, he disalloweth all, whilest he disproueth some. And S. Athanasius:Atha. in simbolo. Whosoe∣uer doth not hold the Catholike Fayth whole and inuolate, he shall pe∣rish for euer. The same auoweth S. Hierome:Lib. 3. de Apolog. cont. Ruf. That for one word or two contrary to the Fayth, many heresies haue bene cast out of the Church. The same S. Gregory:Greg. azianz. tract. de fide. Nothing can be more dangerous then those Heretikes, who when as they runne through all things vprightly, yet with one word, as with a drop of poyson, corrupt and stayne the true and sincere Fayth of our Lord, and of Apostolicall tradition. S. Basil:Apud Theodoret. lib. 4. hist. c. 17. Such as are instructed in the diuine doctrine, do not suffer any sillable of the diuine decrees to be depraued, but for he defence thereof, if need require, willingly imbrace any kind of death. Truly if one word, one sillable may make a man to loose the true Fayth, much more one errour and deprauation in the Scottish Bible, may take away from it the authority of the word of God. Finally it is not inough for a Catholike to belieue al the heads of the Catholike Fayth, but he must also communi∣cate and ioyne in the vse of Sacraments, together with the Catholiks. Therfore though some indifferent and worldly men belieue all things which the true Church belieueth, fearing to professe outwardly that inward beliefe for world¦ly respectes: Yet as long as they separate themselues from outward communion of the Catholike Church; that very separation & that dissention alone is sufficint to cast them headlong into euerlasting fyre:Math: 1. v. 30 For he that doe h not gather with me, scattereth; he that is not with me, is agaynst me, sayth Christ. Wherby it appeareth first, how much they are de∣ceaued
who thinke it to be sufficient to saluation, to belieue the common principles and heads of our Religion contey∣ned in the Creed, not submitting themselues to belieue all and whatsoeuer the holy Church belieueth. 2. It appeareth lykewise how foolishly the Protestants flatter themsel∣ues, crying out agaynst vs Catholikes for want of charity, because we condemne (say they) so many morall and good men of other Religions then of ours, such men being in conuersation modest, blameles in their lyues, zealous in praier, almes, hospitality, and many other vertuous works. Whereunto I answere, that it is no want of charity in vs to speake the truth without dissimulatiō in a matter of so great importance, whereupon relyeth eternall saluation, but ra∣ther an euident token of perfect charity, in forwarning the Protestants of the perill of damnation wherein they are: following in that the holy exāple of S. Paul, who without flatterie wrot vnto the Corinthiās:1. Cor. 6. v. 9. Do not erre: Neyther fornicatours, nor seruers of Idolls, nor adulterers, nor the effeminate &c. shall possesse the kingdome of God. So the Catholikes, zea∣lous of Gods honour, & saluation of soules purchased with the blood of Christ, doe charitably, in forwarning the Pro∣testants of their dangerous estate in the sight of God; not∣withstanding the outward morall lyfe, modest carriage, prayers and almes deeds, which will auayle them nothing to the gaining of heauē, being out of the Catholik Church. S. Augustine sayth:Augu. lib. . con. Donat. c. 8 Let vs suppose a man to be chast, continēt, not couetous, not seruing Idols, ministring hospitality to the needy, enemy to none, sober, frugall, but yet an Heretike: truly no man maketh doubt, but for this alone that he is an heretike, he shall not possesse the kingdome of God. And all those be heretikes who with contumacy and pertinacy manteyne their peruerse o∣pinions against the Church of God, which hath bene this sixeene hundreth yeares: yea those Protestants who wil∣fully follow the heresies of others, who slouthfully de∣ferre to imbrace the true Religion, who fearfully put of to accept the same whē it is sufficiently proposed vnto them, all those in the sight of God be manifest heretikes, & belieue not in the true God, the true Messias, but forge vnto them∣selues
another God, another Messias. Now,Aug, q 19. sup. Iosue. Whosoe∣uer imagineth God such as God is not, he caryeth euery where another God, a false God in his mind, sayth S. Augustine. True it is, that there are many amongst the Protestants who haue no fit occasion to be instructed in the Catholike Religion, yea who neuer hauing heard any thing at all of it, thinke that there is no other Religion except the Puri∣tanes and Protestants, leade lykewise to the eye of men a good morall lyfe: All those I confesse are not so guilty be∣fore God, of the crime of heresie, as the Ministers, as sundry Noble and Gentlemen be, who know in their conscience the Catholike Religion to be the only Religion, yet for feare of the world, of necessity, and persecution, remayne still in the estate of perditiō. Neuertheles those simple ones are in a very hard case, by reason that falling into deadly sins eyther by thought, word, or deed, they haue not the mea∣nes of the holy Sacraments (which are only in the true Church) wherby they may ryse from that damnable estate. Besides that, the very grounds of the Protestant Religion, to wit, That a man continually transgresseth the commaundements of God; Man hath not freewill to work his saluation; There is no merit of good workes; Fayth only is necessary to saluation, and such like: These damnable grounds (I say) often beaten in the eares of the simple people, make them carelesse to withstand tenta∣tion, to ouercome sinne, to do good workes, to be sory for their sinnes committed, and consequently make them to be without excuse in the sight of God. Happy be they then, who hauing heard of the Ca∣tholike Fayth, are carefull in searching and finding it out: Happy are they who hauing found it, do sincerely imbrace and intierly belieue it: happy are they who doe communi∣cate in outward profession and participation of the Sacra∣ments, with the members of the Catholike Church: happy are they who by the often vse of the Sacraments doe renew their life in sanctification and holinesse, and that constant∣ly, till they heare those blessed words:Ma. 25. v. 34. Come yee blessed of my Father, take inheritance of the Kingdome prepared for you, from the beginning of the world.
The twentith two Consideration. What disposition is requisite to him, who by reading the foresayd Considerations, should imbrace the Catholike, Apostolike, and Roman Religion. BEsides the forsayd Considerations, which are sufficiēt to mooue any wise man to imbrace the Catholike, A∣stolike, Roman Religiō, we haue many others, as in al ages & kingdoms innumerable visible professours, innumerable learned and wise men; yea of our Scottish Nation we haue had as many holy, wise and valiant Kings as any externe Nation, and more in number then diuers other Nations, as S. Malcolme called Kenmor, and S. Margaret Queen, S. Dauid King, Constantin the Martyr, S. William King, King Mal∣colme the Virgin, Conuallus King, S. Vdelina Queen, S. Ma∣thilda Queen, S. Richarda Empresse, Blessed Queen Marie the Martyr our Soueraigne King Iames the sixt his mother, S. Alexander, S. Colomannus patron of Austria in Germany, S. Mungo, S. Fridelinus, S. Edmūdus, S. Fiacre, S. Syra, S. Romualdus Martyr, S. Drōstan, S. Oda, S. Maxentia, S. Florentine, S. Clarus & sundry others, famous to this day amongst forrayne nati∣ons, & acknowledged to haue descended of the Royall bloud of Scotland, being all Papists, and Roman Catho∣likes, whose holy conuersation & lyfe I am to set out, God willing in my Menalogy of the Saints of Scotland. We haue had in like māner millions of most cōstant Martirs, who moued only with the Loue of God alone, haue contemned al tem∣porall things, riches, liberty, yea life it selfe; liuing in∣nocently, and shedding their blood constantly for defence of the Catholike Religion. We haue had innumerable ho∣ly Confessours and Virgins, who in vertue of our Religi∣on haue made great mutation in their liues, in changing frō an imperfect degree of vertue to the very top of perfection: and who in proofe of their Religion haue wrought many miracles. Which motiues to our Religion cannot with any colour of truth, be pretended by the Protestants and Puri∣tanes,
who can not proue one debatable poynt of Religi∣on by the expresse word of the Bible. 2. Who cannot im∣proue, no not one poynt of the Catholike Religion by the expresse word. 3. Who cannot name any man, who before Caluin was of their Religiō. 4. Who cannot name any na∣tion which maketh accompt of the Bible now presently v∣sed in Scotland, Latin or Scottish, as of the word of God. 5. Who cannot shew any monument, as Churches, Chap∣pells, or such, builded by any of their Religion, before the cōming of Iohn Caluin the Sophist. 6. Who cannot na∣me any king in Christendome to haue bene of their Religi∣on, before the coming of Caluin and Luther. Notwithstanding all these most weighty and forcible Considerations, sundry Protestants through the liberty of their Freewil, and specially through want of pious affecti∣on to imbrace the truth, for worldly respects, or fleshly li∣berty, doe not suffer their minds to consider earnestly (as the importance of the matter requireth) these forsayd mo∣tiues, doe not permit their will to make election of the true and sincere Religion, and that by reason of a preiudicate erroneous conceit, which is setled in their mind, with pride and obstinacy, which is common to all Heretikes; to which end the Ministers without any conscience inter∣tayne the people with preiudicate and preocupied opini∣ons, yea blasphemies agaynst the Catholike Religion: as that the Catholikes adore Images, put all their trust in their good workes, pray to stocks and stones, and such blasphe∣mies which were tedious to me to rehearse. The other Im∣pediment which hindreth men to imbrace the true Reli∣gion, notwithstāding the foresayd Considerations, is a spi∣rituall slouth, carelesnes, and neglect of heauenly thinges necessary to our saluation. This impediment is remarkable in many Protestants, specially in those who are giuen to honours, pleasures, and commodities of this world, who hauing little feeling of any Religion, no apprehension of things to come, of Gods Iudgments, of death, of the eter∣nall paynes of hell, of the losse of that eternall blisse, haue chiefly fleshly pleasures, worldly honours, or both in mind
and hart of whome our Sauiour foretold:Iohn. 5. v. 44. How can you belieue, who do receaue glory one from another, and doe not seeke the glory which is from God alone? And S. Paul:1. Cor. 2. v. 14. The fleshly man perceaueth not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishnes to him.Iude v. 12.13. Such men, sayth the Apostle, are without all feare, fee∣ding themselues, they are lyke wandring starres to whome is reserued the darknes for euer. If yow talke with such men of matters of Religion, yow shall see them turne all the places of the Scripture, yea can cite to their owne fansie, humor, and bad disposition, not making any accompt of the exposition of the holy Fathers, of generall Councels, nor of the whole body of the Catholike Church: which is no new forme of dealing amongst heretikes, since it was vsed by the Dona∣tists, as wisely remarketh S. Augustine:Lib. 3. cont Don natist cap 19. & epi. 222. The Donatists (sayth he) conuerted all the mysteries, and words of the holy books of the Scripture, vnto the images of those their fansies, which hauing done, they seemed to themselues to follow the very Scriptures, when indeed they followed their owne errours. Doe not the Protestants and Puritanes the same in explicating the Bible to their owne imagination and fansie? He then who desyreth to saue his soule eternally, to en∣ioy the blessings of heauen eternally, to see God, and the Saints of heauen eternally, must needes set aside all world∣ly Consideration, in seeking out the true Religion, set aside passion and obstinacy which are infallible tokens of a diuellish Spirit; and desyre to seeke out, search, and dili∣gently to inquire the true Religion, with humility of will and docility of vnderstandinge, which are opposite to obstinacy and pryde, the very rootes and grounds of all heresie. This humility in hart is one of the greatest dispositions to find out the true Religion, as witnesseth the Prophet who sayth:Isa. co. v. 1. To whome shall I haue respect, but to the poore litle one, and the contrite of Spirit, and to him that trembleth at my words. And our Sauiour Christ Iesus:Matth. 1.. v. 29. Learne of me, because I am meeke & hūble in hart Yea the want of this humility only is the cause that many do not find out the true Religion, be∣cause,Iam. 4. v. 6. God doeth withstand the proude, and lofty mynded, and giueth his grace and fauour to the humble in mind. Docility of vn∣derstanding
is likewise requisite, wherby a man yieldeth willingly to reason without further obstinacy, setting aside contention of idle wordes, which alwayes doe accom∣pany heresy, and is a worke of the flesh, sayth S. Paul: (h) The works of the flesh are manifest &c. wrath, contentions, seditions, heresies. Finally frequent prayer made to God, with a hum∣ble mind, & earnest affection to find out the true Religion is a most fit and necessary meanes to obtayne the same; for true Religion is a special gift of God, which is giuen by in∣stant and feruent prayer. The three & twentith Consideration. Certayne Notes and Animaduersions, which the wise and learned Protestant, is to obserue, in seeking out the true Religion. FIrst of all, yow are to apprehend this mater of Religion as a point of great moment and importance, and wher∣vpon dependeth eternall felicity, and consequently yow should not read Controuersie-books eyther for curiosity, as many doe, or negligently and to passe your time only, nor with the Spirit of contradiction (which is familiar to the Protestants and Puritans) to find out faultes, and quarrell without iust occasion, the Catholikes sayings: But rather yow should read sincerely and in conscience making God himselfe the iudge of your reading, proposing for end only to find out the true Religion, the true fayth and profession for the sauing of your soules: for by this meanes you shall, as it were, oblige God to giue you light and assistance to discerne the true Religion from the false; which to obteyne you haue great need to be hūble in mind, deuout in praier, and indifferent to imbrace the truth only, to pray to God often, saying with the Prophet Dauid: O Lord teach me to ful∣fill thy will, because thou art my God. 2. When yow beginne to read any controuersy, endea∣uour first to apprehend well the true state of the Question, not belieuing one side only, but rather searching out what euery syde, Catholik & Protestant holdeth therin, & in this
poynt, besids many others, yow shall find amongst the Protestant-writers great fraud and deceit vsed, by reason that they propone the questions not sincerely as we Catho∣likes do hold and belieue them, but as they would haue the Reader vnderstand them to their owne aduantage. As for example: The Protestants propose that question thus, Whe∣ther a man may be saued by workes without grace? Which is easy for the Protestants to impugne, by reason that it is false. But the true state of the question, and as the Catholikes do belieue it, is this: Whether by good workes that proceed from the grace of God, and true Fayth, a Christian may be saued? And so in all the rest, yow shall find great fraud amongst the Pro∣testant-writers in proposing the true state of the question, as yow shal see specially in M. Perkins book called, The refomed Catholike, who almost neuer doth propose the true state of the question: which deceitfull proceedings Iohn Fox also v∣seth in the booke of his Actes and Monuments printed at London anno 1596. Where in his preamble to the same pag. 22. setting downe differences in doctrine betwixt the Catholik & Protestant Church, is conuinced to haue made aboue an hundreth & twēty lyes, in lesse then three leaues. 3. When yow haue found the true state of the Question, yow must be very carefull to hold the same continually in your mynd, considering attentiuely whether the discourse which yow shall read in your Author be to the purpose, & doe leuell right at the marke or no, or runne aside to im∣pertinent matters, as often yow shall find the Protestants to doe; and specially D. Whitaker in his controuersies, who doeth fill vp leaues with many wordes, but to little pur∣pose, playing alwayes the Oratour, but not the Deuine & Doctour. In lyke manner yow shall find many Prote∣stant-writers in these our dayes who slip asyde, and will dryue yow into many by-matters to confound your iudg∣ment and memory, weary your patience, and therby make all your reading unprofitable: and thus yow shall find in those Protestant-writers, who haue more words then wit, passion then learning, deceit then truth. 4. Yow must remark diligently how that the Protestāt
writers doe promise nothing but Scripture, nothing but the pure word of God, the expresse words of the Bible; yet in effect yee shall find that they giue for Scripture, their owne in∣ventions, for the word of God, their owne expositions, & for the true text of the Bible, a most corrupted and falsified translation, as yow will see in the booke followinge. Moreouer you must remarke, that when the Protestants doe cite Scripture, and their owne corrupted Bible, you must consider I say, how that place cited by them was vnderstood and interpreted by auncient Fathers, of whome the Protestants themselues make great accompt, and who were many hundreth yeares before those our controuersies did aryse. As for example: We Catholikes doe alledge for proofe of purging fire after this lyfe, those words of S. Paul:1. Cor. 9. (a) He shalbe saued, but so as by fire, as S. Augustin in sundry pla∣ces of his workes witnesseth, and before him Origen, and after him S. Gregory, and sundry others. The Protestants agaynst Purgatory, alledge vpon their side the saying of Sa∣lomon:Ecclesi. 11. Where the tree falleth, there it lyeth. No man shall find that this place was euer alledged in this sense by any auncient Father, which is so certayne and infallible, that the Protestants in citing the Scripture for their heresies & opinions, cannot possibly name not only one auncient Fa∣ther who hath interpreted those places of the Scripture as they doe, which sheweth the Protestāts to be manifest He∣retikes in explicating the Scripture agaynst the streame and multitude of all the learned holy men, who were frō Christ to Luther his time, and since. 5. As for the holy Fathers themselues, when they are al∣ledged, it is to be considered in what age they wrote, and whether that which they say was euer found to be contra∣dicted by other Fathers of that age, or after them. For whē no contradiction is found (though any Fathers sentence doth not make a matter fully de fide, or of necessity vnder payne of sinne, or heresie to be absolutly belieued,) it is a weighty and infallible proofe, that the thing which the Father affirmeth, was so belieued by the whole Church of God, in his dayes, and consequently it were great teme∣rity
not to belieue the same. As for example, S. Augustins plication of the foresayd place, he shall be saued, but so as by fyre, in proofe of Purgatory, was neuer contradicted by a∣ny Father of his age, yea or before or after him, which is an infallible marke that the fayth of the Catholike Church cō∣cerning Purgatory was then vniuersally in vse, and before S. Augustine, yea and after him. And forasmuch as that Church and Religion which was in S. Augustines tyme, was, and is acknowledged by all to haue bene the true Ca∣tholike Church, it must needs be presumed to haue held no∣thing generally, which the Catholike knowne Church of the precedent age before S. Augustine did not also belieue and teach, and so from one age to another, vpward and downward may this demonstration be made, which ought to be a great motiue to any discreet and vnpassionate Rea∣der. Whereof the contrary is manifest in sundry expositions of the Scripture by Origen, Tertullian, and such, whose partiall and erroneous expositions were contradicted by those of their tyme, and after them. 6. Yow must needes in lyke manner remarke the dou∣ble dealing of the Protestants in writing and preaching: by reason that in generall, and publickly they will say and protest the holy and auncient Fathers to be of their Religi∣on, of their Faith, and profession, to the end that they may bleare the eyes of the ignorant. But if any Catholike cite for him any manifest place in particular of any auncient Fa∣ther, as of S. Augustine for Purgatory, & praying to Saints in heauen, S. Ambrose for the Reall Presence, and sacrifi∣ce of the Masse, and such like; then yow shall see the Mi∣nisters answere that the holy Fathers were men, might erre, and lye, deceaue and be deceaued; as if the Ministers were not men, yea lying and erroneous men, since they can doe no good, say they, but continually, do transgresse Gods commaund∣ments, teaching alway two seuerall sorts of doctrine, one in publicke the other in particular. In lyke manner when the holy Fathers are brought agaynst their damnable opini∣ons, they will answere euer with shift and guyle, that there is no comparison betwixt the Fathers and the Scripture; that
they should not be belieued except they bring Scripture with them. But if the Catholike aske Scripture of the Minister, and the expresse word of the Bible for his opinions, the Mini∣ster being guilty, and certayne that he cannot proue any debatable poynt of his Religion by the expresse word, nor yet impugne any of our Religion, will giue yow, insteed of the expresse word of the Bible, his consequences and de∣ductions, that is, his owne expositions, explications, su∣perstitious damnable heresies, and doctrines of the deuill, which he giueth and preacheth to the ignorant people, as if they were the word of God. After the same manner, if the Ministers alledge any places out of any auncient Father, founding to the fauour of any poynt of their Religion, if yow demand of them, whether they will stand absolutly to such a Fathers doctrine and determination in that, and all other controuersies which he handleth, they will refuse it assuredly. But we not, if it be a matter not censured by a∣ny other Father, or by the holy Church at that tyme. As for example, when the Ministers do alledge S. Augustine agaynst Freewill, if yow aske them whether they will stand absolutly to S. Augustines iudgment in this poynt, and in all other poynts of controuersy betwixt vs and them, as Purgatory, Prayer to Saints, prayer for the dead &c. they dare in no wise accept thereof: But we Catholikes haue no dif∣ficulty to admit S. Augustin concerning all controuersed points. Finally if yow cite playne and manifest sentences of the Fathers agaynst Protestants, they will answere that they speake figuratiuely. Thus M. Andrew Ramsey being as∣ked of me, then in prison in Edenburgh, whether S. Augu∣gustine had not in his workes, sundry prayers directed to the Saints in heauen? he answered as a playne Atheist. That S. Augustine prayed per prosopopeiam. Could any Turke or Iew answere more Sophistically or Atheistically? 7. By reason that the Controuersies be so many and the discourse so large vpon euery Controuersy, and the shifts so innumerable, it will be impossible for yow, to quyet and settle your iudgement by only reading of diuers books. And though it were possible for yow, yet it could
not be possible for thousands of others who cannot read, nor haue the commodity of books: for which cause you must haue a more sure and infallible rule, to find out the true Religion, then reading; which is, the Resolution of the vniuersall Christian Church in euery age concerning mat∣ters of Religion. This is the only sure, short, and infallible way, to find out the true Religion: which way S. Augu∣stin teacheth and setteth down plentifully, in his booke a∣gainst Cresconius the heretike saying:Lib. cont. Cres∣con. c. 33. Quisquis falli metuit huius obscuritate Quaestionis, Ecclesiam de ea consulat. That is; Whosoeuer feareth to be deceaued by the obscurity of this Question, let him go, and aske the Church thereof. And this same infallible way our Sauiour commaunded vs to follow, when we are in doubt of any poynt of Religion, saying: Tell the Church of it: He that will not heare the Church, let him be to thee as a heathen and publican. For the which cause S. Augustin sayd wisely:Cont. Epist. Ma∣nich. c. 3. I truly would not belieue the Ghospell, except the authority of the Church did induce me therto. To which testimony of S. Au∣gustin, I might ioyne the testimonyes of the holy Fathers, who with one consent doe appoint, as an infallible rule to find out the true Religion, to try and search diligently, which is the true Church. For, Seeing the Controuersies of Religion (sayth a Protestant in our tyme) are growen in number so many,M. Field in his Epi∣stle dedica∣tory. and in nature so intricate, that few haue tyme and leasure, fewer strength of vnderstanding to examine them; what remayneth for men desirous of satisfaction in things of such consequence, but diligently to search out which among all the societies of men in the world, is that blessed com∣pany of holy ones, that houshould of Fayth, that spouse of Christ, & Church of the liuing God, which is the pillar & ground of truth; that so they may imbrace her communion, follow her directions, and rest in her iudgement, and consequently ioyne themselues to that happy company of the triumphing Church in heauen. I wish from my hart that my deare countrymen in Scotland, England and Ire∣land would yield to this Protestant-writers counsell, in seeking out the true Church of God. To which end I haue set downe these foresayd Considerations to the glory of the blessed Trinity, the proffit of the Protestants and Puritans, and the comfort of the Roman Catholikes.
The foure and twentith Consideration. The Conclusion of this first Part, or Introduction. HAuing set down at length the infallible meanes wher∣by we may find out the true Religion, Church, and Profession: hauing lyke wise proued the true markes of the true Church, and those to be only proper to the Catholike and Roman Church, and consequently hauing proued that for the space of fifteene hundreth yeares the Protestants and Puritanes had no Church at all, no Religion, no Fayth, no outward profession knowen to God, or the world, yea no professours of their Religion except two, to wit, Nullus and Nemo, that is to say in truth, none at all: It followeth then of necessity, that the Protestants Religion before the comming of Caluin & Luther was nothing els, but a plain Platonicall or Poeticall Chymera, that is a meere imagina∣ry fiction inuented by seditious Puritanes, to change the Politicall State (vnder the pretext of a reformed Religion) of Scotland, England and Ireland, that thereby they might more freely inuade the lands and possessions of Catholikes, take to their own vses the rents and temporall goods of the Church liuings, ouerthrow the auncient Nobility of those three auncient kingdomes, casting down their houses, ba∣nishing them from their natiue Countrey, imprisoning their persons, and vsing all sort of barbarity, which the furyes of hell could inuent, against them. Now it followeth to set down in these sixteen follow∣ing Ages or Cēturies, first the names of the chiefe Pastors in euery Centurie, as being the principall members of the vi∣sible Church. 2. The names of the Kings of Scotland (the same is easy to be done of the Emperours, of the Kings of Frāce, England, Ireland, Spayne, Poland, Denmarke, Swe∣den, and other Princes, all Catholiks, who did raygne in all Christendom before the coming of Luther & Caluin) who happily haue raygned & professed the Catholike Religion to this our Age & Century. 3. To set downe the doctrine,
Fayth, and Religion of the most holy, famous, and learned Fathers, who were in euery age and Century, vsing the very words of those holy Fathers with all fidelity, that thereby the Catholike Reader may see manifestly, that the Catholike and Romane Religion (for the which we are now persecuted by the Protestants and Puritanes in Scot∣land, England, and Ireland) is the selfe same Religion which was professed by the holy Apostles, & which from them hath visibly without any interruption continued frō age to age to these our dayes. To which end I haue made choyce of twenty fyue articles of the Catholike Religion, which, (as the chiefest of all the rest) I proue first by Scrip∣ture and good Reason, called probatio de iure. Then, by the consequences & doctrine of the holy Fathers of euery age, called probatio de facto. Thirdly, I set downe the places of the Bible concerning those articles, falsified by the Ministers of Scotland and England. Finally, I shew, cleerly in my o∣pinion, that the Protestants and Puritanes haue neyther for thē the expresse word of the Bible, nor the plaine text ther∣of, eyther to proue any debatable point of their Religiō, or to improue any of ours; nor any groūd in the Scripture, not antiquity, nor succession, nor vnion, nor meanes to man∣teine the same; and finally that their Religion is nothing els but a meere inuention of the Ministers. Now, I challenge the Protestants, if they can, to deuise & set downe a catalogue sufficient to confront this of mine. I challenge them to set down the Professors of their Relgi∣on in euery age, as I doe the Professours of our Catholike, and Roman Religion; to set down their very words, and & plaine sentences faithfully: which they not being able to do, are obliged in conscience (if they haue any conscience) to auow plainly the truth in so weighty a poynt; that is, That they are childrē without Fathers, & schollers without Maisters; That they are the first professours of this new de∣formed Religion, & that they cannot name any professour of their Religion in all essential points, before Luther and Caluin, the former two alwaies excepted, Nullus and Nem.
A deuout Prayer, to conforme our selues to the Will of God. GRaunt me, O most mercifull God, seuently to desire such things as may be most acceptable & pleasing vn∣to thy diuine Maiesty, with wisdome to search after them,Ex Diuo Thoma A∣qumas. & alijs. not to be deceaued in the knowledg of them, & vnfaynedly to accomplish the performing of the same, to the prayse & glory of thy holy Name. Direct so my life, and graunt, I humbly beseech thee, that I may haue both knowledge, wil & power, to do that which thou requirest, & wouldest haue me to do, & in such manner, as is most behoofull, and expedient for my soule. Graunt me, O Lord God, vnderstanding to know thee, wisdome to find thee, conuersation to please thee, perseue∣rance to expect thee; & finally through hope to imbrace thee, and through thy Grace to enioy the benefits of this transitory life, and in the world to come, be made partaker of the reward and heauenly ioy, through the precious bloud of that immaculare Lambe our only Sauiour Ie∣sus-Christ; to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, three persons & one God, be all honour & glory, world without end. Amen. Another Prayer. OMnipotent, & most benigne, and mercifull Father, I most humbly beseech thee, that it may please thy di∣uine Maiesty to visit with thy Fatherly affection, all such as are any way fallen, or departed from the pure Catholik & Apostolike Church, or haue doubt in any article of the Faith & doctrine therof, or be seduced & deceaued through any false persuasion; & to illuminate their harts & vnder∣standing, with the beames of thy diuine light. Stay them O Lord, and bring them backe to acknowledge their er∣rour, that being truly conuerted, and vnited to the Catho∣like Church, they may confesse with mouth, and shew in workes, one true Catholike & Christian Fayth; and by remayning in it, worke their owne saluation; that so both we and they, being of one mind & wil, & dwelling togea∣ther
in one fould, may heare & follow thee O Lord, out true sheepheard, through the merits of thy precious bloud & passion. Who liuest & raygnest world without end. Amen. A Prayer for the imbracing of the true, Catholike, and Roman Fayth. OMnipotent, & most mercifull God, wheras without true Fayth no man can be saued, or please thee, but comming vnto thee (as the Apostle sayth) he must belieue;Ex S. Dio∣nysio & a∣lijs. I most humbly beseech thee to giue vnto me the true, right, & Catholike Fayth, which is not stayned with any spot of peruersenesse, nor inuolued in any errour, but in euery part pure and sincere. Graunt O Lord, that I may follow & imbrace that Faith only, which the holy, Catholike & Roman Church doth teach & professe; she being the pillar & firmamēt of Verity, & so guided & grounded by thy holy Spirit, that in Faith and doctrine she cannot erre. Giue me Grace, O Lord, that whatsoeuer shalbe con∣forme, & consonant to this orthodoxe & Catholike Faith, I may imbrace, and approue the same; & detest & abhorre what shall be contrary therunto: that al my works, words, & deeds may be answerable to this Fayth, least by my bad life & example, I may seeme to deny thee, whome with a true & sincere Fayth I confesse. Increase, O most mercifull Father, and so confirme this true Fayth in me, that neither man, nor diuell may be euer able to take the same away from me: but that both in word & worke, I may alwayes professe, & confesse the same; yea and if need be, to seale this truth with the sheeding of my bloud, and death it selfe, in testimony therof. Confirme O Lord God, this my will & desire, through Christ Iesus thy only Sonne, & our Iudge, who liueth and raygneth, with thee and the holy Ghost, in perfect Trinity, world without end. Amen. The end of the first Part.
THE GROVND OF THE CATHOLIKE AND ROMAN RELIGION IN THE WORD OF GOD. With the Antiquity and Continuance therof, throughout all Kingdomes and Ages. COLLECTED Out of diuers Conferences, Discourses, and Disputes, which M. Patricke Anderson of the Society of IESVS, had at seuerall tymes, with sundry Bishops and Ministers of Scotland, at his last imprisonment in Edenburgh, for the Catholike Faith, in the yeares of our Lord 1620. and 1621. Sent vnto an Honourable Personage, by the Compyler, and Prisoner himselfe. The second Part, & first Century. Philip. 1. Vers. 12. & 13. And I will haue you know, Brethren, that the thinges about me, are come to the more furtherance of the Ghospell: so that my bandes were made manifest in all the Court &c. Permissu Superiorum, Anno M.DC.XXIII.
TO THE RIGHT VVORTHY STVDENTS Of the foure famous Vniuersities of Scotland, S. An∣drewes, Glasco, Aberdine, and Edenburgh. ARISTOTLE that famous Philoso∣pher in penning his morall Philosophy thought all his labours wel imployed if he could proffit any one therby:Lib. 1. Heb. c. 1. how happy then may M. P. Anderson thinke his labours imployed, the tyme of his hard and rude impersonmēt in Edenburgh spent in Dis∣putes, & Conferences with the Ministers, hauing wonne therby sundry to the light of the true Ghospell, to the loue and feare of God, from whence the hope of all Eternity dependeth? And as you are the Fountaines of which many must drinke, the seeds from whence many must proceed, the lightes of the Kingdome, and the Mynes, whose treasure of learning is to be deriued to the whole body of the Kingdome of Scotland: So are there opened nto you in this second Part those veines of gold, cōtey∣ed in the expresse Word of God, and in the testimonies
of the holy Fathers, and Writers of the first hundreth yeares after Christ; which Testimonies I will intreate you to peruse with an indifferent and single eye, with a great zeale of imbracing Truth frō the mouth of Christ, and from those Honorable, Learned, and holy Fathers of the first age, Quorum testimonia sunt omni exceptione maioa. Truly, if yee would heare none but those, in whose bosomes yee haue been bred, and consequently to be so farre enamoured of your Ministers doctrine, without any ground in the expresse Word of God, or al Antiquity; the more yee should be blamed, that being amongst all Na∣tions held of witty & quicke Iudgment, fit for all sort of Sciences, yet yee would willingly, & wittingly preferre the counterfeit drosse of the Ministers, before the true & perfect Mettal of the holy Word, and testimonies of all antiquity. Or can you but imagin, that men of such life and conuersation, as your Ministers be, could find out any holsome doctrine,Bern. Ep. 190. Quae tot latuerit Sanctos, tot prae∣terierit sapientes? S. Augustine remarketh, thatLib. 5. Confess. c. 2 Faustus Manichaeus and the ancient Heretiques of his sect, in their preaching and discourses promised nothing more thē Truth, Truth, the word of God, the Scripture, the Bible: yet he found, as he witnesseth no truth amōgst them, yea nothing but lies, vanities, and new inuented superstitions. The same shall you discerne in the Ministers of our tyme: for although they bragge, and boast of the pure Word of God, the Bible, the written Word; yet in effect they cannot shew, no not one debatable point of their Religion to be cōteyned in the expresse Word of God. 2. They cānot possible improue any point of the Catholike Religion out of the same expresse Word. 3. They cannot
name any Nation vnder the heauens, which auoweth their Scots Bible to be the Word of God. 4. They cannot name any forraine Doctour, or Doctours, who doe free their owne Scots Bible from falsifications, lyes, and er∣rours. Finally,Amb. in c. 3. Ep. ad Titum. By the word of the law they impugne the law, framing their priuate sense and construction to countenāce the peruersity of their mynds, by the authority of the law a ma∣king by their peruerse interpretation,Hier. l. 1 in c. 1. Ep. ad Ga∣lat. The Ghospell of Christ, the Ghospell of man, or which is worse, the Ghospell of the Diuell. They boast of the pure preaching of the Word of God, yet in effect they haue no Cōmission, no Authority to preach, no Vocation at all, but areIoa. 10. v. 2.10. Theues, who enter not by the dore, but climbe another way, to steale, kill, and destroy your soules. They are the false Prophets who cry,Ezech. 13. v. 3 6.7. Thus sayth the Lord, when the Lord said it not, nor sent them. They glory to haue reformed the Church of God; wheras you shall easily perceaue how miserable, and de∣formed Scotland is become by their reformed Religion: and their owne formes and fashions do witnes the same plentifullie, as a famous, yea a Protestant-Writer called Zanchius doth testify thus of them:Ep. ad Ioan. Stur∣mi. Habe∣tur in fine l. 7. & 8. Miscellan. We Protestants of the reformed Church (sayth he) often of set purpose ouercloud the state of the question with darknes; things which are mani¦fest we impudētly deny; things false without shame w auouch; things plainly impious we propose as the first principles of Faith; things orthodoxall we condemne of heresy; Scriptures at our owne pleasure we detorte to our owne dreames; we boast of Fa∣thers whn we will follow nothing less then their doctrine; to deceaue, to calumniate, to raile is familiar with vs &c. O yee flourishing Academians, O Scotland my dea∣rest Countrey, consider wisely, & in the presence of God, I beseech thee, how thou hast damned vp the passage, by
which the cleere waters of al antiquity should flow vnto thy kingdome, and thou hast opened the sluse to the Pud∣dels of the Ministers new doctrine, new fayned Sacra∣ments, new Articles of faith, new Bible, and Scripture vnknowne as yet to all other Kingdoms, and Nations: Consider, I say, how God therefore hath punished thee, yea now of late with extraordinary Indigency; and a∣bandon these new, and vnwonted doctrines, and im∣brace againe that ancient Faith which once thy Noble, Ancient, and Princly Kingdome, Daughter of God, de∣uoutly sucked from the breasts of the Apostles, which all thy former Kings, and Princes, from King Donald the first, vntil Blessed Queen Mary, constantly professed, thy Lawes established, thy People honoured, thy Vniuersi∣ties defēded. To this end I will not cease to sacrifice vnto God my continuall prayers, and rest alwaies, Your most humble Seruant. P.A.S.I.
To the Christian Reader. BECAVSE the visible succession of lawfull Pastours, and the perpetuall pedegree of zealous belieuers is an infal∣lible marke of Christs chosen Church, I haue heere pre∣sented to thy view: First the supreme Heads and Gouer∣nours of the Roman Church. 2. The chiefe professours, yea of our own Nation of Scotland, by which it hath been taught & cō∣tinued. 3. I shew the pedegree of the Kings of Scotland, all Roman Ca∣tholikes, from Donald the first vntill B. Queene Mary the Martyr, our Gracious soueraygne his Mother, few other Mothers in our age being worthy of such a Sonne, few other Sonnes worthy of such a Mother. 4. I prooue by the Scripture twenty foure substantiall points of our Catho∣like fayth the rest being easily deduced out of those, & the Churches au∣thority, which I prooue at length. 5. I chalenge the Ministers to improue any of those 24. articles, and to be contrary to the expresse word of the Bible, which they shall neuer be able to do. 6. I challeng them likewise to proue any one point of their Religion, as set downe in the expresse word of their own Bible, which being impossible for them to do, I force them to auow that they preach not the Bible, not the expresse word, not the Scripture, but their owne fancies, yea old rotten & condemned he∣resies, which they call their consequences drawne out of the Bible. 7. I set downe those same 24. substantiall points of our Catholike Religion proued by the holy Fathers of the first hundred yeares, putting downe most faithfully their owne words, sayings, & consequences drawne out of the expresse word of the Bible; being a thing so notorious, that a man who hath any reason, iudgmēt, or vnderstanding, any feeling of God, or care of his conscience, should willingly prefer the consequences of these holy, wise, learned & ancient Fathers before the stinking puddle of cōse∣quences of the Ministers, who are children without Fathers, & preachers without commission, or any warrant in the word of God 8. I shew how the ministers haue falsified the Bible in all those places which make for vs Catholiks against thē. Finally & last of all, I proue that the Church of God in this & the other ensuing Ages, was a known generation, society & congregation of Pastours & people, Parents & Children, Heades and members successiuely propagated & iointly vnited without interruptiō one frō the other; which must needs still perseuere constant & faithful, what opposition soeuer be made against it. And on the contrary I shew, that the Ministers of Scotlād, England, or Ireland can shew no such pre∣decessors
of their religion, no not one before Luther & Caluin, who do agree with them in all essentiall points of fayth, concluding therby that they are vnkind slipps grafted by Sathan, of whom the Wiseman saith:Sap. v. 1.4. Bastard plants shall not take deep roote, nor lay sure foundation: & if in the boughes for a time they shall spring, being weakly set, they shall be moued of the wind, & by the vehemency of the winds they shall be rooted out. Consider Christian Reader I pray thee, if in the case of some tēporall State any Lord or Earle of Scotland to prooue the tytle of the lands he holds, should produce the publike sentence, not only of all the Iudges of Scotland for the space of fourteen hundred yeares, but of all the world for the space of fifteen hundred years: the sentence, I say, iudicially deci∣ded in the presence of all those Kinges, & of the three Estates of all those Christian Kingdomes in fauour of the true Possessour of the land, condē∣ning the aduerse party of imposture & intrusion: & this their decision, sentence & condemnation in diuers recordes amongst the publike mo∣numents not only of that one Kingdom, but likwise of the whole world to be extant: And on the other side the aduerse party could bring forth none of former tymes to speake in his fauour, alledging only that all his Forefathers & keepers of the land, were & had been inuisible, vnknown & latent; what Iudge, I pray you, what reasonable Man would make doubt who had the better right in Law? So it is betwixt vs Catholiks & the Protestants: for we produce for our Religion the Iudiciall sentence not only of all the Kings & spirituall Iudges of our Kingdom of Scotland iudicially pronounced, but of the whole world, and that not at one tyme but at seueral, for the space of fifteen hundred years; iudicially I say, pro∣nounced, & all accepted, ratifyed, executed, & by publike monuments testified. The Ministers in the contrary can name no visible predecessors for their Religion, yea bring nothing but their own phancies & inuenti∣ōs, vnder the Childish pretext of the word of God; bring no Iudiciall sē∣tence giuen in their behalfe by either Coūsell, or Parlament, or Publike monument, shew vs no Author, name vs no writter, specifie no marke or token of the being of their Religion before Luther and Caluin: shall then any reasonable Man thinke such Ministers & preachers to haue a∣ny Right or Commission to preach, to haue any ground in the word of God, any warrant for their religion, any antiquity or lineall succession. Wherfore I earnestly intreate the Christian Reader to giue place to reason, & to eschew their new Religion & profession, if he will auoyd his eternall ruine, & losse of euerlasting saluation, which is the due & in∣euitable reward allotted for misbelieuers: from the which Christ Iesus free all them who are effectually desirous to liue, & dye in the true and Catholike Church, Amen. With the which desire, I rest alwayes, Thy humble seruant P. A. S. I.
THE FIRST AGE, OR CENTVRY. A Table, or Catalogue of the Names of some Roman Catholiks, which shew that the Roman Church hath byn continually in all ages since Christ & his Apostles, vntill our dayes, & shall continue to the end of the world. CHAP. I. The yeare of our Lord. The chiefe Pastours of the Roman Church. Pastours, Do∣ctours, & Profes∣sours of the Ro∣man Faith. Kings of Scotland from the yeare of Christ 30. vntill 100. 30. Iesus Christ God and Man borne of the Bles∣sed Virgin Mary the 25. of De∣cember, from the Creation of the world 4022. The Blessed Vir∣gin Mary, S. Iohn the Baptist, S. Iohn the Apostle & Euā∣gelist, with the rest of the Apostles, and Euangelists, S. Mar∣tha, S. Mary Magda∣len, Before the comming of Christ the space of 330. yeares, the first Sco tish King was Fegusiu son∣ne to Ferchad, o whome lineally did succeed Fe∣ritharis, Mainus Dorna∣dilla, Notharus, Reuther.
  yeares, did suf∣fer Death vpon the Crosse the 34 yeare of his age. He is our Soue∣raigne Lord, Re∣deemer, and Pa∣stour, who hath left in his Church for the consola∣tion of the Fayth∣full, and to keep peace and vnon, in matters of Re∣ligion, a Vicar vnder him. S. Paul, S. Ste∣phen the first Martyr, Timothy, Barnabas, Dionysius Areopagi∣ta, Martialis. And of our Scot∣tish Nation S. Man∣suetus Bishop of Toul in Lorraine & disciple to S. Peter, of whome Demochares in Cata∣log ep. Tullensium. Frā∣ciscus du Rosiers Tom. 2. Stemmat. Lotharing. ad ann. 62. and others wryte thus: S. Mansu∣etus discipulus S. Petri, socius S. Clementis Epi∣scopi Metensis, Natione Scotus &c. Lykewyse of our Scottish Nation fa∣mous in this age were the S S. Barinthus Priest, Paschasius Ab∣bot sent by King Do∣naldus to Pope Victor in the yeare of Christ 99. B. Claudia wife to S. Pudens Senatour of Rome, and mother to Timotheus, Noua∣tus, Praxedis, & Pu∣dēiana: as witnesseth Romanum Martyrologiū. Finally S. Beatus, S. Peter his Disciple. Reutha, Thereus, Iosina, Finnanus, Durstus, Eue∣nus 1. Gillus, Euenus 2. Ederus, Euenus 3. to whome succeeded Metel∣lanus who was crowned King 5. yeares before the comming of Christ, and dyed the yeare of Christ 29. to him succeeded Ca∣ratacus, Corbredus, of whome thus reporteth du Rosiers Tom. 6. Corbredus licèr à Romanis saepius su∣peratus esset, eos ta∣men cruentissimis praelijs superatos, ex Scotorum & Picto∣num depulit agris. Dardanus, Galcus, or Galcacus, of whom sayth the same du Rosiers Tom. 6. Galcacus Rex optimus egregiè Ro∣manos debellauit. Of this king Galcacus (whom others do call Galdus, as brought vp amōg strā∣gers, for he was brought vp amōg the Brittōs) ma∣keth mentiō Tacitus in vita Agricolae, which Agricola did make war∣re against the Scots, or Caledonians, about the yeare of Christ 82. as witnesseth Dio. 34. S. Peter Apo∣stle, to whome succeeded, 69. Linus. 80. Cletus. 83. Clemens.
But King Galcacus did manfully stand against the power of Agricola, and of the Romans. Tacitus maketh mention of a most eloquent Oration of Galcacus to the Scots, to the end they should keepe their naturall liberty. Of which Oration Lipsius in his Anno∣tations vpon that place giueth this iudgement: Moriar, si quid meo sensu prudentiùs, disertiùs, argutiùs est in omni Romana lingua. I might easily in lyke sort set downe the names of the Kings of England, Ireland, France, Spayne, Dennemarke, Po∣land, Sueden, and diuers other Kingdomes, all Catholike Romans: prouing therby the antiquity and vniuersality in tyme, place, and per∣sons of our Religion, which notwithstanding I will heere omit, to be short. The holy Apostles wrote the new Testament in this first Age: and because the Puritans blinde and abuse the poore people in Scotland, saying, that their Religion is the self-same Religion which the Apostles professed: I will set downe heer some chiefe heads of the Puritans and Prote∣stants Religion, drawne out of their owne Confession of Fayth, which the three Estates of Scotland at seuerall Parla∣ments haue solemnely sworne, auowed and subscribed. And on the other syde I will set downe how such poynts of their Religion be directly against the old and new Te∣stament, and consequently that their Religion is far diffe∣rent from the Apostles Religion, yea is nothing els but a new inuention of the Ministers. That the Puritans and Protestants Religion, is not the Religion of the holy Apostles. The first Section. 1. THE Puritanes doe belieue that the commande∣ments of God are impossible to be kept, yea though a man haue the gace of God:In a prayer vsed in Scotlād called the Confessiō of sinnes, set downe in their Psalm-booke. For the flesh (say they) euermore rebelleth against the spirit, whereby we continually transgresse thy holy Precepts, and Commandements, and so pur∣chase to our selues, through thy iust iudgement, death & damna∣tion. If continually the Puritanes transgresse them, Ergo,
in no moment of their whole lyfe, do they, or can they keep them, though assisted by the grace of God. The Apostles, and the Bible affirme the contrary:Matth. 1. v. 0. For my yoke is easy and my burthen light. Againe:Philip. 4. v. 13. I am able to do all things through the help of Christ, which strengthneth me. And in another place:Ioan. 5. v. 3. For this is the loue of God, that we keep h Commandements, and his Commandements are not grieuous. And againe:Ioan, 2. v. 3. Heereby we are sure that we know him, if we keep his Commandements. He that sayth I know him, and keepeth not hi Commandements is a lyar, and the truth is not in him. And our Sauiour sayth:Matth. 19. v. 17. If thou wilt enter into lyfe keep the Comman∣dements. And S. Luke sayth of Zacharias and Elizabeth Fa∣ther and Mother of S. Iohn Baptist:Luc. 1. v. 6. That both were iust be∣fore God, and walked in all the Commandements and Ordinances of our Lord, without reproofe. Can the Ministers belieue the Bi∣ble, who belieue not so manifest and expresse words of the Bible? Can their Religion be Apostolicall, who bely so euidently the Apostles and Christ himself? 2. Puritanes doe belieue that Catholikes are the lim∣mes of the Diuell; their words be:In the Confession of Fayth sworne by the Mini∣sters at their ad∣mission. The defence of the Church appertayneth to the Christian Magistrats, against all Idolaters and Hereticks, as Papists, Anabaptists, with such lyke limmes of Antichrist, to roote out all doctrine of Diuels and men, as the Masse, Purgatory, Limbus Patrum, Prayer to Saints, and for the Dead, Freewill, Distinction of meats, apparel, and dayes, Vowes of single lyfe, Presence at Idol-seruice, mans Merits, with such lyke. Contrary, I find not one expresse word of all their blas∣phemies in the Bible, or Doctrine of the Apostles, yea the Protestants against their solemne Oath, haue now receaued apparel and festiual dayes, and kneeling at Idol-seruice, that is, at the receauing of their Bakers bread and winy supper: as in his Maiesties 23. Parlament act. 1. holden at Edenburgh anno 1621 appeareth. For praying for the Dead, I find in their owne Bible:2 Ma∣chab. 12. v. 43. And he (to wit Iudas Machabaeus) hauing made a gathering through the company, sent to Ierusalem about two thowsand drachmes of siluer, to offer a sinne-offering, doing very well and honestly, that he
thought of the Resurrection; for if he had not hoped that they who were slaine should ryse againe, it had byn superfluous and vayne to pray for the dead. And therfore he perceaued that there was great fa∣uour layed vp for those that dyed godly (it was a holy & good thought.) So he made a reconciliation for the dead, that they might be deliuered from sinne. This place sheweth that it was at least a custome among the Iewes to pray for the dead.Aug. lib. 18. de ciuit. c. 36. And S. Augustin (whose opinion is to be preferred to all the Ephemerian Mi∣nisters) assureth vs, that not the Iewes but the Church of God euer did hold those book as Canonicall. The Ministers shall neuer be able to giue vs expresse words of the Bible which deny praying for the dead. 3. The Puritanes belieue that the sicke should not be anoynted with oyle, and remission of sinnes giuen to them by men. The Apostles contrary:Ioan. 5. v. 14. Is any sick among you? Let him bring in the Priests of the Church, and let them pray ouer him, & anoynt him with oyle in the name of our Lord, and the prayer of Fayth shall saue the sick, and our Lord shall rayse him vp: and if he haue com∣mitted sinne, it shall be forgiuen him. Which place the Ministers haue corrupted, as prouing clearly the Sacrament of Ex∣treme Vnction. 4. The Puritanes belieue that no sort of sinne is done a∣gainst the will of God, and that he vseth the Diuell but as an instrument: so that in their Religion al sorts of sinnes and abhominations, should rather be im∣puted to God the chiefe Author, then to the Diuell the instrument, conforme to the common saying, Qui est causa causa, est causa causati. The fault is more to be imputed to the Maister, who commaūdeth the ser∣uant, then to the seruant who is but an instrument: Heare the Ministers owne words:In the order of Baptisme. That God is the Authour of Heauen and Earth, that is to say, that the Heauen and earth, and the contents therof are so in his hands, that there is nothing done without his knowledge, neyther yet against his will: & so we confesse and belieue that neyther the Diuels, nor yet the wicked of the world haue any power to molest or trouble the chosen children of God, but so far as it pleaseth him
to vse them as instruments. And agayne:The Articles of ayth set downe in the Scots Cathechis∣me 45. Sunday. God of his in∣finite mercy doth preserue his faythfull, not suffering the Diuell to lead them out of the way, neyther permitting that sinne haue the vpper hand of them: so lykewyse he doth not only giue vp, cast off, and withdraw his grace from such as he will punish, but also he deliuereth them to the Diuell, committing them to his tyranny; he stryketh them with blindnes, and giueth them vp to reprobat mynds, that they become vtterly slaues to sinne, and subiect to all entations. Againe:In the 3 Sunday. So then by this saying, the power of God is not idle, but continually exercised; so that nothing is done but by him, and by his ordinance. Againe:In the 4. Sunday. The knowledge hereof doth wonderfully comfort vs, for we might thinke our selues in a miserable case, if the Diuels and the wicked had power to do any thing contrary to Gods will. The whole Bible is against this blasphemy, as by the Texts following may appeare:Deut. 32. v. 4. God is true, and without wicked∣nesse, iust and righteous is he.Psalm. 44. v. 6. The Scepter of thy Kingdome is a scepter of righteousnes. Thou louest righ eousnes, and hatest wicked∣nes. And againe:Ioan. 1. v. 13. Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God, for God cannot be a tempter of euill, neyther temp∣teth he any man. 5. The Puritanes belieue, that for all those who kneele or worship the Supper of the Lord, there is nothing but eternall damnation; which poynt of Fayth the Parlament, holden almost these 40. yeares ago, did sweare solemnely and subscribe:In the Confessin of Fayth. Neyther must we in the administration of those Sacraments (say the Mini∣sters) follow mans fantasy, but as Christ hmself hath orday∣ned, so must they be ministred, and by such as by ordinary vo∣cation are thereunto called. Therefore whosoeuer reserueth and worshippeth those Sacraments, or contrarywise contemneth them in tyme and place, procureth to himself damnation. Notwithstanding this kneeling at the Lords Supper is now receaued, commanded, and by Parlament confir∣med. The words be:In his Maiesties 23. Parla∣ment holē at Eden∣burgh an. 1621. act. 1. Considering that there is no part of Diuine Worship more heauenly and spi ituall, then is the holy receauing of the blessed Body and Bloud of our Lord & Sauiour Iesus Christ; the Assembly thinketh good, that that blessed Sa∣crament
be celebrated hereafter meekely and reuerently vpon their knees. 6. The Puritanes do excommunicate Kings & Princes, and the ciuill Magistrats: let vs thē giue credit to their owne words, which the Ministers vse:In the manner of the admi∣nistration of the Lords Supper. And ther∣fore in the name and authority of the Eternall God, and of his Sonne Iesus Christ, I excommunicate from this Table all Blas∣phemers of God, all Idolaters, all Murmurers, all Adulterers, and all that be in Malice and Enuy, all Disobedient persons to Father and Mother, Princes or Magistrats, Pastors or Prea∣chers, all Theeues and Deceauers of their Neighbours, and fi∣nally all such as lead a lyfe directly fighting against the will of God. Now the Ministers belieue, that in Kings and PrincesIn a prayer cal∣led the Cō∣fession of sinnes. The flesh euermore rebelleth against the spirit, wherby they doe continually transgresse the precepts of God, and his holy Commande∣ments. Since then the Ministers do excommunicate all those that lead a lyfe against Gods Commandements, and since no man can keep the Commandements of God, and all sinnes are mortall and against the Commandements; it followeth of necessity, that all persōs who receaue the Sup∣per of the Lord, are excommunicate, and consequently re∣ceaue the Supper of the Lord vnworthily, and to their owne damnation. 7. The Puritanes belieue that:In the Confession of Fayth. Christ suffered his Hu∣manity to be punished with most cruel death, feeling in himself the anger and seuere Iudgment of God, euen as if he had byn in the extreme torments of Hel. And againe:n the athechis∣me. the 10. Sunday. Christ did not only suffer naturall death, which is a separation of the soule from the body, but also his soule was in wonderful distresse en∣during grieuous torments, which S. Peter calleth the sorowes of death. And againe:In the said Cathe∣chisme. Heereby we see the difference bet∣weene that grief of mynd, which Christ did suffer, and that which the impenitent sinners do abyde, whom God doth punish in his terrible Wrath: for that very payne which Christ sustay∣ned for a tyme, the wicked must endure continually, and that which to Christ was but a prick, is to the wicked insteed of a glaiue to wound them to death.
Contrary, the Apostles belieued, that the blessed Soule of Christ descended to the Hell where the Soules of the ancient Fathers, Abraham, Isaac, Iacob, Noe &c. were, to wit Limbus Patrum, and not to the Hel of the damned and reprobate, out of the which there is no redemption. 8. The Puritanes belieue, that in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the Body of Christ is not contayned, but only a signe and figure therof. Contrary-wise our Sauiour sayth in expresse wordes:Matth. 26 v. 6. This is my Body. And agayne:Ioan. 6. v. 51. The bread that I will giue, is my Flesh. 9. The Puritanes belieue, that Priests cannot forgiue sinnes on earth. Contrary to our Sauiour his commission and power gran∣ted to his Apostles, and their Successours:Ioan. 20 v. 13. Whose sinnes you forgiue, they are forgiuen, whose sinnes you retayne they are retayned. 10. The Puritanes belieue, that it is not lawfull to make Vowes, and if they be made, they may be broken. Contrary to the expresse words of the Bible:Psalm. 76. v. 11. Vow yee, and render your Vowes.
The first & second Article. 1. That the Catholike Roman Church vniuersally belieued in this first Age, the Reall Presence of Christs Body in the blessed Sacrament, after the words of Consecration. 2. That saying of Masse, was vniuersally in vse in this Age. CHAP. II. BEFORE I come to the testimony of the holy Fathers of this Age, I will proue these two verities by the expresse words of the Bible. First then, Christ promised to giue his Flesh to his Disciples & their Successours:Ioan. 6. v. 51. The bread that I will giue is my Flesh, which I will giue for the lyfe of the world. And againe:Ioan. 6. v. 55. My Flesh is meat indeed, and my Bloud is drinke indeed, in the Greeke it is, my Flesh is meat truly, : if truely, then not figuratiuely, but really, for Veritas & Realitas conuertuntur. Our Sauiour sayth, My Flesh is meat truly; The Ministers say, Christs Flesh is meat figuratiuely. Which of the two should be more belieued, Christ, or the Ephe∣merian Ministers of Scotland? 2. Secondly our Sauiour sayth:Ioan 6. v. 53. Verily, verily I say vnto you, except yee eat the Flesh of the Sonne of Man, and drinke his Bloud, yee haue no lyfe in you. Our Sauiour sayth not, except ye eat my flesh by Fayth, except ye eat the figure of my flesh. Now if they who eat not the Flesh of Christ, cannot go to Heauen, how can the Puritanes go thither, who will not belieue the plaine and manifest words of Christ? yea how can the Ministers belieue in Christ, who bely him speaking so plainly, cleerly, and manifestly? In this whole Chap∣ter our Sauiour neuer sayth, I will giue a figure of my Flesh for
the lyfe of the World: nor yet, Except yee eat my Flesh by Fayth, yee haue no lyfe in you. He then who desireth to saue his own soule, must needes rather belieue the plaine and manifest words of Christ, then the Ministers expositions, yea new inuentions and dreames: since all the holy, learned, and wise Fathers did euer expone these words of our Sauiour, as the Roman Catholikes belieue at this present. 3. Thirdly, let euery man consider in the presence of God, and without passion, and as he will answere at the day of Iudgement, those most playne words of our Saui∣our in the institution of this Sacrament:Matt 26. v. 26. Marc. 14. v. 11. Luc. 21. v. 19. Take, eate, this is my Body which is giuen for you: This do in remembrance of me. First, Christ in his latter Supper made his Testament, and last will, at which tyme euery wyse man is obliged to speak plainly and not figuratiuely. 2. Our Sauiour spake only heer to his twelue Apostles, to whome alone he was not accustomed to speake in figures and parables.Luc 8. v. 10. Vnto you it is giuen to know the mysteries of the Kingdome of God, but to others in parables. And plainly S. Matthew witnesseth that Christ was not accustomed to speak to his Apostles alone in parables and figures:Matth. 13. v. 10. Then the Disciples came and sayd to him, why speakest thou to them in parables: and he answered and sayd to them, Because it is giuen to you, to know the secrets of the Kingdome of Heauen, but to them it is not giuen. 3. Christ sayth, This is, he sayth not, This signifieth my Body, this is a figure of my Body. 4. Christ sayth: My Body which is giuen for you: that is, which is giuen for you as the pryce of your redemption. But bread cannot be the pryce of our Redemption, lyke∣wise a figure of the body of Christ cannot be the pryce of our Redemption. 5. Christ sayth, which is giuen, in the present sense, and not which shalbe giuen, in the future. 6. Christ sayth, Which is giuen for you, and not, which is giuen to you, because it was giuen for the remission of our sinnes. 7. Christ sayth, This is my Bloud which is shed for many, for the remission of sinnes: but pure wyne, & the figure of his bloud, annot be the remission of our sinnes. 8. Christ sayth in the present sense, which is shed, which words cannot be re∣ferred to the bloudy shedding vpon the Crosse, but to the
vnbloudy shedding in the holy Sacrifice of the Masse. As for the words that follow, But I say to you, that I will not drinck henceforth of this fruite of the vyne, vntill that day when I shall drinck it new with you in my Fathers Kingdome,Luc. 22. v. 18. Christ spake them at the eating of the Paschal Lambe, as S. Luke witnes∣seth plainly, and not at the institution of the blessed Sacra∣ment. 9. Christ sayth Do this: Wherby he gaue power to his Apostles,Gen. 1. v. 1. Ioa. 2 v. 9. Exod. 4. v. 3. and theirlawfull successours to do the same thing which he did, that is, as he by his Almighty power and word created the world of nothing, turned wyne in∣to water, turned Moyses rod into a serpent, and infinite such things: So the same God by his Almighty word and power at his last Supper turned bread into his precious Body, and wyne into his precious Bloud to the consolati∣on of the faythfull Catholiks, and gaue power to do the same to his Apostles, and all their lawfull successours. So that whatsoeuer is in this Sacrament aboue our capacity & vnderstanding, is done by the Almighty power of God, wherunto we should submit our iudgements, since the Al∣mighty power of God is infinite, & the iudgement of man so weak, blinded, erroneous, and inconstant, that it can∣not conceaue sufficiently naturall and common things, much lesse supernaturall and heauenly. 10. Remarke the words, Do this, , that is: Sacrifice this, offer vp this. The Syriak words which our Sauiour vsed are playne, Hodo hauaithun, that is, Sacrifice this, for the word and radix, Hauad, signifieth plainly to sacrifice, asExod. 7. v. 16. Let my people go, that they may serue me in the wildernesse. In the Hebrew Bible the self same word, Vera habduni, is thus, word by word, Let my people go, that they may do to me, or sacrifice to me in the wil∣dernesse. And the Greek word , I doe, is sundry tymes in the Bible taken for, to Sacrifice, as in these places:Leuit. 15. v. 15. And the Priest shall make of one of them a sinne-offering. In the Greek, . And againe:Numb. 28. v. 24. After this māner ye shall prepare throughout all the seauen dayes for the mantayning of the of∣fering made by fyre, for a sweet sauour to our Lord; it shalbe done besides the continuall brunt-offering, and drinck-offering thereof. And againe:Leuit. 9. v. 6. This is the thing which our Lord commanded,
that yee should doe, and the glory of our Lord shall appeare to you. Besides this, Pagan wryters doe chalenge our Ministers of intollerable ignorance, for asmuch as they teach, that the word Facio,Virgil in c. Plant. in Aul. Cie. pro Mur. is sundry tymes taken for to Sacrifice, as wit∣nesseth Virgil: Cum faciam vitula pro frugibus ipse venito. Plau∣tus, Faciam tibi fideliam. Cicero, Iuno sospita cuiomnes Consu∣les facere necesse est. Iuuenal, Pro populo faciens: and sundry o∣thers. Lykewise Greeke holy Fathers who did vnderstand better the force of their owne naturall tongue then all the Ministers doe, plentifully witnesse that our Sauiour offe∣red vp in his later Supper, An vnbloudy Sacrifice for vs, which Sacrifice we do call,Chrysost. hom. de ∣iunio Da∣uid. Basil. in orat. suae Liturgiae. Cyor. l. 2. ep. 3 secun∣dū aios 63. Ambro. in exhort ad Virgins. Aug. l. 10. de ciuit. c. 20. the Masse, from Messias, because we be∣lieue that the true Messias is offered therin. See S. Chryso∣stome, S. Basil, S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose, S. Augustin, with many others, who plainly say, that our Sauiour did offer vp, an vnbloudy Sacrifice for vs, in his last Supper: and cō∣manded his Apostles and their Successours, to offer vp the same dayly. Which Sacrifice S. Ambrose, and other holy and learned ancient Fathers call the Masse. I will heer omit to bring other places of the Scripture to proue the holy Sa∣crifice of the Masse, and the verity of the blessed Sacramēt, reseruing the same to euery Age in particuler, where I will also shew, how manifestly the Ministers haue corrupted their owne Bibles in all debatable points of Religion, but specially in this of the holy Masse. 4. Now I will intreat the Reader to consider with∣out passion, how that those expresse and formal words of the Bible aforerehearsed do make for vs Catholiks, and no wyse for the Ministers, who grant willingly that these poynts and articles of their Religion. This is a figure of my Bo∣dy; This fignifieth my Body; we take the Body of Christ by fayth on∣ly, and not really, are not in playne termes & expresse words to be found in their owne Bible: But they will proue, say they, these articles by necessary consequence out of the Bi∣ble: As M. Andrew Ramsey granted, in disputing at seuerall tymes with me in prison, and before some Lords of the Councel of Scotland; he granted (I say) that he could not proue that there were only two Sacraments out of the ex∣presse
words of the Bible, eyther Hebrew, Greek, or Scot∣tish, and such other debatable poynts; but that he could proue it (said he) by necessary consequence: and yet could he neuer make a necessary consequence. To the which say∣ing of M. Andrew Ramsey, I replyed then, and now reply thus: 1. M. Andrew Ramsey must needes then auow, that he cannot proue, not one debatable poynt of his Religion by the expresse word, the formall text, the pure word of God; or if he can, I challenge him heer before the whole world to do the same, and to set out in print his necessarie conse∣quences, to the end the world may see them. 2. That M. Andrew his consequences cānot be called the Word of God, and consequently cannot be the ground of a poynt of Re∣ligion, which must needs be infallible. 3. Eyther Maister Ramsey Minister of Edenburgh may erre in making of his con∣sequences, or no? If he grant that he may erre, how then can his consequences be infallible, as an article of Fayth must be. If he say he cannot erre in making his consequences: who is so sensles to think, that the true Church of God hath erred, and may erre (as the Ministers belieue) seing Mai∣ster Andrew Ramsey (who is but a sinfull man, an igno∣rant Minister) cannot erre in making his consequences, which are no other thing but his owne inuentions, drea∣mes, expositions, and plaine heresies, which the ignorāt people of Edenburgh thinke foolishly to be the Word of God. 4. The conclusion of a Syllogisme, as drawne out of the premisses, sub illa formalitate, cannot be a poynt of Fayth; for as it is drawen out, vi formae, of the premisses, it is grounded vpon Logike, or the Syllogisticall forme of Logik, which is an inuention of man, and consequently it cannot be the ground of true Religiō which must needs be infallible. Let Maister Ramsey then remark this poynt of Philosophy: Conclusio vt formaliter deducta nunquam est de fide, id est, vt deducitur vi formae, in modo & figura. 5. All Heretiks haue vsed the Scripture to confirme their heresies and bla∣sphemies. As Ariue out of these wordes,Exod. 20. v. 3. Thou shall haue no other Gods before me, made this consequence, Ergo, God the Sonne is not God: yea out of these words of the Psalme:
Psal. 91. v. 11. For he shall giue his Angels charge ouer thee, to keep thee in al thy wayes; they shall beare thee in their hands, that thou hurt not thy foot against a stone: The Diuell drew this consequence against our Blessed Sauiour, Ergo,Matth. 4 v. 6. Luc 4. v. 9. Cast thy selfe downe. 6. Al∣beit Maister Ramsey made a Syllogisme, wherof the maior & minor propositions were playne and expresse words of the Bible, which he shall not be able to do to his aduantage; yet the conclusion or consequēce needeth not to be a point of Religion. The reason of this is, because Conclusio sequi∣tur debiliorem partem, and the Syllogisticall forme of an ar∣gument is a part, and the weakest in that case, and conse∣quently erroneous, and not infallible. 7. If the one pro∣position be in expresse words in the Bible, and the other not, though true, then the conclusion can no wyse be in∣fallible, and a poynt of Diuine Fayth, which is infallible. The reason is: Quia conclusio sequitur debiliorem partem. 8. The ground of al Syllogismes and arguments are. 1. It is im∣possible that the same thing be, and be not. 2. Euery thing is, or is not. 3. One verity cannot gaynstand another. 4. Conclusio sequitur debiliorem partem. 5. Ex puris negatiuis nihil in∣fertur, and such others, which though most true, yet as they are not in expresse words in the Bible, so they can∣not be an infallible ground of the true Religion: because they are humane grounds, subiect to errour, instability, and changing. Contrary, the ground of the true Religion, must needs be infallible. Let not then the Ministers make any accompt of their consequences made against the bles∣sed Sacrament, against the holy Sacrifice of the Masse, a∣gainst any other poynt of our Religion, because they are erroneous and fallible; which gaue occasion to our Sauiour to command vs to beware of the necessary consequences of the Ministers:Matth. 15. v. 9. Marc. 7. v. 7. In vayne do they worship me, teaching for Do∣ctrines the Commandements of men. S. Paul lykewyse forwar∣neth vs to beware of the Ministers consequences:Ephes. 5. v. 6. Let no man deceaue you with vayne words. And againe:Coloss. 2. v. 8. Beware lest there be any man that spoyle you through Philosophy. For all the Ministers consequences and arguments are nothing els, but their owne traditions, dreames, Philosophicall sophismes,
and inuentions without any infallible ground of the Word of God. 5. Now as I haue set downe before, the playne and manifest words of the Bible, to confirme the verity of the Blessed Sacrament, and of the holy Sacrifice of the Masse: so I will set downe the consequences drawne out of those foresayd words of the Bible by the holy Fathers of the first Age, and consequently the constant and infallible belief of the Church of God in this first hundreth yeares. And in my opinion there is no man so sensles, so foolish, and soe careles of his owne saluation, who will not prefer and make greater account of the cōsequēces of the holy Church, and of the holy Fathers, then of these our Ephemerian Mini∣sters, who haue no vnion amongst themselues, who are come in at their owne hand, without authority, without power and commission, whose lyues, behauiour, and car∣riage, as it is presently well knowne throughout all Brit∣taine, so in no wise can they be compared to our Ancestors, and holy Fore-fathers, whose deep learning, heauenly wisdome, godly conuersation, charitable and vertuous be∣hauiour, doth vtterly confound, specially our Scottish Mi∣nisters ignorance, worldly greedynes, bad conuersation, and most vicious behauiour. The very auncient monumēts and princely buildings of our Fore-fathers shew manifestly their great charity, angelicall lyfe, and profound humility, plaine contrary to the intollerable pryde, filthy auarice, and lewd conuersation of our Ministers. Testimonyes of the holy Fathers of this first Age, or hundreth yeares, concerning the Real Presence, and holy Sacrifice of the Masse. The first Section. THis witnesseth S. Denys of Areopagita (of whome S. Luke maketh mention) who belieuing constantly that Christ Iesus God and man,Act. 17: v. 34. was conteyned in the Blessed Hoste, prayed therto after this forme:Eccl. Hierar. c. 3 O Diuinissimum &
Sanctum Sacramentum obducta tibi symbolicè operimenta aenigmat̄ reuelans, dilucide nobis fac vt appareas, ac spiritales nostros oculos sin∣gulari aperto{que} lumine imple. That is: O most Diuine & most holy Sacrament, vouchsafe to remoue from the veyles or couerings of those signifying signes, and appeare to vs per∣spicuously, and fill our spirituall eyes with a singular and cleare resplendency of thy light. How could S. Denys pray to the Blessed Sacramēt, if he had not belieued Christ to be contayned therein, really, and truely? And a little after he maketh mention in playne termes of Altars, wher∣vpon the Masse was said, of the prayers vsed at the Masse, of the lifting vp of the precious Body of Iesus Christ to be adored by the people at the Masse, of the Incense, of the Priests kissing the Altar in token of reuerence, of the Priests blessing the people, and saying, Dominus vobiscum, of the Euangel read at the holy Masse. Truly since S. Denys was S. Pauls Disciple, no wyse man will doubt, but that which the Disciple testifieth to vs, was taught and practised by S. Paul his Maister. 2. S. Ignatius Martyr, Disciple to S. Iohn the Euan∣gelist:Epist. ad Rom. post. med. Non gaudio nutrimento corruptionis, nec voluptatibus vi∣tae huius &c. Panem vitae volo, quae est caro Christi filij Dei, quifa∣ctus est posterioribus temporibus ex semine Dauid & Abrahae; & po∣tum volo sanguinem illius. That is: I take no delight in corup∣tible food, nor in the pleasures of this lyfe; but I desire ra∣ther to haue the bread of lyfe, which is the Flesh of Christ, the Sonne of God, who was made of the seed of Dauid & Abraham: I desire for drinke, his Bloud. And plainly the same holy Father calleth the Eucharist:Epist. ad Smyn. Carnem Saluato∣ris, quae pro peccatis nostris passa est, quam Pater sua benignitate su∣scitauit. That is: The Flesh of our Sauiour which suffered for our sinnes, which the Father by his bounty raysed vp. So that by this holy Fathers consequences drawne out of the Bible, the selfe same flesh of our Sauiour, which suffe∣red for our sinnes, is in the Eucharist or Blessed Sacrament; the selfe same Christ God and man, who was made of the seed of Dauid is contayned in the Blessed Sacrament. And towards the midst of the same letter to the people of Smyr∣na,
he witnesseth, that no man should offer vp sacrifice, or baptize without the Bishops authority and ordination. Non licet sine Episcopo baptizare, ne{que} offerre, ne{que} sacrificium m∣molare. It is not lawfull without the Bishop to baptize, neyther to offer, or sacrifice. 3. S. Andrew the holy and ancient Patron of Scot∣land, witnesseth clearly, how that he euery day said the holy Masse, and receaued the precious Body of Christ.Lib. pss. S. An∣dreae. Ego Omnipotenti Deo immaculatum agnum quotidie sacrifico, qui cùm verè fit sacrificatus, & veré à populo carnes eius manducatae, in∣teg perseuerat & viuus. That is: I sacrifice dayly to the Al∣mighty the vnspotted Lamb, who albeit truely sacrificed, and his flesh truely eaten by the people, yet continueth whole and lyuely. 4. S. Clement, S. Pauls Disciples of whom in his Epistle to the Philippians he maketh mention, plainly v∣seth the word Masse, saying:Philip. 4. v. 3. The saythfull & specially Priests, Deacons, and other Church-men should beware to do any thing with∣out the licence of the Bishop: Yea the Priests in their own Parish should neyther say Masse, nor baptize without the Bishops authority. The words be: A cunctis fidelibus & summopere omnibus Presbyteris & Diaconis, ac reliquis Clericis attendendum est, vt nihil abs{que} Episcopi proprij licentia agant, non vti{que} Missas sine eius iussu quispiam Pres∣byterorum in sua paroecia agat, non baptizet. And a little below: Qoutam in alijs locis sacrificare, & missas celebrare non licet nisi in his in quibus Episcopus proprius iusserit &c. Haec Apostoli à Dmino acceperunt & nobis tradiderunt, haec nos docemus, robis{que} & omnibus abs{que} reprehensione tenere & docere quibus agendm est, mndamus. That is: It is not lawfull to sacrifice, and say Masse but in those places, where the Bishop of the same place comman∣deth. 5. Besides these most plentifull and manifest words of the holy Fathers of this Age, sundry holy Fathers make mention ot the changing and transubstantiation of the bread and wyne in the body and bloud of Iesus Christ by vertue of the Sacramentall words: yea the Fathers do fur∣ther wryte, that our senses are heer deceaued, for though the eye seeth only the shapes of bread and wyne in the Eucha∣rist,
yet they say plainly, that there is neyther bread nor wyne. So Eusebius Emissenus:Euseb. Emiss. serm de corp. Domin. The inuisible Priest doth change, through a secret power of his Word, the visible creatures into the substance of his body and bloud. Declaring therby that Christ the inuisible Priest is Author of all that which is done in this holy Sacrament: Againe, the same holy Father sayth more plainly: Quando benedicendae &c. When the Creatures (which are to be blessed) are placed vpon the Altars, before they be consecrated with the inuocation of the highest power, they are the sub∣stance of bread and wyne; but aster the words of Christ, they are the body and bloud of Christ. What meruaile is it, if those things which he could creat by his word, he can change being al∣ready created? Be not these words playne and sufficient to moue any vnpassionate mynd? S. Augustin:Aug. serm quem citat Beda in c. 10. prior. ad Corinth. Non omnis panis &c. Not euery bread, but that only which receaueth the Bene∣diction, fit Corpus Christi, is made the Body of Chrst. S. Chry∣sostome:Hom. 83. in Mat. & Homil. de Euchar. in Enan. Num vides panem, num vinum? &c. Doest thou see bread? Doest thou see wyne? Doe those things passe into the common passage as other meats do? Let it be far from thee to thinke so, for euen as wax cast into the fyre doth assimulate or change it selfe to it, nothing of the substance therof remayning, or superfluously redoun∣ding, so mayst thou suppose the Mysteries heer to be consumed by the substance of the body. S. Gregory Nyssene:Orat. Catech. c. 37. Quamobrem re∣ctè, &c. Wherfore we now truely belieue euen by the Word of God, that the sanctified bread is changed by the Word of God &c. That those things which are seene (to wit, bread and wyne) are changed into the body of our Lord, is to be attributed to the vertue of the be∣nediction. 6. I will supersede to cyte other authorities of the Fa∣thers, who make amply mention of the transubstantia∣tion or change, which is wroght by the power of God in this holy Sacrament and Sacrifice; contenting my self to shew, how that these holy Fathers do witnesse, that the custome of the primitiue Church, was to adore and wor∣ship with Latria the Blessed Sacramēt, belieuing that Christ true God and Man was contayned therin. S. Augustin ex∣poning those words, Adorate scabellum pedum eius, wryteth thus:In Psa. 98. Fluctuans conuerto me ad Christum &c. I doubting doe
turne my selfe to Christ, because I seeke him heer, and doe find how without impiety the earth may be adored, the footstoole of his feete may be adored; for he did take earth from earth, because flesh com∣meth of the earth, and he tooke flesh of the flesh of Marie: and because he did heer walke in that flesh, and gaue that flesh to be eaten by vs, for our health, now no man doth eat that flesh, except he adore it be∣fore. Heer then it is found how such a footstoole of the feet of our Lord may be adored; so as that heere we not only do not sinne in adoring, but we sinne in not adoring. And wryting to Honoratus he witnesseth, that the vncleane re∣ceaue and adore the Body of Christ, though not to their saluation:Epist. 120. c. 27. Adducti sunt ad mensam Domini & accipiunt de cor∣pore & sanguine eius, sed adorant tantùm, non etiam saturantar, quia non inuitantur. The same holy Father warneth most earnestly the Catholiks, and especially Priests to be care∣full, that no part of the Host or blessed Sacrament fall v∣pon the ground. 7. As for the holy Masse if any man will aske, whe∣ther or no the holy Apostles sayd Masse? I answere, that sundry holy Fathers (whose authority is to be preferred to all the ministry for learning, antiquity, piety, and god∣linesse) witnesse the same plentifully; as S. Isidorus Hispalensis twelue hundreth yeares ago:In 2. off. lib. c. de Missa. Ordo au∣tem Missa vel orationum quibus oblata Deo sacrificia consecrantur, primùm à S. Petro est institutus, cuius celebrationem vno eodem{que} modo vniuersus peragit orbis. The same witnessethIn l. de corp. & sang. prope finem. Pascha∣sius,Haeres. 79 ante med. Epiphanius,Apol. c. 17. p. 97. Lindanus, and sundry others which I omit. Yea the self same Masse which S. Peter vsed, is yet extant, as the forenamed Authors and sundry others wit∣nesse, in the which holy Apostles Masse, are contayned the selfe same prayers and ceremonies, which the Roman Catholik Priests vse in this Age: as, the Kyrie eleison, Domi∣nus vobiscum, Credo in vnum Deum Patrem Omnipotentem &c. Lauabo inter innocentes manus meas &c. Sursum habeamus corda nostra. Verè dignum & iustum est. Te igitur clementissime Pater &c. Memento Domine famulorum tuorum &c. Communicantes & me∣moriam venerantes &c. Qui pridie eius diei &c. Supplices te roga∣mus &c. Pater Noster &c. Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi &c.
And sundry others particularities which I refer to the rea∣ding of the diligent Reader inIn An∣n i in∣num 4. Baronius, andIn 3 chactor dgmatic. libro post medium. Turti∣anus. Lykewise the Masse which S. Iames the Apostle called maior, was accustomed to say, is yet extant, and hath been famous in Christian Kingdomes this sixteenth hun∣dreth yeares, as witnesseth after many others,I Chro. in fine pri∣is ecl. Genebrar∣dus. S. Matthew the Apostle his Masse is yet extant, as wit∣nesseLib. 1. hist c. 15. Socrates, andAdan. 44 nu 35. Baronius, which Masse is called commonly in the Aethiopian language, Corbon, that is, a voluntary Free-gift, or Sacrifice, and with vs in Europe the word Missae, or Masse, signifieth a voluntary Sacrifice, drawne from the Hebrew word, Missah, as the Bible wit∣nesseth,Deut 16 v. 10. And thou shall keep the Feast of weekes vnto the Lord thy God, euen a free gift of thy hand, yea the Apostle calleth the Sacrifice of Christ vpon the Crosse, a voluntary Sacrifice:See this place in the Bible. Oblatus est quia ipse volit. 8. Truly it is a great comfort and consolation to vs Catholiks, to see the holy Apostles and ancient Fathers of this first Age, so constant in this poynt of the blessed Sacra∣ment, and of the Masse. For it is most cleare, that those ho∣ly Fathers so neere to the Apostles, yea Disciples to the A∣postles, so learned in all Doctrines, so addicted to Hea∣uenly things, so deare and familiar to God, could not be but inspired by the spirit of God, in so weighty a matter, wherfore we Catholiks securely follow such Captaynes and guydes, who haue byn sixteene hundreth yeares be∣fore vs. That the Ministers haue corrupted the Bible in sundry places, which proue the Reall Presence, and holy Sacrifice of the Masse. The second Section. EVen as in this our corrupted Age, there be many and diuers Sects and Religions (yet but one true Religion Fayth, and Profession) in Germany & Holland specially, in Scotland, England, Denmarke, and Sueden; so there be many diuers Bibles, euery Religion forging and making
a Bible to proue and mantayne the errours, heresies, and blasphemies therof. And this with that pretext, which by inuentours of heresies is vsed in euery Age, saying alwayes to the poore ignorant people, that they preached nothing but the expresse Word of God, the playne Scripture, the formall text of the Bible. Notwithstanding in effect they preached nothing but their owne fantasies, inuentions, dreames, expositions, yea in a word, heresies and blasphe∣mies. To the which end it hath bene euer the custome of new Religion-makers to corrupt the Bible, to falsify the word of God, committing therby Lese-Maiesty Diuine. So the Puritane Ministers in Scotland haue euery where corrupted the Bible, and that in such sorte, that there is not one debatable poynt of Religion, betwixt vs and them, wherin they haue not most blasphemously and impiously corrupted the Bible. 2. As for example, our Sauiour Christ Iesus in Saint Matthew, in that short prayer called the Lords prayer, teacheth vs to aske specially not only corruptible bread, but the bread of Lyfe, that is, his owne flesh contayned in the blessed Sacrament, vnder the shape of bread, for the which cause our Sauiour called itMatth. 6. v. 11. Supersubstantiall (because one substance is changed in another substance) or supernaturall bread, for so it is in the Greeke, , that is, Giue vs this day our supersubstantiall bread, which word:In Cō∣ment. in hunc loū & in epist. ad Titum c. 2. & in Ezech. c. 18 S. Hierome expoundeth plainly of the blessed Sacrament. Likewise,Lib. 3. de fide cont. Arri. c. 7. S. Ambrose,Lib. de Incarnat. Christi. S. Athanasius,Ep. 121. S. Augustin, andIn orat. Loini. S. Cyprian, whose words are; Sicut enim dicitur Pater noster, quia credentiam Pater est: sic panis noster, quia in Sacramento nobis datur. That is: Euen as God is called our Father, because he is God of the faythfull: so he is called, our Bread, because he is giuen to vs in the blessed Sacrament. Da∣mascenus confirmeth the same with sundry other holy Fa∣thers, who all expone those words of the Lords prayer, specially of the Blessed Sacrament, and Reall Presence. 3. And notwithstanding that in all the Greek Bibles, it is, , supersubstantiall bread, yet neuer a one of the Scottish Bibles hath followed the Greek text heer, be∣cause
it is a disaduantage, against them, and for vs Catho∣liks. And the word , not only is in S. Luke, but also the same is craued , dayly, because the bles∣sed Sacrament is both supersubstantiall and dayly bread, as witnesseth plainly the custome amongst the Apostles and Christians in the primitiue Church, & S. Ambrose giueth the reason wherfore it is called, supersubstantial:Lib. 5. de Sacram. cap. 4. Panem nostrum (sayth he) quotidianum da nobis hodie. Memini sermonis mei cùm de Sacramentis tractarem: Dixi vobis, quòd ante verba Chri∣sti, quod ossertur, panis dicatur: vbi verba Christi deprompt a fuerint, iam non panis dicitur, sed corpus appellatur: Quare ergo in oratione Dominica quae postea sequitur, ait, Panem nostrum? Panem quidem dixit, sed , hoc est supersubstantialem. Non iste panis est, qui vadit in corpus: sed ille panis vitae aeternae, qui animae nostrae sub∣stantium fulcit, ideo Grecè  dicitur &c. 4. Euen as heer the Ministers haue left their owne Greeke text to mantayne their errour in not translating the Lords prayer as they should haue done, so they haue added to the Lords prayer, For thyne is the Kingdome, the power, and the glory for euer. It is manifest, that there be many Greeke new Testaments, that haue not these words, which though they had, it would proue nothing, forIn 7. act. Apost v. 14. Caluin belieueth constantly that the Greek text, now extant, is corrupted, AndIn 46. Gen. v. 27. Beza witnesseth the same: Ita{que} ingenuè profiteor edi∣tionem Gracam eo loco mihi videri deprauatam. Lykewisec. 27. Matth. v. 9 Cal∣uin granteth that the Greek Euangel of S. Matthew is cor∣rupted, where all the Greek copyes haue (which was spo∣ken by Ieremias the Prophet) yet those words are found in Zachary, and not in Ieremy. Lykewisestc. c. 6 num. 12. Caluin lea∣ueth the Hebrew text (as corrupted) of the nynth Chapter of Isay, and the twenty three of Ieremie, and preferreth our Latin Catholik version therunto. And he sayth plainly,Ios 24 That in the seauēth Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles vers. 16. The Greek text is manifestly corrupted, because the word Abraham is put for Iacob. And vpon the 20. of S. Mat∣thew 16. vers. he sayth that those words, Many are called, but few are chosen, are impertinent, and no wyse to the pur∣pose. Lykewise BezaIn c. 10. ad Rom. v. 18. Vide Bell. l. 2. de verbo Dei c. 2. lac Gord. tom. 1. cont. 8. Gautier in Dilemma∣tibus. abandoneth in sundry other pla∣ces
the Greek text as corrupted, and followeth the Catholik Latin text, which is called Vulgata editio. 5. If the Greek new Testament be fulty and errone∣ous, how can it be the infallible Word of God? For as S. Augustin teacheth very wisely: If the Apostles haue erred in wryting the Euangells but in one place, it followeth, that they had not the infallible assistance of the holy Ghost in that place, and consequently the Reader will euer re∣maine incertaine, when they had that infallible assistance, and when not: wherof it followeth of necessity, that nei∣ther the Greek text of the new Testament, nor the Hebrew text of the old Testament, can be an infallible rule and iudge of Controuersies, because there is no Hebrew, Greek, nor Syriake copy now extant, which doth not containe sundry errours, the originals and autographes which the Apostles writ, not being extant. For this cause S. Hierome sayth wisely:In prae∣fat. in pen∣tateuc. That the Latin copies of the Bible are more correct and true, then the Greek, and the Greek more correct then the Hebrew: Emendatiora sunt exemplaria Latina, quàm Graeca, & Graeca quàm Hebraea. Thus also constantly belieueth S. Augustin (whom Caluin calleth the Eagle of the Doctours):Lib. 1. de Doct. Christ. c. 15. In ipsis autem interpretationibus, Itala caeteris praeferatur, nam est verborum tenacior cum perspicuitate sententiae, & latini quibslibet emendandis Graeca adhibeantur, in quibus sep∣tuagintae in erpretum, quoad vetus Testamentum attinet, excellit auctoritas. And Beza himself the Oracle of the Puritanes, maketh greater account of our Latin Edition, then of the Greek copies that are now extant:In prae∣fat. in no∣uum Testa∣mentum. Quin etiam aliquot locis animaduertimus veteris interpretis lectionem, quamuit cum nostris Graecis exemplaribus non conueniat, interdum tamen melius quadra∣re, nempe quòd emendatius aliquod exemplar sequutus esse videatur. And a little after he preferreth our Latin vulgar Edition (which is preferred to all other Editions by the Catholike Church) saying: Quam ego maxima ex parte amplector, & ceteris omnibus antepono. 6. Since then, our vulgar Latin edition hath not these words. For thyne is the Kingnome, the power, and glory &c. why should the Ministers put them in the Lords prayer?
specially since the ancient Greek copies haue them not as may appeare,Aug. l. 2. c. . de ser. Domini in monte. Ambro. l. 5. de Sacra. Hierom in c. 6. Matth. Cyil. Cate. Myst. 5. Cypr. tract de orat. Domini. Tertul. de orat. c. 8. because S. Augustin, S. Ambrose, S. Hie∣rome, S. Cyril, S. Cyprian, and Tertullian, explica∣ting the Lords prayer, make no mention of those wordes, in whose tyme the Greek copies did not differ herein from the Latin. 7. And it is easie to remark and see in this matter the new-fangled spirits of our Scots Ministers, amongst whom scarsely shall you find three that say the Lords prayer after the same forme: for some say, Our Father which art in Hea∣uen, others, O Our Father: some, Hallowed be thy name, o∣thers, Hallowed and blessed be thy Name, others, Hallowed, blessed, and sanctified be thy Name: some, Giue vs this day &c others, Giue vs O Lord this day: some, But deliuer vs from all euill, others, But deliuer vs from that euill one. And if in so short a prayer ther be such variety amongst Ministers, what marueile is it to see so great variance in matters of Religion, in expoun∣ding the Bible? the one suffering banishment for not a∣uowing kneeling, others for receauing kneeling against the solemne Oath and promise inioying their rents and sti∣pends: to the one and the other I will addresse those words of the Bible, for taking out of the Bible the words, supersubstantial bread:Reuel. 22. v. 18.19. If any man shall adde vnto these things, vnto him God shall adde the plagues that are written in this book: and if any man shall diminish &c. God shall take away his parte of the booke of lyfe. 8. The second corruption is in S. Matthew:Matth. 26. v. 26. And at they did suppe, Iesus took the bread and blessed it, and brake it, and gaue it to his Disciples &c. in the Greek it is , he blessed, whereby the Bible shewes that our Sauiour blessed the bread, and by vertue of his blessing and words, turned the bread into his precious Body, for the blessing of Christ is not idle,Marc. 6 v. 41. as when he multiplyed the fyues loaues, and two fishes by his blessing. And notwithstanding that al the Greek Bibles haue the word Blessed in S. Matthew: yet the Ministers haue left out the word, Blessed, and translated He gaue thankes, not making any account of the Greek Bi∣bles in this point, and that only to improue and gainstād
the forme o lessings, which the Cathoike Church vseth in administring the Sacaments. 9. The double and peuers dealing of the Ministers in this, is, that the same Greek word , I blesse, they turne in other parts of the Bible, as it should be turned: as in S. Matthew:Matth. 14 v. 19. And he looked vp to Heauē, and blessed, and brake &c. And in S. Luke:Luc 24 v. 50. And be lifd vp his hands and blessed them. And to the Galathians:Galat. 3. v. 8. In thee shall all Nations be blessed, and in sundry other places where they turne alwaies the Greek word as it should be, and not in the 26. of Matthew. For the Syriake text maketh plainly for vs: Nesab Ieschuah lachemo barec, Iesus took bread and blessed it. When the word blessing is referred to God, then it may signify to thank God, to praise God; but when it is referred to a creature, as in S. Matthew it is, it cannot be taken for thankesgiuing. But S. Luke say the Ministers, hath only (y) He took bread, and when he had giuen hanks, he brake it, not making mention of the word, Blessing.August. de con Euang c. 49. I answer that our Sauiour both gaue thanks and blessed the bread, as S. Augustin testifieth, and the two Euangelists, S. Matthew and S. Marke plainly witnesse, vsing the word , He blessed it. Now it is certaine, that the word blessing, cānot be taken for the word than∣kesgiuing, as when Iacob desired God to blesse his sonne Ioseph,Gen. 48. v. 15 it cānot be said that he desired God to giue thanks to his sōne Ioseph, & infinite such other places which I o∣mit to be short, only cōtent with those words of S. Paul:1. Cor. 10. v. 16. The cuppe of blessing which we blesse, is it not the communion of the Bloud of Christ? , it cānot be said the cuppe of thankesgiuing which we thanke for. The article, is the accusatiue case, wherfore the holy Fathers accordingly a∣uowe, that our Sauiour both gaue thankes, and blessed the bread. S. Augustin, quem citat Beza:Serm. de verb. Euang. Non enim omnis panis, sed accipiens benedictionem Christi, fit Corpus Christi. Shew∣ing plainly that the blessing of Christ, had force to turne the bread into his body, for the blessing & words of Christ are of efficacy and working, not like the words of man, which are idle and without effect sayth S. Ambrose:Ambr. l. 4. de Sa∣cram. c. 4. Tu fortè dicit, Meus panis est vsitatus: sed panis iste, panis est ante
verba Sacramentorum, vbi accesserit consecratio, de pane fit car Christi. Hoc igitur astruamus. Quomodo potest, qui pauis est, corpesse Christi? Consecratione. Consecratio igitur quibus verbis est, & cuius sermonibus? Domini Iesu. Nam reliqua omnia qua dicuntur, aus Deo defertur: Oratione petitur pro populo, pro Re∣gibus, pro cateris: vbi venitur vt conficiatur venerabile Sacramen∣um, iam non suis Sermonibus Sacerdos, sed vtitur Sermonibus Chri∣sti. Ergo, sermo Christi hoc conficit Sacramentum. Quis Sermo Christi? Nempe is, quo facta sunt omnia. Iussit Dominus & facta est terra: Iussit Dominus & factum est caelum: Iussit Dominus & facta sunt mania: Iussit Dominus & omnis creaturae generata est. Vides ergo quàm operatorius sit Sermo Christi. Can any man speake more plainly, against the Puritanes and Prote∣stants? 10. I doe supercede the prouing of other blasphe∣mous corruptions of the Ministers, referring them to se∣ueral Ages; asking only these three questions of Maister Ramsey. First, to name me any auncient Father, who euer did take the word, Blessing, for Thankesgiuing? The secōd, to name me any man of any Nation, who before Cal∣uin corrupted the Bible so blasphemously in this place? The third: Whether the perfect knowledge of the Greek tongue should be rather graunted to the Greek Fathers, (who do read vniuersally the word, He blessed, heere) then to our Scottish Ministers, whose ignorance in the Greek tongue is such, that to this day not one of them haue shew∣ed to be skilfull therin (to my knowledge) by any pu∣blik testimony.
The 3. 4. & 5. Article. 1 That holy Images. 2. The signe of the Crosse. 3. And holy Reliques were with reuerence in vse, amongst the Catholiks, in this first Age. CHAP. III. IT is certaine amongst vs Catholikes, that it is not lawfull to pray to Images, to kneele to Images, or to giue that ho∣nour to them, which is only due to God; as the Ministers doe teach and de∣ceaue the ignorant people. The vse then of Images in the Catholik Church, is, to vse thē as instrumēts to put vs in memory of the life & passion of Christ, & the glorious actions of his Saintes. For it is certaine that things seene by vs, do moue vs more, then things we heare: specially considering how that the multitude of worldly affaires, the weaknes of the flesh, & tentations of the Diuel, withdrawe vs from thinking on God. Which was the reason wherfore God himself or∣dayned the vse of Images in the old Law, commanding Moyses to make the Images of Cherubims, which were Angels:Exod. 25. v. 18. And thou shalt make two Cherubims of Gold &c. at the two ends of the Mercy-seat &c. And the Cherubims shall stretch their wings on high. Now I aske of the Ministers: Those pi∣ctures of the Cherubims eyther they were Images or Idols? If Idols, then God commanded Idolatry, which is a bla∣sphemy: If they were Images, then God commanded the vse of Images, and did neuer recall this Cōmand in any part of the Bible. Yea if those words of Exodus:Exod. 20. v. 4. Thou shalt not make thee any grauen Image, were the word of God (as in effect they are not) he had contradicted himself, forbid∣ding
in the 20. Chaper Images, and commanding Images in the 25. of Exodus. 2. Secondly, in the booke of Numbers, the Image of the brasen Serpent is plainly set downe:Numb. 11. v. 8. God said to Moyses, make thee a fyerie Serpent and set it vp for a signe, that as many as are bitten, may look vpon it and liue. Where the word of God calleth this fyerie Serpent a signe, Image, or Picture, which signe and Image our Sauiour commendeth great∣ly, as an Image and figure of himself:Ioan. 3. v. 14. And as Moyses lift vp the Serpent in the wildernesse, so must the Sonne of man be lifted vp. This Image was seen by more then three hundreth thousand Iewes in the wildernesse. Now I aske, Eyther this fyerie Serpēt was an Image, and figure of Christ, or an Idol? If an Image and figure, then God commanded it, notwithstanding he forsaw that the Iewes after were to a∣buse this his holy institution,2. Kings 18. v. 4. as the Bible witnesseth: If an Idol, then God commandeth Idolatry, which is a hor∣rible blasphemy. And euen as by the viewing and looking vpon the fyerie Serpent, the Iewes receaued health in body and inward comfort; so the Catholiks in viewing deuout∣ly Images, specially of our Sauiour, receaue sundry times health in body, and comfort in mind. Certes Tertullian calleth this Serpent an Image.Lib. de Idolat. c. 5. Effigies aenei Serpent is sus∣pensi figuram designauit. In the Hebrew it is, Hasé lecha saráph, Make vnto thee a fyerie Serpent, by reason it was molten by fyre,. or made of brasse, which glistereth like fyre, sayth Vatablus, the 70. turne it, a brasen Serpent. 3. Thirdly, Salomon (as witnesseth the Bible) did place Images in his Temple and Church, at the command of God:1. Reg. 6. v. 23. And within the Oracle he made two Cherubims of Oliue tree, ten cubits high &c. And againe: And he put the Cherubims within the inner house. And againe, the Bible witnesseth, that the Temple of Salomon was wholy of grauen Images, & figures of the Cherubims:1. Reg. 6. v. 29. And he carued all the walles of the house round about with grauen figures of Cherubims &c. Of the which words of the Bible these propositions ensue. 1. Thou shalt make two Cherubims, that is, the Images of Cheru∣bims. 2. Thou shalt make a fyerie Serpent for a signe and Image.
3 The Temple of Salomon was whole of figures, or Images of the Cherubims &c. I ake now of the Ministes to giue as plaine words out of the Bible that make against Images, which they shall neuer be able to doe: but rather they will igno∣rantly rage & boast of their foolish necessary consequences, which are nothing els but their own dreames, inuentions, and plaine heresies. Wherfore let the wise preferre to the Ministers consequences and foolish traditions, the conse∣quences and deductions of the holy Fathers, as the Bible manifestly commandeth vs to do:Eccl. 8. v. 9. Go not from the Dctrine of the elders, for they haue learned it of their Fathers, and of them thou shalt learne vnderstanding, and to make answer in the tyme of need. Yea we are obliged in conscience, to enquire of the auncient Fathers the true Religion:Deut. 38 v. 7. Remember (sayth the Bible) the auncient dayes, consider the yeares of so many generatiōs, aske thy Father, and he will shew thee, aske thy elders, and they will tell yee. The Puritanes leauing the waies of their for∣fathers, shall neuer haue rest in conscience:Ierem. 6. v. 16. Stand in the wayes and behold, and aske for the old way, which is the good way, and walke therin, and you shall find rest for your soules. Wherun∣to the Puritanes answere: We will not walke therin. For the which cause the Puritanes and ProtestantsIerem. 18. v. 15. Haue stumbled from the auncient wayes, to walke in the wayes not troden. Yea a∣gainst the expresse words of their owne Bible:Prou. 22. v. 28. Thou shalt not remoue the ancient bounds, which thy Fathers haue set. Whereof S. Augustin giueth a very good reason:Cont. Pelag. Because that which the holy Fathers haue found in the Church, that they haue holden, they haue taught what they haue learned; what they haue receaued from their Fore-fathers, they haue deliuered to vs their po∣sterity. And specially in matters of Religion,Origen. tract. 29. in Matth. We should not depart from the first Ecclesiasticall tradition, nor belieue other∣wyse, but as the Church of God hath by succession deliuered vnto vs. Which was euer the practise of the Church of God, as wit∣nesseth Lyrinensis:Lib. adu. haer. If any new question do arise, we doe re∣paire to the iudgment of the holy Fathers. Let vs then follow the consequences of the holy Fathers concerning Images, the signe of the Crosse, and holy Reliques.
Testimonyes of the holy Fathers of this first Age, for the vse of Images, the signe of the Crosse, and honouring the Re∣liques of Saints. The first Section. SAint Ignatius Martyr:Ep. ad Phil. ante medium. . Princeps mundi huius gaudet, cùm quis crucem negarit: cognoscit enim crucis confessionem, suum esse exitium: Id enim trophaeum est contra ipsius potentiam, quod vbi viderit, horret, & audiens timet. The holy Crosse is a banner against the power of the Diuel, who seeing the Crosse ab∣horreth it, and hearing of it, feareth. S. Martial:In epist ad Burde∣gal. c. 8. Crucē Domini in quem credidistis, Deum verum & Dei filium, semper in mente, in ore, in signo tenete. Crux enim domini est armatura vestra inuicta contra Satanam. Haue euer the crosse of God in whō yee haue belieued, in mynd, in mouth, & marke yourselfe therwith &c. And since the signe of the crosse is nothing els but an Image of Christ, this holy Father in commen∣ding to vs the signe of the crosse, commendeth likewise the vse of Images. 2. The holy Apostles in that general counsel holden at Antioch say thus:Pam∣phil. Mar∣tyr Innoc. 1. Epist. 18. ad Alexād Episc. Turrin. lib 1. pro Canon. Apost. c. 15 Ne errent fideles erga Idola, sed ex∣primant diuinam, humanam, immaculatam, manufactam imaginem veri dei & saluatoris nostri Iesu Christi, ac seruorum eius ex aduerso coram Idolis & Iudaeis, ne{que} amplius errent erga Idola, aut Iudae is si∣miles fiant. Wherby the Apostles commaunde Christians to vse Images, giuing also the reason wherfore they were first instituted, and shewing a manifest difference betwixt Images and Idols. So that wisely Gregory the great called Images,lib. 7. Epist. ep. 109. the books of the vnlearned. And accordingly, Gre∣gory Nyssene sayd,Orat in Theod. The silent picture speaketh in the wall and profiteth very much. The reason wherof is, because the view and sight of Images, increaseth in vs faith, the loue of God and of his Saincts, and kindleth in our hartes the coales of deuotion: which S. Chrysostome felt when thus he write,Orat. quod ve. & nou. test. vnus fit mediator. I loued a picture of melted wax ful of piety. Gregory Nyssene7. Syn. act. 2. & . was often wont to weep, looking on the Image of Abraham sacri∣ficing
his sonne Isaac. And Gregory the Great wryting to Se∣cundine Abbot (to whom also he sent the Images of Christ) sayd thus,Lib. 7. ep. 53. I know thou longest for our Sauiours Image, that ga∣zing on it, thou mayst burne the more with the loue of God. 3. S. Denis Areopagita speaking of the ceremonyes of Baptisme, wherin the signe of the crosse was, and is vsed by the Bishop, whoEccl. Hier. c. . p. 2. Inchoans vnctionem trino signaculo, inun∣gendum deinceps Sacerdotibus toto corpore hominem vbi traedidit, ipse ad adoptionis matrem proficiscitur, eius{que} aquam sacris inuocationibus sanctificans, & tribus sanctissimi vnguenti crucisormibus effusionibus illam perficiens. And a litle after, he sheweth the custome and forme in receauing Monks and religious men to the seruice of God, vsing in such reception the signe of the Crosse, ra∣sure of their heads &c.Eccles. Hierarch. c. 6. p. 2. Vbt verò omnia haec, is qui institui∣tur, promiserit, cruciformi figura consignans eum Sacerdos tondet, trinam diuinae beatitudinis personam inclamans. And of Images he sayth thus:Citatur in septima Synodo ge∣nerali c. 36. Tom. 3. Concil. In his book called Pa∣stor. Lib. de tra∣ditionib. Apostolic. sunt reuera ea quae videntur, eorum quae sub aspectum non cadunt certae clara{que} imagines. 4. Besides the foresaid Doctours, Hermes a most anciēt and Apostolical wryter of this Age, maketh mention of Reliques, Prayer for the dead, vnwritten traditiōs, of Chri∣sme, consecration of Monkes, of Altars, places sanctified, & sundry other ceremonyes, of the tonsure of Preists heads, burning incense at the Altar, of merit and iustification of works, of professed chastity in preists, of fasting from cer∣tayne meats, of works of supererogation, as witnesseth Ha∣melinanus a Protestant wryter. Finally we Catholiks cō∣stā ly do honour the holy Reliques of Saints, notwith a di∣uine honour which is due to God ōly, but with a Religious honour, much inferiour to the foresaid, yet aboue a ciuill honour due to the Magistrat; & that we do, & affirme with S. Austin:De Eccl. deg. c. 73. Sanctorum corpora & pracipuè beatorum Martyrum reliquias ac si Christi membra sincerissimè honor and a credimus: si quis contra hanc sententiam venerit, non Christianus, sed Eunomianus & Vigilantianus creditur: He that doth not belieue that the holy bodies & Reliques of blessed Martyrs should be honored as the members of Christ, he is not a Christian, but a Vigilan∣tian, or Heretik, sayth S. Augustin.
That the Ministers haue corrupted the Bible in sundry places, which proue the vse of Images, of the holy Crosse &c. The second Section. SAint Augustine witnesseth, that Faustus Manichaeus he Heretike bragged much of the Bible,Lib. 5. conf. c. . & . of the Word of God, of the Scriptures, yet in effect he had nothing but lyes, vanities, and vile superstitions: the lyke is easie to be seene in the Protestants and Puritanes of Scotland, who do vaunt of the Scriptures, of the Bible, yet they cannot proue, yea not one debatable point of their Religion out of the expresse word of the Bible, but rather are forced to giue vs their consequences and foolish illations, for the ex∣presse word of God: wherby they are to be accompted,Ioh. 10. v. 2. Theeues who enter not by the doore (of the word of God but climbe another way to steal, kill, and destroy our soules. So that by peruerse interpretations of the Ministers,Hiero. l. 1. in c. 1. ad Galat. The Gospell of Christ it made the Gospell of man, or which is worse, the Gospell of the diuell. 2. To make Images odious to the commō people, & to stirre vp the Nobility to cast down the Churchs, they haue abhommably corrupted sundry places of the Bible, specially the twenty of Exodus, thus:Exod. 20. v. 4. . Thou shall not make to the selfe any grauen Image &c. Contrary to the Greeke text, contrary to the Hebrew, Lo thahhasche leca, contrary to the Latin, Non facies tibi Idolum, aut sculptile, contrary to all the Bibles which haue been vsed amongst all nations, the space of fiftene hundreth yares, which all haue in sub∣stance, Thou shall not make vnto thy selfe any Idol. Wherfore see∣ing that the Protestans cannot shew any Bible before the comming of Caluin, that hath such blasphemous words, Thou shall not make to thy selfe any grauen Image, it followeth, that it is a manifest corruption and nouelty, carying with it selfe many blasphemies. 3. The first Blasphemy. If God forbad Images, heere it followeth that he contradicted himselfe: for in the 25. of
Exodus he commandeth the Image of the Cherubims, & after the Image of the fyrie serpent. 2. If Idol and Image be all one (as the Puritanes say to excuse this their Blasphemous translation) it followeth, that Christ,Coloss. 1. v. 15.  who is the Image of the inuisible God, may be called, the Idol of God, and conse∣quently, all those that worshippe Christ, worshippe an Idol. Agayne, If Idol and Image were all one, they must translate thus:1. Cor. 15. v. 49. As we haue borne the Idol of the earthlie, so let vs beare the Idol of the heauenly. And agayne: We are transformed into the same Idol, & sundry other such places. 3. That man who is called the Image of God, may be called, The Idol of God, which is absurd. 4. It would follow that all the Mi∣nisters are makers of Idoles or Images, and consequently are Idolatrous. For the Apostle sayth:Ephes. 5. v. 5. Coloss. 3. v. 5. This yee know, that no fornicatour, neyther vncleane person, nor couetous person which is an Idolater, hath any inheritance in the kingdome of Christ, and of God, they should translate, nor couetous man, which is a worshipper of Images, and consequently al the Ministers being couetous, they must needes be all Idolaters. 5. When Idolls are called God (to whom the Pagans prayed, and whom they adored) then the Ministers do not translate Images but Idol (though the same Greeke word be alwayes one) knowing well that the Catholikes do not worship Images as Gods. As for example:Esa. 44. v. 17. And the residue therof he maketh a God, euen his Idoll, he boweth vnto it, and worshipeth, and prayeth vnto it. And agayne:Esa. 4 v. 20. Lephis lo. i∣his Idol. Assemble your selues & come, draw neer togeather, the obiect of the Gētils, they haue no knowledge that set vp the wood of their Idol & pray vnto a God that cannot saue them: Which two places shewe plainly the malice of the Mi∣nisters, and the difference betwixt Catholik Images and the Pagans Idoles. For the Pagans prayed to their Idols, and thought them to be Gods, did put their trust in them, kneeled vnto them &c. 6. The Hebrew Word, Pesel, is alwayes translated by the 70. , and not .Origen. hom. 8. in Exod. Theod. q. 38. in Exo. And the greek word  euer is turned into Image, as the hebrew word Tselem, & neuer into Idol. 7. The Ministers shall ne∣uer be able to name me any Grecian wryter of the primi∣tiue
Church, who confound the word Idol with Image: for it is certaine that Origene and Theodoret both ancient & learned Grecians, with others holy Fathers of Greece make a manifest distinction betwixt  and . And all the Latin Fathers without exception make one di∣stinction betwixt Idol and Image, condemning Idols as ab∣hominable, auowing Images as commendable. 8. The Mi∣nisters themselues breake willingly this Commande∣ment in kneling at the reception of the Supper of the Lord, and that against their owne solemne Oath giuen at their reception, and confirmed and sworne solemnely by the three Estats of Scotland in sundry Parlaments:In the confession of Fayth of the Mini∣sters of Scotland. Therfore whosoeuer reserueth and worshippeth those Sacraments (meaning Baptisme, and the Supper of the Lord) procureth to himselfe damnation. For since the Ministers belieue, that the Supper of the Lord is but an Image and figure of Christ, in knee∣ling before such figures, the Commandement of God, ac∣cording to their translation, is transgressed. As also the second Commandement, Thow shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vayne, is lykewise transgressed by the Mini∣sters, they hauing sworne solemnely not to receaue knee∣ling vnder the payne of eternall damnation: yet now haue receaued the same against their former Oath, and so haue broken both the first and second Commandement of God, by committing both Idolatry and periury.
The 6. & 7. Article. 1. That the custome of the Catholik Church in this first Age, was to honour the Saints in Heauen. 2. And to pray vnto them. CHAP. IIII. SEING by the Law of God, and Nature, Honour is due to Excellency, there must be so many kinds of ho∣nour, as there be kinds of excellency, which are three. The first is, of God, which is infinit, for the excellency of God must be infinite. The second ex∣cellency is supernaturall, yet created, as that of grace and glorie. The third is, humane, or naturall, consisting in naturall gifts, or worldly dignity. To these three kynds of excellency pertaine three kynds of honour, The first,. Di∣uine, due to God only, which we call, Latria. The second belongeth to Saints and holy things, as eleuated by God aboue the course of nature, and this is called, Dulia, and Hy∣perdulia. The third is, Ciuill honour, due to men according to their naturall qualities. The first is due to God only, the second is due to the Saints in heauen, as to the glo∣rious seruants of God, being now in glory with him. And notwithstanding that the outward actions of kneeling, bowing, kissing, praying &c. be indifferently giuē to God, to the Saints, and ciuill men; yet the intention and mind of him who doth those outward actions distinguisheth the same: for kneeling to God is diuine worship: kneling to Saints is an inferiour pious worship or honour; kneeling to a mortall King is ciuill honour. The two last alwayes tending to the honour and glory of God, who will be ho∣noured
in his Saints & creatures, conforme to that saying of the Scripture, Gloria haec est omnibus sanctis eius. 2. This doctrine is confirmed by the holy Fathers, specially by S. Augustine, who sayeth:Lib. 10 cōt Faust. c. 21. We honour Mar∣tyrs with that worship of loue and society; wherwith holy men are worshipped in this lyfe, whose heart we perceaue is prepared to like sufferance for the Euangelical verity: But Martyrs more deuoutly, by how much more securely, after all vncertaynties are ouercome, & with how much more confident prayse, we preach them now victori∣ous in a more happy lyfe, then others yet fighting in this life. But with that worship,. which in Greeke is called Latria, which in Latin can∣not be expressed by one word, we neyther worship, nor teach to be worshipped but one God. And for so much as offering of Sacrifice per∣taine h to this worship (wherof they are called Idolaters, that offer sacrifice to any Idols) we by no meanes offer any such thing, nor teach to be offed, eyther to any Martyr, or blessed Soule, or holy angell May S. Augustine speake more plainly against the Protestant The same teacheth other Doctours:Theod. l. 8. ad Graecos. Beda in Luc. 4. an∣te medium. Our Lord hath depry∣ued false Gods of the honour they had in Temples, and in place of them, caused his Martyrs to be honored, yet not in the same manner, for we neyther bring hostes nor libaments to Martyrs, but honour thē as holy men, and most deare freinds of God. 3. To make this mater more plaine, it is to be remar∣ked: that we Catholiks pray not to the Saints in Heauen eyther as Gods to help vs. Redeemers to saue vs, or as the chiefe Authors of any gift or grace bestowed vpon vs. For we acknowledge only God, to be the supreme Author and fountaine of all naturall and supernaturall fauours, of grace and glorie. Secondly, we pray not to Saints as Mediatours of our redemption, but, of Intercession only: for our Mediatour and Aduocat of redemption is only Chryst Iesus, as the Apostle sayth:1. Ioan. 2. v. 1. If any man sinne, we haue an Aduocate with the Father, Iesus Chryst the Iust; and he is the reconciliation for our sinnes. And agayne:1. Tim. 2. v. 5. There is one God & one Mediator betwixt God and man, which is the man Christ Iesus. Which place though corrupted by the Ministers, yet speaketh only of the Mediatour of Redemption: for the Scripture witnesseth playnly, that Moyses was Mediatour betwixt God and the
Iewes:Galat. 3. v. 19. For the Law was ordeyned by Angels in the hand of a Mediatour. Wherby the Bible auerreth a Mediatour of inter∣cession, besides Christ Iesus. And this is the reason wherfore we Catholikes euer addresse all our petitions to Saintes or Angels with this conclusion: per Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum filium tuum &c. declaring therby that Chryst is only our Aduocat or Mediator of Redemption, and that the Saints in heauen, are but intercessours besides the holy Trinity for vs; yea when the Minister is desyred to pray for any friend, he is made therby Mediator of intercession, though he be a sinfull man, and of little credit with God, yea per∣haps of none, in respect of the Saints of Heauen, who are in the estate of glorie, and without spot of sinne. 4. I conclude then, that the Catholike Church sayth to God only, haue mercy on vs, saue vs, forgiue vs our sinnes &c. And to the Saints, Pray for vs. And if any Catholike say to any Saint saue me, his meaning is, that the Saint saue him by his prayers to God: so we call sometymes the Blessed Virgin Marie our hope, life, refuge, because the brought forth our hope, life, and refuge Christ Iesus. Or because by her intercession she may procure our life and saluation: and in this we follow the practise of the Scripture. For S. Paul calleth the Thessalonians,1. Thess. 2. v. 19. his hope, his ioy, his crown of glorie. And he calleth Timothy, the saluation of others,1. Tim. 4. v. 16. This doing thou shal saue thy self & them that heare thee. And playnly Iob doth pray vnto the Angels according to S. Augustins exposition and meaning, when he sayeth,Iob. 18. v. 21. S. Augu∣stin in his annotati∣ons vpon Iob. Haue pitty vpon me, haue pitie vpon me (o yee my freinds) for the hand of God hath touched me And in my Iudgemēt S. Augustines opinion alone in this place should be preferred before the new vp∣start Ministers dreames and expositions. For the text she∣weth that Iob his visible and secret freinds had left him:Iob. 19. v. 19. All my secret friends abhorred me; & they whome I loued, are turned against me. First then it is manifest by the testimonyes of the Bible, that the Angels and Saints in Heauen praye for vs:Zach. 1. v. 12. Then the Angell of our Lord answered and said: O Lord of hosts, how long wilt thou he vnmercifull to Ierusalem, and to the
Cittyes of uda, with whome thou hast bene displeased nou these threescore and ten yeares. It is certayn lykewise that the Saints in Heauen are equall to the Angles,Luc 10. v. 16. For they can do no more, for as much as they are equall to the Angels, and are the sonnes of God, since they are the children of the resurrection, both their the Angels, and Saints pray for vs. Secondly, it is lawful to vs to pray to the Angels or Saints in Heauen, according to the example of the holy Patriarch Iacob:Gen. 48 v 16. The Angel which hath delyuered me from all euill, blesse the children, and let my name be named vpon them, and the name of my father Abraham & Isaac, that they may grow as fish into a multitude in the midst of the earth. Cōforme to the which example of Iacob, S. Athanasius (who was thirteene hun∣dreth yeares since) prayeth to the Blessed virgin Marie thus:Serm. de dripara. Inclyne thy eares to our praiers and forget not thy people. O Lady, Mistres, Queene and Mother of God pray for vs. And S. Augustine:Serm. 18 de san∣ctis. O Blessed Marie, receaue our prayers, obtayne our suits, for thou art the speciall hope of sinners. Thirdly, Iob was counselled to pray to the Saints:Iob. 5. v. 1. Call if there be any who will answere thee, and turne to some of the Saints: which place the Ministers haue filthily corrupted in translating it, by way of interrogation, And to which of the Saints wilt thou turne? 5. Now I would aske of the Ministery to giue me so playne & expresse words of the Bible that make for thē. Secondly, since they abuse the poore people, saying: that they preach nothing, that they belieue nothing but the expresse and playne word of the Bible, in what part of the Bible are these poynts of their faith to be found, There is no inuocation of Saints? The Saints do not heare our prayers. And a∣gayne: It is agaynst the honour of God to pray to Saints. For their Blasphemous propositiōs are no wise in the expresse word of the Bible. How then shall they proue them out of the Bible? By necessary consequence, say they. But those ne∣cessairie consequences are not infallible, but erroneous, and not the word of God, & consequētly we make no such ac∣compt of their foolish and newfangled cōsequences, as of those of the holy Fathers of this first Age. Let vs heare thē.
The Testimonyes of the holy Fathers of this first Age, Concerning praying to the Saints in Heauen, and honouring of them. The first Section. SAINT Dionysius Areopagita:Eccles. Hierarch. c. 7. parte 3. ante med. Dico autem, oracula sequutus vbi{que}, planè vtiles esse in hac vita Sanctorum preces, hoc modo si quis Sanctorum numerum amore incensus, & ad corum par∣ticipationem piè affectus tanquam propriae conscius exiguitatis, quem∣piam Sanctorum roget sibi fieri adiutorem & comprecatorem, vtilita∣tem omnino ex eo consequetur omni vtilitate superiorem. That is: I say, following the holy Scriptures, that the prayers of the Saints are most profitable for vs &c. And in the nynth Chapter of the same booke he witnesseth: That S. Michael the Archangel was giuen by God as a protectour to the Ie∣wes to assist them, and to present their prayers to God: yea the same holy Father auoweth euery particular mā to haue his owne Angell who doth offer our prayers vnto God, and knoweth our necessityes, as witnesseth the holy An∣gell of Cornelius, who said to him:Act. 10. v. 4. Thy prayers and thy almes are come vp into remembrance before God. Which place sheweth that the Angels, and consequently the Saints in Heauen know our prayers, our necessityes, and good workes. The same holy Father witnesseth, that the pray∣ers of the Saints in heauen help, not only those in this life, but also the faithfull departed out of this life:Loco supra cit. Quòd autem & iustorum preces etiam in hac vita, nedum post mortem, ijs duntaxat prosint, qui sacris precibus digni sunt, verae oraculorum traditiones nos edocent. 2. S. Clement witnesseth the same:Lib. 5. Const. A∣post. c. 8. edit. Tur∣riā. Graec. &c. 7. La∣tin. De Martyribus verò praecipimus vobis, vt in omni honore sint apud vos, vt apud nos fuerunt Iacobus Episcopus, & Condiaconus noster Stephanus: hos enim & Deus beatos fecit, & viri sancti honorarunt, & fuerunt puri omnis delicti, & ne{que} ad peccatum flecti, ne{que} a virtute detorqueri potuerunt, quorum non sunt dubiae laudes, de quibus Dauid aiebat, Pretiosa in cōspectu Domini mors sanctorum eius &c. And a litle after, this
holy Father inuiteth vs to keep holy the Festiuall dayes of the Saints in heauen, in praying to them, and calling for their help:Lib. 8. Constit. Apostol. c. 33. In diebus Apostolorum vacent. Magistri enim vestis fuerunt ad docendum vos de Christo, vobis{que} Spiritum Sanctum de∣derunt. In die Stephani Protomartyris item vacent: ac reliquis die∣bus Sanctorum Martyrum, qui Christum vitae suae anteposuerunt. And in another place he counselleth vs to call vpon, and inuocate the holy Martyrs,Lib. 8. const. Ap. c. 13. Martial. ep. ad Bur∣degal. c. 3. d Memoremus Martyres sāctos, vt mereamur certaminis eorum participes fieri. 3. S. Martialis first Bishop of Burdeaux, sent thither by S. Peter the Apostle, witnesseth likewise, that holy Aultars were erected to God in S. Stephens name, where Masse was said to God, and prayers to S. Stephen, to the end he should pray for the Catholike Church: conforme to that which S. Augustine wyselie wryteth:Serm. 17. deverb. Apost. prope ini∣tium. Iniuria est pro Martyre orare, cuius nos debemus orationibus commendari. 4. S. Peter witnesseth the same in the holy Masse, which he was accustomed to say, and which hath bene famous through all Christendome these sixteene hundreth yeares, where S. Peter prayeth:Litur. Pet. ante med. Libera nos quae sumus Domine ab omni malo praesēte ac futuro, intercessionibus immaculata & gloriosae Dominae nostra Deiparae, semper{que} Virginis Mariae &c. That is, Delyuer vs, we pray the O Lord, from all euill present and to come, by the intercession of the Blessed & Immaculate Virgin Marie &c. And a litle before, Be boun∣tifull vnto vs, O Lord, by the intercession of the Blessed virgin Marie, and of all the Saints in heauen. 5. S. Iames the Apostle witnesseth the same in his Masse, famous specially amongst the Grecians to this day:In Lit. Iacob. Mi∣nor. Commemorationem agamus sanctissimae, Immaculatae, gloriosis∣simae, benedicta Dominae nostrae Matris dei & semper Virginis Mariae, at{que} omnium Sanctorum & iustorum, vt precibus & intercessionibus eorum omnes misericordiam consequamur. I pretermit to set down other testimonyes, since the practise of the Catho∣like Church (to pray to Saints) in this Age, was so vni∣uersall, that no heretike did call it in doubt, before Vigi∣lantius, who being foure hundreth yeares after Christ, is condemned by the holy Fathers, yea by the Protestants
themselues, as a manifest and Idolatrous heretike. That the Ministers haue corrupted the Bible in sundry places, which proue the Inuocation of Saints. The second Section. THE Catholike Church, and all antiquity readeth to the honour of the holy Apostles and Saints in heauen that saying of the Prophet Dauid (who as a Prophet did foresee the honour which the Catholike Church was to giue to the Saints in heauen)Psa 138 v 16. al. 130 v. 17. Nimis honorificati sunt amici tui Deus. That is; Thy freinds O God, are become exceeding ho∣norable, Their Princedome is exceedingly strengthned. Now to make this place obscure to the Reader and to take away the force of both the Hebrew & Greeke words, the Ministers haue blasphemouslie translated thus:Regeka. How deare therfore are thy thoughts vnto me O God, how great is the summe of them? Doth not the Hebrew word make more for vs, and signifie, friends? Doth not S. Hierome (who alone did vnderstand better the Hebrew toung, them all the Ministers together) translate friends? Doth not the Greeke text put it out of doubt, since it is according to our ancient Latin translation Thy friends O God? why do ye hunt after noueltyes and for∣sake the troden path of antiquity, and passe the bounds, which our holy Forefathers haue appoynted, preferring your owne imaginations and new deuyses, euen there where yee cannot pretend iustly eyther the Hebrew or the Greeke, where it is,. their princedome is exceedinglie strengthned, and not, how great is the summe of them. 2. But this newfangled singularity in the blasphe∣mous translations of our Ministers shall better appeare in their dealing about our Blessed Lady, whose honour they haue soght so many wayes to diminish, and deface, with their Maister Iohn Caluin, who blasphemously and worse then the Deuils themselues, speaketh of the Blessed virgin:Cal. in Luc. c. 1. v. 38. prin∣ted by Ro∣bert Estien∣ne an. 1568. Videtur Sancta virgo non minus malignè restringere Dei poten∣tiam, quàm prius Zacharias. And a little after: Ne{que} verò mag∣nopere laborandum est, vt eam purgemus ab omni vitio.
3. In the first Chapter of S. Luke, it is said of the Blessed Virgin Marie:Luc. 1. v 28. In greeke . Maldonat in primum Luc. c. Hayle Mariefull of grace, our Lord is with thee, in Latine: Aue gratia plena; which translation the holy Fathers of the Latin Church haue constantly kept, a Maldonate sheweth. But our Ministers haue found out a new kynd of translation, Haile thou that art freely beloued, making the blessed Virgin lesse in fauour with God, then S. Iohn the Baptist, of whom it is said:Luc. 1. v. 15. And he shall be filled with the holy Ghost: Inferior to S. Steuen,Act. 7. v. 55. who was full of the holy Ghost. Yet their Mariomastikes will not haue the blessed Virgin Marie, full of grace. How can these Mini∣sters be friends to God, who thus disgrace the Mother of God? They are sworne enemyes not only to the Greeke text, but also to the Syriake in this poynt, which the Angell vsed: Schelom lech, Maleiath taibuthoi. That is: Pax tecum, O plena gratia. Peace vnto thee, O full of grace. Will any wyseman more belieue ignorant Ministers, rather then S. Ambrose who calleth the blessed Virgin,Lib. de Spir. sanct. cap. 7. Gratia plena? Then S. Augustine who prayeth to the blessed Virgin thus:Serm. 18 de tēp. & l. 2. de symb. ad Catech. Aue gratia plena, Dominus tecum: Dominus tecum, sed plusquam me∣cum &c. And agayne: Audite Gabrielem Angelum eam slutan∣tem, Aue gratia plena dominus tecum? Then S. Hierome who lykewise prayeth and calleth her, gratia plena? Then Beda:In c. 1. Luc. Bene gratia plena vocatur, quae nimirum gratiam, quam nulla meruerat assequitur, vt ipsum videlicet gratiae concipiat, & generet au∣ctorem? 4. As for the Greeke Fathers, they lykewyse called her vniuersally full of grace:Athan. hom. de Deipara, . S. Athanasius,Epiph. haeres. 78. . Epiphanius Theophilactus, and sundry others, whome we should be∣lieue to be more skilfull in the Greeke their naturall ton∣gue, then the Ministers can be, who of malice that they cary to the blessed Virgin, translate other words of the same nature and forme otherwyse, for thy translate:Luc. 16. v. 20. , Full of sores, yet they will not translate , full of grace. 5. Secondly, out of their dislike of inherent inward supernaturall grace of God giuen to the blessed Virgin, they translate thus:Serm. de Annūt. Feare not Marie, for thou hast found
fauour with God, insteed of translating with all antiquity, Feare not Marie, for thou hast found grace with God: Ne timeas Ma∣ria inuenisti enim gratiam epud Deum, as S. Bernard sayth:Serm. de Ann̄t. Ne timeas Maria, inuenisti enim gratiam apud Dominum; quantam gratiā? gratiā plenam, gratiā singularē &c. The Syriake text is playnly for vs, Schcachethi ger tobutha leuath eleho: For thou hast found grace before God. Caluin the sworne enemy to God, and the B. Virgin, Beza his beloued Father in Christ, our first Ministers branded Doctour will no wayes suffer the B. Virgin to be called full of grace. For he wry∣teth of her, thatIn c. 2. Luc. v. 35. she doubted in her faith. Agayne: That she preferred her selfe to God. And, that Christ made no accompt that the B. Virgin was his Mother. And, that Christ thought her not worthy to be his Mother. But let vs leaue these abhominable blasphemyes of Caluin the Capitane of Puritanes, and see rather what S. Augustin sayth of this B. Virgin.De nat. & grat. c. 36. vid. S. Thom. 3. part. q. 27. art. 4. Ex∣cepta ita{que} sancta virgine (sayth he) Maria, de qua propter honorem Domini nullam prorsus, cum de peccatis agitur, haberi volo questionē. Inde enim scimus, quod ej plus gratiae collatum fuerit ad vincendum omne peccatum, quia concipere ac parere meruit enim, quem constat nullum habuisse peccatum. Hac ergo virgine excepta, si omnes Sanctos & Sanctas congregare possemus, &c. vna voce clamarent, Si dicimus quia peccatum non habemus, nos ipsos seducimus, & veritas in nobis non est. Wherunto agreeth ancient and famous Sedulius a Scottish Poet, who was in the same age with S. Augustine: thus sayth he. Et veluti è spinis mollis rosa, surgit acutis, Nil quod laedat habens, matrēque obscurat honore: Sic Euae de stirpe sacra veniente Maria, Virginis antiquae facinus noua virgo piaret. And agayne:In ope∣re Paschali lib. 3. Salue sancta parens enixa puerpera regem, Qui caelum terram{que} tenet per saecula: Cuius Numen & aeterno complecteus omnia gyro, Imperium sine fine manet, quae ventre beato Gaudia matris habens cum virginitatis honore, Nec primam similem visa est, nec habere sequentem: Sola sine exemplo placuisti femina Christo.
The 8. and 9. Article. 1. That the Catholike Church in this first Age, beleeued that there was a Purgatory. 2. And was accustomed to pray for the soules deteyned in Purgatory. CHAP; V. HAVING maintayned the honour of our noble Patrones, the Glorious and triumphant Saints in heauen, their holy Images, the veneration of their Reliques: Now I come to defend the cause of our humble prayers made for the poore af∣flicted soules in Purgatory, which is the place of their punishment. First then we stand not vpon the name, but vpholde the thinge it selfe: that is, We Catholiks constantly belieue that there is a certaine place where some soules of the Faithful after this lyfe are purged & clensed, which place we call Purgatory. The Ministers contrary to our beliefe hold these propo∣sitions as poynts of faith, necessary to be belieued, There is no purgatory; The prayers for the dead are superfluous, and such like, which they shall neuer be able to proue by the ex∣presse word of their owne corrupted Bible: but rather be∣ing empty and voyd, to proue them against vs Catholiks by the expresse word, they are forced to giue vs, for the ex∣presse word of God, their necessary consequences, which in a word are nothing els but manifest heresies, and playne Idolatry, condemned in Arius a manifest heretike, as S. Augustine,Aug. l. 16. de haeres. c. 35. Epiph. Haeres. 75. and Epiphanius witnesse, and some Prote∣stants themselues auow. True it is, that we Catholiks haue not the expresse word for euery poynt of our Reli∣gion, and we do not tye our selues to that alone, but rather
to the word of God, together with the consequences and expositions of the holy Church, and Fathers, which hath these sixteene hundreth yeares byn famous amongst all Na∣tions. The Ministers contrary, promise to the poore people only the expresse word of God, setting a syde the exposi∣tions of the holy Church and Fathers: Yet in effect they giue nothing lesse then he expresse word of God, but ra∣ther for the word of God their owne consequences, inuen∣tions, and expositions, not making accompt of the anti∣quity of the doctrine, of the holynesse of all our Fore-fa∣thers. Can there be any excuse in the day of Iudgment for those men, who willingly & wittingly prefer the exposi∣tions of the Ministers, before the constant and vniforme exposition of the holy Fathers? For example S. Augustine (who was aboue twelue hundreth yeares since) proueth Purgatory out of these words of the Prophet Malachie, who speaking of the last penall Iudgement, sayth thus:Malac. 3. v. 2. But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall endure when he appeareth? for he is lyke a purging fire, and lyke fullers sope. And he shall sit downe to try and fine the siluer: he shall euen fine the sonnes of Leui, and purifie them as gold and siluer. S. Augustine (I say) hence doth infer Purgatory:Aug. l. 20. de ciuit. Dei c. 25. For these words (sayth he) cannot signifie a separation only of the polluted from the pure in the last penall Iudgement &c. but must intimate a purgation of the good, who haue need therof. The same S. Augustine praying to God, vseth these words:In Psal. 37. Purge me O Lord, in this lyfe, and make me such a one as shall not neede the amending fire. And agayne: He proueth Purgatory by a necessary consequence drawen out of those words of the Prophet Isay:Isa. 4. v. 4. Our Lord shall purge the dregs of the daughters of Sion, and shall wash the bloud of Hieru∣salem out of the midst therof, in the spirit of Iudgement, and in the spirit of combustion. 2. Secondly, S. Luke speaking of Christ, maketh mention of a third place besydes Heauen & Hell:Act. 2. v. 24. Whom God hath raised vp, and loosed the sorrowes of death, because it was impossible that he should be holden by it. Out of which S. Augu∣stin draweth this consequence and exposition:Lib. 12. de gen. ad lit. c. 13. & Epist. 99. ad Euod. It is belie∣ued the soule of Christ to haue descended to the place where sinners are
punished, o release them of their torments, whome he in his hidden istie thought worthy to be released. Otherwise I see not how to ex∣poe that text &c. For neyther Abraham, nor the poore man in his bosme, that is in the secret of his quyet rest, was reteyned in sorrowes: aowing, that Purgatory was constantly and vniuersally belieued in his tyme. 3. Thirdly, S. Paul spake plainely of the fire of Pur∣gatory:1 Cor. 3 v. 13. Euery mans worke shall be made manifest: for the day shall declare it, because it shalbe reuealed by the fyre: and the fire shall try euery mans worke of what sort it is; if any mans worke that he hath built vpon, abyde, he shall receaue wages; if any mans worke burne, he shall haue losse, but he shall be saued himselfe, neuertheles yet as it were by the fire. Where three kynds of fire are assigned. 1. The generall fire, which goeth before the day of Doome. It shalbe reuealed in fire. The second fire, the tryal of Gods Iudgement, The worke of euery one of what kynd it is, the fire shall trie.Orig hom. o in c. 15. Exod. Cyp. l. 4. ep. 2. ad Anton. Ambros. in hunc loctm. August. in Psal. 17. Thirdly, he cōcludeth of the fire of Purgatory, he shallbe saued, yet so as by fire. Which place Origen, S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, expound of the fire of Purgatory (with whome all the Greeke and Latin Fathers, after long disputation agree in auowing Purgatory, in the generall Councell of Florēce.) Why are some said to be saued by fire, sayth S. Augustine? because they build vpon the foundation, hay, wood, stubble: but if they would build gold, siluer, and pretious stones, they might be secure from both fyres, not only from that euerlasting, which shall torment the impious eternally, but from that which shall amend them, who shall be saued by fyre &c. Euen so truely, although they be saued by fire, yet that fire will be more paynfull and grieuous, then any thing that can be suffred in this life. And agayne so plainly, that no vnpassionat man may doubt of S. Augustines Re∣ligion in this poynt:Lib. 2. de Gen. cont. Ma∣nich. c. 20. He who hath not happily tilled his field, but hath suffed it to be ouergrowen with thornes, hath in this lyfe the malediction, and curse of the earth in all his works, and after this lyfe he shall haue eyther the fire of Purgatory, or euerlasting payne: Et post hanc vitam habebit vel ignem purgationis, vel vitam aeternam. And before S. Augustine, S. Gre∣gory Nssene: Man after sinne in many toylsome labours ought to be exercised, that taught by experience, he might returne to his first
happinesse, all vitious affections being purged, eyther in this world by a sober course of lyfe &c. or after our departure hence, by the fornace of Purgatory fire. 4. Caluin the prime Puritan Minister and Apostata, forced by the truth and verity, confesseth that the custome to pray for the soules in Purgatory, was in vse long before S. Augustine, to whose tyme inclusiuè, he auoweth the Church of Rome to haue bene the pure, true, and sincere Church of God:Calu. l. 4. c. 2. Inst. num. 2. & 3. Edit. Gallic. It is ou of Controuersie (sayth Caluin) that nothing was changed in the true doctrine of Religion, neyther at Rome, nor in other townes, to the age and tyme of S. Augustine, and o∣ther anciēt doctours. The very words of Caluin cōcerning the forsaid custome of praying for the dead are:Pag. 1101 Opus∣cul. edit. Geneis. Gallic. in fol. per Baptistam Pinereul. I deny not but the prayers for the dead were in vse with Chrysostome, Epiphanius, Augustin, and others, who receaued it from their Forfathers. And a∣gayne:Lib. 3. Inst. c. 5. num. 10. Thirteene hundreth yeares from hence the custome was to pray for the dead. And Luther himself, yet euer with the spirit of contradiction:Tom. 3. edit. VVitemb. ann. 1558. fol. 68. I belieue strongly, that there is a purgatory, and I am easely persuaded that mention therof is made in the Scrip∣ture, as that of S. Mathew, It shall not be forgiuen vnto him neyther in this world, nor in the world to come: meaning therby, that some sinnes are forgiuen in Purgatory. I admit likewise that of the Ma∣chahees, It is a holy and healthfull cogitation to pray for the dead that they may be loosed from their sinnes. Which words the Mini∣sters haue pulled out of the Bible, though Luther receaued them as Canonicall. 5. Besides the foresaid places of the Scripture, I adde these to proue Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead:Tobi 4. v. 18. Set thy bread and thy wyne vpon the buriall of a lust man. Which place though corrupted by the Ministers, declareth the ancient custome to haue bene amongst the Iewes, to giue almes to the poore, and nourish them to pray for the dead. Which custome is yet kept throughout all Christiandome in clo∣thing and feeding the poore, called with vs, Salies. S. Chry∣sostome maketh mentiō therof, saying:Chrys. hom. 32.  c. 9. Matt. Why after the death of thy freinds dost thou inuite the poore ones? Why intreatest thou the Preists to pray for them? I know thou wilt answere, To the end, that he who is dead, haue peace and rest. That the booke of
Tobias is Canonicall, the Councell of Carthage holden anno 419. (besides the tradition of the holy Church) wit∣nesseth playnly,Lib. 2. de Doct. Christ. c. 8 wherof S. Augustine who was present at that Councell giueth this reason: Because we haue no other assurance that the Books of Moyses, the foure Gospells, & other books are the true word of God, but by the Canon and tradition of the Church: for the which cause the same Doctour vttered that famous saying:Cont. Epist fūd. c. 5. That he would not belieue the Gospell, except the authority of the Catholike Church moued him therunto. 6. S. Augustine out of that place of the Bible:Matt. 12. v. 12. But he that shall speake against the holy Ghost, it shal not be forgiuen him, neyther in this world, nor in the world to come: And other holy doctours inferre hereupon this consequence:De ciu. Dei l. 22. c. 13. l 21.4 Greg. l. 4. Dial. c. 39. That some sinnes are remitted in the next life, and consequently that there is a Purgatory. Should not with any reasonable man S. Au∣gustines consequences be preferred to the Ministers drea∣mes and new traditions? Since it shall neuer be possible to the Ministers to proue out of the expresse word of the Bible, that there is no Purgatory; no wyse man will make accompt of their consequences, but rather of the conse∣quences of the holy Fathers of this Age, wherof I will o∣mit the testimonyes of S. Clement, and of S. Martiall, both famous wryters in this first Age, contenting my selfe with S. Denys his testimony. The testimonyes of the Fathers of this first Age, prouing Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead. The first Section. S. Denis manifestly maketh mention of the custome to pray for the faithfull deceased:Eccl. Hierar. c. 7. p. 2. . &c. Accedens deinde Diuinus antistes precem sacram super mortuum peragit: precatur oratio illa diuinam bonitatem, v cuncta dimittat per infirmitatem humanam admissae peccata defuncto, eum{que} in luce statuat & regione viuorum &c. And a little after, he sheweth that such holy Prayers are only valuable for those that dye in the bosome of the
Catholike Church: Quod autem & iustorum preces etiam in hac vita nedum post morem, ijs solum prosint, qui dgni sunt sacris pre∣cibus, Scripturarum nos edocent verae traditiones. And a litle there after: De praedicta ante precatione quae Antistes super defuncto pre∣catur, quaenam ad nos peruenerit a diuinis ducibus nostris traditio, di∣cere necesse est. Wherby it is easy to be seene by the testimo∣ny of this holy Father Patrone of France, & disciple to S. Paul, that the Prayers for the dead, and the holy ceremo∣nyes which the Catholike Church vseth at burials of the deceased, are Apostolicall tradition, grounded vpon the holy word of God. Secondly that such prayers are profita∣ble to those who dye in the Catholike Church, & in the grace of God. 2. S. Matthew the Euangelist in the holy Masse, which he vsed to say, and which hath bene famous in all Christendome these sixtene hundreth yeares, hath therin the same prayers which we vse this day at the holy seruice:Extat. tom 6. bi∣bliot. Pat. edit. ann. 1589. Memento domine dormientium Principum, Pontificum, Regum, Pa∣triarcharum, Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, Sacerdotum, Diacono∣rum, Parentum nostrorum, & omnium in recta fide quiescentium. 3. In S. Marke the Euangelist his Masse, which is yet extant in that famous towne of Italie, called Venice, where the very Autograph it selfe is to be seene:Extat. 10.6. bibl. Pat. cit. Anima∣bus patrum & fratrum nostrorum, qui antea Christi in side obdor∣mierunt, dona requiem Domine Deus noster. That is, O Lord our God, giue rest to the soules of our parents and brethren, who died in the faith of Chryst. 4. In S. Iames the Apostle his Masse yet extant:Litur. S. Iacob. Minor. Pro requie Patrum & Fratrum nostrorum, qui ante nos dormierunt, dicamus omnes toto amino, domine Miserere. Finally Caluin the Arch-minister of the Puritanes auoweth playnly, that the custome to pray for the dead was most ancient in the Ca∣tholike Church.
That the Ministers haue corrupted the Bible in sundry places, which proue Purgatory, or any third place. The second Section. IT is to be remarked, that before the coming of Christ, the soules of the lust did not ascend vnto heauen after their departure, but remayned eyther in the place, called Limibus Patrum, or sinus Abrahae, without any paynes or tor∣ments; or els in Purgatory where transitory torments were: The bad being alwayes condemned to hel where the eter∣nall torments are:Ad Hebr. 9. v. 8. For the way vnto the holyest of all (sayth S. Paul) was not yet opened, while as yet the first Tabernacle was standing. That is, before the coming of Chryst, and during the tyme of the first Tabernacle, the way vnto the holyest of all, that is, to Heauen, was not as yet opened, which after was only opened by the passion of Christ: after the which passion, the soule of Christ went downe to those parts where the soules of the ancient Fathers were detay∣ned, as in Limbus Patrum, and Purgatory, preaching vnto them their Redemption, conforme to that which the A∣postle sayth:1. Pet. 3. v. 19. By the which also he went and preached to the spirits, that were in prison. And conforme to that which we say in our belief, He descended into hell. The which name of Hell is giuen, by the holy Scripture and holy Fathers, to the place of the damned, & also to those two places Abrahās bosome, and Purgatory, which the Apostle calleth the lowest parts:Eph. 4. v. 9. Now in that he ascended, what is it, but that he had also descended first vnto the lowest parts of the earth? Yet with this difference, that Purgatory, and Lymbus Patrum, is called Hell, but the place of the damned, is called the lower Hell:Psal. 85 v. 12. E∣ruisti animam meam ex inferno inferiori. And the circumstance specified in any place of the Scripture, sheweth whether the word Hell, should be taken in the one or the other sense. 2. The Ministers to blind the poore people, and to take away all memory of Limbus Patrum, or Purgatory, they haue blotted out of the Bible sundry places, that proue
the same, as, Thou shall not leaue my soule in hell, which the Prophet Dauid did foretell of Christ, to wit, that Christs soule going down after his Passion to the hell of Purgatory and Limbus, should not remayne there. The Ministers haue translated,Act. 2. v. 27. Thou shall not leaue my soule in the graue: declaring therby the soule of Christ to be mortall and cor∣ruptible, and consequently denying Christ to be trew God and man.. For whatsoeuer is put in the graue is corrup∣tible in it self. This Blasphemy is agaynst the Hebrew text, against the Greeke text, against all antiquity, wherof all the Ministers together shall not be able to produce one ancient Father who did euer dreame of such a blasphemous trāsla∣tion. 2. It is agaynst that of the Creed, he descended vnto hell, where before it is sayd, that he was crucified, dead & buri∣ed: yea the Protestants themselues do sing the contrary in their Church of Scotland. HisThe Protestāts Creed in meeter at the end of their Psal∣mes. spirit did after this descend Into the lower partes, To them that long in darknesse were, The true light of their harts. Heere affirming that the soule of Christ went to hell and not to the graue. 3. Also when Iacob sayth:Gen. 37 v. 35. I will go down to my sonne into hell mourning, knowing well that Ioseph his sonnes soule was not in hell of the damned persons; they haue translated, I will go down into the graue of my sonne: where as Ia∣cob knew not that his sonne Ioseph was buried, being persuaded thatGen. 37 v. 33. a wicked beast had deuoured him, and torne him in peeces: And as though if Ioseph had bene in a graue, Ia∣cob would haue gone down to him in the same graue. Can there be greater absurdityes deuysed? more despitfull blas∣phemyes inuented? and al to eschew the force of this place, which maketh for Purgatory, conforme to the exposition of S. Hierome:In Epi∣tap. Ne∣pot. c. 3. Before the comming of Christ, Abraham was in hell, that is, in Limbo, after his coming the theef was in Paradise. And Tertullian:Lib. 4. aduers. Marcion. I know, that the bosome of Abraham was no heauenly place, but only the higher hell. Finally S. Augustine condemneth this translation of the Protestants of manifest
heresie saying:Tract. 73. in Ioa. Quis non est derelictus in Inferno? Chistus Iesus, sed in anima solae. Quis reurrectur{us} in triduo tacuit in sepulchro? Chri∣stus Iesus, sed in carna sola. Agayne:Ep ad ardanū. Quod anima illa in Infer∣num descenderit, Apostolica doctrina praedicatur. Quando quidem B. Petrus ad hanc rem testimonium de Psalmis adhibet, vbi de ipso prae∣dictum esse demonstrat, quoniam non derelinques animam meam in Inferno. I would aske of the Ministers to name me any wry∣ter sacred or profane, who did translate the word  for a graue? They shall neuer be able to do it: But rather as they haue cast down Churches, ouerthrowen Abbyes, chā∣ged Princes Estates, taken away Traditions, corrupted the Scriptures, peruerted Sciences, so they will turne vpside down Languages as it pleaseth them. 4. Finally, if Christs soule was in the graue, it was vnited with his body, which was lykewyse in the graue, wherin also was his diuinity, & consequently his diuinity, his soule, and his body being in the graue, he behoued to be aliue in the graue the three dayes that he was buryed; which is a horrible blasphemy. To all the foresaid probations that Christs soule went down to Limbus and Purgatory, I ad this only of a famous Protestāt Maister Bilson, who sayth:Bilson. in his full Redemptiō of mākind. That all the fathers with one consent affirme, that Christ delyuered the soules of the Patriarches, and Prophets out of hell at his comming thither. 5. As the Ministers haue, by translating that Christs soule was put in the graue, denyed the immortality of Chrysts soule, and consequently our Redemption, so they deny the diuinity of Christ, making him Author of all sinnes, in saying that God not only giueth vp, casteth off, and withdraweth his grace from man; but also delyuereth thē to the diuel. For these be the very words of the Scotish Ca∣techisme rehersed by the Schollers euery Sonday in Scot∣land:The 45 Sunday in the Cathe∣chisme printed in the Psalm-book. God of his infinite mercy doth preserue his faithfull, not suffering the diuell to lead them out of the way, neyther permitting that sinne haue the vpperhand of them: lykewyse he doth not only giue vp, cast off, and withdraw his grace from such as he will punish, but also he delyuereth them to the Diuel, committing them to his tyranny, he stryketh them with blindnes, & giueth them vp to reprobate mynds,
vtterly slaues to sinne, and subiect to all tentations. And to this end they haue corrupted the Bible thus:Iames 1 v. 13. Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God, for God cannot be tempted with euill, neyther tempteth he any man; but euery man is tempted when he is drawen away by his owne concupiscence, and is entysed. Contrary to the common translation which is, and hath bene these sixtene hundreth years: Let no man say, that he is tempted of God,In Greek . for God is no tempter to euill. And in latin: Deus enim intentator malorū est, they translate God cannot be tēpted, passiuely, where the Apostle sayth actiuely, that God tempteth no man, as the whole sense and drift of the Apostle sheweth playnly, say∣ing, That euery man is tempted when he is drawen away by his owne concupiscence, and is entysed. The blasphemy was first inuented by Caluin, then followed by Beza, lastly approued by our ministers in their confession of faith, and in their Scottish Catechisme. Caluins words are:Calu. l. 1. Inst. c. 18 §. 1. 2. 3. & l. 2. c. 4. §. 2. & l. 3. c. 21. & 23. §. 8. God is cheef author of his owne iust vengeance, and Sathan is but only a Mi∣nister therof: That God purposeth, willeth, moueth, loueth, and com∣mandeth the wickednes of sinners, their obstinat blindnes and hardnes of heart. And Beza:Annot. nou. Test. an. 1556. in 6. Matt. v. 13. The Lord leadeth into temptation those, whome he permitteth to Sathans arbitrement, or into whome rather he leadeth or bringeth in Sathan himself, to fill their heart, as Peter speaketh. The latin words are, Inducit Dominus in tentationē eos, quos Sathanae arbitrio permittit, aut in quos potiùs Satanam ipsum inducit, vt cor eorum impleat, vt loquitur Petrus. So by Beza his opinion God brought Satan into Iudas his hart, & so was author of Iudas treason, euen as he was of S. Pauls conuersion. Which impious doctrine, is vniuersally auo∣wed by the Ministry of Scotland, whose words are:In the Order of Baptisme set down before the Psalmes in the expli∣cation of the first ar∣ticle. That God is the creator of heauen and earth, that is to say, that the heauen and earth and the contents therof are so in his hands, that there is nothing done without his knowledge, neyther yet against his will (remarke wel these words Gētle reader how that al sins are done by the wil of god) & so we cōfesse & belieue that neyther the deuils nor yet the wicked of the world haue any power to molestor trou∣ble the chosen childrē of God, but in so far as it pleaseth him to vse thē as instruments. Thus our learned Ministers make God to be causa prima peccati, & the diuell to be the instrumentall cause
only. How can the Ministers belieue in God, since they hold so impious and diuelish opinions of God? How can the Ministers Religion be acceptable to God, since they be∣lieue constantly that God is the chiefe cause, the diuell the instrumētall cause only of all the abhominations and wic∣kednes of the world? How can there any saluation be for those which dye in the Puritans Religion, since they dye in such abhominable and peruerse doctrine? O Impiety! O Infidelity! For this blasphemous doctrine of Caluin and of the Ministers, our Soueraigne king Iames hath wysely for∣bidden the reading of so poysoned works of Caluin to the noble Students of his Vniuersityes. Likewise Castalio a learned Puritan familiar with Caluin wryteth, that, by reason of such doctrine, Caluin and the Ministers must needs haue some other God, for their God, then the true God who hath created heauen and earth.Castalio in lib. ad Calu. de Pradest. The false God of Caluin is slow to mercy prone to anger, who hath created the greatest part of the world to destruction, and predestinated them not only to damnation, but also to the cause of damnation. Therfore he hath de∣creed from all eternity, and he will haue it so, and he doth bring it to passe that they necessarily sinne; so that neyther thefts, nor murthers, nor adulteries, are committed but by his constraint and impulsion, for he suggesteth vnto men euill and dishonest affections, not only by permis∣sion, but effectually (that is, by drawing them to such affections) and doth harden them in such sort, that when they perpetrate euill, they do rather the worke of God, then their owne; he maketh the diuell a lyer, so that now not the diuell, but the God of Caluin is the Father of lyes. But that God which the holy Scriptures teach, is altogeather con∣trary to this God of Caluin &c. And immediatly after: For the true God came to destroy the worke of that Caluinian God, and those two Gods as they are by nature cōtrary one to another, so they beget & bring forth childrē of contrary dispositions, to wit, that God of Caluin bringeth forth Childrē without mercy, proued, lofty mynded, vncleane, filthy &c. To whom I adde the censure of Stancarus lyke∣wyse a famous Protestant, who saluteth Caluin & the Mi∣nisters, who follow Caluins doctrine set down in the Scots Catechisme,Ste. cont. Calu. & written first by Caluin in french, thus: (b) What Diuel O Caluin, hath seduced thee to speake with Ari agaynst
the sōne of God, that thou mightst proclaime him to be depryued of his glory &c. After he concludeth thus: Beware (O Christian Rea∣der, and specially all row Ministers) bewar of the books of Caluin, and principally in the articles of the Trinity, Incarnation, Mediatour, Sacrament of Baptisme, and Predestination, for they conteyne wicked doctrine &c. The tenth Article. That the Sacrament of Confession was vniuer∣sally in practice in this first Age. CHAP. VI. I MAY with reason compare the Mini∣sters of Scotland to the Camelion, for as he changeth himselfe into all variety of colours except only white, the most true colour: so our Ministers admit all manner of doctrine, except that which the Catholike Church, whyte without spot, belieueth. And in this present poynt they admit al sort of Confession, except that which is most important to their soules: wherin they chiefly deny, First the power in Priests to absolue from sinnes: Secondly, the necessity we haue to confesse our sinnes to a Priest the lieutenant of God, which notwithstanding I wil deduce and proue out of the words of the Bible. 2. First then it is manifest, that Christ gaue power to his Apostles and their Successours to forgiue sinne:Ioan. 20. v. 21. Then said Iesus to them agayne, peace be vnto yow: as my Father sent me, so send I yow. And when he had said that, he breathed on them and said vnto them: Receaue the holy Ghost, whose sinnes yee remit, they are remitted vnto them; and whose sinnes yee retayne, they are re∣tayned. Now let vs consider the words of the Bibe. Our Sauiour was sent by his Father to forgiue all sinnes, not only by preaching of the word, but also as a Iudge pronoū∣cing
the sentence of absolution, for so he said to Mary Mag∣dalene without preaching:Luc. 7. v. 47. Thy sinnes are forgiuen thee; & to the sick man of the palsie:Matth. 9. v. 2. Thy sinnes are forgiuen thee. Where the Euangelist also affirmeth, that he gaue the same power to men:Matt. 9. v. 8. So when the multitude saw it, they meruailed and glorified God, which had giuen such authority to men. Now that power which our Sauiour receaued of his Father, he gaue it to his Apostles and to their successours, and that as a great benefite wherof the posterity of man would haue need. Secondly, our Sauiour breathed giuing this autho∣rity, declaring therby, that by vertue of the holy Ghost which he breathed in them they might forgiue sinnes, so that when the Priest forgiueth sinnes, it is rather the holy Ghost who forgiueth them, then the Priest, who is only but an instrument. And Iesus said vnto them, receaue the holy Ghost, whose sinnes yee remit &c. So that by these wordes, Iu∣risdiction is giuen to the Preists to forgiue sinnes, as S. Cyrill witnesseth:Lib. 12. c. 50. in Io. It is neyther absurd, nor yet inconuenient that they forgiue sinnes who haue the holy Ghost, for when they pardon or retayne sinnes, the holy Ghost pardoneth or retayneth sinnes by thē: and that they do two wayes, by Baptisme first, afterward by Pēnance: He sayth not, that by preaching of the word, sinnes are pardoned. 3. Lastly this power granted to Priests was not only to declare by the preaching of the word, the absolu∣tion of sinnes, but by a true authority giuen by God to for∣giue sins. So S. Athanasius calleth it,Serm. in illa verba, profecti in pagum. A power giuen by our Sauiour to Priests to loose sinnes. But specially S. Chrysostome declareth this power to be an inward dignity giuen to Priests by God aboue Kings and Princes.Chrys. l. 3. de Sacer. They that in∣habite the earth and conuerse theron, to them commission is giuen to dispense those things that are in heauen. To them that power is giuen, which Almighty God would not communicate eyther to Angell or Archangell: For to them it is not said, Whatsoeuer ye shall bind in earth shalbe bound in heauen &c. Earthly Princes indeed haue also authority to bind, but the bodyes only: but that binding of Preists which I treat of toucheth the very soule it selfe, and reacheth euen to the heauens. In so much as whatsoeuer the Preists performe beneath,
the very same Almighty God doth aboue: and the sentence of the ser∣uant our Lord doth confirme. And what is this truely els, but that the power of heauenly things is granted by God vnto them? whose sinnes soeuer (sayth he) ye shall retayne, they are retayned. What power I beseech you can be greater then this? The Father gaue all power vnto the Sonne: But I see the same power delyuered altogether by the Sonne vnto them. Wherfore as our Sauiour Chryst Iesus had a spe∣ciall power to forgiue sinnes, distinct from this power of preaching; so the power he gaue to the Apostles to preach, was distinct from the power giuen to them to forgiue sinnes. 4. This power of Priests to forgiue sinnes, being so established, it is easie to declare how confession of our sin∣nes to a Priest, ensueth necessarly of the forsaid power giuē to Preists, and consequently that it is not sufficient to con∣fesse our sinnes to God priuatly, but we must, by the com∣mand of God, confesse our sinnes to the Priests, since God hath giuen them power to forgiue vs our sinnes. And in effect that which we confes to the Priest is cōfessed to God himselfe, who hath ordeyned the Priest as an instrument of this holy Sacrament. So sayth S. Augustine:Aug 50. hom. ho. 4. Let no man deceaue himselfe and say, I do penance secretely, I do it in the sight of God: God who pardoneth me knoweth I do it in my hart. Thē without cause was it said: Those things which you loose in earth shalbe loosed in heauen: Then without cause were the keyes giuen to the Church of God. Do we frustrate the Ghospell? do we euacuate the words of Chryst? Where by it is euident that sinners are o∣bliged to submit themselues by confession to the Priest: & euen as the commandement which our Sauiour gaue to his Apostles to baptize:Matth. 28. Go teach all Nations baptizing them &c. This power I say had bene giuen to them in vayne, if all men were not bound to receaue the Sacrament of Baptis∣me. And as this power of Baptisme & preaching the word, was no only giuen to the Apostles in person, but also to their successours to the end of the world: So the power to forgiue sinnes was not giuen only to the Apostles, but lykewise to their successours. And as the authority to pre∣ach which Christ gaue to the Disciples, were in vayne if
men were not obliged therby in conscience to giue eare to the preached word: so idle, and in vayne were the power that Chryst gaue to his Apostles to retayne or forgiue sins, if all sorts of men (who haue offended after Baptisme) were not tyed & obliged to submit their sinnes vnto the Priests, who are the Apostles successours, which submission euery one is obliged to performe for two reasons. 5. First, because as Boetius sayth:De cō∣solat. pros. 4. If thou desire the helpe of the Physitian, it is requisite thou discouer thy desease. Ther∣fore it is necessary, that those who are burdened with sores of many sinnes, discouer the same to the spiritual Physitian appoynted for their cure. Secondly, because Priests are made (by the vertue of the commission granted by God to them) not only Physitians, but also spirituall Iudges, to vn∣derstand the quality of our crymes, to know what medici∣nable pennance they should apply, to discerne what sinnes are to be remitted, and what are to be retayned. Now I say, since they are Iudges, they cannot iudge sufficiently of the quality of sinnes, and pronounce as Iudges the sentence of absolution except that our sinnes be discouered vnto them, conforme to that commō saying. It is impossible for a man to iudge discreetly who hath no knowledge of the case. And naturall reason proueth the same manifestly, and the custome of all ciuill countries wherin Iudges are cōstituted sheweth, that before a Iudge pronounce any sentence in Iudgement, he must needs haue notice and knowledge of the cause which he iudgeth. Now there is but two meanes wherby we may giue notice of our sinnes to the Priest, ey∣ther publickly or priuatly. To giue publike notice of secret & hidden sinnes, is against th word of God, against cha∣rity, against the law of nature, against the obligation we haue to keep our hoour and good fame, against the obli∣gation we haue to giue good example to our Neighbour. Wherfore it followeth, that we should giue secret notice of secret sinnes to the Priests, which is by way of Sacramen∣tall Confession vsed in the Catholike Church, wherof the se∣crecy is kept so strictly among Priests that they are obliged vnder the paine of damnation, and by the law of God ra∣ther
to dy then to reueale the least venial sinne which they heare in confession. Yea the practise and experience which hath bene these sixteene hundreth yeares begun, and yet is amongst all the Kings and Princes of the world, sheweth how faithfull, constant, and honest the Catholike Priests haue bene in this mater of secrecy: & it is very well known to all Scotland, England, and Ireland, how secret and fai∣thfull imprisoned Priests haue byn, not only in maters heard in confession, but likewyse in outward dealing and con∣uersation. 6. This iudiciall power giuen to the Priests, is playnly collected out of the holy Scriptures by the holy Fathers, whose expositiōs & cōsequences should be prefer∣red before the expositions and consequences of the Mi∣nistry. S. Augustine out of those words,Reuel. 20. v. 4. And I saw seates, and they sate vpon them, and iudgement was giuen vnto them, infer∣reth this consequence:Aug. l. 20. de ci∣uit. Dei c. 9. This may not be thought to be spoken of the last iudgement, but by the seates are meant the Rulers, thrones of the Church, and the persons themselues by whome they are go∣uerned. And for the iudgment giuen them, it cannot be better explay∣ned, then in those words; Whatsoeuer yee loose on earth, shalbe loosed in heauen. 7. The other place of the Bible which maketh playnly mention of Confession, is,Iames 5. v. 16. Confesse your sinnes one to another: where the Apostle vnderstādeth confession made to the true pastor & superiour, not to euery particular man: for he giueth an exāple touching the prayer of Elias who was superiour amongst the Iewes, and before he sayth,Iames 5. v. 14. Is any sicke amongst you, let him call for the Priests of the Church. Which two places as making for vs Catholiks, the Mini∣sters haue filthily corrupted, the first thus: Acknowledge your faules one to another. The other: Let him call for the Elders of the Church. 8. Wherby it is easie to be seene that those propo∣sitions, Confesse your sinnes one to another: Christ gaue power to men to forgiue sinnes: Christ gaue power to the Apostles to forgiue sinnes, are in playne termes, and as it were ex∣pressely set down in the Bible. Wherfore I aske of the Mi∣nisters
to shew me in the expresse words of the Bible; con∣trary propositions to the foresaid; as, Men cannot forgiue sinnes; Christ gaue not power to Priests to forgiue sinnes, and such. But they shall neuer be able to giue any expresse word against Sacramentall Confession: But rather they will bragge and boast of their necessary consequences, which are nothing but their owne inuentions and here∣sies: Inuentions, I say, against the doctrine of their owne maister, Iohn Caluin, who is of that opinion, that we should confesse our sins to our Pastour, specially when we go to the holy table, & proueth the same by the foresaid saying of S. Iames:Lib. 3. Iustit. c. 4. §. 12. Tametsi Iacobus neminem nominatim assignando, in cuius sinum nos exoneremus, liberum permitit delictum vt ei confiteamur qui ex Ecclesiae grege maximè idoneus fuerit visus: quia tamen Pastores prae alijs vt plurimùm iudicare sunt idonei, po∣tissimū etiam nobis eligendi erunt. And a litle after:§. 13. & 14. Quin sistāt se Pastori oues priuata confessione, quoties sacram coenam participare volunt, adeo non reclamo, vt maximè velim hoc vbi{que} obseruari. 9. Now, let vs see the necessary consequences, & ex∣positions of the holy Fathers of this first Age, concerning Confession, which necessary consequences any wyse man will preferre to the consequences and expositions of our Scots Ministers, who neyther in learning, pietie, doctrine, or good behauiour can be compared to those holy Fathers. The Testimonyes of the holy Fathers of this first Age, prouing the vse of Confession. The first Section. S. DENIS wryting to Demophilus, reproueth him for not doing his duty towards a certaine Priest, who was accustomed to heare confessions, and for not doing his duty towards a certaine Catholike who was accustomed to confesse is sinnes vpon his knees, which custome hath bene euer in the Church of God:Dionys. epist. ad Demoph. ante mod. Tu verò vt tuae literae in∣dicant,. procidentem Sacerdoti impium, vt ais peccatorem, nescio quo pacto contra disciplinae ordinem astans calce abiecisti. Adhuc cùm
ille quidem, quod oportuit, fateretur se ad peccatorum remedium querendum venisse; tu non exhorruisti, sed & bonum sacerdotem ausus es lacerare conuitijs, miserabilem eum dicens, quòd poenitentem & im∣pium iustificasset &c. Where this holy Father witnesseth that Sacramentall confession duely made iustifieth the sinner, and giueth consequently remission of sinnes. Secondly he witnesseth that in the primitiue Church the custome was to declare in particular the number of our sinnes in confes∣sion, so far as man can remember, for God doth not oblige vs to impossible things. And euen as a souldiour hauing receaued many wounds in warre, it is not sufficient to tell his Physitian in generall only, that he is wounded, but he must shew the seuerall wounds, otherwyse no man will venter to heale and cure him: euen so, it is not sufficient for a Christian wounded in his soule with diuers deadly sins, to complayne and confesse in generall, but he must par∣ticularly specify (so far as he can remember) the number and quality of deadly sinnes, that therby the spirituall Phi∣sitian (that is the Priest) may discerne what satisfactory Penance, what good counsell and aduyse he should giue vnto the penitent: which doctrine is of S. Gregory, who sayth:Greg. Niss. Ep. ad Episcop. Mytil. Euen as in corporall infirmityes there are sundry kindes of medicins according to the diuersity of diseases, so wheras in the di∣sease of the soule there is a great veriety of affections, sundry sorts of medicinable cures ought to be abhibited. And this is the common doctrine of the Fathers, who do exhort vs very earnestly to make a particuler rehearsal of deadly sins in our confessiō, to the end the Priest may be fully acquainted with the full estate of our soules, and vnderstand the great variey of our spirituall diseases conforme to that famous saying of S. Hie∣rome:Super 16. Matth. Then the Bishop or Priest knoweth who is to be bound, and who is to be loosed, when he heareth the variety of sinnes. And the reason is euident. For except the Priest know distinctly the deadly sinnes of his penitent, he cannot pronounce a iu∣diciall sentence, for no man can Iudge of things he kno∣weth not, he cannot apply soueraigne medecins, he cānot know what to loose or what to retayne; and in a word, he cannot know his commission. And truely if in the old
law the Iewes were obliged to manifest in particular their sinnes vnto the Priest of the Leuiticall stock, as cōmandeth expressely the 5. Chapter of Numbers, and the 5. of Le∣uit much more should the Christian Priests haue this pri∣uiledge, sayth S. Chrysostome:Lib. 3. de Sacerd. The Iewish Priests had leaue to iudge, or try such is were purged from corporall leprosy: but to our Priests it is granted not to try the purged, but altogether to purge, not the leprosy of the body, but the infection of the soule. 2. S. Clement in lyke manner wryteth thus of Confession:Ep. 1. ante med. Si fortè alicuius ira vel liuor, vel infidelitas, el aliquod malum ex his quae superiùs memorauimus, latenter irrepserit, non erubescat, qui animae suae curam gerit, confiteri haec, huic qui prae∣est, vt ab ipso, per verbum Dei & consilium salubre curetur, quò possit integra fide & operibus bonis paenas aeternae ignis effugere, & ad per∣petuae vitae praemia peruenire &c. By the which words he tea∣cheth three things; first that the custome was in this age a∣mongst the Catholiks to confesse their sinnes priuately to their pastor. 2. That the absolution which the Priest gaue was grounded in the word of God. 3. That not only by faith, but by faith & good works men did eschew the pay∣nes of hell, and obtayne heauen. That the Ministers in Scotland haue corrupted the Bible in sundry places, which make for Sacramentall Confession. The second Section. . Hauat bun den meden Sacleua∣thocun. Porro cō∣fitemini a∣lius alij de lictavestra. Confitemi∣ni alteru∣trum pec∣cata vestra.THE first place is of S. Iames the fifth Chapter: Confesse your sinnes one to another: For so it is in the Greeke, in the Syriake, and in the Latin: yet the Ministers haue corrup∣ted it two seueral wayes: first putting for the word confesse, the word acknowledge, and for the word sinnes, the word offenses, to make the sentence more obscure, and to insinuate their corruption craftily. For the word Offences properly signifieth outward wronges done to our neigbours; so we are accustomed to say, he hath offended me, which is signi∣fied by the Greek word , or , but in this place there is the Greeke word , which signifieth
properly a sinne done against God; and the Ministers shall neuer be able to name me any wryter or ancient Father, Greeke or Latine, who before Caluin did euer insinuate so blasphemous a corruption as the foresaid, wherof Caluin was the first inuentour. Truely any wyse man should pre∣ferre S. Augustine (who was skillfull in Hebrew, Greeke, and Latin) his iudgement & exposition of this place before any of the Ministry.Lib. 50. Hom. 12. homil. Its omnibus (sayth he) Scripturis diui∣nis, fratres dilectissieni, vtiliter ac salubriter admonemur, vt peccata nostra debeamus iugiter & humiliter, non solùm deo, sed etiam Sanctis & deum timentibus confiteri. Sic enim per Iacobum Apostolum nos admonet Spiritus sanctus, Confitemini alterutrum peccata vestra, & orate pro inuicem vt saluemini. And with S. Augustine I∣renaeus,Lib. 1. c. 9. S. Iohn the Euangelist his disciple,Lib. de Poenit. c. 2. Ter∣tullian,Hom.  in 6. c. ad Roma. S. Chrysostome, and sundry others manifestly proue, that we are obliged to confesse our sinnes to the Priest. Should not these holy Fathers translations, conse∣quences and illations, be preferred before our new vpstart Ministers illations? 2. Likewise to make the simple & ignorant people belieue that Ministers and trew Church-men should be maried & haue wyues, they haue corrupted the Bible hor∣ribly thus:1. Cor. c. 9. v. 5. Haue we not power to lead about a sister, a wyfe, as the rest of the Apostles, insteed to translate, as all antiquity hath translated, Haue we not power to lead about a woman sisters? for our Sauiour himselfe had some holy women, who of charity did furnish necessary things to his sustentation:Luc. 8. v. 3. And Ioanna the wife of Chusa Herodes steward, and Susanna, and many other, which ministred vnto him of their substance. To the which custome the holy Apostle alludeth only. And it is certaine that S. Paul was a Virgin and neuer maried, as he witnesseth saying:1. Cor. 7 v. 7. For I would that all men were euen as I my selfe. And not only S. Paul remayned euer a Virgin, but the rest of the Apostles except S. Peter who before his cō∣uersion being maried, left wife & all he had when he was called to be Christs disciple.Matt. 1. v. 7. Then answered Peter and said to him, Behold we haue forsaken all, & followed this, For the which
cause Tertullian with the rest of the Fathers auow, that all the Apostles except S. Peter were Virgins & vnmaried:Lib. de Monoga∣mia ante med. Petrum solm (sayth he) inueni maritum. 3. The Ministers likewise, to persuade the poore people that no good works can be done in this lyfe, they haue corrupted the Bible manifestly thus:2. Pet. . v. 10. Wherfore Bre∣thren giue rather diligence to make your calling and election sure, for if yee do these things ye shall neuer fall, where they haue wholly taken out the word good works, for so it is in sundry Greeke copyes, and playnly in the vulgar latin. Wherfore Brethren giue rather diligence that by good works yee make certaine your cal∣ling and election. Quo propter fratres magis satagite, vt per bona opera certam vestram vocationem & electionem faciati. Doth not the Apostle a little before make mentiō of good works, to wit; to fly the corruption of the world, to ioyne vertue to faith, temperance with patience, and patience with godlynes. concluding afterward, If yee do these things yee shall neuer fall, That is; yee shall neuer fall into sinne, but alwayes by the grace of God, keep the Commandements in doing good works?
The 11. and 12. Article. 1. That man hath Freewill, not only in Naturall and Ciuill Actions. 2. But also in Morall and Supernaturall Acti∣ons. CHAP. VII. OVR Ministers deny absolutly & with∣out distinction, Freewill to be in man, wherin they shew both their folly and ignorance. Which heresy of theirs, they haue forced at sundry Parlaments the three Estats of Scotland to sweare and subscribe publickely, as it is conteyned in their confession of faith thus:Confes∣siō of Faith approued by the Church of Scotland and ioyned with the Psalmes. The defence of Christs Church apperteyneth to the Christian Magistrats against all Idola∣ters and heretiks, as Papists, Anabaptists, with such like lymmes of Antichrist, to roote out all doctrine of Deuils and men, as the Masse, Purgatory, lymbus Patrum, prayer to Saintes and for the dead, free∣will, distinction of meates, apparell and dayes, vowes of single life, presence at Idol-seruice mans merits, with such like. Is it not a great shame to the Nobilite of Scotland, to haue subscry∣bed, and sworne so blasphemous words, no wayes con∣teyned in the expresse word of their own corrupted Bible, yea fully against the Bible: to haue subscrybed, I say, that all their Forefathers, all their Kings and Princes, were He∣retiks, the space of fifteene hundreth and fifty yeares, were I say, lymmes of the diuell, lymmes of Antichrist? And yet in the last Parlament to haue sworne the contrary to some of those poynts, as. 1. Distinction of meates, for lent is straitly cō∣manded in Scotland, at the least ciuilly. 2. Apparell & dayes, for they haue ordeyned the fiue holy dayes to be kept, & corner cappes and surplises are desired by many. Which
changing, contradiction, and inconstancy, in so weighty maters of religion, sheweth that the Ministers haue no Re∣ligion at all. 2. To vnderstand playnly this point of Freewill, we must distinguish as it were foure estates and conditions of man: The first state is of Innocency, which Adam had be∣fore his fall, in the which Estate the Heretiks both Pro∣testants and Puritanes grant, Adam to haue had freewil. 2. The state of corruption, which Adam and al his poste∣rity incured by sinne, in the which state some of the Pu∣ritans asLib. 1. Inst. c. 16. § 8. & l. 2. c. 4. § 6. Caluin,Lib. de Concord. art. de lib. Arbit. Bucer, withClemēs l. 3. de Re∣cog. Simon Magus,Tert. l. de anima c. 10. Marcion, and other Heretiks do deny man to haue any frewill. Others, asLib. 1. cont. Du∣reum p. 78 Whitaker,In his reformed Catholik. Perkins,In the way to the true Church. Whyte, and many English Protestants with Luther, do grant man to haue Freewill in ciuill and naturall things, but not in supernaturall. But this foolish distinction they shall neuer be able to proue out of the expresse word of their owne corrupted Bible, which they will only belieue. 3. The state of vprysing and entring in the grace of God, as when a man not being as yet called to the true Religion, hath some good motions wherunto he cannot freely consent or dissent, say they. 4. The state of Iustification, which is when God giueth some good motions to men now iusti∣fied to do good works, to absteyne from euill, to ouer∣come tentations and such: to the which motions a man cannot freely consent or dissent say the Ministers, and con∣sequently, they say, that man hath no freewill to do good works, or to keep Gods Commandements, but rather con∣tinually doth transgresse them:In a prayer cal∣led the con∣fession of sinnes. For the flesh euermore rebel∣leth against the spirit (say they) wherby we continually trāsgresse the holy Precepts and Commandements. 3. Against this blasphemous heresy the Catholike Church euer hath belieued, that man after the fall of Adam had and hath freewill, in matters concerning his saluation, grounded alwayes vpon the expresse word of the Scriptu∣re, and word of God, wherin Moyses said vnto the Ie∣wes:Deut. 30. v. 19. I call this day heauen and earth to witnes, that I haue set before you lyfe and death, benediction and malediction, therfore choose
lyfe &c. Where moyses putteth in the choyse or freewill of the Iewes, to giue themselus to good or bad things. And a litle before:Vers. 16 I command thee this day, to loue the Lord thy God, to walke in his wayes, to keep his Commandements &c. How then is it impossible to keep them? In lyke manner God offered a choyse to Salomon:1. Reg. 3. v. 5. Aske what I shall giue thee. Wherby God declareth that Saloman had freewill, to choose the one or the other, as Dauid had choyse and free election to take any of the three seuerall punishments which God offered vnto him:2. Sa∣muel 24. v. 12. I offer thee three things, choose the which of them I shall do vnto thee. Which words playnly sheweth the free∣dome of election of man, the true liberty, not only from constraint, but also from necessity, for it is in our free po∣wer to take this or that, one thing or another (as the for∣mer examples do witnesse) we are not restrayned necessa∣rily to the one part alone, as the Ministers do impiously teach. 4. Moreouer the Wyseman sayth:Ecel. 15 v. 16. God hath set be∣fore thee water and fire, to which thou wilt stretch foorth thy hand. Before man is lyfe and death, good and euill, that which pleaseth him, shallbe giuen vnto him. Are not these places plainly set downe in the Bible, against the Ministers? are not such words sufficient to conuict them, if they had any conscience or desire to follow the word of God, which obstinatly and impiouslly they deny, in denying, that man hath freewill to do good or euill. 5. The Ministers deceaue the poore people saying, that man hath not freewill, but doth things concerning his saluation or condemnation of necessity. Should rather the Ministers, or S. Paul be belieued, who sayth:1. Cor. 7. v. 37. He that hath determined in his heart, being setled, not hauing necessity, but hauing power of his owne will, and hath iudged this in his heart to keep his virgin, doth well. So then be that giueth her to mariage doth well, but he that giueth her not to mariage, doth better. Which place though the Ministers haue corrupted in taking away the word necessity, yet it proueth plentifully freewill, & that to keep virginity is better then to mary. S. Peter teacheth vs also the same, speaking to Ananias:Act. 5. v. 4. Whiles it remayned,
appertayned it not vnto thee? and after it was sold was it not in thy owne power? Wherupon S. Augustine sayd thus:Aug se 1. Diers. That be∣fore we vow, it is in our power, but after we haue vowed we ought to performe the same vnder payne not of corporall death, but of euerla∣sting fire. And agayne:ug l 2. de Act. cum flice Manich. c. 4. In the freewil of man it is, eyther to choose good things, and become a good tree, or euill, and become a bad tree. What? will not the Ministers belieue the expresse words of the Apostles which I haue cited? will they not belieue the expresse word of Moyses? Of God himselfe to king Salomon, and King Dauid? can there be any salua∣tion for thē, who do expone the Bible against the Bible, and who do corrupt the Bible against the Bible, which is a sinne against the holy Ghost? 6. To the foresaid places I wil ad the place where God himselfe in his owne person teacheth Cain to haue freewill, and that Cain should command his lust and ap∣petit, in vertue of his grace, and of naturall reason giuen vnto him to this effect:Gen. 4. v. 7. If thou do well, shalt thou not receaue againe? and if thou do euill, shall not thy sinne forthwith be present at thedore? but the lust or appetit therof shall be vnder thee, and thou shalt haue dominion ouer it. Which place the Ministers haue so perniciously adultered, that if there were no other corrup∣ted place in all their Bible but this alone, it were sufficient to condemne their Bible, as not being the word of God, but rather a rapsody of corruptions, inuentiōs, sacriledges, yea plaine heresies of Caluin, and Beza, forged and printed first in Geneua, and from thence brought to Scotland by Iohn Knox that famous Apostata frier, the first planter of this new Religion in Scotland, as witnesseth a Protestant wryter.Sut∣clif in his answere to a certaine Libel sup∣plicatory pag. 192. Iohn Knox and others his adherents grounding them∣selues vpon the foresaid opinions, concerning violent reformation, did by priuate motion, without any authority, put in practise a strange maner of reformatiō in Scotlād. The Ministers thē haue corrup∣ted the forsaid place after this form. And thou shall rule ouer him, that is, ouer Abel, to take away the force of the sētēce which signifieth, that man hath power & freewill, to rule ouer his appetite & lust. Doth not the Greeke Text plainly signify: And thou shalt rule & maister it? Doth not the hebrew read thus:
Vnto thee is the appetite of it, & thou shalt beare rule ouer it. Doth notAug. l. 15. de ciu. Dei c. 7. S. Austine with all the ancient Fathers read, as our Latin translation readeth, whichLib. 4. in Gen. c. 4 v 6. Pererius witnesseth: Thou shalt beare sway ouer it (sayth S. Augustine) What? ouer thy brother? God forbid. Ouer what then but sinne. The same sayth S. Hierome:Hier. quast. Hebraic in Genesim. Because thou hast freewill, I warne thee that sinne haue not the soueraignty or Maistership ouer thee, but thou ouer sinne. 7. The Catholiks in disputing against the Prote∣stants or Puritans should remember & cal oft to memory, that the Protestants at their first in comming to Scotland, and England, said and preached to the people, and yet do preach, that they were sent extraordinarily to reforme the Church of God. 2. That they would preach nothing, but the expresse word of God, the playne Scripture, the only word of God: and vpon this false pretext they haue cast downe our Churches, ouerthrowen our Abbayes, taking away our Priories, casting down to the groūd our anciēt monumēts, and Noble mens-houses, corrupted the Bible, changed Ec∣clesiasticall discipline, and made most pernicious, seditious and vngodly Lawes against vs Catholiks, who do now aske of the Protestants, first: to proue but one debatable poynt of their religion by the expresse word of the Bible, which they shall neuer be able to doe. 2. To improue any debatable poynt of our religion by the expresse word of the Bible, which lykewyse they shall neuer be able to do. 3. To name vs but one man, who before Luther or Caluin agreeth with them in all essentiall poynts of their Religion, which likewyse they shall neuer be able to do. 4. To name vs any Nation vnder the heauens, which maketh accompt of their Scotish, English, or Latin corrupted Bible, which likewyse they shall neuer be able to do. For it is certaine that there is no Nation now a dayes, nor euer was which did accompt the Latin, English, or Scots Bible now in vse in England, & Scotland, for the word of God: which I obiected at seue∣ral tymes to the Ministers being in prisō in Edenburgh, where without books, pen, paper, inke, or any such cōmodity to passe the tyme, with coales I ouercast the walles with ver∣ses, and litle poemes in sundry languages, wherof I heere set down one which was after sent to me out of Scotland, it
being to the prayse of Scotland, and commended by friends be placed in this Treatise. The Priui∣leges of Scotland.QVIS me carcer habet vinctum? quae septa recludent Corpora, pro canae Fidei Regalibus armis PatrumFour∣score Kings of Scotland al Catholiks. octodecies longo de stemmate Regum? Ecce colo sine luce domum, sine iure catenas. Scotia terra parens, O vbi caelestiaScot∣land the Seminary of many holy and learned men. dona, Queis super Imperium sociale excelsior ibas! NecVVas neuer van∣quished by a foraine Prince. Mauors potuit peregrino tradere vestra Colla iugo, famae tantum decus Anglia nescit, Hybernum{que} solum: surgit quae gloria genti, Quòd Scotos omni regesAl the Kings of Scotland of Scottish bloud. ex ordine sceptri Traxerit è patrijs laribus: maius quo{que} nomen Exoritur, quòd sancta FidesScotlād receaued the Catho∣lik Fayth long before England & many o∣ther King∣domes. radiârit in oris Scotorum, ante facum multis data semina regnis Christiadum, signat Donaldi purpura tempus. (Scotia!) qualis erat terris decor additas, ante Tempora Caluini?Scotlād till the cō∣ming of Caluin and Knox ne∣uer chāged Religion. nullis mutata procellis Religio fidei steterat; pro cuius honoris Vertice, lectus apexThe Kings of Scotland called Protectours of the Fayth. Iacobus nomine Quartus Protector Fidei titulis celebratur auitis. Quin memor esTo haue conuerted many Nations. Belgis, Alemanno, Anglo{que} Batauis Prima dedisse viris primae sacra germina vitae. Nec dataScotland honored by the most auncient Alliance of Europe. Francigenis violasti faedera pacis Quae magnis Magnus sanciuit Carolus astris: Hinc Franco Regi Scotus munimen ahenum est. Scotia, nonne vides à caelo pignora? testis Sit mea Morauiae regio,The Prayses of Murrayland. pulcherrima sedes Veris, opus florae, Pomonae apricior hortus, Triptolemi Cereris{que} lares.Queene Mary the Mar∣tyr called Murrayland litle France. Haec Francia parua Dicitur, auspicijs Reginae addicta Stuartae. Hanc liquidis vtrin{que}, fretis duo flumina vallant Aequoreo laetos cursu lambentia fines.
SpeyaMur∣raylād bet∣wixt Spey & Nesse. Salmonum nutrix, qua parte recurrit Solis opus, preceps currit, qua parte caditúe, Nessa fluit; victrixNesse frezeth not bruinae, victrix{que} rigoris: Quam placet haec patriae species!The des¦cription of Murreylād in general. Ascendere colles Hic video intonsos, illic descendere valles; Hic laetas campi segetes agros{que} feraces: Aspicio glebae de versicoloribus illic Pratorum spatijs, Chloris mouet omnia vernae Laetitiae. Hic Lucus Zepherynas sustinet auras, Illic arboreo foetu nemus omne grauescit, Bacciferis{que} comis: vitreo cum murmure fontes Aufugiunt ortus laticum, per prata, per herbas, Subsiliunt{que} vagis lymphis in amore liquorum. Quot virides scaenae Musis! quot amaena locorum Castra virent doctae vatum monimenta coronae! Veris amica Domus nulli est reticenda poetae. AstElgin the cihef Town in Murreylād Elgena parens non indonata recedes Morauiae vrbs princeps orae, sanctissima quondam; Quam diuaeThe Trinity, Chaury, or Trinity Church. Triados sedes ditabat honore Balsameo. O vtinam staret domus aurea caeli! AegidioS. Giles Church. sacrata Domus stat tempore nostro Nobilis ornatus,Many Abbyes & Monaste∣ries in old tymes in Murray∣land. Diui praesentia firmat Nutantes animos in religione Parentum. O quàm multa piae circumLeslaeus Boetius & sundry o∣thers do make men∣tion of this Miacle of King Duffus. vestigia dantur Aedis, & vmbra mouet pulchrae sacraria plantae Certa virûm qui vota Deo fudere preces{que} Inclusi castis thalamis, castis{que} sacellis. Vna alias inter sedes celeberrima surgit Condecorans Regis Duffi nomen{que} decus{que} KilflosThe Ab∣by of Kil∣los. nomen habet, florum de nomine natum. Posteritas heu nescit opus florale, pudores Proh sancti! DuffumLeslaeus Boetius & sundry o∣thers do make men∣tion of this Miacle of King Duffus. regem violârat acerbo Funere turba virûm, Diuis inimica Danorum, Furtiuo{que} sola laniatum corpore toto Tradiderat, dum prodit opus iustissima virtus Flore sato medijs brumis prope pectora Regis Quo Superisigno niueas monstrare Monarchae Exuuias, roseos{que} lares Regalis amici
Virgineae sobolis; Iacta te Scotia mater Muneribus diues Duffi pretio{que} coronae Angelicae, qua Duffus habet Capitolia Caeli. 8. The Protestants then not being able to proue or improue any debatable poynt by the expresse word of God, are forced to proue the same (say they) by necessary consequences, that is, by their owne expositions, sophis∣mes and inuentions: but we reply. 1. That in making these consequences they may erre. 2. That these consequences cannot be infallible, and consequently cannot be the groūd of any poynt of Religion. 3. That these consequences are manifest inuentiōs of their owne head, against the expresse word of God. 4. That they haue sworne and subscrybed solemnely, that to interprete, expone, or inferre conse∣quences out of the Bible, doth not apperteyne to any pri∣uate or publick person. Heare their owne words:In the Confession of their Faith in the actes of Parlamēt in the year of God 1560. the 17. of Au∣gust. The interpretation (of the Scripture) we confesse neyther apperteyneth to publick nor priuat persons, neyther yet to any Church for any prehe∣minency or prerogatiue personally or locally, which one hath aboue a∣nother, but appertayneth to the Spirit of God &c. A foolish and contradictorious doctrine, for as much, as they say the in∣terpretation of the Scripture doth not appertayneth to no publick nor priuate person, but to the Spirit of God. For some publick or priuate man must haue this spirit of God, otherwyse how can we be certayne of the interpretation that it cometh of the spirit of God? Truely the Protestants do shew in this, and in all the poynts of their Religion, that they haue not the spirit of God, because they contra∣dict themselues euery where, as in this Treatise the learned Reader may easily perceaue. 9. To conclude then, the Ministers shall neuer be able to proue out of the expresse words of their Bible these poynts of their Religon: Man after his fall hath not freewil, ney∣ther in ciuill maters nor maters of saluation. Man sinneth necessarly: Man continually transgresseth the Commandements of God. &c. Nor yet by necessary consequences. Of which confequences or rather heresies of their owne, a wyse mā should make no
accompt, preferring therunto the consequences and expo∣sitions of the holy Fathers in this first Age, which I set down heer to the consolation of the Catholike Reader. The holy Fathers in this first Age, do witnes playnly and plentifully, man to haue Freewill in matters concerning his saluation. The first Section. S. Clement:S. Cle∣mens Epist. 3. ante me∣dium. Si quis sanè audiens sermonem veri Prophetae, velit recipere aut nolit, & amplecti onus eius, i. mādata vitae, ha∣bet in sua potestate. Liberi enim sumus arbitrij &c. Nunc autem quia liberum est animo, in quam velit partem declinare iudiciunt suum, & quam probauerit eligere viam, constat euidenter inesse ho∣minibus arbitrij libertatem. That is: If any man heare the pre∣aching of a true Prophet, it is in his power to make his profit therof, or not, for we haue freewill &c. Now since it is free to man to choose eyther the one or the other way, it is manifest that man hath freewill. And agayne he bringeth in S. Peter the Apostle disputing with Simon Magus, who denyed freewil, against whome S. Peter pro∣ueth that if men had not freewill, Lawes would be made in vayne, exhortations and preachings in vayne, admoni∣tions and threatings in vayne. For euer still men might an∣swer: We haue no freewill to keep those Lawes. We haue no freewill to keep those instructions and preachings; for what we do, we do it of necessity.S. Cle∣mens l. 3. recog. non longe ab initio. Vi∣de l. 4. ante medium. Sed dic, quomodo ergo Deus iudicat secundū veritatem, vnumquem{que} actibus suis, si agere aliquid in potestate non habuit? hoc si teneatur, conuulsa sunt omnia, frustra erit studium sectandi meliora: sed & iudices saeculi frustra legibus praesunt, & pu∣niunt eos qui malè agunt. &c. 2. S. Denis manifestly calleth man : that is, as hauing free power ouer himselfe, and that God concurreth with man in his actions freely, that is, offereth his grace to man, who may eyther refuse it or accept it. Which if he accept, God concurreth with him, if he accept it not, it is his owne fault. With necessary causes God con∣curreth necessarily:Lib. de Diuin. nom. c. 4. p. 4. Cum liberis liberè, cum contingentibus con∣tingenter:
Ideo & vanam multorum non admittemus rationem, qui oportere, aiunt, Prouidentiā etiam. inuitos nos ad virtutem du∣cere, ne{que} enim est prouidentiae violare naturam. Quocirca sicut pro∣uidentia cuius{que} naturae est conseruatrix, à se mobilibus, vt à se mobilibus prouidet: & viuersis & singulis iuxta proprietatem totius & vniuscuius{que}, in quantum prouisorum naturae suscipit totius ac multifariae prouidentiae proportionaliter vnicui{que} attributas prouisiuas bonitates. The which placeIn l. de Denin. nom. c. 4. loc. 23. S. Thomas exponing plainly sheweth out of this holy Father, that man hath freewill, eyther to accept the grace of God, or to refuse, it, to gayne∣stand good motions sent from God, or to imbrace them, to apply his mind to vertue, or to vice, conforme to the saying of the Prophet:Osee 13. v. 19. O Israel thy perdition is of thy self, but thy help and saluation cometh of me. Which place the Ministers haue corrupted. 3. S. Ignatius:Epist 3. ad Magne∣sianos. Quandoquidem igitur actiones habent prae∣mia, vita{que} ex obedientia proponitur, mors au em ex inobedientia: & singuli qui hoc vel illud elegerunt, in eius quod elegerūt locum habituri sint,. fugiamus mortem, & eligamus vitam. And a little af∣ter: Si quis pietati studeat, dei homo est: si impiè agat, diaboli homa ct, non id factus per naturam, sed per suum ipsius arbitrium. That is: If any study to piety, he is of God; if he do impiously he is a seruant of the Diuell, not by nature, but by his owne freewill. Now whose men shall the Ministers be, who belieue, that continually they transgresse the Com∣mandements, that they are euer in the state of sinne? I omit to set downe other Fathers, the matter being so cleare and manifest in it selfe. That the Ministers haue falsified the Bible in sundry places, which proue man to haue Freewill in maters of his saluation. The second Section: S. Paul signifieth vnto vs, that he laboured togeather with the grace of God in preaching to the Iewes:1. Cor. 25. v. 10. I laboured more abundantly then they all: yet not I, but the grace of God with me. In the vulgar Latin. Non ego, sed gratia Dei mecum. In the Greeke . Declaring
therby that the grace of God did concurre as the principall agent with al his labours, yet that his freewill wrought. withall, as if the Apostle would haue said: I laboured more aboundantly then all they, yet not I alone laboured, but the grace of God which is with me laboured. That S. Paul laboured it is manifest thus:2. Cor. 11. v. 23. They are the Ministers of Christs, I am more, in labours more abundant, &c. Wherfore he calleth vs,1. Cor. 3. v. 9. Dei adiu∣tores su∣mus. Gods worke fellowes and helpers, by reason of the free cooperation of our freewill with the Grace of God. Now the Ministers to ouerthrow this Catholike doctrine haue trāslated thus. I laboured more abundantly then they all, yet not I, but the grace of God which is with me, denying therby the cooperation of mans freewill with the grace of God, adulterating the text with these two words, which is, against the meaning of the Apostle, and against the Greeke text: for the Apostle vn∣derstandeth, that not only he laboured, but also the grace of God laboured with him. It is a strange matter of our Ministers, that in translating the Bible so ignorantly, they shew that they haue no conscience; no feare of God, nor shame before men, translating so impudently & ignoran∣tly the word of God, to couer their Idolatry and heresies. When I was in prison for the Catholike Religiō in Eden∣burgh straitly warded and narrowly kept, I offered at seuerall tymes to some Ministers, that for as much as the Bible is diuersly exponed of vs and of them, they neyther being tyed to my interpretation, nor I to theirs; I desired them earnestly to put aside my interpretation, and their owne likewise, referring the mater to the interpretations and Iudgement of the ancient Fathers, of generall Coun∣cels, of vniuersall custome, of tymes and places amongst all Nations. M. Andrew Ramsey answered no, we will not referre the mater to the ancient Fathers, rather we will referre it to Caluin, Beza, and such. Wherunto I was content, so he should bring me Caluin and Beza to try thē with the touchstone of the Bible, which he would not performe. Other Ministers at other tymes answered, we will be tryed by the Scriptures only, by the word of God, by the Bible. I replyed, will ye be tryed by the expresse
word of God only, or by the word of God interpreted as it pleaseth you? Some of them answered, we haue the spirit of God to interpret the Scripture. I replyed: Thē yee will be both party and Iudges; had not the holy Fathers the spirit of God? had no Nation, no kingdome, no Coun∣try the spirit of God before the comming of Luther and Caluin? Hath not that bene the brag of all heretiks. Well then (said I) content, we be both tryed by the Scriptures only, by the expresse word therof, because yee will needs haue it so, and consequently I alledged to them the booke of Machabees for prayer for the dead:2. Ma∣chab. 12. v. 44. VVhere they haue fully taken away the 44. Verse. And if he had not hoped that they which were slayne should ryse agayne, it had bene superfluous and vayne to pray for the dead. No (said the Mi∣nisters) we admit not those for Scripture. Why so? Are not those books approued for Canonicall by the authority of the same Church, of ancient Councels, and Fathers, that the other books are? How do yee know that the Euangell of S. Iohn is Scripture, & the Euangell of S. Bartholmew (for one was put out with his name) is not? if yee reiect the authority of the Church, which giueth not authority to the Scripture as yee calumniat vs, but declareth which is, and which is not Canonicall Scripture; as1. Reg. 3. v. 17. Salomon declared the true Mother of the chyld, though she was true Mother before his declaration, but because that was vn∣knowen to the people, Salomons declaration was fully requisit: So the true Scripture in it selfe hath sufficient authority before all declaration, but for as much as that authority is vn knowen to euery member of the Church, it is fully requisit, there be some supreme power to decla∣re the same, which must be the Church of God. No matter answered the Ministers, we will not admit those books for Canonical because the Iewes admit them not. I reply∣ed, that was to play the Iew and not the Christian, con∣forme to S. Augustines opinion. Well then, let vs go for∣ward and come to the poynt. Will you allow at least the Iewes Canonicall books of the old Testament, to wit, all that are extant in the Hebrew Bible, and all of the new Testament, without exception? yea that vve will. In these
books then will ye be tryed by the vulgar ancient Latin Bible famous in the Church of God aboue twelf hundreth yeares? No, we care not for your latin Bible said the Mi∣nisters. I replyed, will yee be tryed by the Greeke Bible of the Septuaginta interpreters, so authorized in our Saui∣ours owne speaches? No we will not: how then will ye be tryed? They answered, only by the Hebrew Bible of the old testament, we do thinke it only authenticall & true Scripture. I replyed, why then haue you left the Hebrew text as corrupted, in turning thus:Psalm. 22. v. 16. Caru. They pierced my hands & my feet, for in the Hebrew it is otherwyse if yee be skilfull in the Hebrew toung. For all the Hebrew Bibles read thus, as a Lion my hands and my feet. There truely they answered, we wil not follow the Hebrew but the Greeke Text.Caari Iadal Sicut Lo manus mea. But that is but one place alone. I replyed, that one corrupted place of the Hebrew Bible is sufficient to take away all in∣fallible authority of the word of God from it, and to hin∣der it to be the word of God: euen as in a contract band or obligation, if there be but one essentiall fault or falsity, the rest of the contract or band is reiected, and hath no au∣thority, much more in the word of God, wherin all is es∣sentiall & necessary to be belieued vnder the paine of con∣demnation. For we cannot iudge of the Bible and word of God as of other books, as Virgil, Ouid, William Wal∣lace, and Dauid Lindesay, wherin though there may be some errours, corruptions, and lies, yet there be some tru∣thes and verities, which neuertheles cannot be called infal∣lible verities, but rather fallible. Contrary, the Bible and word of God being ēdyted to the holy wryters as to Moy∣ses, the holy Prophets, Euangelists, and Apostles, by God himselfe, must haue wholly infallible verities, because they were infallibly assisted with the holy Spirit, & that in such sort, that they could not erre in wryting those holy Books: and if we grant that they haue erred but once, yea ōly once, it followeth necessarly that they had not a infal∣lible assistance of the holy Ghost & consequently the rea∣der of such a Bible shall euer be incertayne when they had infallible assistance of God, & when not: which is the reasō
also wherfore the Scottish & English Bible translated by the Ministers cannot be the infallible word of God. Be∣cause the Ministers had not in translating the Bible an in∣fallible assistance of God, but as men, and ignorant men might erre, and erred filthily almost in euery verse. 2. To these discourses of myne, one of the Mini∣sters answered, that it was not a poynt of faith, that the Scottish or English Bible is the infallible word of God, which sundry Ministers of Frāce, speaking of their French Bible, haue affirmed publickly. But we haue recourse said this Minister to the Hebrew text. Wherunto I replyed, all the Hebrew Bibles that are now extant, are corrupted; which verity yee testify your selfe: as for example ye haue translated in your Scottish Bible that of S. Matthew thus.Matth. 2. v. 21. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet, which was, that he should be called a Nazarite: Yet there is no Pro∣phet of the old Testament, now extant, that maketh men∣tion of this place, as witnesseth S.Hom. 9. in hunc locum. Chrisostome, andIbidem. Theophilact with the rest of the Fathers. Heer then ye haue left all the Hebrew Bibles as corrupted. 2. Ye haue translated that of S. Matthew.Matt. 17. v. 9. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Ieremias the Prophet, saying, And they tooke thirty siluer peeces &c. Which words are no wyse now in the Hebrew text of Ieremy, but rather in the prophet Zachary; so heer ye haue left the Hebrew Bible as corrupted, and followed our latin translation and the Greeke. 3Apo∣log. 2. pro Christianis Iustinus martyr a famous and ancient author witnesseth, that those wordsPsal. 95. v. 10. Regnabi à ligno Deus, were in the first Hebrew copies and originalls, yet now no Hebrew Bible hath them;Lib. cō∣tra iudeos c. 10. for the Iewes (sayth he, togeather with Tertullian) in hatred of the Passion of Christ did scrape them out malici∣ously. 4. Yee haue trāslated that of S. Paul,Galat. 3. v. 13. Deut. 11. v. 23. For it is written, cursed is euery one that hangeth on the tree. Which words S. Paul citeth, as written by Moyses in Hebrew, and yet there is no Hebrew Bible now extant which hath precisely those words. So in this ye haue in lyke māner left the Hebrew Bible as corrupted, & haue followed our Latin & Greeke Bible. 5.Lib. 1. Instit. c. 13. §. 9. Caluin your Maister & prime Heresiarch ac∣knowledgeth
those words of Ieremy which proue the Mes∣sias to be true God:Ierem. 33. v. 26. In Hebrew Adonat, proper on∣ly to God. Hoc est nomen quod vocabunt eum, Dominus iustus noster, to haue bene corrupted by the Iewes, for there is no Hebrew Bible now extant which hath those words, & you lyke Iewes haue followed the Iewes in translating this place against the opinion of your Maister, and against our Latin translation. 6. That place of Zachary:Zach. 9. v. 11. Tu quo{que} in sanguine testamenti tui emisisti vinctos tuos de lacu, in quo non est aqua, is corrupted in the Hebrew Bible, and refer∣red by the Iewes to the Synagogue, and not to Christ, as it should be. Where your Maister Iohn Caluin playeth the Doctour ignorantly in saying tha the Hebrew word ath, cannot be but of the feminine gender and referred to the Synagogue. But let him learne this lesson of me,See Pagni∣nus in ra∣dice Eth. that the word ath, without the letter he (as it is there) is both the masculine & feminine gēder. Finally yee haue left the He∣brew Bible as corrupted in those words of Ieremy which condemne you all with the Iewes as corrupters of the Bible:Ierem. 8. v. 8. Verè mendacium operatus est stylus mendax scribarum. Where the Prophet complayneth against the Iewes as ha∣uing corrupted the Hebrew Bible, and ye being guilty of the same cryme haue falsly & obscurely trāslated the same words: Lo, certainly in vayne made he it, the pen of the scribes is in vayne. Yea the holy Fathers complayne greately that the Hebrew text is filthily corrupted by the Iewes, and amongst othersGal. l. 1. c. vlt. Galatinus, andIn Chro¦nologia ad ann. Dom. 476. Genebrardus witnes the same largely. To these sayings of myne the Mi∣nisters (as they are very ignorant in the Hebrew tongue) could not make any answere. 3. As I haue proued all the Hebrew Bible now extant to be corrupted, and far different from the originals which were before Christ and immediatly after Christ, so it shall be easie to proue the Greeke Bible of the Septua∣gint Translatours (which was of great accōpt amongst the Iewes) to be corrupted; as this place of Ieremy witnesseth:Ierem. 17. v. 1. The sinne of Iudah is written with a pen of Iron, & with the poynt of a diamond. Which place the Ministers haue translated, & yet it is not in the Greeke Bible, which they haue left as
corrupted. 2. The Ministers haue abandoned the Greeke Bible as corrupted thus:Isa. 56. v. 23.  All flesh come to worship before me; sayth the Lord. Leauing out these two words, in Ierusalem, which are in the Greeke Bible. 3 In the Prophet Ionas: And Ionas began to enter into the city a dayes iourney, and he cryed and said,Iona. 3. v. 4. Yet fourty dayes, and Niniue shall be ouerthrowne: In the Greeke text now extant it is, yet three dayes, and Niniue shalbe ouerthrowne. So in this place the Ministers haue left the Greeke Bible as corrupted. 4. The hoy Fathers proued a∣gainst the Arrians, that God the Father had a consubstanti∣all sonne, out of hose words of the Prophet Isaias:Isa. 66. v. 9. Nun∣quid ego qi altos parere facio, ipse non pariam dcit Dominus si ego qui generationem caeteris tribuo, sterilis ero, ait dominus Deus tuus? in translation of the which place the Ministers haue fully left the Greeke Bible, as corrupted, and haue vitiously translated the same place in their English translation. 5. That place of Leuiticus:Leuit. 19 v. 26. , non comedetis in mōti{us} Yee shall not eat the flesh with the bloud, the Ministers haue fully corrupted. For the two words, the flesh, are neither in the Hebrew nor in the Greeke, nor in the Chaldean text. So that eyther those must be cor∣rupted, or els the Ministers must needs be traytors to the word of God. 6. In Isaias:Isa. 40. v. 2. . And cry vnto her, that her warfar is accomplished. Heer the Ministers leaue the Greeke text as corrupted, wherin it is, her humility is accomplished. 7. The Ministers haue translated, that Adam begat Seth beingGen. 5. v. 3. a hundreth and thirty yeares, and yet in the Greeke text it is that he begot Seth being two hundreth and thirty yeares. 8. The Ministers follow not the Greek text in these places.Psal. 119 v. 112. I haue inclyned my hart to keep thy iustificatiōs for reward. And agayne, Redeme thy sinnes with almes. Which places as making for the Catholiks the Ministers haue corrupted, and left th Greeke text.Dan. 4. v. 14. It were superfluous to reckon the mul∣titude of the corruptions either of the Greeke or Hebrew Bibles now extant; wherof it followeth that it is folly to the Ministry in disputing, to be take thēselues to the He∣brew or Greeke texts, as to incorrupted fountaynes, they not being the infallible word of God. 4. As for the new Testament in Greeke, sundry anci∣ent
Fathers imediatly after the Apostles auow constātly that the Greeke new Testament hath bene corrupted in sundry places. SoLib. 2. cōtra Hae∣res c. 19 Irenaeus,Lib. 5. cōtra Mar∣cion. Tertullian,In vlt. c. Epist. ad Rom. v. 23. Origen,Apud Euseb. l. 4. Hist. c. 22. & 23. Dionysius Bshop of Corinth, andLib 1. de Hares. c. de Tati∣ano. Theodoeus, who witnesseth that in his Bishoprike alone he had found more then two hundreth new Testamēts in Greeke filthily corrupted by the Heretiks, which the Catholiks did not remarke. Ego iuueni (sayth he) plusquam ducentos huiusmodi libros qui in honore habebantur in nostris Ecclesijs. Quos cùm omnes simul coegissem, deposui, & loco eorum reposui quatuor Euangelista∣rum Euangelia. Yea all the ancient Heretiks, as Manicheans, Valentinians, Arians, Macedonians, Nestorians &c. being Grecians by birth, did sully corrupt the Greeke new Testa∣ment, setting out copies to fauour their heresies, which S. Hierome himselfe witnesseth, auowing,Lib. de Script. Ec∣cles. Se nouum Testamentum Graecae fidei reddidisse. Now it is certayne that the latin new testament of S. Hierome which we vse is diffe∣rent in many places from the Greeke new testament now extant. 5. And that the new Testament now extant is cor∣rupted in many places it is manifest: I will only produce two or three, to the end that I be not tedious to the reader. 1.1. Cor. 15. v. 51. Behold I shew yow a secret thing, we shall not all sleepe but we shall all be changed. Which words are manifestly erro∣neous, and directly against those of the Prophet:Psalm. 89. v 4.8. What man liueth and shall not see death? yea against the same Apo∣stle S. Paul:Hebr. 9. v. 27. It is appoynted vnto men that they shall once die. Which is the reason wherfore the latin vulgar translation hath rightly Omnes quidem resurgemus, sed non omnes immutabi∣mur. 2. In the Reuelation, it is said:Reuel. 4. v. 8. And they ceased not day nor night, saying Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty. Which place as corrupted the Ministers haue not translated, for in the Greeke, the word Holy is repeated nyne tymes, and in our latin text but three tymes, which the Ministers haue followed and left the Greeke as corrupted: peraduentur because we Catholiks do repeat the Aue Maria nyne or ten tymes togeather, the Ministers would rather leaue the
Greeke text, then approue our holy custome grounded vpon the word of God. 3. The Greeke text is corrupted in those words:Matt. 6. for thyne is the kingdome, power and glory, for euer and euer. AsThe one and the other in annot. in 6. Matth. Decad. 5. Serm 5. in orat. Do∣minicam. Erasmus, andThe one and the other in annot. in 6. Matth. Decad. 5. Serm 5. in orat. Do∣minicam. Henricus Bullingerus Arch-Ministers testifie themselues, & none of the ancient Fathers readeth so in the Lords prayer. 4. The Greeke new testaments printed at Geneua are in many places fil∣thily corrupted. And to the end the Ministers of Geneua couer the better their corruptions, they haue printed sun∣dry Greeke new Testaments as if they had bene printed in Catholike Townes in France, with these words, Imprimè a Lyon, Imprimè a Rouen, Imprimè a Paris, Imprimè a Tholouse, which double-dealing they haue vsed in the printing of sundry of their Hugenot Bibles. 5. Beza a Prime-Minister auoweth the Greeke new Testamēt to be corrupted, as ha∣uing left out those words, which are in our vulgar latin:Act. 23 v. 24. Timuit enim ne fortè caperēt eum udaei & occiderent, & ipse pos∣tea calumniam sustineret, tanquam accepturus pecuniam. Beza his words are:In An∣not. in būc loun. Haec in Graecis exemplaribus non inueni, nec tamen temeré videri possunt addita. 6. Caluin a hardy compa∣nion in his resolutions sayth plainly, that the Greeke new Testament is corrupted, and giueth for example these words:Act. 7. v. 14. Then sent Ioseph and caused his Father to be brought, & all his kinred euen threscore and fifteene soules. Which place sayth Caluin should be corrected as erroneous, and that of Ge∣nesis where it is said:Genes. 46. v. 27. All the soules of the house of Iacob which came into Egypt are seauenty, should be preferred. 7. Caluin condemneth agayne the Greeke new Testament as corrup∣ted in these words:Matth. 20. v. 16. Caluin. in hunc locū. Many are called, but few chosen. Which words he calleth superfluous & no wayes to the purpose. 8. The originals and autographes written by the Prophets and Apostles themselues in Hebrew and Greeke, are no wayes extant, nor can be found: What infallible assurance then can any man haue, that the Hebrew and Greeke co∣pyes now extant are the word of God? wherof this Syllo∣gisme ensueth: The Religiō of the Ministers in England & Scotland cannot be more infallible and certaine then the
ground wherupon it relyeth, which is the Hebrew and Greeke Bible; but that ground is erroneous, fallible, incer∣tayne, and doubtfull as I haue proued. Ergo &c. Like∣wyse the Protestants and Puritans who vnderstande not the Hebrew & Greeke tongue, can no wayes be in∣fallibly assured of their Religion, if it be grounded vpon the Originall Hebrew and Greeke, which they vnder∣stand not. 6. But what sort of Bible amongst all the rest is the most infallible, and should be most preferred? S. Augustine answereth:Lib. 1. de Doct. Christ. c. 15. In ipsis autem interpretationibus Itala caeteris prae∣feratur: Nam est verborū tenacior cum perspicuitate sentētiae. This, Itala interpretatio,Praesat. in lib. Mo∣ral. c. 5. ad Leandrū. is the same which now the holy Church specially vseth, called the vulgar or latin editiō, as witnesseth playnly S. Gregory, &Praef. in Penta∣teuchum. S. Hierome, who at the Com∣mandemēt of Pope Damasus reuewed this Latin and vul∣gar translation: Ita, sayth he, calamo temperauimus, vt ijs tan∣tum quae sensum imitare videbantur correctis, reliqua pateremux manere vt fuerant. And Beza himselfe maketh great accompt of our vulgar latin, and preferreth the same to any other whatsoeuer. Likewyse the Church of God vniuersally hath euer had in great honour and reuerence the same, as wit∣nesseth the Councell ofSessione 4. in De∣cretis. Trent, preferring and authori∣zing it aboue any other whatsoeuer, in establishing any poynt of faith and Religion. Which vul ar and latin tran∣slation we Catholiks imbrace, as approued specially by the Church of God, which Church must be infallible, and infallibly certayne in all her decisions, following in this the example of S. Augustine, who belieued that Bible only to be the true word of God, which by the holy Church was approued.Cont. Epist. Ma∣nih. c. 3. Ego verò, sayth he, Euangelio non crederem nisi me Ecclesiae Catholicae commoueret authoritas. That is, I would not belieue the Gospell, except the authority of the Church did induce me therunto. And the Apostle S. Paul doth assure vs:2. Tim. 3. v. 5. That the Church of God is the pillar and ground of truth, wher∣upon we may rely without feare of falling: which infal∣lible
ground S. Augustine (with the ancient Fathers) had so deeply printed in his hart, that he gaue commonly this infallible rule to find out the true Religion, touching any Controuersy or question:Aug. l. 3. contra Crescon. c. 53. Quisquis falli metuit huius obscuritate quaestionis, Ecclesiam de ea consulat. That is, Whosoeuer feareth to be deceaued by the obscurity of this question, (which was betwixt S. Augustine and Cresconius the Heretike) let him go, and aske the Church therof. Wherfore it is folly to a Protestant, desirous to find the true Reli∣gion to trouble himselfe with euery question in parti∣cular, but rather he should be carefull, first of all to seeke out diligently what is the Church, which be the marks of the true Church, which be the offices and quality ther∣of; and after that, to be informed of euery Controuersy in particuler:Iren. l. 3. Haeres. c. 4. Ye must not seeke the truth from others, then from those that be in Church, from which Church it is easie to take the same: for so much as the Apostles did most fully place in the same Church, as in a rich treasure house, all things that belong vnto the truth of Christian religion, to the end that euery one that would, might take from thence the drinke of lyfe.
The 13. 14. and 15 Article. 1. That with the grace of God, men may keep God his Commandements. 2. And, that the keeping therof, is meritorious of life euerlasting. 3. And, that Faith only doth not iustify, was constantly belieued by the Catholikes in this first age. CHAP. VIII. CALVIN in sundry places doth igno∣rantly deny, that men though assisted by the grace of God, may keep the commandements: which doctrine our Ministers in Scotland do teach playnly in the maner to examē children before the supper of the Lord, set down in the end of the Scots Catechisme, or Articles of faith, where the Minister asketh of the child thus. M. Canst thou keep Gods Commandements of thy selfe. C. No verily M. Who then doth keep and fulfill them in thee? C. The holy Ghost M. When Gd then giueth thee his holy Ghost, canst thou perfitly obserue them? C. No, not so. M. Why, God doth curse and reiect all such as do not in euery point fulfill his Commandements. C. It is true. O the which impious doctrine these blasphemyes do fol∣low. 1. That a man assisted with the grace of God and holy Ghost, cannot keep perfitly the Commands. 2. That the omnipotency of the holy Ghost (who is God) cannot haue that strength to make a man to keep the Commands. 3. That the power of the diuell in making a man to beake the Commāds, is greater then the power of the holy ghost to make a man to keep them. Because a man (say the
Ministers) cannot keep them perfitly, though assisted by the holy Ghost, yet he breaks them perfitly assisted by the diuell. 4. That the best liuing Protestant or Puritane that is, is euer in the state of the curse and malediction of God: because, say the Ministers, no man can perfitly fulfill the Commands: wheron followeth this Syllogisme. The Mi∣nisters are obliged vnder the payne of condemnation to eschew sinne. But the holyest worke which they can do in this world, as to take the supper of the Lord, to pray, to preach, to giue almes, to sing the psalmes, are alwayes con∣ioyned necessarly with deadly sinne. Ergo the Ministers are obliged vnder the payne of condemnation, not to do any of those works. The Maior is euident:Ioan. 8. v 34. Whosoeuer com∣mitteth sinne, is the seruant of sinne. And agayne:Rom. 6 v. 23. The wages of sinne is death. I proue the Minor, because in those actions, of praying, preaching &c. eyther the Ministers keep the Commandements perfitly or not? If not, then that imper∣fection ioyned with the worke which they do, being a deadly sinne (because they make not a distinction of deadly and veniall sinnes, but al are deadly sinnes with thē) they are obliged vnder the payne of damnation to eschew it, as being against the Commandements of God: If in doing that worke, they keep the Commandements perfitly, then they contradict their owne doctrine, and belye Caluin. Secondly I proue the Minor. The best worke that a Mini∣ster can do, as to pray, preach &c. is ioyned with imper∣fection & sinne. But all the Ministers are obliged to eschew sinne. Ergo &c. 2. I would aske of the Ministers in what part of the Bible is found this distinction of theirs, to keep the Com∣mands perfectly or imperfectly, since the Bible euer speaketh of that matter without distinction and absolutly, asMatt. 19. v. 17. If thou wilt enter into life, keep the Commandements. Agayne:Ioa. 14. v. 21. He that hath my Commandements, and keepeth them, is he that loueth me, and he that loueth me, shall be loued of my father, and I will loue him, and will shew my owne selfe to him. Can there be more playne words against the Ministers impious doctrine? Finally, it followeth of this doctrine, that none
of the Ministers haue true faith in Christ, for they teach in their publick prayer called the Confession of sinnes:In the prayer cal∣led the Confession of sinnes. That the flesh euermore rebelleth against the spirit, wherby we conti∣nually transgresse thy holy Precepts and Commandements, &c. And agayne in their Confession of faith sworne publickly they say:In the Acts of Parlamēt holden at Eēburgh 17. of Au∣gust. 1560. Artic. 13. Therfore we feare not to affirme that murtherers; oppressors, cruell persecutours, Adulterers, whoremongers, filthy persons, Ido∣laters, drunkards, Theeues, and al workers of iniquity, haue neyther true faith &c. Of which words I argue thus: Those that transgresse the Commandements of God haue not true faith: But all the Ministers continually transgresse the Commandements of God. Ergo &c. The difference be∣twixt vs Catholiks & the Protestants in this poynt is, that we teach that we may keep the Commandements of God, (being assisted by his grace) according to the rigour of the Law, hauing regard to our weaknes & fragility, yet we cō∣fesse that sundry tymes we trangresse the Cōmandments, and hauing transgressed them we may ryse from the state of sinne to the state of grace, assisted by the help of God; and thus being assisted by the grace of God, we may do some good works voyde and empty of any deadly sinne. The Protestants do beleue the contrary, that we cannot keep the Cōmandmēts, though assisted by the grace of God, that cōtinually we transgresse the Cōmandments, that the best worke that a man can do hath sinne necessarly ioyned with it; which doctrines they hold against the expresse word of God, and against all Scripture. So Luther: Al good actions be sinnes. Whitaker:In his answer to the 10. rea∣sons of M. Campian. Luther said this, and he said it truely, for in euery action of a man though neuer so excellent, there is some fault, which may wholy marre the action and make it odious to God &c. Which Blasphemyes are directly against the Bible & word of God; Against S. Paul:1. Cor. 7 v. 36. If thow take a wife thou sinnest not. Against S. Peter:2. Pet. 1. v. 10. Doing these things you shall not sinne at any tyme. Which words the Ministers haue corrupted. Against S. Iohn:1. Ioan. 3. v. 9. Whosoeuer is borne of God, sinneth not, for his seed remayneth in him, neyther can he sinne, be∣cause he is borne of God. Against S. Matthew:Matth. 21. v. 22 If then thyne ye be simple, thy whole body shall be light. Which place the Mi∣nisters
haue corrupted also. And though these foresaid words of the Apostles be plainly against the Protestans re∣ligion, yet effrontedly they say to the people, that they fol∣low the only doctrine of the Apostles. 4. Finally it is against God himselfe who spake of Iob:Iob. 1. v. 22. In all these things Iob sinned not with his lips, neyther spake he any foolish thing against God. Which place the Ministers haue corrupted. Do not these foresaid places proue manifestly that sundry actions & good works of men are not sinnefu and haue not sinne ioyned with them, which is manifest when a man suffereth martyrdome and sheddeth his blood for the true Religion, what mixture I pray you of sinne can that holy action haue? Truely it can haue none that arry∣seth from the obiect beloued which is God, not from the will which loueth that obiect; because no feare of excesse, no danger of impurity can possibly flow from the desire to loue God aboue all things, which is then when a man suf∣fereth for God martyrdome. Which excellent action of the loue of God in sundry holy men, is voyd of the mudde of distraction, of the scumme of vayne glory, of the froath of pryde, which imperfections do accōpany very often many of our good actions, yet they are not deadly sinnes, as the Ministers ignorantly do abuse the simple people, but they are veniall sinnes, and take not away the merit and re∣ward of a good worke. As for fleshly motions, rebellious inclinations which sometymes do accompany our acti∣ons, they are not sinnes except a man consent therunto, for not in such imaginations or motions, which sometymes cannot be escaped, can there be any sinne, but in the con∣sent therof, because those first imaginations and motions are not in our power, and consequently they cannot be voluntary.Seneca l. de mori∣bus. Away away with all excuse (sayth Seneca, a Pagan) no man sinneth against his will. And againe; It deserueth not prayse not to do, which thou canst not do. S. Augustine shall decyde this mater betwixt vs and the Ministers, yea and seale vp the mouthes of Protestants Ministers, and quyet the harts of Catholikes, who sometymes in their good actions do remarke many imperfections. Note well his
wordes:Lib. de Natura & Gratia c. 67. & l. 2. contra Pe∣lagianos. Whatsoeuer cause there be, of the will impelling it to offend, if it cannot be resisted, it is yeilded vnto without sinne; but if it may, let it not be yeilded vnto, and there shalbe no sinne committed. What doth it perchance deceaue a man vnawares? Let him ther∣fore be circumspect that he be not deceaued. Or is the deceit so great, as it cannot be auoyded? If it be so, the sinnes therfore are none, for who doth sinne in that which can by no meanes be escaped? Likewyse. Not in the euill desire it selfe, but in our consent do we sinne. Mo∣reouer. In as much as it apperteyneth vnto vs, without sinne we might be alwayes, if this euill of concupiscence were healed, if we should neuer consent vnto it, but in, and for such things, in which if not mortally, yet venially we are ouercome of it, we may daily say, forgiue vs our trespasses, 5. I aske of the Ministers, those spots, contagions and imperfections of our good works, eyther they are acti∣ons distinct from the good works which they defyle, or not distinct. If they be distinct, then they cannot defile the good works, but are to be considered as seuerall sinnes in themselues, as hauing both in nature and quality an obiect different from the obiect of the good worke: If they be not distinct, but rather if the selfe same worke which is good, be spotted with deadly sinne (for there is no distin∣ction of veniall, and mortall sinnes with the Ministry) then all good workes be they neuer so excellent are deadly sinnes and transgressions of the law:Dio∣nys. de di∣uin. nomi∣nibus c. 4. part. 4. For good aryseth from an enteir cause, euill from euery defect and imperfection, Bonum est ex integra causa, malū ex singulis defectibus, say the Doctours. The reason wherof is, because a morall act or action can∣not simul & semel be good and bad, pure and defiled: for as it inuolueth contradiction, that one and the same assent of our vnderstanding can be at the same tyme both true and false: so it is impossible that one and the same act of our will, should be ioyntly at the same moment good and euil, pleasing and displeasing to God. Wherfore if the best actiō we can do, hath drosse & spots of sin ioyned with it, it fol∣loweth of necessity that all our actions are sins, yea deadly sinnes. True it is, that in materiall substance really distinct, the one substance may be good, and the other bad; the
badnes of the one not hindering the goodnes of the other, as drosse may be mingled with good siluer: But so it is not in morall actiōs, which eyther are fully good or fully bad. 6. Concerning the second poynt that our good workes are meritorious, it is to be remarked, that three thing are necessary to make our actions and good workes meritorious, all which three do flow from te merits of Christ and the holy streames of his bloud shed for vs, with∣out the which no worke of man can haue any merit. The first thing requisite is, that no worke of man can truely me∣rit or deserue reward, except being wrought with the help of God, it also prooceed from the inherent grace of God re∣mayning in our soules, wherby our actions are enobled greately in the sight of God. The second thing to be ob∣serued is, that God hath ioyned the seale of his promise & obliged himselfe by his owne word to remunerate our works: for though God be not obliged to ingage himselfe to vs his poore creatures, yet hauing promised and ingaged himselfe to recompense our labours and good workes (to the end he may animate, and stir vs vp therby to do good works) he is obliged to performe his promise: Euen as a king not being obliged to giue some extraordinary aduan∣cement to some poore subiect of his own, yet hauing pro∣mised the same, and sealed his promise solemnely, he is obliged to performe the same: so standeth the case betwixt God and vs. The third is, that all meritorious actions be freely and sincerely done; freely from the necessity of com∣pulsion, sincerely from the badnes of sinister intentions. These things presupposed we Catholiks constantly man∣tayne that good workes are worthy of reward and men∣torious of euerlasting life: not that there is an arithmetical equality or proportion betwixt our good works and hea∣uenly felicity, as is betwixt one shilling and another, one crown of Gold and another: for what proportion can be betwixt a finite and infinite thing? But the proportion only is that, which is betwixt grace and glory, as betwixt the seed sowen in the ground, & the statelynes of the tree which cometh of the seed, which is a vertuall proportion. For
the which cause the word of God expreslly teacheth vs that our good workes are worthy of God. And specially spea∣king of the constancy of Catholiks, who do remayne in the midst of heretiks,Reuel. 3. v. 4. Thou hast a few persons names yet in Sardis, which haue not defiled their garments; and they shall walke with me in white, for they are worthy. And likewyse to the good Catholike who auoweth his Religion before the enemys of God, he sayth thus:Reuel. 3. v. 5. He that ouercometh, shalbe clothed in whyte aray, and I will not put out his name out of the booke of life, but I will confes his name before my father, and before his Angels: Agayne,Colss. 1. v. 12. Giuing thanks vnto the Father which hath made vs worthy to be partakers of the inhabitation of the Saincts in light. Which place the Ministers haue corrupted. And a∣gayne:2. Thss. 2. v. 13. Wherefore we pray also alwayes for you, that our God may make you worthy of his calling. And agayne playnly S. Paul witnesseth, that our good workes do merit before God:Hebr. 13. v. 16. To do good and to distribute, forget not: for with such sa∣crifices God is promerited: Talibus enim hostijs promeretur Deus. Which place the Protestants haue corrupted. And agayne:Genes. 32. v. 10. I am inferior to all thy mercies, where the Caldeā Paraphrasis readeth, my Merits are lesse then all thy mercyes which thou hast shewed to thy seruant. And agayne, the very word meritum, is specified:Eccles. 16. v. 15. All mercy shall make a place to euery man according to the merits of his works: Omnis misericordia faciet locum vnicui{que} secundum meritum operum suorum. Which place the Ministers haue impiously corrupted, as fully making against their wi∣cked doctrine. 7. To the former reasons I will adde this only argu∣ment: If the best worke a man doth, hath sinne ioyned with it necessarily, then the Protestants are iustified by sin, which is a blasphemy. I proue the consequence, for that act of faith wherby the Protestant is only iustified for they sweare and subscrybe,In their Confession of Fayth. That they receaue remission of their sin∣nes by fayth only) must needs be a good worke, or a bad worke: If a good work (cōfrome to that of our Sauiour,Ioan. 6. v. 29. This is the worke of God that yee belieue in him whome he hath sent.) it must needs haue some spot of sinne ioyned with it, and consequently the Protestant is instified by sinne and sinfull
actions. Likewise when the Protestant prayeth thus: And forgiue vs our sinnes: eyther this prayer is fully a good worke or els spotted with sinne and iniquity. It spotted with sin, then the Protestants do obteyne remission of their sins, by sins thēselus, & a sinfull petition which is greatly absurd. 8. Last of all I aske of the Protestants in what part of the expresse word of the Bible these propositions are to be found: The Commandements of God are impossible to be kept. 2. The commandements of God cannot be kept perfectly by the holy Ghost. 3. Our good works are alwayes spotted with sinne. 4. Our good workes proceeding from the grace of God, are not worthy of re∣ward, are not meritorious? But they shall neuer be able to giue any expresse word of the Bible. As for their erroneous consequences, let vs preferre the consequences of the holy Fathers therunto. The Testimonyes of the holy Fathers of this first Age, concerning the keeping of Gods Commandements, and the merit of good Works. The first Section. SAINT Clement proueth that our Sauiour came to keep the Law and the Commandements, and by his grace to make the Christians to keep them:Lib. 6. c. 19. const. Apostol. Non enim legem soluit, vt opinatur Simon Magus, imò impleuit: Ait enim; Iota vnum aut apex non praeteribit à lege donec omnia fiant: non enim, inquit, venisoluere legem, sed adimplere. And againe he auoweth that the Catholiks and Christians do fulfill the Law more perfectly then the Iewes, and that they are more obliged therunto.Lib. 6. Constit. Apost. c. 23. & l. 1. recog. Qui tunc homidicium interdixit, nunc etiam iram temerè concitatam: Qui tunc adulterium, nunc prauam quo{que} cupiditatem, vt tendamus ad amicitiam Cōditoris: a∣micitia autem efficitur bene viuendo, & voluntati eius obediendo, quae voluntas omnium viuentium lex est. And againe he teacheth that he, who ioyneth a good life and conuersation with prayer, doth merit much before God:Lib 3. Const. A∣post. c. 12. Audiri autem à deo ita demum meribitur quis, si orationes ipsa bonis moribus & bonis operibus adiu∣uentur.
2. S. Ignatus in his Epistle teacheth manifestly, that the perfection of this life consisteth in true saith and perfect charity, which charity cannot be, sayth he, without the fullfilling of the Law by the grace of God, conforme to that.1. Ioan. 2. v. 4. He that sayth I know God, and keepeth not his Comman∣dements, is a lyar, and the truth is not in him. Do not the Mini∣sters playnly say the contrary? He that sayth that he keepeth Gods Commandement is a lyar? The same holy Father writing to the Romanes, prayeth them earnestly not to hinder his passion that therby he may merit eternall felicity:Epist. ad Roma∣nos. Mihi verò difficile est Deum promereri, si vos mihi non peperceritis pretextu carnalis amicitiae. Nolo autē vos hominibus, sed deo placere, sicut & pla∣cetis. And after. Ego omnibus Ecclesus scribo quòd voluntarius mo∣ior, si modò vos non prohibueritis: obsecro vos ne intempestiua beneuo∣lentia me complectamini Sinite me ferarum escam fieri, per quas lice∣bit Deum adipisci. And wryting to a Gentlewoman exhor∣teth her therby to be constant, and to do good workes:In Ep. ad Mariam Cassoboli∣tam. Praesens nam{que} labor modicus,. multa autem quae hinc expectatur merces. 3. S. Martialis who is of great honour for his holy∣nesse and doctrine in Bourdeaux & Limoges in France to this day, of good workes sayth thus:Epist. ad Thoso∣lanos c. 17. Vobis enim Deus est testis, scrutator renum & cordium, in eius obedientia nihil arrogan∣ter, nihil superbè, nihil temerè praesumere, sed tanquam pusillus grex Dei, voluntatem eius admplere studete in verbis sanctis & o∣peribus bonis; etenim frequens & assidua Dei custodia super vos &c. Could he speake more playnly for good workes, & for the keeping the Commandements? 4. The Merites of good workes S. Dionysius tea∣cheth so playnly, and so manifestly, that no vnpassioned mā cā haue any doubt therof, by reasō of the Iustice of God, wherby euery man shall receaue, saith he, according to his works good or bad, according to his merits or demerits:Eccles. Hierarch. c. 7. p. 2. Iustus verò rursum Deus vt omnibus secundum meritum retribuens dicitur, rectam{que} mensuram, & pulchritudinem, & ordinem, & dispositionem, & omnes distributiones at{que} ordinationes vnicui{que} se∣gregans iuxta definitionem verè iustissimam, & omnibus proprij sin∣gulorum operis author existens. And a little after: Operepretium
est cognoscere diuinam Iustitiam in hoc omnino esse veram iustitiam, quod omnibus quae sua sunt distribuit pro singulorum merito, & cuius{que} naturam seruat in suo ordine at{que} virtute. And Agayne: Ita{que} vt verum dicam, hoc magis est diuina iustitiae proprium nequaquā emol∣lire ac destruere optimorum virtutem masculam, rerum materialium largitione; ne{que} si quis id agee conetur, abs{que} adiutorio linquere, sed illos in praeclaro inflexibili{que} statu solidare, & ipsis, quum tales fue∣rint, reddere secundum meritum. Can this holy Father speake more playnly? Can he prayse more highly the merits of good Works? can he recommend more earnestly the care of good works? Is not this doctrine far different from that blasphemous doctrine of Caluin who impiously & filthily denieth Chryst to haue merited?Lib. 2. Instit. c. 17 Sect. 6. Quaerere verò an sibi ipse me∣ruerit Christus (quod faciūt Lōbardus & Scholastici, meaning vs Catholiks) non minùs stulta est curiositas, quàm temeraria definitio. Directly against S. Paul, who teacheth that Christ did merit by his death and passion:Philip. 2. v. 8. To haue a name aboue euery name, he humbled himself: and became obedient vnto the death, euen the death of the Crosse. Wherfore God hath also highly exalted him, and giuen him a name aboue euery name. That the Ministers haue falsified the Bible in sundry places, which proue good workes, and the merites therof. The second Section: THE holy Catholike Church hath euer taught, that Iustification consisteth in true faith and good works, and not in only faith, as the Ministers teach: for this cause the Ministers suppresse the very name & word of Iustificatiō in such places where it signifieth the keeping of the Com∣mandements, or the Law of God; as in that place of S. Luke:Luc. 1. v. 6. . Both were iust before God, and walked in all the Com∣mandments and iustifications of our Lord without reproofe: In om∣nibus iustificationibus. Where the Ministers haue taken away the word Iustifications, to the end that the simple people should not thinke, that our iustification before God consis∣teth in true Faith, and the keeping of Gods Commande∣ments,
for the which cause they haue put in the word or∣dinances, in place of the word iustifications. But I pray you, why translate you ordinances, and auoide the word iustifica∣tions? Signifyeth not the Greeke word, , iustifica∣tion, , iustus? Doth not S. Luke testify that Zacharias and Elizabeth were both iust, because they walked in all the iustifications of our Lord? Lykewise yee haue cor∣rupted that place of S. Paul:Rom. 4. v. 20. If the vncircumcised keep the iustifications of the law. Of the which blasphemous corrup∣tions of yours, Beza your prime Minister giueth reason say∣ing:Annot. in 1. c. Luc. That he reiected the word Iustification, to auoyde the cauillation of the Papists, which might be made by this word against iustification by faith only. Is this vpright dealing in translating the word of God, to corrupt it manifestly when it maketh for the Catholiks? Againe, where the Scripture maketh mention of the iustifications or good works of the Saints, as:Reuel. 19. v. 8. for the silke is the iustification of Saints. The Ministers translate, the righteousnes of Saints: they could not say for shame, ordinance of Saints, as they said before: they would not say, iustification of Saints, with the Catholike Church, but rather, righteousnes, though the same Greeke word be in all the former places. But I pray you good Countrymen why turne yee, they were both iust, in S Luke before cited, & not, they were both righteous, and yet in this foresaid place yee tran∣slate, the righteousnes of Saints, though the same Greeke words be, , and . 2. I intreat the Catholike Reader to consider the double and pernicious dealing of the Ministers, who when the word lust is ioyned with Faith, then they vse the word Iust, and not righteous: asRom. 1. v. 17. The iust shal liue by faith, to make the ignorant belieue that man is iustified by faith only. But when the word iust or vniust is ioyned with good workes then they vse not the word iust but righteous, or righteousnes, to make the simple people thinke that man is not iustified by good works: as,Heb. 6. v. 10. . For God is not vniust to forget your good workes, where the Ministers haue translated; God is not vnrigh∣teous. Agayne S. Paul to signify that God is obliged (since he hath ingaged himselfe to vs by his promise) of iustice to
giue vs a reward for our good works done by his grace & mercy, sayth:2. Tim. . v. 8. Henceforth is layed vp for me a crown of Iustice, which our Lord the iust iudge shal giue me at that day: Where the Ministers haue put in the word righteous and righteousnes, for iust and Iustice. For if that place of S. Paul were rightly translated, it would signify, that men are iustly crowned in Heauen for their good works done in this world, and that it is Gods iustice so to do, & that he will do so, because he is a iust iudge, as the ancient Fathers (namely the Greeke doctours) do interpret and expone, and that so far, that one of them sayth:Oecum. in 2. Ep. c. 1. ad Thess. See heere, to suffer for Chryst procureth the kingdome of Heauen according to iust Iudgement. And yet ac∣cording to his grace and mercy, conforme to that saying of S. Augustine:Aug. de Gratia. & lib. Ar∣bc. c. 6. How should God render or repay as a iust Iudge, vnles he had giuen it as a mercifull Father? Where S. Augustine discouereth the third corruption of the Ministers in the fo∣resaid place not only saying, righteous Iudge, for iust Iudge, but also putting the word giue a crown of Iustice, for render a crown of Iustice vnto me: for so it is in the Greeke, he will render or repay, reddet mihi Dominus in illa die: that is, a thing due & deserued, which hath relation to works going before.Theo∣phil. vpon this place. The Apostle said not (sayth Theophilact) he will giue, but he will render or repay, as a certayne debt. 3. The other place which they haue corrupted is:Rom. 8. v. 18. I belieue that the afflictions of this tyme are not equall to the glory which shalbe shewed in vs, because the afflictions are short, the glory eternall, the afflictions small and few, the glory great & aboue measure. Now the Protestants to perswade the Reader, that there is no worthynes in our good works or afflictions in respect of that heauenly felicity, turne thus in some of their Bibles:Bible 1577. , non sunt con∣dignae ad futuram gloriam. I am certaynly persuaded that the afflictions of this tyme are not worthy of the Glory which shalbe she∣wed vpon vs. In the which place there be three notable cor∣ruptions. 1. I am certaynly persuaded, for, I suppose, I belieue. 2. are not worthy, for, are not equall, as Beza their prime Mi∣nister turneth, Statuo minimè esse paria, for the Greeke word, sayth he, rightly and properly is spoken of such things, as being weighed, are found of one weight. The third cor∣ruption
is, of the glory, for, to the glory. And though our af∣flictions cannot be comparable or equall to that eternal fe∣licity, as the Apostle sayth heere, yet they may merit and deserue the same: as the afflictions and passions of our Sa∣uiour Christ Iesus were not equall in substance, though in valour, to that eternal glory which he obteyned to his mā∣hood, and to vs therby; yet did he deserue & merit eternall glory, not only for himselfe, but for all the world: yea by the least affliction he suffered, he did merit and deserue all this. Which is against the doctrine ofLib. 3. Iust. c. 11. num. 18.10 &c. 15. n. 2. & 3. Caluin, and his fellow Minister Molineus who impiously speaking of Christs merits sayth:Molin. in 51. part. harm. vt refert Pe∣uard Dial. 4. Haeres. 31. Errarunt Monachi & Doctores Papistici, vrgentes merita tum incarnationis, tum natiuitatis, tum tentationum & af∣flictionum Christi; nihil haec omnia proderant nobis, nihil poterant. Can there be a greater blasphemy affirmed? 2. The pleasure which a man hath in committing adultery is not compa∣rable nor equall to the eternall torments of hell, yet that action of adultery doth demerit and deserue the same: and shal God be more prone to punish man eternally for a tran∣sitory bad action, then to reward him for a good action? 3. The Apostle by making an incomparable difference be∣twixt the glory to come with the afflictiōs of this life, doth exhort vs Christians more vehemently to suffer all those afflictions couragiously and willingly. But if he had said, as the Ministers do translate, the afflictions are not worthy of heauen, you are neuer the nearer Heauen for them, only belieue; this had not bene a good motiue to exhort them, but rather to discourage them. 4. The Apostle when he will in other places encourage the Christians to suffer pa∣tiētly all sorts of afflictions and persecutions for their Reli∣gion, vseth this argument: That the persecutions though transitory, yet they worke and merit that eternall fe∣licity:2. Corā 4. v. 17. . Our tribulation which presently is for a moment and light worketh or causeth aboue measure exceedingly, an eternall weight of glory in vs. Which place the Ministers haue corrupted. Re∣marke, I say, the comparison betwixt short afflictions and eternall felicity, and yet the one worketh the other, that is, causeth, purchaseth, meriteth, and deserueth the other:
euen as a little seed not being comparable to the great tree, yet causeth it, and bringeth orth; so our tribulaion and good workes otherwayes incomparable to that eternall glory, yet by the vertue of Gods grace working in vs, wor∣keth, causeth, and meriteth the said glory. Yea the very. Greeke word which the Ministers turne heer obscurly Worketh, in other places. Cor. 7. v. 10. they turne playnly Causeth. De∣claring therby (though against their will) that our tribu∣lations and good workes are cause of that eternall felicity, yet a subalterne cause. 5. That holy and ancient Father S. Cyprian will decyde the whole matter, and declare the meaning of the Apostle, his words be:Epist. 6 O what maner of day shall come (sayth he) my brethren, when our Lord shall recount theSingulo∣rum meri∣ta. merites of euery one, and pay vs the reward or stipend of faith & deuotion. And a little after: For that we shall receaue greater things then heere eyther we do, or suffer, the Apostle pronounceth, saying: the passions of this tyme are not condigne, or comparable to the glory to come. Likewyse S. Augustine:Serm. 37 de san∣ctis. The exceeding goodnes of God hath prouyded this, that the labours should soone be ended, but the re∣wardes of the merits should endure without end: The Apostle testi∣fying: The passions of this tyme are not comparable &c. For we shall receaue greater blisse, then are the afflictions of all passions whatsoe∣uer. Where these holy Fathers with many others make mention of the very word, Merit. Which that prime and branded Minister for the sinne of Sodomy Caluin himself testifieth, saying:Lib. 3. Instit. c. 15. num. 2. vsi sunt fateor passim vetusti Ecclesiae scrip∣tores, meaning the word Merit. 3. Now I would intreat the vnpassionate Reader to remarke diligently how that this poynt of doctrine of good workes with many others which the Catholiks do teach, tendeth fully to the increase of piety, and reforma∣tion of manners, to good life and conuersation. Contrary, the Protestants doctrine against good works and merits, against the keeping of the Commandemēts &c. disposeth a man to all sort of wickednes: for the Protestants Gospell and doctrine denyeth a man to haue free will, to do good, to absteyne from sinne; teacheth the Commandements of God to be impossible to be kept, yea with the grace of God:
And who will euer assay to do, which he hath not power to will, or possibility to performe? And who can with any courage endeauour to keep that which he knoweth before hand to be impossible to be kept? Likewyse the Ministers hold, that God doth purpose, decree and cooperate to the obstinacy of the wicked, and that whatsoeuer he wil, must of necessity ensue. That God doth creat some and ordeyne them (not hauing any regard to their bad behauiour) to the eternall fyre of hell. Which blasphemy is fully against the tender bowells of his infinite mercy.VVitaker cont. 1. quast. 5. The Protestants auowe all our good works, euen the best, to be stayned with sinne, and displeasing to God, and therfore do merit damnation: A blasphemy repugnant to the very light of nature, reason, and word of God. In like manner many of the Protestants directly do teach, that a man once iustified cannot loose his iustice whatsoeuer wickednes he doth cō∣mit. That God doth not impute to the faithfull the vncle∣anes of their dishonest lyues: Could any Mahometan desire more pleasing dreames to flesh and blood? The Mi∣nisters allow no distinction of veniall and mortall sinnes, yea euen the sodayne and inuoluntary motions of the flesh they affirme to be of their owne nature damnable and deadly, yet if they haue faith (that is a forged persuasion of their owne) there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Iesus, say they. Doth not this doctrine plane the way to all wickednes, to all iniquity, and mischiefe? for that the Protestant who persuadeth himselfe, that no Am∣bition, Pryde, Pleasure, no wrong done to his Neigh∣bour, can be hurtfull vnto him and procure damnation if he belieue and haue faith: The Protestant I say, who doth belieue the first motions or euill suggestions to be deadly and mortall sinnes, as well as the consent or consumma∣tion of them; what stop or barre can such a man haue to bsteyne from his violent passions or carnall desyres? For he may reason thus with himself: since I am already drow∣ned in all sort of sinnes, since I continually transgresse the Commandements, since my first motions are deadly sins though I consent not to them, since the best worke I can
do, is nothing but abhomination before God, what doth it auayle me to striue against the streame? what doth it a∣uayle me to ayme to do what is impossible? All this is con∣firmed by a Protestāt his owne testimony who sayth thus:Andre∣as Muscu∣lus Domi∣nica 1. Aduent. The case thus standeth with vs Protestants, that if any be desirous to see a great rable of knaues, of turbulent persons, deceitfull co∣siners, vsurers, let him go to any Citty where the Ghospell is purely pre∣ached (as to London or Edenburgh) and he shall find them there by multitudes. It is more manifest then the day light, that there was ne∣uer amongst the Ethniks, Turks, or other infidels more vnbrydled and vnruly personnes, with whome all vertue and honesty is quite extinct, then are amongst the professours of the Ghospell. These abhomina∣ble fruits of this new preached Ghospell be the cause wher∣fore many of the Protestants and Puritans, specially of the Ministry dye desperatly, which M. Iohn Knox a Prime Minister witnesseth plainly:Knox in the or∣der and doctrine of the gene∣rall Past &c. holden at Eden∣burgh. 1565. True it is (sayth he) that thisid est, poi∣son. venome of desperation is neuer throughly purged from our harts, so long as we cary this mortall carcasse. 4. Contrary to these blasphemyes, the Catholike doctrine leadeth a man to all sort of vertue; as the do∣ctrine of freedome of will maketh a man carefull to fulfill the law of God. The doctrine of reprobation and damna∣tion, that it proceeds from our selues and not from God, maketh a man carefull to do some good workes & men∣torious of heauen. The doctrine, that the fauour of God once gotten may be lost, maketh a man wary and cir∣cumspect in his behauiour. The doctrine, that Concupis∣cence without consent is not sinne, but stoutly resisted is occasion of merit, maketh a man carefull to gaynstand the same. Likewise the Catholike doctrine exhorteth men to the mortification of their passions, denying of them∣selues, contempt of honours, riches & worldly pleasures. We preach voluntary pennance, chastisement of our bo∣dyes, watching, fasting, contrition, and satisfaction for our sinnes. We incite and stir vp our followers not only to the keeping of Gods Commandements, but also to the imbracing of his Euangelicall Counsels, to religious Po∣uerty, Chastity, and Obedience: to such vnion with God
and holynesse of life, that those who imbrace & feruently put in practice the exhortations of our Catholike Church, seeme rather to lead in this mortall flesh angelicall, then humane lyues. The 16. 17. & 18. Article. 1. That the custome to fast Lent. 2. And some other dayes. 3. And to abstaine sometymes from certaine meates, was vniuersally in vse in this first Age. CHAP. IX. HAVING spoken of good workes and the merits therof in generall, it follo∣weth to speake of some good works in particular: as of the keeping of Lent &c. Which Caluin with the rest of his fel∣low Ministers abhorreth greately, as those who haue consecrated their belly to Bacchus, their body to Venus, their Pen to the inuention of prophane noueltyes and contra∣dictions:Harm. in Matth. 4. v. 1. & 2 Mera stultitta fuit (sayth Caluin) iciunium Qua∣dragesimae. And agayne:Lib. 4. Inst. c. 12. num. 16. Ieiunium per se nullius momenti est. The contrary Caluin himselfe, alwayes tossed with the spirit of contradiction, as a wyly Fox teacheth, affirming that the Church of God hath power to institute & ordayne fasting, solemne supplications, and such outward ceremo∣nyes. Rliqua pars disciplinae quae clauium potestate propriè conti∣netur, in eo est,Lib. 4. Inst. c. 12. num. 14. vt pro temporum necessitate plebem exhortentur pasto∣res vel ad ieunia, vel ad solemnes supplicationes, vel ad alia humilita∣tis, penitentia ac fidei exercitia: quorum nec tempus nec modus, nec forma praescribitur verbo dei, sed in Ecclesiae iudicio relinquitur. Huius quo{que} partis obseruatio, sicuti est vtilis, ita veteri Ecclesiae ab ipsis vs{que} Apostolis sēper fuit vsitata. Could Caluin speake more playnly
for the institution of Lent, and other fasting dayes, and sundry other ceremonyes vsed in the Caholike Church? It is certayne that the Bible in diuers places commandeth vs to fast:Ioel. 2. v. 22. Therfore also now the Lord sayth; Turne you vnto me with all your hearts, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning. Which Commandement bein morall, yea natu∣rall, appertayneth as well to the Christian Church, as to the Synagogue of the Iewes, as learnedlySermo 4. de leui∣nio septimi mensis. S. Leo tea∣cheth, and the Scripture it selfe by the testimony of our Sauiour witnesseth:Matth. 6. v. 17. But when thou fastest, annoynt thy head, and wash thy face, that thou seeme not vnto men to fast, but vnto thy Father which is in secret: and hy Father which seeth in secret, will reward thee openly. Which place though the Ministers haue corrupted, yet it sheweth, that since our Sauiour therin maketh mention of some forme and fashion how to fast, much more he commandeth vs to fast, to pray, and to giue almes, as S. Augustine wysely deduceth saying:Aug. Ep. 86. ad Casulanū. I, consi∣dering with my selfe the Euangelicall and Apostolicall doctrine of the new Testament, do find, and see that fasting therin is commanded. If then fasting be commanded vnto vs by the holy Scripture, though the precise fashion, forme, and dayes to fast are not therin prescrybed, it appertayneth to the holy Church (as Caluin himselfe before hath declared) to prescrybe and determine the forme, fashion, and tyme to fast, it being ma∣nifest amongst the learned, that modus praecepti non cadit sub praecepto. 2. S. Paul likewise recommendeth to the Christians earnestly the vse of fasting, with sūdry other good workes, which if they were not in our power to do, & meritorious, in vayne would the Apostle recommend them, in vayne would we performe them:2. Cor. 6. v. 4. In al things we exhibit and shew our selues as the Ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities; in distresses, in strypes, in prisons, in tumults, in labour, by watching, by fasting, by chastity, by knowledge. &c. Which place the Ministers haue corrupted three seuerall wayes. 3. M. Iohn Knox an Apostata Fryar or Monke, yea one of the most seditious Ministers which Scotland hath affoarded, in a little Treatise of his concerning publicke
fasting, as he sheweth intollerable ignorance and horrible lyes, so he taketh vpon him to institute & ordayne publick fastes:In the order and doctrine of the ge∣nerall Fast appointed by the ge∣nerall as∣sembly of the Church of Scotlād, holden at Edēburgh the 25. of December 1565. The power, (sayth he) that we haue to proclayme this fasting is not of man, but of God &c. Truely if Knox take vpon him such vsurped power without any warrant of the Bi∣ble, which in no place makes mentiō of any power parti∣cularly giuen to him, much more such power should be granted to the Church of God, the holy spouse of Chryst, the authority wherof must needs be infallible. Where I would haue the good Reader to consider, that the Church of God, in this our purpose may be considered two wayes. First, as it is a company of men contayning in it many le∣arned and vertuous men, not considering in it any spe∣ciall assistance of Gods spirit, and so doubtles the authority it hath is not infallible, but only is a probable motiue to make a wyse man giue human credit to that which it hol∣deth. Secondly, it may be considered as it is a company of men assisted infallibly by Gods spirit, sent and appoyn∣ted by God, hauing commission to teach others, who are warranted and commanded to heare it, and threatned, if they heare it not to be worthy of eternall damnation:Matt. 18. v. 17. Who refuseth to heare the Church, let him be to thee, as a Hea∣then and Publicane. This second way then, I consider the Church, when I say the authority therof is infallible in in∣stituting any publick fast or such thing. But of this infalli∣bility of the Church I will speake more at length in some other place: This only I say for the present, that all the Ministers togeather shall not be able to improue by the ex∣presse word of their owne corrupted Bible Lent-fasting, nor yet shall they be able to proue their Pharisaicall forme of fasting, in eating of flesh vpon fasting-dayes, in taking two meales those dayes, and such other, by any expresse word of the Bible. As for their consequences drawen out of the Bible, I make no accompt of them, because such consequences of the Ministers are nothing els, but Super∣stitions and Pharisaicall inuentions, old Heresies condem∣ned in those whome they themselues do acccompt to be Heretiks, and ministeriall traditions preached to the igno∣rant
sort with a faire shew of words. But let the wyse Rea∣der, who hath care to saue his soule, remarke diligently what the holy Fathers of this age speake of Lent-fasting. The first Section. The Testimonies of the holy Fathers of this first Age, con∣cerning the fasting of Lent &c. S. CLEMENT in his Apostolicall Canons witnesseth, that he who did not kept Lent-fasting, and who did not fast wensday and fryday, should be deposed frō his of∣fice, vnles bodily sicknes excused him:Canon. 60. iuxta distinctio∣nem Tur∣riani. ex∣tant Tom. 1. Concil. . Si quis Episcopus, aut Presbyter, aut Diaconus, aut Hypodiaconus, aut Lector, aut Cantor sanctam Quadragesimam non ieiunat, aut quartam feriam, aut sex∣tam, deponatur, nisi imbecillitas corporis obstet; sin veròlacius sit, ex∣communicetur. And agayne, he sheweth, That Christ∣mas-day was kept in this Age, lykewise Vp-holy day, and the fasting in lent:Lib. 4. Const. c. 11. latinae edi∣tionis, Graec. c. 13 Dies festos agitate fratres, ac primùm quidem diem Na∣talis, qui vigesimo quinto die mensis noni celebretur: post hunc dies Epiphaniae in maximo honore sit, in quo Dominus Diuinitatem suam nobis patefecit, is vero dies sit sexto mensis decimi; post quos dies ser∣uandum vobis est ieiunium. Quadragesimae, quod vitae Christi & legis latae recordationem continet. Yea Chemnitius a famous Pro∣testant confesseth playnly that the holy Fathers S. Ambro∣sius, Maximus,Exam. Concil. Trident. part. 2. Theophilus, Hieronymus, and others do affirme, the fast of Lent to be an Apostolicall tradition. And other Protestants do acknowledge, how that in the primitiue Church Aerius a famous Heretike (for deny∣ing the Diuinity of Christ) was specially condemned for denying of Lent-fasting, and of other fasting-dayes; for the which Heresy and others, likewiseS Aug. haeres. 33. S. Augustine andEpiph. haeres. 75. S. Epiphanius condemne Aerius as an Heretike. Moreouer as touching the fashion and maner of fasting, the same S. Clement witnesseth the custome to haue bene in his tyme:Lib. 5. Const. A∣post. c. 19. 2. recog. l. 7. To absteyne from flesh on fasting dayes; affirming further, the example of S. Peter in that forme of fasting.Euseb. l. 2. hist. c. 1. Euse∣bius a famous and ancient history-wryter, witnesseth the
same fashion to haue bene kept amongst the Christians from the beginning. Wherby our Protestants are conuicted of nouelty in vsing flesh vpon fasting dayes. 2. S. Augustine affirmeth, that in his tyme, he who did fast vpon the Sonday offended God, fasting against the custome of the holy Church:Epist. 85. ad Ca∣sulanum. Quis non Deum offendet, si velit cum scandalo totius, quae vbi{que} dilatata est, Ecclesiae, die Dominico ieiunare? Tertullian:Tertul. de corona militis. c. 3. To fast on Sonday we esteeme a sinne. And playnly the Councel of Carthage holden in S. Augustines tyme, auoweth those not to be Catholiks, who do fast v∣pon Sonday, and consequently condemneth all the Puri∣tans as Heretiks for fasting on the Sonday:Concil. 4. Carth. Can. 64. Qui dominico die studiose ieiunat, non credatur Catholicus. AndEpiph. haeres. 75. S. Epi∣phanius auoweth, that the Aerians were condemned as He∣retikes for fasting on the Sonday, and banketting on the fryday & saturday, which was also the custome of the Ma∣nichees, as witnesseth S. Augustine in the foresaid place. Do not the Protestants the same now adayes? 3. S. Ignatius:Epist. ad Philipp. prope finē. Disdayne not the fast of Lent, for it contayneth the imitation of our Sauiour Iesus Christ. Quadragesimā ne spernatis, imitationem enim continet conuersationis Domini. And agayne: Ne negligatis ieiunare quarta feria & sexta, tiborum re∣liquias pau peribus elargientes. The which holy custome of fas∣ting on fryday was exactly kept in Scotland from our first conuersion, that is, to the yeare of Christ 1560. Which custome also S. Aidanus a holy Bishop of Scotland, and Apostle of Northumberland brought first into England, as witnessethBeda l. 3. hist. An∣glic. c. 5. Beda. The fasting or abstinence from flesh on Wednesday is yet kept exactly by innumerable Ca∣tholiks euery where. 4. The same holy Father in the foresaid epistle con∣demneth of sinne those, who do fast on the Sonday: the which to be S. Ignatius true and sincere Epistle sundry fa∣mous Protestants do witnes, asVVhit∣gift in his defence p. 102. Whitgift,Alled∣ged ibidē. Cartwright, and M.In his Ecclesiast. polic. l. 5. sect. 72. Hooker. As for other fasting dayes called quatuor tempora, or Ember dayes & vigils, sundryeo Magnus serm. 2. de ieiun. Pen∣tec. & ser. 8. de ieiun. septimi mensis. Theophil. in Epist. 3. Paschal. holy Fathers make mention of them, as being in vse in the primitiue Church: It being the custome of the same holy Church to
absteyne from flesh on these tasting dayes. The which doctrine I conclude with that famous saying of S. Au∣gustine, speaking of vnwritten traditions, and in particular of not rebaptizing Heretiks:Aug. de Baptis. cōtra Don. l. 5 c. 23. & Epist. 118. ad ianuar. The Apostles writings comman∣ded nothing hereof, but that custome which was opposed herein a∣gaynst Cyprian, is to be belieued to proceed from their tradition, as many things be, which the whole Church holdeth, & are therfore wel belieued to be commanded of the Apostles, although they be not writtē. Could S. Augustine speake more playnly in defence of A∣postolicall traditions, wherof this of fasting is one? yea the chief poynts of the Ministers owne religion is nothing els but manifest traditions, or rather new inuentions of the Ministers, without any warrant of the expresse word of God: as, that fasting should be kept on sūday. 2. kneeling at the communion 3. the festiuall day of Christmasse and o∣thers which they now keep. 4. That there is only two Sa∣craments. 5. That the Scots Bible is the word of God. 6. Man is only iustified by faith. 7. Ministers may excommu∣nicate. 8. Ministers should haue wyues, and such. Wherof there is no mentiō in the expresse word of the Bible. That the Ministers haue corrupted the Bible in sundry places which auow Apostolicall Traditions, wherof Fasting is one. The second Section. THOVGH the fasting of Lent be not in expresse words in the Bible, as the denyall therof also is not in ex∣presse words: yet it is easie to deduce the same out of the Bible, as before is mentioned: for the which cause it hath bene euer accompted as one of the holy, ancient, and Apo∣stolicall traditions, which are very odious to the Ministers who will no wayes receaue vnwritten traditions, though their religion be no other thing, but a rapsodie of Ministe∣riall traditions. 2. Remarke Catholike reader, that Tradition is no other thing, but a doctrine taught verbally, or by word, and communicated from one to another: for the which
cause the Scripture in seuerall places commandeth vs to follow the holy and Apostolicall traditions of our forfa∣thers. Now the word Tradition in the new Testamēt is takē two seuerall wayes: first in a bad sense and meaning. 2. in a good sense and meaning, as when we are commanded to follow traditions. When the word Tradition is taken in an euill sense, then the Ministers translate alwayes Tradition, to make all Traditions indifferently odious to the ignorant people: as,Matth. 15. v. 3. Why do yee also transgresse the commandement of God by your tradition? And agayne:Matth. 15. v. 6. Thus haue yee made the commandement of God of no authority by your traditiō Where our Sauiour condēneth traditiōs which are against the expresse word of God. Here then the Ministers do translate Traditiō. But now on the other side whē we are cōmāded to follow & belieue vnwritten traditiōs, thē they turne not the word tradition, but rather ordinances, preachings, instructions, iusti∣tutions, to the end the ignorant people should not find the word tradition taken in a good sense in the Bible. As,2. Thess. 2. v. 15. Therfore brethren stand fast and keep the, that is saith Be∣za on this place, keep diligently, as it is in the Syriak Vecham∣senu. traditions which ye haue bene taught, eyther by word or by our epistle. And agayne:2. Thes∣sal. 3. v. 6. We command you brethren, in the name of our Lord Iesus Chryst, that ye withdraw your selfe from euery brother that walketh inordi∣natly, and not after the Tradition which he receaued of vs. And a∣gayne:1. Cor. 11. v. 2. . Now brethren I command you, that you remember all my things, and keep the traditions as I delyuered them to you. Heer then the Ministers do neuer translate the word tradition, but craftily and deceitfully the word ordinances, and instructions, or any word els rather then tradition, to the end they may make the reader to beleue that we should not follow tra∣ditions. Who would thinke the malice and partiality of the Ministry against traditions, against the word of God, against the Bible to be so great, as to conceale impiously the word tradition, when it is taken in a good sense, and to translate it in other places when it is taken in an euill sense, the Greeke word being one in all those places? Can there be a more impious forme of proceeding? They brag, boast, & preach to the ignorant people and Nobility, that they wil follow nothing but the greeke text, that they
will translate faithfully the Greeke and Hebrew text: yet in effect they abandon both the one and the other when it pleaseth them. Besides this impious forme of proocee∣ding in not translating faithfully the Greeke text; in other places, they haue craftely put in their Bibles the word tra∣dition when it is not in the Greeke or Syriake, yea in no copy at all of the Greeke and originall text, as:Coloss. 2. v. 20. Why, as though yee liued in the world,. are ye burthened with traditions? Where they haue put in the word burthened & the word tra∣ditions, which are no wayes in the Greeke nor in the Latin, where it is, decernitis. Tell vs playnly: Yee protest to haue skill in the Greeke toung and to translate according to the Greeke text, tell vs then whether this Greeke word,  do signify tradition, and  to be burthened with traditions? Name vs any holy Father, ancient wryter, kingdome or nation who euer before the coming of Cal∣uin so impiously did corrupt the Bible, and translate that place as you do? Iustify your translation if you can, eyther out of Fathers or Lexicons, and be ashamed of your igno∣rance and malice. Because ye put the word tradition where it is not in the Greeke, and would not put it in those places before cited where ye know that it is most euidently in the Greeke. Know ye not that the instructions of Plato, or Aristotle cannot be called Traditions, because Traditions do signify and contayne some antiquity and succession of tyme, some vnwritten doctrine proceeding from one to another? Likewyse are ye not ashamed to translate in S. Peters Epistle, thus:1. Pet. 1. v. 18. . Knowing that yee were not redeemed with corruptible things, as siluer and gold, from your vayne conuer∣sation, receaued by the traditions of the Fathers? Yee know that it is not so in the Greeke, but rather thus: From your vayne conuersation delyuered by the Fathers. Neuer a word of tradition. Can there be any saluation for you, or for those that do follow you, who so impiously do corrupt the Bible? feare yee not that horrible sentence pronounced against you, and against those who allowe, reade, and accompt of your corrupted Bible?Reuel. 22. v. 18. If any man shall adde vnto these things, God shall adde vnto him the plagues that are written in this
booke. And againe,Prou. 30 v. 6. Put nothing to his words, least he reproue thee, and thou be found a lyar, And againe:Deut. 22. v. 32. Thou shall put nothing thereto, nor take ought therefrom. In other places translating the same Greeke word, yee make no mention of Traditions, as in S. Luke 1. Chap. Vers. 2. and els where. 3. If any Minister reply, that our vulgar Latin tran∣slation hath here the word Tradition, what is that to the purpose? for you professe and protest to translate faithfully the Greeke, and not our vulgar Latin Edition, so great is your partiality and inconstancy to follow the old Latin translation though it differ from the Greeke; and an o∣ther tyme you will not follow it though it be all one with the Greeke, as in sundry places before alledged. But all this yee do without shame or conscience, only to frame your translations to your Errours and Heresies, deceauing therby those who are ignorant of the Greeke and Hebrew languages, casting them, in following your translations, into the pit of eternall damnation. Yee protest to them to follow the Greeke and Hebrew; is it the Greeke text that induceth you to translate blasphemously ordinances for traditions, traditions for decrees, Ordinances for Iustifications, Elder for Preist, Graue for Hell, Image for Idol? which abho∣minable forme of proceeding, proueth you to be manifest heretiks, and sworne enemyes to the true word of God and Scripture.
The 19. 20. & 21. Article. 1. That the custome of the Catholike Church in this first age was, that Church-men and Religi∣gious men should not be marryed. 2. But rather lead a single and chast life. 3. And that the vowing of chastity, pouerty, and obedience was lawfull, and in vse. CHAP. X. AFTER the treatise of Lent-fasting follo∣weth accordingly to speake a little of single life and vowing of chastity, spe∣cially by Church men, which the Pro∣testants do abhorre greately, inuiting the politike MagistrateIn the Confession of Fayth of the Prote∣stants of Scotland set out with the Psalme-Book. To roote out al doctrines of Diuels, vowes of single life &c. Which abhominable doctrine they learned of Caluin their prime Minister, and of Luther, who as a filthy Epicurean sayth:Luth. Serm. de Matrim. tom. 5. O∣perum Lu∣ther. As it is not in my power that I be not a man, so it is not in my power to be without a woman. Vt non est in meis viribus situm, vt vir non sim, tam non est etiam mei iuris, vt abs{que} muliere sim. And agayne: Verbum enim hoc quod deus ait, cres∣cite & multiplicamini, non est praeceptum, sed plus quàm praeceptum; Diuinum puto opus, tam necessarium, quàm vt masculus sim, magis{que} necessarium quàm edere, bibere, purgare, mucum emungere, somno & excubijs intentum esse. Could Epicurus himselfe, or any Turke speake more profanely then this Apostle of the Protestāts, whose common prouerbe was,Luth. loco citato. If the wife will not, let the maide come, si non vult vxor, veniat ancilla. The same sayth Caluin in sundry places of his Institutions, contradicting himselfe in his booke of Harmony, where he sayth directly the contrary:Calu. 1. Cor. c. 7. Praeclarum donum est virginitas, fateor. And
againe: (e) Summa totius disputationis huc redit, meliorem esse cae∣libatum coniugio, quia in illo maior sit libertas, vt expeditius ser∣uiant homines Deo. Where he sayth also that ancient holy Fa∣thers made great accompt of single life. But let vs leaue these Epicureans, and come to the point of the matter. 2. The Catholike Church teacheth that neyther in the old or new Law, any man was, or is bound to vow eyther chastity, pouerty, or such: but that it is, and euer was a Counsell & not a Commandement: yet a thing of great deuotion and perfection in the old & new Law, intrinse∣cally belonging & furthering to the true worship of God; which I proue. In a vow there be two things to be cōside∣red: the one is, the good which is vowed, called the materiall part, for example, fasting, praying; the other, the promise it selfe made to God, which is the formall part: the material parts do belōg vnto their seuerall vertues, but the promise and fulfilling of the vow is a substantiall part of the worship of God: the reason is, because by promising and vowing any good thing to God, we acknowledge and professe therby that God is the soueraigne goodnes it selfe, supreme verity and worthy of al sort of holy seruice: in performing also that which we haue vowed, we testify that God is full of Maiesty, Reuerend, and Dreadfull; and consequently, that all promises and vowes made to God righteously are to be accomplished diligently, & without delay, because by those vowes we honour and worship him. By the contrary, they much dishonour God, who breake with him and keep not their vowes. If then all other vertuous seruice done to the glory of God be parts of his true worship, much more vowes are to be thought parts of the true worship of God: wherof it followes necessarily that at all tymes vowes were, and may be vsed; and that they were in practise before the Law of Moyses, it is eui∣dent by that vow which Iacob made of setting vp a stone, and of paying the tenthes of all his goods:Genes. 28. v. 20. Then Iacob vowed a vow, saying, if God will be with me and will keep me in this iourney which I go &c. Which vow of Iacob was well taken by God, was of an indifferent matter, and done freely by
Iacob without any compulsion or Commandement. I aske of the Ministry any expresse text of the Bible, which maketh as playnly against vowing, as this maketh for vo∣wing: which the Ministers shall neuer be able to do. And agayne:Genes. 31. v. 13. I am the God of Bethell, where thou anoyntedst the pillar, where thou vowedst a vw vnto me. Where God maketh great accompt of Iacobs vow. Likewise the Prophet Da∣uid doth inuite vs to vow, & keep our vowes:Psalm. 76. v. 21. Vow and performe vnto the Lord your God all yee that be round about him. Yea the Prophet I say foretelleth, that the Christians shall vow vnto God, and therby worship God, ioyning vowes with sacrifice and oblation, which are a speciall part of the worship of God:Isay 19. v. 21. And the Lord shallbe knowen of the Egypti∣ans, and the Egyptians shall know the Lord in that day, and do a sacrifice and oblation, and shall vow vowes vnto the Lord, and per∣forme them. See the ProphetsIonas. 1. v. 16. Ionas,Baruch. 6. v. 34. Baruch, andIerem. 44. v. 25. Ieremias, who playnly do make mention of vowing and performing therof. Aske of the Ministry as playne words out of the Bible which make against vowes, which dis∣commende and condemne vowes, as they themselues do by word and writ, by life and behauiour. 3. As for the new Testament and Law of Grace, did not S. Paul make a Vow, worshipping therby God, and that in a very indifferent mater?Actes 18. v. 18. After that he had shorne his head in Cenchra, for he had a vow. Here we haue expresse words out of the Bible for vowing; let the Ministers, if they can, giue me as expresse words against vowing, since they teach that nothing should be belieued but the ex∣presse word of the Bible.Contr. 3. p. 244. Nihil credendum nisi quod ex∣presso Dei verbo continetur, sayth Danaeus a prime Minister. And Beza:Beza contra Hesbus. p. 275. Nihil aliud quàm purum Verbum scriptum creden∣dum. The Ministers not being able conforme to their Oath and promise, to giue vs the expresse word of the Bible, do thinke it sufficient to pay vs with their sophisticall conse∣quences, wherunto euery one of vs Catholiks may reply iustly with S. Augustine:Lib. de peccat. Merit. c. 20. Credo illa qu in Scripturis sāctis leguntur, non credo ea qua ab hareticis vaenis dicuntur. I beleue that which is read and conteyned in the holy Scripture, I belieue not that
which by vayne heretiks is affirmed. In the meane tyme let vs follow and preferre the consequences, & faith of the holy, learned, and ancient Fathers of this age. The Testimonyes of the holy Fathers of this first Age, concerning Chastity, and single life of Religious Men, and Priests. The first Section. S. DENIS Areopagita in his Ecclesiasticall Hierarchy,Cap. 6. per totum. prayseth greatly Religious and solitary life, wherin the vowes of Chastity, Pouerty, & Obedience, are contey∣ned: he teacheth likewise that the custome of his tyme was, that any man being desirous to leaue the world & become Religious, he was receaued solemnely by some Pastours of the Church, his habit was changed, and he was conse∣crated by certayne prayers & ceremonyes before the whole assembly, which custome is kept to this day. 2. S. Ignatius:Epist. ad Phila∣delphenses. Vxores maritis subditae estote in timore Dei, Virgines Christo in puritate; non abhominantes nuptias, sed id quod praestantius est amplectentes; non in calumniam matrimonij, sed meditādae legis gratia. And a little after, he reckoneth out sun∣dry of the old and new Law, who kept perpetuall Vir∣ginity, as Melchisedec, Iosue, Elias, Elisaeus, Ieremias, Iohn the Baptist, Iohn the Euāgelist, Timothy, Titus, E∣uodius, Clemens, with sundry others, as S. Paul, & Christ his disciples (except S. Peter) which is the reason wher∣fore Caluin himselfe auoweth, that euen from the Apostles the custome was amongst Religious men and Priests to make vowes of Chastity:Inst. l. 4. c. 13. Sect. 17. Hoc, inquit, ab vltima memoria fuit conseruatum, vt se alligarent continentiae voto, qui totos se Do∣mino dicare vellent. And Peter Martyr:De Cae∣libatu & Votis p. 477. Statim ab Apostolo∣rum temporibus nimium tribui coeptum est calibatui &c. 3. The same holy Father Ignatius witnesseth that many monasteries & colleges of virgins were erected in his tyme:Ep. ad Philip. in sine, Saluto Collegium Virginum, & coetum viduarum. And agayne he auoweth that Virgins, Widowes, and Preists, who had consecrated themselues by vowing chastity, should be ho∣nored:
Epist. ad Tarsense. prope finē. Eas, quae in Virginitate vitam agunt, honorate, veluti Christi Sacerdotes: Viduas, quae in sanctimonia, velut altare Dei. Wherwith agreeth that famous testimony of S. Augustine, who wryting against Manicheus, (who as an heretike, condemned vowes with our Protestants, and taught that there were two Gods, one good and another bad) affirmes that S. Paul did moue a Virgin, fit for mariage, to consecrat her selfe to God in keping her Virginity:Contra Faustum Manich. l. 10. c. 4. Ipsi iam timeo A∣postolo ne daemoniorum doctrinam intulisse tunc Iconio videatur, cùm puellam oppignoratam iam thalamo, in amorem, sermone suo, perpe∣tuae virginitatis incendit. Do not our Countrey-Ministers, with those impious Manichees, call single lyfe, the doctrine of deuills? 4. Finally S. Martiall witnesseth,Ep. ad Tholos. c. 8 that he him∣selfe did perswade the holy Virgin Valeria to consecrate by a vow, her virginity to God. AndBaron. in Mar∣tyrol. 11. Septemb. S. Matthew the A∣postle induced S. Iphigenia to do the same. AndAmbr. l. . de Virginib. S. Paul induced S. Tecla a Gentlewoman well borne. And S. Clement a Romā Lady called Flauia Domitilla:Beda in Martyrol. 7. Maij. Quae (sayth Beda) à S. Clemente ob integritatis perseuerantiam fuit consecrata. In lyke manner the holy virgin S. Pudentiana daughter to S. Pudens a Roman Senatour, and Claudia a Scotish Lady (of both whom S.2. Tim. 4 v. 21. vide Ba∣ron. ad 19. Maij. Paul makes mention) vowed their Virginity vnto God. AndIn eius vita in Breuiario Tullensi. S. Mansuetus Bishop of Toul in Lorrayne disciple to S. Peter, a Scot∣tishman borne, perswaded likewise a Gentlewoman of good birth, to vow her Virginity to God. That the Ministers haue corrupted the Bible in sundry places which proue the authority of Priestood, and of Preists, who alwayes led a single a life. The second Section. TO the end that the Gentle Reader may better vnder∣stand the policy and double dealing of the Ministers against the name of Priests (who alwayes led a single life as I shew before) it is to be remarked, that the word Priest,
in Greeke , in latin Presbyter, or Sacerdos, signi∣fieth a Church-man who hath receaued the holy Sacramēt of Orders, and consequently power by the imposition of hands, as witnesseth S. Paul saying:1. Tim. 4. v. 14. Dispyse not the grace that is in thee, which was giuen thee by Prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the company of the Preists. Where the Ministers blasphemously haue translated against all antiquity Elder∣ship. Do the Elders of Edenburgh lay on their hands v∣pon the Ministers when they are chosen? If not, why then do they translate so ignorantly this place? Why haue the Ministers taken out the wordPer gra∣tiam. Grace, translating gist, but to signify that sanctifiing Grace is not giuen by the impo∣sition of hands? Shall the Elders make Ministers and Bi∣shops by the imposition of their hands? for certaynly Ti∣mothy was a Bishop.Ep. ad Trallian. . Is it not euidēt that the most famous and ancient Ecclesiastical wryters who alwayes haue byn, do take the word Priesthood, for the company of Church∣men, and not of Laity? So holy Ignatius disciple to the A∣postles: what is (sayth he) Priestood, but the holy assembly of Bi∣shops, Confessors &c. And againe, he calleth it,Ep. ad Antioch. The holy priesthood, because Priests are dedicated, by reason of their office, to the administration of the holy Sacraments, and to the preaching of the holy word of God. The same witnesseth S.Cypr. l. 3. Ep. 11. Cyprian. S. Hierome calleth the Priests, the Senate of the holy Church:Ep. ad Rusticum. Vide Au∣gust. de ci∣uit. Dei l. 20. c. 10. Ecclesia habet Senatum, coetum Presbyterorum. Yea that Pu∣ritan wryter and Apostata Henricus Stephanus is forced to auow the same, saying:In the∣sauro lin∣guae Grae∣ca. . Quo nomine (to wit of Priest∣hood) existimatur Apostolū significasse coetum omnium illorum, qui in verbo laborabunt; remarking lykewise, that when the word Priesthood is found alone, it signifieth the society of Priests, or the power giuen to them. 2. Now the Ministers to take away the holy Sacrifi∣ce of the Masse which is alwayes offered by Priests, to take away Altars wheron the holy Masse is said (for those three things, Priest, Sacrifice and Altar, are alwayes conioyned one with another) they haue taken out of the Bible in sun∣dry places the word Preist and Priesthood, & specially where the word Priest is taken in a good sense. As for example,
when there fell out a question in Religion concerning Circumcision, Paul & Barnabas were sent to the Apostles and Priests for the resolution therof:Acts. 15. v. 2. They ordayned that Paul and Barnabas, and certayne other of them should go vp to Ieru∣salem, vnto the Apostles, and. Priests about this question. Where the Ministers impiously haue taken away the word Priests, and translated Elders. And againe, the very power giuen to Priests, is signified by the holy Sacrament of Order:Acts. 14. v. 22. And when they had ordayned them. Priests in euery Church, and prayed and fasted, they commended them vnto our Lord, in whom they belieued. Where the Ministers haue committed two euident Blasphemyes. 1. They haue ioyned to the text, By election, which is not in the Greeke nor Syriake, to signify that the Priests and Ministers should be chosen by the Laity. 2. They haue put Elders, for Priests, to keep the people from all holy and reuerend cogitations of Priests: yet the Mini∣sters shall neuer be able to name me any holy wryter or nation who turned the word Elder, for Priest, before Cal∣uin their Prime Sicophant, who was the first Author of this blasphemous translation. Besides these places, the Mi∣nisters haue corrupted sundry other parts where the word Priest, is taken in a good sense, as:1. Tim. 5. v. 17. The Priests that rule wel are worthy of double honour, specially they that labour in the word and doctrine. Which saying can no wayes be applyed to the ignorant Elders of Scotland and England who are not ac∣customed to preach. And againe:1. Tim. 5. v. 19. Against a Priest receaue no accusation, but vnder two or three witnesses. And againe:Iames 5. v. 14. Is any sick amongst you? let him call for the Priests of the Church, & let them pray aboue. him, and annoynt him with oyle in the name of our Lord, and the prayer of faith shall saue the sicke, and our Lord shall rayse him vp: and if he haue committed sinne, it shalbe forgi∣uen him. Out of which placeLib. 3. de Sacerd. . S. Chrysostome proueth the high dignity of Priests in forgiuing sinnes. Do the El∣ders of Scotland annoynt the sick? do they giue remission of sinnes to the sick? do they pray aboue them? Since the Elders do not these offices, why do they heere vse the word Elders? Since the Ministers do not practise this poynt of the Apostles Religion, nor yet belieue the same, how
can they with reason say that their Religion is the Religiō of the Apostles? 3. Now when the word, Priest, is taken in a bad sense or meaning, the Ministers translate playnly the word Priest, to make it odious to the people, asActs. 4. v. 1. . And as they spake vnto the people, the Priests, and the captayne of the temple, & the Sad∣duces came vpon them, and in sundry other places which I do omit, to be short. As for the dignity of Priests and the fashiō kept in ordeyning Priests, let the Councell of Carthage (where S. Augustine was present the yeare of God 436.) speake:Concil. Carthag. Can. 3. A priest when he taketh his Orders, the Bishop blessing him and holding his hand vpon his head, let the Priests also that are present hold their hands by the Bishops hand, & vpon his head. Which imposition of hands & consequently perpetuall succession of our Bishops and Priests to these our dayes, amongst vs Catholiks, is an euident token that our Catholike Church is the only true Church, according to that worthy saying of S. Augustine:Lib. cont. Ep. fund. c. 4. Tenet me in Ecclesia ab ipsa sede Petri A∣postoli, cui pascendas oues suas Dominus commendauit, vs{que} ad praesen∣tem Episcopum, successio sacerdotum &c. 4. Besides these corruptions the Ministers haue vsed the like in the word Kircke, or Church: for the which they haue placed the word Cōgregatiō, in the Bibles printed in the yeare 1562. the reason wherof was this. When first that abhominable heresy of Caluin entred in Scotland openly, which was the yeare of Christ 1559. the first day of May, some of the Nobility of Scotland (being peruerted in En∣gland) ioyned themselues together, and made open rebel∣lion against the Queene, and resolued to cast down the Churches, ouerthrow the Abbyes, yea & change the Po∣liticall state of the kingdome, vnder pretext of Religion, induced to the same by King Henry the eight, and the English nation. And to the end that the people might take better their doings, they called themselues, The Lords of the Congregation, who were the Lord of Glencarne, the Lord Ruthen, Lindesay, Boyde, and some others, whose posterity for the greatest part is already sufficiently puni∣shed by God; as for the rest, respice finem. Now to the end
that the simple people might thinke that the Lords of the Congregation were sent from God, to bring in a new Re∣ligion, and change the old of their For-fathers, they made a new Bible to be printed at London (the yeare 1562.) wherin you should neuer haue found, yea not once, the word Church, but insteed therof the word Congregation, & consequently that of S. Matthew they turned thus:Matt. 10. v. 18. And vpon this rock will I build my Congregation. And againe:Matth. 18. v. 17. If he refuse to heare the Congregation also, let him be vnto thee as a heathen man and a publican. And agayne:1. Tim. 3. v. 15. The congregation of the liuing God is the pillar and ground of truth. Which impious dea∣ling they vsed, to the end that the people might thinke that the Lords of the Congregation were sent from God, since they found thē so often named in the Bible. But after they had gotten the vpperhand in Scotland and changed all, then they commanded another Bible to be printed, which euer had the word Church, and not the word Congregation. By reason of this impious forme of proceeding, are not the posterity of those Lords vtterly wracked? Is not the hand of God vpon them? are they not remoued from the anci∣cient lands & possessions of their For-fathers, because they were the first Authors and in bringers of this new deformed Gospell? Let any man consider wysely and he shall easely remarke most ancient and famous houses of noble Lords, Barons, & sundry others in the Prouinces of Fife, Augus, Louthiā, Mernes, Sterling, & euery where almost, wholly changed, ouerthrowen, and no mention therof, and that by a iust iudgement of God, who hath promised to punish the sinnes of the Fathers, who do bring in a new Religion, to the third and fourth generation.
The 22. Article. That S. Peter his Primacy in the Catholike Church was acknowledged in this first Age vniuer∣sally. CHAP XI. SVNDRY Wryters assigne three se∣uerall maners to gouerne a Common Wealth or Kingdome; wherin if the meaner sort beare sway and command, it is called Democracy: if few of the No∣bility command, Aristocracy: if one, Monarchy. The first sort of gouerne∣ment is subiect to sundry broyles, by reason of the incon∣stant multitude: The second is commonly diuyded with dyuers factions of the ambitions Nobility: The third as it is lesse subiect to diuision, so is it most conuenient and fit to guide and keep the subiects in peace and vnity. This is the most diuine and noble forme of gouernement, when one man hath the supreme power in administration, which is easy to be remarked in supernaturall and naturall things: as in the Mistery of the Blessed Trinity, there is the Father, from whome the Sonne, and the holy Ghost pro∣ceed, being euery way equall, in proprietyes distinct, in persons three, yet oueruling as one God. In the heauens there is one, by the which the inferiours are moued, called primum mobile. One Sūne frō whom the light of the Moone and Planets is borrowed. Likewyse in man, the little world, there is one heart, from which the vitall spirits; one braine, from which the sinewes; one liuer, from which the veynes haue their head and origine. In euery element ther is one predominant quality. Amongst birds the Eagle, amongst beasts the Lyon, amongst the fishes the Whale do dominier and command. YeaCypr. de Idolorum vanitae. The very Bees haue their guide
and captaine whom they follow. 2. Shall not then the Church of Christ militant vpon earth, the holy Citty, kingdome, sheepfold, and the house of God haue one visible pastour, one maister and superiour? whom the Scripture auoweth playnly to be S. Peter and his successours, as our Sauiour witnesseth spea∣king to S. Peter:Matth. 16. v. 18. And I say vnto thee, that thou art Peter, and vpon this rocke will I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not ouercome it: and I will giue vnto thee, the keyes of the kingdome of heauen, and whatsoeuer thou shall bind vpon earth, shall be bound in heauen, and whatsoeuer thou shalt loose on earth, shall be loosed in heauen. By the which words our Sauiour promiseth to giue vnto S. Peter supremacy or supereminent dignity aboue the rest of the Apostles, in calling him a RockAmb. serm. 7. S. Peter is called a rock (sayth S. Ambrose) because he, as a rock or an im∣moueable stone vpholdeth the full weight and fabrike of the Christian worke Because S. Peter isOrig. Hom. 5. in Exod. the great foundation, or most solide stone vpon which Christ builded his Church. Which primacy of S. Peter S. Augustine deduceth out of the fore∣said words, saying:Con. 2. in Psal. 30. & in Psal. 69. Only Peter amongst the Apostles deserued to hear, Thou art Peter, and vpon this rock will I build my Church; worthy truely to be a stone for the foundation of the people, which were to be builded in the house of God, to be a pillar for their stay, a key to open to them the gates of the kingdome of heauen. Not that S. Augustine thinketh Peter to be the chief and principall foūdatiō who is Christ: but rather an inferiour, secōdary, or subordinat foūdation: as wysely sayth S. Basill:In Cou∣cion. de Poenitent. God imparteth his dignities, not depryuing himselfe of them, but inioying he bestoweth them. He is the light, and yet he sayth, you are the light of the world. He is a priest, and he anoynteth priests: He is the lambe, and he sayth, behold I send you lyke lambes amōg the midst of wolfes: He is a rock, and he maketh a rock; yea though Peter be a rock, yet he is not a rock as Christ is, for Christ is the true rock imoueable of him∣selfe, Peter imoueable by Christ the rock. Which is conforme to that which the Catholiks daily do affirme, saying: That S. Peter is the head of the Church, but subordinate to Christ Iesus, the chief and independant head. 3. Secondly, our Sauiour sayth vnto S. Peter: To the
I will giue the keyes of the kingdome of heauen: by which words he giueth to Peter and his successours power to make La∣wes, summon, and confirme Councels, appoynt or dis∣place Offices, consecrate or degrade Bishops: in a word, all power & authority which is requisite for the good go∣uernement and instruction of the Church. Euen as when the keyes of a citty or town are giuē to the King, the whole power & authority of that town is put in the kings hands; and wheras there be two sorts of keyes in the Church of God, the key of knowledge, to teach and instruct, called, Clauis scientiae, of which S. Luke speaketh:Luc. 11. v. 52. yee haue taken away the key of knowledge. And the key of authority and iurisdictiō to gouerne and rule, wherof S. Iohn:Reuel. 1. v. 18. I haue the keyes of hell and of death. Againe:Isa. 22. v. 22. And the key of the house of Dauid will I lay vpon his shoulder: both those keyes were here giuen to Peter. By the one, he and his successours obteyned in∣fallible assistance and power of God to decyde maters of faith: by the other the scepter of Ecclesiastical gouernement in the mysticall body of Christ. 4. Thirdly, our Sauiour sayth to Peter: whatsoeuer thou shalt bind vpon earth &c. That is, whatsoeuer punishmēt thou shall giue, eyther of excommunication, suspension or such other spirituall censure (for Christ speaketh without restriction) the same shalbe ratified by God himselfe: and whatsoeuer of those thou shall loose, the same shalbe loo∣sed in heauen aboue; wherby power is giuen to S. Peter to loose and bind, to be the foundation of the Church of God, and that by expresse words of the Bible. Let the Mi∣nisters if they can giue as playne words against S. Peters supremacy, which they shall neuer be able to do. 5. The Ministers will say, that all the Apostles are called Rockes, & foundatiō of the Church: I answer, they were so in effect, to the end they should plant the faith in euery part of the world: they had all most ample and v∣niuersall iurisdiction and power ouer others. But S. Pe∣ter had ouer them also: they had all the keyes, but with de∣pendance of S. Peter: they were all foundations, but Pe∣ter the first after Christ, wherby Peter excelled the rest of
the Apostles in preheminency of power, in preheminency of faith, and of dignity. For the which cause whatsoeuer priuiledge is attributed by the holy Scripture to all the A∣postles togeather, the same is imparted agayne to S. Peter alone, in a more peculiar and speciall maner. For as to the Apostles al power wa granted to forgiue sinnes:Ioa 10. v. 23. Whose sinnes yee forgiue, they are forgiuen them: and whose yee retayne, they are retayned; the same power is giuen to Peter alone, in a more ample forme:Matth. 16. v. 19. Whatsoeuer thou shalt bind vpon earth, shalbe bound in the Heauens, &c. For all the Apostles Christ prayed, that they might be constant in faith:Ioan. 17. v. 9. Not for the world do I pray, but for them whom thou hast giuen me. And the same for Peter alone:Luc. 22. v. 32. I haue prayed for thee, that thy saith fayle not. To all the Apostles our Sauiour said:Ioan. 16. When the spirit of truth cometh, he shall teach you all truth. To Peter alone:Luc. 22 v. 32. Confirme and strengthen thy brethren. To all the Apostles:Ephes. 2. v. 10. Yee are built vpon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets. To Peter alone:Matt. 16. v. 19. Thou art Peter, & vpon this rock will I build my Church. To all the Apostles Christ said:Marc. 16 v. 15. Go yee into all the world and preach the Ghospell to euery creature. To Peter a∣lone:Ioa. 21. v. 16. feed my sheep. But what sheep (saythLib. 1. de consid. S. Bernard) The people of this or that City? Of this or that kingdome? My sheep; (sayth he) to whome is it not manifest he designed not some, but as∣signed all: nothing is excepted, where nothing is distinguished. 6. The other Argument and Testimony wherby the Bible proueth Peters Supremacy aboue the rest of the Apostles is:Ioa. 21. v. 15. Iesus said to Simon Peter: Simon the sonne of Iona, louest thou me more then these? He said vnto him. Yea Lord, thou knowest that I loue thee: he said vnto him: Feed my lambes. And a∣gaine, feed my sheep, & the third tyme, feed my sheep. Where our Sauiour vsed the word feed three seueral tymes, to con∣firme more playnly the power which he gaue to Peter a∣boue the rest, and to put the matter out of doubt: vnderstan∣ding by the word sheep, the Pastours and Rectours of the Church, and by the word lambes, those of the meaner sort, or the one and the other, as witnesseth Eusebeius:Euseb. Emissen. serm. in Natiu. S. Ioa. Euāg. He committed, sayth he, to S. Peter his lambes, and then his sheep, be∣cause he made him not only a Pastour, but the Pastour of Pastors Peter
therfore feedeth the lambes, and also the sheep. He feedeth children and their mothers, he ruleth the people & their Prelats: he is therfore the pastour of all, because besides lambes & sheep, there is nothing in the Church. And what is, feed my sheep and lambes, but feed my Church? for all those that are in the Church of God are eyther lambes or sheep. 2. Our Sauiour promised before to build his Church vpon S. Peter, and consequently to giue him power therin: when was, I pray you, this promise performed by Christ, if not in these words, feed my sheep? Wherof it followeth necessarly, that S. Peter in vertue of these words receaued a particular power aboue the rest of the Apostles. 3. The Greeke words , do put the matter out of doubt. For it is certayn that the word , signifieth to gouerne, to rule as a superiour:Ierem. 3 v. 15. And I will giue you Pastours according to my hart, which shall feed you with knowledge and vnderstanding. Agayne:Ierem. 23. v. 2. Thus sayth the Lord God of Israel vnto the Pastours that feed my people. Agayne.Ezech. 34. v. 15. I will feed my sheep and bring them to their rest, sayth the Lord. Againe.Matth. 2. v. 6. . Out of thee shall come the Gouernour that shall seed my people Israell. Where alwayes the same Greeke word is which is here, signifiyng alwayes to gouerne, com∣mand, and rule. Out of which places, and sundry others I do inferre, that it is all one to haue said, Peter feed my sheep, my lambes, and to haue said, Peter gouerne, command, and rule all those that are in my Church, be they sheep or lam∣bes, that is pastors or inferiors. Which meaning is playnly taught by the holy Fathers, who not only do acknow∣ledge in Peter a primacy of grace or calling (as the Mini∣sters, with their sophismes and distinctions, no wayes con∣teyned in the expresse word of God, which they sweare only to teach and belieue, do dreame and forge) but also a particular primacy of power and authority aboue all o∣thers sayth S. Hierome.Lib. 1. in Iouin. Among the twelue one was chosen, that a chiefe or head being appoynted, occasion of dissention might be pre∣uented. So that Peters Bishoprike which is the sea of Rome is preferred to any other whatsoeuer,Cypria∣nus. Who knoweth not Peters principality of Apostleship to be preferred before euery bisho∣prike? but although the grace or preheminence of chatres be different:
yet their glory of martyrdome is one and the same. Which primacy and principality of the seat of Rome, being acknowledge by vs Catholiks doth take away infinite number of heresies schismes and diuersity of religions, which euer shall raigne and do raigne now amongst the Protestants, and Pu∣ritanes in England and Scotland, for not acknowledging a supremacy and visible head in matters of religion.Cypr. Ep 55. ad Cornel. Pap. Ne{que} enim aliunde haereses obortae sunt, aut nata sunt schismata, quàm inde, quòd sacerdoti Dei non obtemperetur, nec vnus in Ecclesia ad tempus sacerdos, & ad tempus Iudex vie Christi cogitatur, sayth the same holy Father and martyr. Wherof he giueth this good reason: if God who is goodnes it selfe hath so great care of little and small things, and thatMatth. 10. one spar∣row shall not fall on the ground without him, and that all the haires of our head are numbred; much more doth it apperteyne to the prouidence & goodnes of God, that in his Church, which is the house of the liuing God, some visible head and superior be placed to iudge in matters of religiō, to the end we be not like Children,Ephes. 4. v. 14. wauering and caryed about with euery wind of doctrine, by the deceit of men, and craftynes. Which craftynes the Puritanes of Scotland haue deceitfully vsed in promising to preach nothing but the expresse word of God, the scripture, the playne words of the Bible. Which promise they not being able to performe, no not in one debatable poynt of Religion, will haue vs to take their rotten and stinking consequences, fond distinctions, and new inuen∣ted expositions, for the pure glittering gold of the word of God. Let not vs Catholiks make accompt what M. Ro∣bert Bruce, M. Robert Rolloke, M. Caluin, and M. Ram∣sey do say, but what the Bible sayth.Aug. de vnit. Eccl. c. 3. Non audiamus (sayth S. Augustine) hac dico, haec dicis, sed audiamus haec dicit Dominus: who sayth in playne termes to S. Peter, feed my sheep, three seuerall tymes: Peter I will build my Church vpon thee. Peter I will giue thee, the keyes of the kingdome of heauen. Peter whatsoe∣uer thou loosest in earth &c. The meaning of the which words shall neyther be taken of the Ministers nor of me, but let the holy Fathers of this first age be iudges therof. 2. But before I enter to produce the sentences of
the holy Fathers, I would intreat at least the vnpassionate Protestant to consider that notwithstāding this supremacy and superiority in spirituall matters which we Catholiks do acknowledge in S. Peter and his successours, yet we acknowledge likewyse, and constantly belieue, absolute authority, whole power, intier iurisdiction to be in Kings, in temporall matters and their gouernment; yea the want of true religion in kings and superiours cannot bring with it a necessary want of authority in gouernement; for as true faith is not necessary for true iurisdiction, so true autho∣rity and iurisdiction is not lost by the losse of true faith, & religiō. Which is the cause wherfore the Catholike Church commandeth vs,Tit. 3. To be subiect of necessity, not only for feare, but also for conscience; directly against that axiome of the Protestāts, which doth teach, that the law of kings cannot oblige in conscience. To the which purposeAug. in Psal. 124. S. Augustine re∣marketh, that in his tyme the Catholiks were obedient in tēporal matters to Iulian the Apostata Emperour, when he commanded them in any temporall thing: As to make warre vnder him, to fight against his enemyes; but when he commanded them to do things against their religion and conscience, they would only obey God the king of kings, and Emperour of Emperours. Iulianus extitit infidelis Imperator, (sayth S. Augustine) nonne extitit Apostata? Milites Christiani seruierunt Imperatori Infideli: vbi veniebat ad causam Christi, non agnoscebant, nisi illum qui in caelo erat: quando volebat vt Idola colerent, vt thurificarent, praeponebant illi Deum: Quando autem dicebat producite aciem, ite contra illam gentem, statim ob∣temperabant: distinguebant Dominum eternum à Domino temporali, & tamen subditi erant propter Dominum aeternum Domino tempo∣rali. S. Ignatius giueth the reasō of this Catholike doctrine in that Epistle of his ad Smirnēses which was writtē fyftene hundreth yeares since. Because, sayth he, as in wordly maters none is aboue the king, nor lyke to him; so in the Church there is none greater then the true Bishop. As in temporall maters the king hath all soueraignty, so in spirituall some chiefe head must needes be ordeyned, acknowleged, and obeyed. Wherfore if Kings and Princes do persecute vs Catholiks for our
conscience and religion, we should be both constant and patient; constant in our Religion, remembring that saying of Christ Iesus:Matth. 10. v. 33. He who nyeth me before men, I shall deny him before my Father in heauen. Patient, considering that we1. Pet. 4. v. 15. suffer for well doing, and not as malefactors; assuring our selues, that2. Cor. 4. v. 17. our tribulation which presently is but momētary & light, will work in vs aboue measure eternall glory. Let not ther∣fore my deer Countrey-men any grieuance imposed vpon our temporall estates make vs impatien, discontented, or put vs in danger to loose the true religion of our Forfathers, calling to mynd the infinite multititude of Noble men & women who not only haue lost their goods and temporall estates for the Catholike religion, but likewyse haue sea∣led the same with their blood, hauing won manfully, for transitory things eternall, an infinite riches in heauen; for a momentary calumny and shame of this world, a per∣petuall and euerlasting glory before the Angels in heauen; for worldly preferment and fleshly liberty, an eternall preferment and euerlasting liberty in heauen. Finally tou∣ching the reuerence & honour which our Catholike reli∣gion giueth to Kings and Princes in particular, I say with S. Bernard, the same which at seuerall tymes I sayd, being in Prison, before the Lords of the high Commission:Bernar. Ep. 221. ad Ludouic. Regem. If all the world should conspire against me, to mooue me for to attempt any thing against the Kings maiesty, yet would I feare God, as not da∣ring to offend the king by him appoynted: for I know it is written, that who resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God, and purchas∣seth to himselfe damnation. To conclude then, let vs be euer myndfull of those words of S. Peter,1. Pet. 2 v. 17. feare God and honour the King.Matt. 22. v. 21. And, (h) To giue to Caesar, that which is Caesars, and to God, that which is Gods. 3. As concerning the reuerence honour and obe∣dience which the Puritans in Scotland, the Hugonots in France, the Lutherans in Germany, and the Anabaptists in Holland, do giue to kings and superiours, conforme to the grounds of their religion; I will set down their owne very words, that the good Reader may giue greater credit to my report. First of all M. Iohn Caluin, the ground and first
Author of this reformed or rather deformed religion, spea∣king of the authority of kings, who are of a different reli∣gion from him, sayth thus:Calu. in Daniel. c. 6 v. 22. & 25. Earthly Princes do beeaue them∣selues of authority, when they erect themselues against God, yea they are vnworthy to be accompted in the number of men, and therfore we must rather spit vpon their faces, then obey them. Which blas∣phemous doctrine D. Wilkes an English Protestants wit∣nesseth to be Caluins, wryting thus to the seditious Puri∣tanes, Caluins schollers:In his Book cal∣led Odedi∣ence or Ec∣clesiasticall vnion pag. 60. ante medium. They were your teachers (sayth he) who accompt those Princes, who are not refined by your spirit, vnwor∣thy to be accompted amongst the number of men, and therfore rather to be spitted vpon, then obeyed; they were your teachers who defend rebellion against princes of a different religion: which abhomina∣ble doctrine of M. Iohn Caluin was put in practise in Ge∣neua it selfe, for as much,M. Sut∣cliffe in his answer to a certaine Libell sup∣plicatory pag. 194. & others. As they of Geneua (as witnesseth an English Protestant) did depose their Catholike liege Lord & Prince the Duke of Sauoy, from his temporall right, albeit he was by right of succession the temporall Lord and owner of that Citty and territory. Hence it was, that M. Iohn Knox an Apostata fryar and the piller of the Scots Deformation, a man tray∣ned vp at Geneua, and whom Caluin calleth,Caluin in his Epi∣stle Ep. 305 An ex∣cellent man, and his most reuerend brother, did learne of Caluin that doctrine of Sedition, and brought it into Scotland, to the playne ouerthrow of the authority of kings and of the Nobility, which gaue occasion to anM. Bā∣croft. English Prote∣stant to make a booke against the seditious doctrine of Knox, thus intituled: Of the proceeding of the Scottish Mini∣sters, according to the Geneuian rules of Reformation. 4. To make this poynt more euident in the confessed doctrine of M. Iohn Knox, Buchanan, and others Scots and English Ministers instructed at Geneua, I wil set down the very words of M. Bancroft an English Protestant, who alledgeth the history of the Church of Scotland set our by M. Iohn Knox, and printed by Vautrouiller. First then he sayth:In his Book inti∣tuled Dan∣gerous po∣sitiōs. pag. 12. & sq. That after a certayne sermon of M. Iohn Knox made in S. Andrewes, the houses of the fryars and abbayes of that towne (as after in Sriueling, Lithquo and Edenburgh, the Quene being fled thence for feare) were cast downe. 2. Knox & those of that diabolically reformed
religion kept the feild two moneths, and tooke away to them selues the Coyning-Irons, which is lese-Maiesty. 3. They gaue the Quene the lye diuers tymes, and vsed her with most despytfull speaches, and renoun∣ced their obedience vnto her. 4. They depryued her from regiment by a formall act penned by Knox. 5In his answer to a certaine Libell sup∣pliatory &c. pag. 193. M. Sutcliffe another famous Protestant asketh the Puritans, Whether the reasons alledged by Knox and Willoks, against their gouernour and Prince, were sufficiēt for subiects to depose a Prince or Regēt lawfully appoynted, as they & their fellowes did depose the Quene Regent of Scotland? 6 What e∣normityes did the Scots Puritans and Protestants against Blessed Quene Marie, his Highnes dearest Mother, let his Maiesty be witnesse therof.His Maiesties words in the summe of the con∣ference be∣fore his Maiesty &c. anno 1604 pag. 8. How they vsed, sayth his Ma∣iesty, that poore lady my Mother, is not vnknowen, and with grief I remember it. 7. KnoxFol. 49. 50. in a booke of his to the Commu∣nalty sayth: Reformation of religion (that i manifest rebelliō) belongeth to the communalty. And againe, That God (saythKnox in his Hy∣story of the Church of Scotland pag. 343. and see 372 373. 500. 501. &c. Knox) hath appointed the Nobiliy to brydle the inordinate ap∣petites of Princes. Againe, That Princes (saythIn his History pag. 371. Knox) for iust causes may be deposed. And againe, If Princes be Tyrans (saythIn a certaine E∣pistle of his to Englād and Scot∣land fol. 76 Knox) against God and his trueth, their subiects are freed from their oath of obedience. Againe, The people haue right (saythLib. de Iure regni apud Scot. pag. 13. Buchanan a Scots Puritan) to bestow the crown at their pleasure. It were tedious and loathsome to set down the abhominable doctrine, diuelish precepts and Idola∣trous speaches, which Bucanan setteth down in that booke of his, de Iure Regni apud Scotos, which doctrine the Huge∣nots in Frāce of late did put in practise, giuing therby place to the Prouerb: That it is as rare to find a whyte Aethiopian, as a faithfull Hugenot. But let vs come to the consequences of the holy Fathers.
The Testimonies of the holy Fathers of this first Age, prouing the primacy of S. Peter: And of his successours in the Catholike Church. The first Section. S. DENYS S. Paul his disciple conferreth S. Peter with the rest of the Apostles, and calleth him, the chief and head of the rest of the Apostles:Dionys. de diuinis nominibus cap. 3. , supremum & antiquissimum Theo∣logorum fastigium. Which verity was so constantly beleued by the holy Fathers of this age, that Origen himselfe doth witnes those of his tyme to haue receaued the foresaid doctrine frō their Forfeathers, that is, from those of the first age, which is the cause wherfore he himselfe calleth Peter (b)Hom. 17. in Luc. Apostolorum principem, the prince of the Apostles. And againe.In Tra∣ctat. in Matth. Petrus per promissionem meruit fieri Ecclesiae fun∣damentum. 2. S. Clemens S. Peters owne disciple and successor after Linus in the Apostolicall seat, affirmeth S. Peter to haue bene chosen by Christ as head and Father of the rest:Clemēs Ep. 2. Simon Petrus, qui verae fidei merito, & integrae praedicationis ob∣tentu, fundamentum esse Ecclesiae definitus est: qua de causa etiam Domini ore diuino cognominatus est Petrus, qui fuit primitiae electi∣onis Domini, Apostolorum primus, cui & primò Deus Pater filium re∣uelauit, cui & Christus competenter beatitudinem contulit, qui & vo∣catus est & electus, & conuiua Domini & comes effectus, tanquam bonus & probatissimus discipulus, qui obscuriorem mundi plagam Oc∣cidentis (velut omnium potentior) illuminare praeceptus est, qui{que} & integrè potuit implere praeceptum. And againe he witnesseth that there was not a like equality amongst the Apostles, but one was preferred before the rest.Ibidem post mediū. Nec inter ipsos Apo∣stolos par institutio fuit, sed vnus omnibus praefuit. And againe he calleth S Peter:Ibidem in initio. Beatum Apostolum, omnium Apostolorum pat∣rem, qui claues regni caelestis accepit. 3. S. Ignatius Martyr in an epistle of his to the Ro∣mans, commendeth the Roman Church greatly aboue
the rest as most holy, most famous, and worthy to com∣mand others.Ep. ad Rom. Ignatius qui & Theophorus misericordiam conse∣quutae Ecclesiae sanctificatae & illuminata &c. quae praesidet in loco re∣gionis Romanorum, Deodigna, decore digna, meritò beatissima, digna laude; digna qua quis potiatur castissima & praecellenti dilectione Christi, ac patris nomen ferens, spiritu plena &c. Which doctrine was so constantly receaued by the holy Fathers of the ensu∣ing ages that no wyse man may doubt therof. Of the which holy Fathers, some called PeterOpta∣tus apud Fulk in his Retentiue pag. 248. Worthy to be preferred be∣fore all the Apostles, worthy to be called the Prince of the Apostles:Cyril. Hieros. Catech. 2. The head of the rest,Cyril. Alexand. l 12. in lo. c. 64. the pastor and head of the Church placed by Christ ouer the whole earth:Chrys. in Ioan hom. 87. & ad Pop. hom. 80. ante medium. The Maister of the whole world; the rock & top of the Catholike Church. Which authority of Church gouernement affirmed by those & other holy Fathers could not be tyed to the person of S. Peter alone, as to die with him, but was to suruiue and continue in his succes∣sours to the worlds end, to procure therby vnity and obe∣dience, and to keep all the Pastours of the world in peace, to conuince heresyes, to settle controuersies of Religion. Truly if God had not set down some head ouer his church, itM. Co∣nel a Pro∣testant in his exami∣natiō &c. pag. 107. pauo post medium. should be in a farre worse case, then the meanest Common∣wealth, nay almost then a den of theeues, if the Church were left destitute of meanes, eyther to cōuince heresies, or to suppresse them. And Melancthon another famous Protestant, acknowledged the Popes supremacy descending frō S. Peter to be wholly necessary in the Church of God.In his Bo k inti∣tuled, Cen∣turia Ep. Theol. Ep. 74. For as certayne Bishops, sayth he, are president ouer many churches, so the Bishop of Rome is president ouer all Bishops and Canonicall policy, which no wyse man, as I thinke, doth, or ought to disallow &c. for the Monarchy of the Bishop of Rome is, in my opinion, profitable to this end, that consent of doctrine may be retayned: Wherfore an agreement may easily be established in this article of the Popes primacy, if other articles could be agreed vpon. To whome agreeth M. Iacob an English Pro∣testant, who sayth:In his reason ta∣ken out of Gods word &c. pag. 24. By acknowledging a Catholike visible Church, it followeth necessarily that there is, and ought to be on earth an vniuersall gouernement Ecclesiasticall &c. for if there be properly one visible Church and gouernement Ecclesiasticall throughout the world, then this must be in some one place eminently, for some whither
we must go when Christ biddeth vs tell the Church: now there is no place in all the world so likely as Rome, to be the visible and spring head of vniuersall gouernement of the Catholike Church, That the Ministers haue corrupted the Bible in sundry places, which proue S. Peters Primacy, and others poynts of Catholike doctrine. The second Section. IT is aboue the expectation of any mā that feareth God, of whatsoeuer Religion he be, to see how impiously the Ministers haue corrupted the Bible to cōfirme their heresies, errours and blasphemyes. And as cōcerning this point of S. Peters primacy they haue corrupted S. Marke thus:Marc. 3. v. 16. And the first was Simon, and he named Simon Peter. Where they haue put in the text these words, and the first was Simon, which are no wyse in the. Greeke, nor els in the Syriake, where it is only Veschami leschemhhun schema kipho, & nominauit Schemeun nomine kipho. Can there be a greater abhomination or sinne before God then willingly & wittingly to put in the vul∣gar text, which is not in the originall? Can the Ministers beleue in God, who thus do corrupt the word of God? Is it not a sinne against the holy Ghost,Matt. 12. v. 3. which shall not be forgiuen to men, to belye the holy Ghost and make him to say that, which he did neuer say, and which is not in the originall? to corrupt, bely and speake against the holy Fa∣thers (as the Ministers do) it is a great sinne,Matth. 12. v. 32. but whosoeuer shall speake against the holy Ghost (in corrupting the Originall text of the holy Ghost) it shall not be forgiuen him neyther in this world, nor in the world to come. Caluin was the first inuenter of this corruption, which was confirmed byIn hunc locum. Beza, who granteth that the word first, in S. Mathew, is found in all the Greeke copyes:Matth. 10. v. 2. . Now the names of the twelue Apostles are these, the first is Simon called Peter: But it hath bene put in, sayth he, by some Papist: Ab aliquo additum est, qui Petri primatum vellet stabilire. But wherfore haue the Ministers put in the text of S. Marke the word first, which is not in the Greeke, since it is playnly in S. Mathew? The reason is. Because in S. Ma∣thew
the Apostles are named conforme to their place, dig∣nity and authority thus: The first is Simon called Peter. Not say∣ing after, the second is Andrew his brother, but because Peter was first in dignity, he was first named. Nor likewyse by reason of the tyme they were called to Christs seruice, for Peter was called afterIo. 1. v. 40. Andrew, and yet Peter is by all the Euangelistes placed the first, by reason he was the chief and the head of the rest, and had primacy aboue the rest. As Iudas Iscariotes is alwayes placed the last by reason of his vnworthynes: So S. Peter is placed the first by reason of his dignity. And because S. Marke maketh mention of the Apostles in order, as their names were changed by Christ, placing first Peter, and then Iames and Iohn &c. and not Andrew, as S. Matthew did, the Ministers haue put in S. Marke the word first, to infirme and weaken S. Mathew his fashion of reckoning, by reason of dignity, and to fortifie S. Marks fashiō of reckoning, which is by reason of the changing of their names; inferring consequently, that both the one and the other in placing S. Peter first, regarded not his Primacy, but because his name was first changed: a crafty and subtile forme of corrupting the word of God, which hardly at the first and simple vew will be perceaued. But why doth S. Paul reckon Peter after Ia∣mes?Galath 2. v. 9. And when Iames, and Cephas, and Iohn knew of the grace &c. By reason of Iames his age wherof he had regard an not of any other thing. Doth not S. Paul in the same chapter declare that Peter had a particular obligatiō aboue the rest to preach to the circumcised? 2. Another corruption is in the second of the Cronicles, where they haue ioyned to the text many words, which are not in the Greeke, nor yet in the He∣brew. The words are:2. Chro. 36. v. 8. Concerning the rest of the acts of Iehoiakim, and his abhominations which he did, and carued Images that were layed to his charge, behold they are written in the booke of the Kings &c. These words, carued Images layed to his charge, are not in the Hebrew text, but impiously put in all the Bibles printed in the yeare 1562. to make the Images odious, and to encourage the people in that yeare to
cast down the Churches, and after they had become Maister of all, they tooke those foresaid words out of the Bible printed afterward: which corruptiō I set down heer by rea∣son of the Ministers animosity against the Church of God, wherof S. Peter is head. 3. To make the holy Processions, which the Ca∣tholike Church doth vse, odious, they haue likewise cor∣rupted the Bible thus:2. Ma∣chab 6. v. 7 And when the feast of Bacchus was kept, they were constrayned to go in the procession of Bacchus with gar∣lands of Iuy. Vsing the word procession, which is not in the. greeke, and conferring the holy processions of the Catho∣like Church, where the holy Crosse the Instrument of our redemption is exhibited, to the filthy and abhominable feasts of Bacchus. Is there any Minister so ignorant, that he knoweth not, that  signifieth only, to go in pompe, and not in procession? Doth not their fellowHenricus Stephanus in thesaur. linguae Graecae. Puritan teach, that  is, cum pompa incedo? and Ouid, Cineri materno ducere pompam. And Budaeus . Ignorant Ministers who carry about with them in their pocket the Greeke new Testament for a shew, yet few of them can read it, and very few vnderstand it, wherof I made experience being in Prison in Edenburgh the yeare 1620. The Catholike translation of this place is: And when the feast of Bacchus was kept, they were compelled to go about crowned with Iuy vnto Bacchus. Neuer a word of Proces∣sions. 4. To make odious the holy foundations which our forfathers of charity erected for the seruice of God, they haue corrupted filthily the Bible, thus:2 Reg. 23. v 5. Et deleuit aruspices quos posu∣rant R∣ges Iuda. And he put down the Chemarims whome the Kings of Iudah had founded, to burne incense in the high places. In the Hebrew, Greeke, and Latin text it is otherwyse: And he destroyed the sooth-sayers, which the Kings of Iudah had appoynted to sacrifice in the excelses in the citty of Iuda. Agayne, to make the great and feruent deuotion of the Catholiks in their prayers odious to the people, they haue corrupted the Bible thus:Act. 17. v. 23. . For as I passed by, and beheld your deuotions, I found an Altar, wherin was written, Vnto the vnknow∣en God. Where without conscience, or any religion at all
they haue thrust in the word deuotion, which is not in the Greeke, or Syriake text, in the which it is thus, Passing by, and seeing your Idols, or simulachres, not, seing your deuotions. Could the Diuel himselfe in person inuent greater craft to corrupt the word of God, to deceaue the poore silly soules of the Protestants? What excuse can the Protestants haue in the day of Iudgement, in reading and belieuing such abho∣minable translations, such malicious corruptions, such de∣testable Bibles, which are much lesse the word of God, then William Wallace booke, wherin there is no blas∣phemous nor Idolatrous translation; as is in the Bibles presently read, and preached in Scotland. Remarke the double dealing of the Ministers, who do translate in o∣ther places the same Greeke word otherwyse, as that of S. Paul, who speaking of the proude and lofty mynd of the Puritan Minister, or of a Protestant Bishop, sayth:2. Thess. 2. v. 4.  Who is an aduersary, and exalteth himselfe against all, that is called God, or that is worshipped. Where the same greeke word is not tran∣slated, deuotion, but worshipped.
The 23. & 24. Article. 1. That the true Church of God must needs be infal∣lible. 2. And as she hath absolute authority to propone matters of faith, so she cannot erre in proponing such matters to be belieued, as Apo∣stolicall Traditions, which euer haue bene belie∣ued. CHAP. XII. THOVGH I haue handled before this matter of the Church, of the markes and propertyes therof, yet I thought good to speake more at length of the infallibility of the true Church of God, and of the ab∣solute authority therof in maters of faith, which once being granted, no difficulty can be found in any other poynt of the Catholike religion; for he who is persuaded that the true Church of God hath sufficient authority to propone maters of faith, & likewyse cannot erre in proponing the same, must needes easily im∣brace & belieue whatsoeuer the Church proponeth to be belieued. True it is, that I haue conferred with some Mini∣sters in Scotland, who were certaynly perswaded (as they said) that the true Church of God could not erre. That the true Church of God is infallible in proponing matters of faith to be belieued: Others denying the same but ignorantly, of passion rather, then of reason conforme to their custome. But to the end this matter be deduced more playnly I will intreat the Reader to consider. 2. First, that the word Church, may be taken foure seuerall wayes. First, for the whole company of Christian professours consisting of sheep and Pastors, that is, of some
who by Gods ordinance and appoyntement, haue office and authority to feed, and teach the right faith and religion; and of others who are taught: and thus the word Church is taken when we say, the Church of God is vniuersal and Catholike: The Church of God hath euer bene and shalbe. Secondly, the word Church is taken for the more principall part of that compa∣ny, to wit, the full company of Pastors gathered togeather or dispersed throughout the world. Thirdly for a principal member, to wit, the visible head of this mysticall body, the chief Pastor, Christs vicar, S. Peters successour called the Pope: Not as he is a particular and priuate man, but as ey∣ther alone, or at least assisted with a generall Councel, hath receaued of Christ ful authority to feed the Christian flock, by proponing to them maters of faith. Fourthly, the Church is taken for euery particular Pastour, not as he is a priuate man, but as he is authorized, vnder, and with dependance of the chief pastor to feed that flock prticularly, which is committed to his charge: wherby it is euident that those Apostata Priests and Monks, as M. Iohn Knox, Willox, Craig, and such like (nothing els but our dregs, yet the first and chief pillars of the deformed Scots religion) who prea∣ched first the Puritans religion, had no ordinary calling to do the same, because they were not authorized by their immediat superiors, nor yet by the chief Pastor, to preach such a new religion. As for extraordinary calling and au∣thority, they had none (though ignorantly they brag of it) by reason as they were not sent extraordinarly and imme∣diatly by God, so they had no marks of extraordinary cal∣ling, which are humility, extraordinary good and holy Life and Miracles, as witnesseth the Scripture in Moyses, the Prophets, S. Iohn Baptist, and S. Paul, as learnedly S.Lib. 1. Dial. c. 1. Gregory the great teacheth, with sundry others. 3. Secondly, consider that the infallible and abso∣lute authority that I am to proue to be in the Church of God, is with reason called the authority of the Church, specially as the word Church is taken in the third significa∣tion, as being ordayned to the proffit of the whole Church, and of euery mēber therof, in regard of the doctrine which
proceedeth, and taketh hold from the authority of the Church: which doctrine as it is in it selfe infallible, so it worketh infallibility in the hart of euery seuerall person, so much, as he groundeth his faith vpon the diuine doctrine reuealed by God to the Church, and proponed to him by the Church. So that God the prime Verity of all doth re∣ueale (conforme to his promise set down in seuerall places of the Bible) to the Church that holy doctrine which we should belieue vnder payne of damnation: for,Marc. 16. v. 16. He that beleueth not shall be condemned. And the Church being groun∣ded vpon the word and authority of God, and infallibly as∣sisted by the holy Ghost, doth propone the same doctrine to the Christians to be belieued: wherof it followeth, that we Catholiks do not build our faith and religion vpon the priuat opinion of any one, or some few Doctors or Pastors of the Catholike Church; yea not vpon the priuat opinion of the Pope or chief Pastor, as this priuat opinion is made knowne to vs priuatly▪ as by a Sermon preached, publick audience, or printed booke: but rather it is necessary that the doctrine of the chief pastour, (to the end it haue infal∣libility) be delyuered to vs by pastorall authority, as the publick doctrine of the Church, when in matters called in question he defyneth as chief Pastour (specially with a generall Councell) what is to be holden, proponing the same to the whole Church to be belieued, and pronoun∣cing Anathema against those that hold the contrary; or els when the chief pastor expresly signifieth that his inten∣tion is with his pastorall authority to oblige the vniuersall Church to hold that which he proponeth as a matter of faith, wherin God hath promised to assist & guide the chief pastour infallibly, saying:Luc.  v. 3. I haue prayed for thee, that thy faith fayle not. Therfore when thou art conuerted, strengthen thy bre∣thren. Where the word conuerted, is to be remarked dili∣gently. 4. Of the which doctrine it followeth, how igno∣rantly some of the Ministry obiect the lyues of some Popes or of other Pastors, or certayne historyes, & recordes which we beleue not as matters of faith. Likewyse how ignoran∣tly
the Ministers do teach, that we beleue whatsoeuer the Church proponeth, as a mater of faith, though it be against the Scripture: for it is impossible that the true Church be∣ing infallibly assisted by God (according to his promise) can, or may propone any thing which is against, or besids the Scripture. 5. Fourthly, of the said doctrine it followeth likewayes how ignorantly the Ministers do preach, that we beleue as maters of fayth, all visions and miracles of Saintes &c. Which is a manifest calumny. For as it were temerity, rashnes, & a sort of folly to deny or misbelieue (fide humana & piè,) those miracles, which so many wyse, holy and learned Pastours, Kings and Princes, Kingdomes and na∣tions haue constantly auowed; So we belieue only those which the Catholike Church (authoritatiuè) proponeth to be belieued as maters of faith, which are very few. 6. Fyftly, when I say, the authority of the Church is absolute and infallible. I do not vnderstand, as if it were independant of God or his word, as though the Church might at pleasure pronoūce any doctrine to be diuine, with∣out any respect to God or his word. But I accompt the doctrine of the Church to be infallible of it selfe, and the authority to be absolute in respect of vs, in this sense, that we, after the sentence of this or that poynt of faith pro∣nounced by the Church, we (I say) are absolutly bound and obliged to submit our iudgements, and to belieue that for infallible truth, which by the Church is defyned for such. The Ministers religion vpon the other side denying the infallible and absolute authority of the Church, can haue nothing but errour, deceit, instability and fallibility for the last ground and resolution therof. 7. First then I proue the Church to haue such ab∣solute authority to propone vnto vs matters of religion to be belieued vnder the payne of condemnation. I proue it (I say) out of that of S. Paul:Heb. 13. v. 7. . Remember them which haue the ouer sight of you, which haue declared vnto you the word of God, whose faith follow, considering what hath bene the end of their conuersation. And againeHeb. 23. v. 17. Obey your Superiours, and submit your selues, for
they watch for your soules, as they that must giue accompt, that they may do it with Ioy, and not with greef, for that is vnproffitable for you. By these words & other places of the Scripture, we are ab∣solutly commanded to obey the Church, our Prelats, and su∣periours, and to be subiect vnto them, as to men that are to giue accompt for our soules. But absolute obedience and su∣biection on our syde, supposeth absolute authority to be in them, whom we obey. Ergo, since absolutly we are com∣manded to obey thē, they must needs haue absolute power to command vs. 2. The reason why we should obey our Superiours, is declared by the Apostle, because they are to giue accompt for our soules. Wherof it followeth, that this our obe∣dience (as likewise their authority) extendeth it selfe to all maters perteyning to the saluation of our soules, which are specially matters of faith, without the which there is no sa∣luation: which is the reason wherfore the Bible witnesseth that matters preached vnto vs, haue annexed certayne obe∣diēce, Wherby those who do preach should be obeyed & belieued:Rom. 10 v. 16. But they haue not all obeyed the Ghospell: For Isaias sayth, Lord who hath belieued our report? Where both the Prophet, and the A∣postle testifie, that we are obliged to obey the true Pa∣stours who teach the word of God, to whome consequently absolute authority must needes be granted. 3. The differēce betwixt science and belief, is, that science is grounded im∣mediatly vpon the euidence of things wherof we haue science, and so there may be perfect science though there be no authority at all in the speaker, or in him who maketh a demonstration à priori, or à posteriori: But so it is not in maters of belief which are grounded immediatly vpon the authority of the speaker, whether the thing be euident or not: yea commonly diuine and humane faith is,Heb. 11. v. . of things which are not euident or seene. Which is specially true of diuine faith, the reason wherof the Scripture giueth: Nam quod videt quis, quid credat? Since therfore we haue not science but be∣lief of diuine things, spoken first and immediatly by God to the Prophets and Apostles, spoken immediatly to vs by the Church and the present pastours therof, we canno expect euidence of those things, but it suffiseth vs to giue credit
to the Church and Pastour therof, for the authority of the speaker: which Church doth, by authority receaued from God, speake and reueale those things to vs. 4. If there were no absolute authority in the Church, in proponing maters of faith, but rather after the Church hath proponed them, & sufficiently pronounced sentence, it were free and lawfull for euery man to examine the proponed doctrine of the Church, with the Scripture, conferring the doctrine therof with sundry places of the Scripture (as the Ministers do ig∣norantly and foolishly teach,) so that it were lawfull to e∣uery man to admit, reiect or not belieue the doctrine of the Church, because after collation therof with the Scriptur he findeth not the said doctrine, according to his fantasy, imagination, yea passion, well grounded in the Scripture: If this (I say) were lawfull to euery man to do, as the Mi∣nisters do teach, there should neuer be an end of exami∣ning by the Scripture, since this priuat examination hath much more need of a new examination thē the doctrine of the Church, and this other examination, of another, & sic in infinium. Being in Prisō I asked of M. Andrew Ramsey what certaynty and infallibility he had in preaching the word of God? he answered, that in preaching the word he might erre and lye: What certaynty then and infallibility, said I, haue those who do heare you? He replyed, that he desired them to conferre & examine his doctrine with the Scriptures. I replyed; eyther they may erre in examining your preaching with the Scripture, or not? if they may not erre, then they haue greater certaynty and infallibility then you who are a Minister: if they may erre, what auayleth thē to examine your doctrine with the Scripture, since after due examination they remayne euer incertayne, and doubt∣full of what you haue preached, and what they haue exami∣ned; and consequently neyther can your preaching not their examination of the Scripture, breed true and diuine faith (which must be infallible) in their harts: and this is the reason wherfore the last resolution of the Protestants faith and religion, is nothing but errour and incertaynty, & consequently the faith & belief of the Protestants cannot
be diuine but humane: for diuine faith, as it is infallible, so the last resolution therof must be in some infallible autho∣rity, which cānot be, except in the authority of the church: which verity gaue occasion to S. Augustine to say,Aug. cont. Ep. Fund. c. 5 That he would not, or should not beleue the Ghospell it selfe, if he were not moued therevnto by the authority of the Church. And thus far con∣cerning the absolute authority of the Church: adding only this, that if a King in his Kingdome had not absolute au∣thority to make lawes, to the good and the proffit of his Kingdome: if a Parliamēt had not absolute authority to set down things for the good state of the Commō wealth, but ther if it were permitted to euery particular man, or foure or fiue heady & rebellious cōpanions gathered togeather, to examine the Kings & Parlaments authority in making of the lawes, to examine them (I say) after the sentence of the Parlament duely pronounced; truely neyther could such a King be called a true King, nor such a Parlament, a lawfull Parlament: euen so it is in the Church, in respect of absolute authority. 8. As concerning the infallibility of the Church, which I promised to proue; it is to be remarked, that I take the word Church, as a company of men assisted infallibly by the holy Ghost, the doctrine wherof consequently is called, not meerly humane, but rather diuine: as proceeding originally and principally from the spirit of God. This being noted, I proue the infallible authority of the church in maters of faith, out of these places of the Bible. First:Matth. 28. v. 18.19. And Iesus came and spake vnto them, saying, All power is giuen vnto me in heauen and in earth: Go therfore and teach all nations, bapti∣zing them in the name of the Father, & the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, teaching them to obserue all things, whatsoeuer I haue commāded you; and loe I am with you alway vntill the end of the world. And a∣gaine with this whole power (which he receaued of his Father) he sent the Apostles and their successours:Ioan. 20. v 21. As my father sent me, so send I you. And againe, he giueth com∣mission to the Apostles and their successours:Marc. 16 v. 15. Go ye into al the world and preach the Ghospell to euery creature. Againe:Luc. 10. v. 16. He that heareth you, heareth me, and he that dispyseth you, dispyseth
me, and he that dispyseth me, despyseth him that sent me. Now I say, Chryst our Sauiour (to whome all power was giuen in heauen and earth) had infallible power and authority: euen as he was man, to teach and propone to vs matters of faith, and had power to giue to others the same authority, But what power Christ had in this kynd, he communica∣ted it to his Apostles and to their successours, at least so far as it was necessary for the good of the Church. Ergo, the first proposition is certayne, and as it were, in playne words in the Bible. The Minor I proue: Because Christ sent his Apostles, and their successors with that authority, wher∣with his heauenly Father sent him: But that authority was infallible. Ergo the authority of the Apostles and their suc∣cessours must needs be infallible. 9. Secondly if the authority of the Church, in propo∣ning maters of faith to be belieued, were fallible, or could in such a case erre or deceaue vs, it would follow, that God himselfe could be the author of false belief, by teaching & causing the church to teach false doctrine in maters of faith: but that is impious and abhominable to grant, that God the prime verity can possibly be the author of false belief, cau∣sing the Church, or permitting the same to teach false do∣ctrine. That it would follow, God to be the authour of false belief, I prooue it in this sort. What authority the Church hath to propone maters of diuine faith, is grounded wholly in the authority of God, promising infallible assistance to the Church, sending and appoynting the Pastours therof to preach and teach, commanding vs to heare and obey thē, threatning those who will not obey, as the places of the Bi∣ble before specified do witnesse. Ergo if the authority of the Church be fallible and may deceaue men, inducing them to belieue that which is false; God himself ordeyning this au∣thority should be iustly esteemed author of this false belief, & men might iustly & with reason say to God in the later day (as learnedly Richardus à Sancto Victore a Scotsman remarketh):Lib. 18. de Trinit. cap: 2. Domine si decepti sumus, tu decepisti nos: O Lord, if we be deceaued, thou hast deceaued vs, by reason that God com∣mandeth vs, vnder the payne of damnation, to obey the
Church, & yet the Church is fallible and erroneous in the Ministers opinion. Thus much concerning the absolute & infallible authority of the Church: Wherof I will speake more amply (God willing) in the following centuryes & ages: only this is to be remarked, that we haue the expresse words of the Bible for vs to proue the absolute and infalli∣ble authority of the Church.1. Tim. 3. v. 15. The Church is the ground and pillar of truth. How then can it be fallible?Matt. 16. The ports of hel shall not preuayle against the Church. What blasphemy then is it to say that they haue preuayled in making the Church to erre? I shall be with you to the end of the world, and such other sayings as I haue cited before. I aske now of the Ministers as playne and manifest words of the Bible that proue the cōtrary, which they not being able to do, wil play the sophists & take hold vpon their sophismes & consequēces▪ which will haue some shew with the sighing sisters & ig∣norant brethrē, but none at all with vs Catholiks, of whom specially they learne that small portion of Philosophy which they haue; which is euident, by reason that the cheef authors and Philosophers which they read and peruse in their Colledges are Papists and Iesuits, as Cardinall Tolet, Fonseca, Conimbricenses, Ruuius, Zuares, Vasques, Pere∣rius, Zabarella, Balfoureus a Scots man, Mazius and sundry others. For to this day neuer hath a Scots Minister written any thing of accōpt in latin (to my knowledge) of Theo∣logie or Philosophy, or of history to the prayse of his coun∣trey, but little pamphets very fit for the Trone Lords, and the sighing sisters, which cōsequently do not passe the sea, and bringe no great commodity to the printers & booke∣sellers of Edenburgh. But let vs leaue these sophistical Mi∣nisters with their sophismes, foolish consequences & Pam∣phlets, & see the belefe of the holy Fathers of this age con∣cerning the absolute & infallible authority of the Church in proponing vnwritten traditions to be belieued and re∣ceaued.
The Testimonyes of the holy Fathers of this first Age, prouing that the true Church of God must needs be infallible, in proponing maters of faith &c. The first Section. S. DENIS renowned and famous in the kingdome of Frāce, witnesseth, how that the holy Apostles (by rea∣son of their absolute and infallible authority) proponed & commanded the Christians to belieue vnwritten traditiōs, making mention of sundry traditions in particular, in that booke of his:Eccl. Hierarch. c. 1. Necessario igitur primi illi nostrae hierarchiae duce▪ cùm ex supersubstantiali principio diuino sacri muneris plenitudne accepissent, & idipsum deinceps propagare à diuina bonitate iussi es∣sent, ipsi{que} abs{que} inuidia cuperent, vt pote deificati, posterorum subi∣ectionem & deificationem, sensibilibus signis supercaelestia, varietate & multitudine quod vnicum est collectum, & in humanis diuina, & in materialibus immaterialia, & in ijs quae nobis sunt. familiaria, res su∣per substātiales, partim scriptis, partim non scriptis institutionibus suis, iuxta quod sacrae definiunt leges, nobis tradiderūt. Which doctrine of S. Dennis gaue occasion to S. Chrysostome to say:In 2. ad Thss. hom. 4. The Apostles did not delyuer all things by wryting, but many things without wryting, and those be as worthy of credit as the other. And Epiphanius:Epiph. Haer. 61. circame∣dium. We must vse traditions, for the Scripture hath not all things, and therfore the Apostles delyuered certayne things by wry∣ting, and certayne by tradition. 2. S. Clemens Romanus in his Apostolical Constitu∣tions maketh mention of sundry vnwritten traditions, as the forme and fashion to consecrate Bishops, to receaue pu∣blick siners into the church, of the ceremonies of baptisme, of the ceremonyes of the Masse, of the ceremonyes cōcer∣ning holy virgins liuing togeather in monasteries, of holy∣water, of the Passion weeke, concluding thus:Lib. 8. c. 3. Const. Apost. ver. Turriani c. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. &. 9. &c. Omnia se∣cundum mandata Christi nobis tradita faciatis, sciētes quòd qui nos audit, Christum audit, qui verò Christum audit, Deum eius eun∣dem{que} patrem audit, cui gloria in saecula seculorum, Amen. And a∣gaine:Ibid. c. 34. Precationes facite manè, hora tertia, sexta, ac nona, & vespere, at{que} ad gallicantum Manè gratias agentes, quia illuminauit nos nocte sublata & reddito die: tertia, quia ea hora Pilatus iudicium
aduersus dominum pronunciauit: Sexta, quia ea hora in crucem actus est: Nona, quia tum omnia mota & tremefacta sunt Domino crucifixo, quia horrerent audaciā imporum Iudaeorum, & contumeliam domini ferre non possent: Vespere, quòd noctem dederit ad requiescendum à diurnis laboribus: ad gallicantum, quòd ea hora nunciet aduentum diei ad facienda opera lucis. Where it is easie to see, that in the very tyme of the Apostles, Catholiks, Papists and religious men were accustomed to pray and sing Mattines, & Euen∣song in the Church, yea Mattins at midnight: which holy custome was so famous in Scotland, that there were some Monasteryes therof (as that of S. Mongo in Glasco, of S. Brandane in the west Iles, of S. Columbanus in the Ile of Iona, of S. Serf in the Abbey of Culros) which being furnished to the number of six hundreth Religious men, at euery houre of the day and night, foure & twenty were appoynted to sing the prayse of God, one company succe∣ding to another. Which holy custome S. Columbanus e∣rected first in France in the Abbey of Luxouium in Bur∣gundy, called therefore by S. Bernard, Laus perennis. 3. S. MartialisCap. 11. in his Epistle to the Christians of Burdeaux testifieth, that the Church of God is constant & firme, and cannot erre, or fall to teach false doctrine. Inimi∣cus, qui nunc à cordibus vestris proiectus est, venturus est, vt super∣seminet populo Dei grana errorum. Sed firma Ecclesia Dei & Christi nec cadere, nec disrumpi poterit vnquam. 4. S. Ignatius witnesseth lykewise in seuerall places the infallible authority of the Church, in proponing vn∣written Apostolicall traditiōs, & maketh mētion of sundry in particular, as witnessethEpist. ad Tralli∣anos paulo ante med. his owne letter writtē to the Catholiks: and the same affirmethLib. 3. Hist. c. 30. Eusebius. I omit to set down the testimonyes of other Fathers of this age, the mater in it selfe being so playne and manifest, conforme to all reason and equity. Let vs them see, how abhominably the Ministers haue corrupted the Bible to proue this their Capitall heresy and Idolatry, deceauing thereby the simple people to the eternall perdition of their soules.
That the Ministers haue corrupted the Bible in sundry places, which proue the Churches Authority. The second Section. BEFORE, I did shew how that the Ministers at their first entry and preaching in Scotland,In the Bi∣bles prin∣ted anno 1562. Aug. in Psal. 81. to authorize the Lords of the Congregatiō in pulling down the Churches and Abbayes, scraped out the word Kirke, or Church, and placed instead therof the word cōgregatiō, which word may be applyed to an assembly of Iewes, of Turkes, sayth S. Augustine, of Infidels, yea of beastes, considering the word in the original, congregatio, though the word Ecclesia, church is taken commonly in the holy Scripture, and euer in the new testament, and among the Ecclesiasticall wryters, for the assembly of the faithfull. The Ministers not content with this impious forme of proceeding against the militant Church, they likewyse cast out their blasphemyes against the triumphant Church, wherof this place of S. Paul spe∣aketh manifestly.Heb. 12. v. 22. Accessi∣stis ad Ec∣clesiam pri∣mitiuorū. . Yee are come to the mount Sion, and to the citty of the liuing God, the celestiall Hierusalem, and to the company of innumerable Angels, and to the Church of the first borne which are written in heauen. Which place the Ministers haue corrupted thus, and to the cōgregatiō of the first borne, taking away therby the force of the Apostles saying, who prayseth the Hebrews made Christians in regard that therby they were ioyned to the primitiue Church, or the Church of the first borne; for so readeth S. Chrisostome with vs, primitiuorum fidelium. The force of the which word primitiue Church, because the Mi∣nisters cānot abide, they haue made the sentence obscure in changing Church into congregation. So that by this translatiō of the Ministers there is no more a militant or triumphant Church, but a Congregation: and Christ is not the head of the Church, but of the Congregation: and this congrega∣tion at the casting down of the Church was in a few Lords whose posterity hath exactly bene punished by God, as all Scotland knoweth. 2. Lykewise they haue taken out the word Catholike in the title of S. Iohns Epistle. The first Catholike Epistle of S.
Iohn; They haue turned, The Generall Epistle: as in the Creed or Beliefe they cannot abide those words, The holy Catholike Church, but rather, the holy Vniuersall Church: vsing al∣wayes noueltyes, which is an infallible token of heretiks: neuertheles other Greeke words (which are to their fan∣cy) they keep and vse, as Bishop, Deacon, Baptisme, Eu∣charist, Psalmes, and such; but the holy Fathers S. Hie∣rome, S. Athanasius, Amphilochius, Nazianzemus, Cyril∣lus Hierosolymitanus, S. Augustine, and sundry others do call it, the Catholike and Canonicall Epistle of S. Iohn. Ca∣tholike, because it was written to all Christians, not to particulars, as S. Paul to the Corinthians, Ephesians, &c. Canonicall, because it was belieued as the word of God vniuersally.Tract. 7. in 2. Ep. Ioan. Canonica est ista epistola (sayth S. Augustine) per omnes gentes recitatur, orbis terra authoritate retinetur, orbem terrarum ipsa adsicauit. But neither the Scots nor latin Bible vsed in Scotland, is, or euer shall be, by any forraine nation acknowledged for the word of God. 3. The third place which the Ministers haue cor∣rupted is in the Epistle to the Hebrews, where S. Paul tea∣cheth the infallibility of the faith of the Church of God, though things which we belieue be not euident, for if they were euident, they could not be the obiect of faith. For as, habitus scientiae is euident, so habitus fidei, is ineuident, yet in∣fallible. So sayth the Apostle:Heb. 11. vol. Faith is the ground of things which are hoped for, and the conuiction or demonstration of things which are not seene. Where the Ministers haue turned the eui∣dēce of things, most ignorantly; since it is certayne that inui∣sible things which we belieue are infallible, yet not euident as sayth S. Chrysostome:Lib. 2. fides est eorum quae non sunt mani∣festa, & eorum quae non videntur. And S. Augustine turneth the Greeke word. conuictionē non apparentiū, as signifiyng pro∣perly conuiction, by reason of the infallibility of the true faith, conforme to that saying of his:Aug. serm. 29. de verb. Apo∣stol. What is faith? to be∣lieue that which thou seest not: the reward of this faith is to see that which is to be belieued. And againe:Aug. Ep. 58 ad Consent. Habet fides oculus suos, quibus quodammodo videt, verum esse quod nondum videt, & quibus certissimè videt, nondū se videre quod credit:. The treachery of the
Ministers is to be remarked that in this place they turne the Greeke. word, the euidence (because it makes for the falli∣bility of their faith) and not in other places, as inIoa. 3. v. 20. S. Iohn,1 Cor. 14. v. 14. S. Paul and others, where the fame Greeke word is, yet they do neuer turne it euidence, but otherwyse and far differently from the word euidence. 4. Finally, against the vnity of the Catholike Church the Ministers do translate impiously that saying of SalomōCant. 6. v. 8. Vna est columba mea, My doue is one; insteed wherof they trāslate My doue is alone, to take away the vnity, & to signify their forged inuisibility of their Protestant Church (which they are forced to auow to haue bene alone in the wildernes these 1550. yeares) as if it were a like to say: There is one king in the kingdome,. and, The king is alone in his kingdome. Doth not the Hebrew and Greeke word signifie one, and not alone? Is there not a great difference in the latin tōgue betwixt vnus, one, & solus, alone. To take away wholy out of the Bible the word Church at the first preaching of their heresy, they changed it in the word Congregation, to the end that the word Church should neuer sound in the common peoples eares: then to deface the proprietyes of the Church, as Catho∣like, and one, they translate vniuersall, & alone. To signify that the faith of the Church should not be of ineuident things, eyther to the vnderstanding or to the ey, they translate, faith is the euidence of things, meaning therby that we should not belieue the reall presence, because that it is not euident to the ey, nor yet to our vnderstanding. O Impiety! O abhomi∣nation! to follow the doctrine of these Ministers who are nothing els butOrig. in 2. ad Rom. Scripturarum fures & adulteri, Adulterers of the Scriptures, corrupters of the Ghospell, and false in∣terpreters of the word of God:Ierem. 17. v. 1. whose sinne is written with a pen of Iron, and with the poynt of a diamond, and engrauen vpon the table of their hart, because they haue so impiously corrupted the word of God, falsified the Bible & defiled the Scripture.
The Conclusion of this first Century, or hun∣dred yeares. IT is euident by the forsayd proofs & reasons how that the selfe∣same religion which is now presētly professed in France, Spaine, Italy, Poland, Germany, Flanders, in Asia, Africa, Europe, A∣merica, publikely; in Scotland England & Irland, though priuat∣ly, was before professed constantly in the Apostles tyme. In the which Apostles tyme it is constantly auowed by the Protestants themselues, that the Ile of great Britany (that is Scotland and the other part thereof which now is called England) was conuerted to the Catholike Apostolike and Roman Fayth: to the selfe same Religion and Faith (I say) wherof I made mention before & which I haue set downe in the twenty foure former Articles: It was prea∣ched (I say) to Scotland and England by the Apostles themselues in the first Age, or hundred yeares, as witnesseth Cambdenus, who sayth:In his history of Britany p. 401. & 47. Certum est Britannos in ipsa Ecclesia infantia Christianam re∣ligionem imbibisse. In proofe wherof he there alleadgeth sundry an∣cient authorityes, auowing also that the famous monastery of Glas∣terbury was founded and erected by Ioseph of Arimathia,Matth. 17. v. 57.58. who buryed Christs Body after his Passion and addeth: Nec est cur de hatre ambigamus. M. Harison an English Protestant likewayes af¦firmeth, thatIn his description of Britany annexed to Holinsheds Chronicle. volum. 1. pag. 23. Ioseph preached in Britany in the Apostles tyme, his sepulcher yet in Glastenbury & Epitaph affixed thereto, is proofe suffi∣cient. The same is auowed byIn his catalogue of Bishops. M. Godwin, & M. Iewel:In his pageant of Popes. The Britans (sayth he) being conuerted by Ioseph of Arimathia held that fayth at Augustines comming. And Doctour Fulke:Against the Rhems testamēt in 2. cor. c. 12. The Catho∣like Britans, with whome Christian reigion had continued in succession from the Apostles tyme, would not receaue Augustine. And agayne:In his answer to a coūterfait Catholike pag. 49. The Britanes before Augustines comming continued in the fayth of Christ euen from the Apostles tyme. And M. Fox:In his acts & mo∣numents, printed 1576. pag. 463. The Britanes after the receauing of the fayth, neuer forsooke it for any manner of false preaching, nor for torments. Finally M. Middleton, a famous Pro¦testand auerreth the same plainly:In his Papistomactix printed 1606. pag. 202. The religion (sayth he) cleerly taught in the word of God was brought hither first by Simon Zelotes, and Ioseph of Arimathia, S Paul the Apostle &c. 2. If then the selfesame Religion which S. Augustin found in England & Scotland was preached by the Apostles (as particularly of Scotland auowethNicepho. lib. 2. c. 4. Nicephorus,Theod. de cur. Graec. affect. l. 9. Theodoretus,Tertulli in. lib. cōt. Iudaeos. Ter∣tullian,Origen. in Ezec. hom. 4. Origen,Chysost. hom. Quòd Christus fit Deus. S Chrisostome, (p) Beda & the Protestants, before named:) it followeth of necessity, that the Religion which Beda in hist. Els. passi.
the Apostles then preached, is that selfe same religion, for which the Catholikes of Scotland, England & Ireland are now presently per∣secuted. Because Venerable Bede (the most famous & ancient En∣glish history-writer) maketh mention plentifully, that the religion which S. Augustin at his comming found in England & Scotland, was no other, but that which is now professed by the Roman Ca∣tholikes, to wit, the vse of Masse, making of vowes, pilgrimages, inuo∣cation of Saints &c. as the history of Beda sheweth at large. More∣ouer, that this selfe same Religion preached by the Apostles, by Marcus, Dionysius, & Palladius to our Nation of Scotland, by Au∣gustin to England, by S. Patrike to Ireland, hath euer continued as publikely & only professed in al Christendome without any deba∣table contradiction till the comming of Luther and Caluin, is also manifest: first because no History-wryter, no not one of these thre Kingdome, or of any other Kingdome, before the comming of Lu∣ther & Caluin, do make any mention of any change of the Catho∣like religion in these Kingdomes for the space of 1559. yeares. Se∣condly the Scots & English history-wryters since Luther & Caluin (yea Protestantes) do make mention of diuers other alterations & changes, which happened either in temporall or Church affayres in these three Kingdoms▪ yet they make no mention at all, that for the space of 1550. yeares there was any change or mutation in Religion. Haue they not set downe in particular the fundations of many Bi∣shops Seas, Cathedrall Churches, Colledges, Monasteries in Scot∣land, England and Ireland? yet they speake, no not one word, that euer there was any chāge of religion: Which is an infallible proofe & marke, that the selfe same religion which was taught to vs by the Apostles themselues hath alwayes continued to this our Age. To the wise consideration whereof, as also to the carefull reading of these two former books & parts, I earnestly exhort, & humbly re∣quest you, my deere Countrey-men, & that by the respect of your owne saluation, by your Christian zeale to the true religion, by the passion & death of Christ Iesus who suffered for vs all. And so not doubting to preuayle with you in so iust a request, so necessary a petition, & so reasonable a postulation, I will continue my dayly prayers to God for you, that it may please his heauenly maiesty to blesse you with the inward light of the true Religion, with the hea∣uenly gift of the true Catholike Faith & profession, wherin your noble Ancestors, valiant & wise Kings raygned happily, and dyed peaceably. The end of the second Part, or first Century. FINIS.
THE GROVND OF THE CATHOLIKE AND ROMAN RELIGION IN THE WORD OF GOD. With the Antiquity and Continuance therof, throughout all Kingdomes and Ages. COLLECTED Out of diuers Conferences, Discourses, and Disputes, which M. Patricke Anderson of the Society of IESVS, had at seuerall tymes, with sundry Bishops and Ministers of Scotland, at his last imprisonment in Edenburgh, for the Catholike Faith, in the yeares of our Lord 1620. and 1621. Sent vnto an Honourable Personage, by the Compyler, and Prisoner himselfe. The third Part, & second Century. Philip. 1. Vers. 12. & 13. And I will haue you know, Brethren, that the thinges about me, are come to the more furtherance of the Ghospell: so that my bandes were made manifest in all the Court &c. Permissu Superiorum, Anno M.DC.XXIII.
TO THE MOST HONOVRABLE AND CONSTANT CATHOLIKES in Scotland. WHo doth not see (most dearly Be∣loued, Worthy and Constant CA∣THOLIKES) but that this third Part, or Treatise of my Works, doth chiefly, and principally belonge to you that are Catholiks in Scotland, as hauing receaued the Catholike Religiō vniuersally in your Country in the second Age, (or at least in the very beginning of the third Age) in the persō of King Donald▪ your first Christian King, and his Nobility, you being most worthy children of so renowned Parents, most honourable Of-spring of so excellent ancestours, most glorious posterity of so famous antiquity, whome future ages will iustly esteeme and extoll aboue many of your predecessour for retaining that in tyme of war which the left to you in tyme of peace, and for defen∣ding that by singular constancy in your sufferings, which they both receiued, & left you by quiet Traditiō.
Which Tradition, or Catholike religion being pro∣ued and declared most cleerly in this second age or cen∣tury; I doe by offering the same vnto you, but present the history of your own Kings of Scotland, the records and Chronicles of your owne families, the pedigree & Genealogy of your owne Forefathers, the antiquity & Nobility of your own progenitors, together with your iust Title & Clayme to their Inheritance, producing iointly for the same the word of God, the Scripture, the Bible, the testimonies of the holy Fathers of this age, yea, the very monuments of your owne Kingdome, which no man but foolish, can deny or call in doubt. True it is, that by Gods holy prouidence you are borne in this time of warre, tribulation and contradicti∣on, insteed of that large peace and tranquillity which your ancestours enioyed, in the vse and exercise of that religion, for which you striue and suffer now presently in SCOTLAND; which sufferings of yours though for the present they seeme vnpleasāt & distast∣full to flesh & bloud, yet assuredly will the houre come when it shall proue a most singular benefit, an eternall blisse, glory & honour in your behalfe; by reason that,1. Thes. 1. You are become such followers of Christ, and of his A∣postles, as receyuing the word of God with ioy of the holy Ghost in great tribulation, you are made an example or spe∣ctacle to all other faythfull people in Macedonia and A∣chaia, by grace of your fayth, which is published euery where throughout the world. You are of the blessed number of those to whome as the Apostle sayth,Philip. 1. it is granted not only to belieue in God, but also to suffer for God. Yea, I may say, to my great comfort and consolation, of you as he sayd and gloryed of himselfe, and his fellowes: Vincula vestra
manifesta fiunt in Christo in omni Praetorio: Your bands & sufferings for Christ are made notorious thoughout all the tribunall seats of Scotland, which God hath visi∣ted now of late extraordinarily, by reason of the extra∣ordinary and barbarous proceeding of your enemyes in your behalfe (Et inimici vestri sunt Iudices) as your very enemies witnesse the same. Your Countrey of Scotland hath been exceeding famous and reuowned in forraine nations, by reason of antiquity & constācy of the Catholike religion, with∣out any interruption, the space of fourteene hundred yeares, without any marke of heresy or schisme, as (be∣sides▪ many others history-writers) a famous forrayne writer witnesseth saying thus: NullaBozius lib. 8. de sig. Eccles. cap. 1. gens è. Boreali∣bu tamdui perstitit in vnanimi Religionis vnius consensu, vt Scotia: and by reason of this constancy in religion, Scotland was alwayes free frō the yoake and dominion of forraine Kings, saith the same writer: NullaEodem loco. gens njus res vel gracis vel latini scriptis illustratae, tāto tēpore indigenas habuit reges, vt Scotia. Your countrey was in such manner ennobled with many holy, learned & fa∣mous Bishops, who by reasō of their great zeale & cha∣rity did preach the Catholike & Roman religion in di∣uers forraine Natiōs, specially in Germany, where they were preferred to Ecclesiasticall and politicall dignity by Charles the great, and Emperour, before other nati∣ons, by reason of their Holinesse, Vertue, and Fidelity sayth PaulusLib. 2. de gest. Fran. Aemilius: Honores magistratus{que} alie∣nigenis, & imprimis Scotis, mandabat, quorum egregia fide virtute{que} vtebatur. Your Countrey is in like man∣ner renowned for the great number of holy Catholike Kings, Queenes, and Royall Posterity, famous to this day in diuers Kingdomes of Europe, who all
now glorious in heauen receaue a particular consolati∣on by your integrity, and constancy in the selfe same Catholike religion, which many of them sealed with their bloud, praying for your perseuerance in that most honourable course & profession. Which offering of prayers for you, though it be cō∣mon to all the Saints in heauen, yet particularly that B. Queene and Martyr Q. MARY, our Princes most gracious & holy Grand-mother, doth offer vp her pray∣ers for your perseuerance in the Catholike religion, as hauing experimēted during her mortall life your fide∣lity in her Seruice, against the calumnies, sedition & re∣bellion of the Ministers, of whome his Maiesty iustly saith; Me persecuti sunt à iuuentute mea. And as it is a great honour & glory to you to haue had so many Blessed & holy Kings & Queenes, as pro∣fessours of your owne religion, so it is a great honor & comfort vnto you to haue had, aboue other Christian Kingdoms, the religion for which you do suffer, confir∣med & sealed, after fourteen hundred yeares continu∣ance in Scotland, with the holy bloud of a B. Queene; of whom besides others, a forrayne Author saith thus: Christus hoc magnum laudabilissimum{que} bonum septentrio∣ni dedit, vt Scotia haberet martyrem Reginam, Regis filiam, coniugem & Matrem. Whose holy prayers will be the more effectuall in your behalfe, that be constant in that religion, which she confirmed by the admirable con∣stancy of twenty years Imprisonment, and sealed with her Royal bloud. To the which end I will offer vp like∣wise my poore prayers to God the Father, as being, All your most humble Seruant, P. A.
THE SECOND AGE, OR CENTVRY. A Table, or Catalogue of some Roman Catholikes, which shew that from the yeare of Christ 100. vntill 200. the Catholike, Apoctolike, and Roman Fayth and Religi∣on did successiuely continue, without any interruption. CHAP. I. The yeare of our Lord. The chiefe Pastours of the Roman Church. Pastours, Do∣ctours, and Pro∣fessours of the Ro∣man Fayth. Kings of Scotland from the yeare of Christ 100. vntill 200. 103. Anacletus. Irenaeus Bishop of Lions and martyr. Pius Pope & Mar∣tyr. Alexander Pope and Martyr. Iusti∣nus Philosophus & Martyr. Tertullian who had written before he follow∣ed Montanus many things Catholikly Luctacus. 103. Mogallus. 136. Conarus. 148. Ethodius 1. 162. Sathrael. 192. Donaldus 1. The first Christian and Catho∣like King of Scotland, of whom du Rosiers Tom. 6. stemmat. Lothar. sayth thus 112. Euaristus. 121. Alexander 1.
132. Sixtus 1. Telesphorus, Polycar∣pus, Origen, S. Cy∣prian and many o∣thers. Likewise of our Scottish Nati∣on sundry holy & learned Bishops, Priests, & Abbots as the Saints Pris∣cus, Amphibalus, Modocus, Calanus Ferranus, Ambia∣nus, Marnocus, frō whom Kilmarnoke in Cuninghame, cal∣led by vs, Culden or Culdis, as wor∣shipers of the true God, Cltores dei: as I haue set down at large in my booke Of the famous men of our Scottish Nation, intitled, Menologiū Sāctorū regni Scotia. Donaldus 1. Etho∣dij frater Rex cle∣mentissimus, Pri∣mus Scotorum re∣gum Catholicam & Romanam fidē professus; primus∣que nummos au∣reos & argen teos, cruce ornatos in Scotia cudit. Of the Conuersion of King Donald to the Ca∣tholike and Roman Religiō sundry foraine Authors do witnesse; as Baronius, Sāde∣rus, Azorius, Gual∣terus, & many others which I haue at large se down in the life of S. Padie. To be short I omit the Kinges of England, Ireland, France, Spayne &c. 142. Telesphorus. 154. Higinius. 158. Pius 1. 165. Aniceus. 175. Soter. 179. Eleutherus. 194. Victor 1.
The first and second Article. 1. That the Catholike Romane Church, belieued the Reall Presence of Christs body in the blessed Sacrament, after the wordes of Consecration. 2. And that saying of Masse, was vniuersally in vse in this second Age. CHAP. II. AS there is nothing that sheweth more vnto vs the infinite goodnes, the vnspea∣kable loue, and charity of God, then the institution of the Blessed Sacrament: so there is no mystery of our Faith which the deadly enemy of mankind, the Di∣uell, aymeth more to ouerthrow, by his familiar instruments the Ministers, then this most blessed, dreadfull, and admirable Sacrament. On the other side, considering with my selfe the voyd, and empty Table of the Ministers, which neyther contayneth the Body, nor Bloud of Christ, it maketh me to rememberAelius Lampridi∣us de Ant. Heliogaba∣lo. Heliogaba∣lus the Emperour his Table, who inuiting the Romā Prin∣ces thereunto, set painted, and artificiall dishes before them, which could neyther please their tast, nor satisfy their hun∣gry appetites: so the Ministers in this holy Banquet, prepa∣red by the hand of our Sauiour, doe forge and deuise figu∣red, and metaphoricall meates, vnworthy of the goodnes of Christ, vnworthy of the Maiesty of God, and no wayes answerable to his promise made vnto vs, nor agreable to the necessities of vs his inuited guests. 2. Besides those proofes, which I vsed in the first Age or Century, I adde these other drawne out of the expresse wordes of the Bible:Marc. 14. v. 22. . Barach. Iesus tooke breade, and blessing brake it, and gaue to them, and sayd, Take eate, This is my body. Which
wordes (though corrupted by the Ministers) are more playne in the Syriake Language, which our Sauiour spake; in the which word by word it is thus: This truely is y body, lithauhi pagri, or, Hoc est ipsum corpus meum: where maliciou∣sly Tremelius hath left out the affixe hi,hi. which hath a great Emphasie. S. Augustine reades these wordes, This my bloud &c. in the future tense thus:Aug. in exosi. psal. 3 se him in psal. 5. This is my bloud of the new Te∣stament, which shalbe shedde for many, in remission of sinnes. Which translation of his, is alwayes of a great force for vs Catho∣likes. For eyther the word Bloud is taken properly or figu∣ratiuely, for the signe of his bloud. If properly, S. Paulis with vs; if figuratiuely, then the true bloud of Christ was not shed on the Crosse for vs, which is a horrible blasphe∣my. But what Body was giuen to the Apostles in the last supper? What bloud was shed for vs in the last supper? The same Body (saythAugu lib. 12. cōt. Faust. cap. 10. l. 3. de Trinitate cap. 10. lib. 6. Conf. c. 13. S. Augustine) in which he endured, & suf∣fered so much. What bloud? The same liquor, which flowed from his pierced side. How then can it be a figure of that liquor? And agayne S. Augustine boldly affirmeth, that, The same victime, or holy Sacrifice, is dispensed from the Aultar, whereby the hand writing is defaced, which was contrary to vs. How then can it be a figure? And S. Iohn Chrysostome auoweth, that the selfe same bloud was giuen to his disciples,Hom. 24 in 1. Co∣rinth. c. 11. Qui ex latere fluxit, which issued from his side. And the selfe-same body to be in the blessed Sacrament, which was whipped, imbrued with bloud, wounded with a speare, and which the Sunne seeing cru∣cified, withdrew his beames. Is it possible for the wit of man to speake more playnely? And a little after, this holy Father cōstantly auerreth that the body of Christ which is in the B. Sacrament, is the selfe same, which was adored by the Magi, and put in the cribbe: Hoc corpus in praesepi reueriti sunt Magi, & cum timore, & tremore plurimo adorauerunt: tu veò non in praesepi, sed in Alari, non mulierem quae in vlnis teneat, sed sa∣cerdotem praesentem, & spiritum superabundè super proposito Sacra∣mento dissusum vides▪ And agayne: Non Angelos, non Archange∣los, non caelos, non caelos caelorum, sed ipsum horum omnium Domi∣num tibi stendo: neque eum conspicaris tantùm sed tangis, & come∣dis; non hominis regium puerum, sed vnigenitum Dei filium accipis.
But to take away all ambiguity, and excuse from the Mi∣nisters, S. Iohn Damascene speaketh so playnly, and coun∣trepointe, as it were, of set purpose to the Ministers, saying thus:Damasc lib. 4. de fide ortho∣doxa c. 14. Christ sayd not this bread is a figure of my body, but this is my body. The same saithIn 26. Matth Theophilactus, andIn Nic. Synodo 2. act. 6. Epipha∣nius. 3. The other place which proueth the vertue of this Catholike doctrine is the practise of the primitiue Church, which S. Paul remarketh saying:1. Cor. 10. v 16. . The chalce of benediction which we doe blesse, is it not the communication of the bloud of Christ? And the bread, which we breake, is it not the participation of the bo∣body of our Lord? Which place (though corrupted by the Mi∣nisters) yet sheweth manifestly that the words blessing, is re∣ferred to the chalice, and consequently cannot be turned in∣to thankes-giuing; otherwise this absurde translation would insue: The cup of thankes-giuing, which we thankes-giue. And commonly when the word blessing, is referred to vnreaso∣nable creatures, it is taken properly, and not for thankes-gi∣uing, as the blessing of bread inCap 9. v. 16. S. Luke: yea our Sa∣uiours blessing euer wrought some admirable effect in the thing which was blessed, which gaue occasion to S. Gre∣gory Nissen to say, that in vertue of Christ his blessing, theGregori orat. Ca∣tech. Substance of bread, and wine was turned into the body, and bloud of Christ. And S. Cyprian therefore also calleth theCypr. de coena Domini. Chalice, consecrated with holy blessing. Finally I adde this argument, which I propounded to a Minister when I was very sicke in the Tollbooth of Edenburge. Our Saui∣our gaue that to his disciples, which was giuen for vs; but Christs true body was giuen for vs; Ergo, Christ gaue his true body to his disciples. The Maior & the Minor are in the Bible. As for the holy Sacrifice of the Masse, S. Luke (who wrote in the greeke tongue) maketh mention that the cu∣stome of the primitiue Church, and in the tyme of the A∣postles, was to say Masse, which he calleth Liturgia:Act. Apost. c. 13. v. 2. . And as they were ministring to our Lord, and fasting, the holy Ghost sayd &c. That is; as they were sacrificing vnto our Lord, asIn hūc locum. Erasmus himselfe turneth: sacrificantibus illis Domino. YeaIn the sauro lin∣guae greca Henricus Stephanus (though a Hugenot) affirmeth that ,
in the Ecclesiasticall History is taken for offering vp Sacrifice, which because it is a publike seruice, is called Liturgia: which word as it signifieth a publike seruice, so when it is ap∣plyed to sacred and holy seruice, is taken for a Sacrifice: yea in sundry languages the Sacrifice of the Masse, is called the Diuine seruice, as in French, le Seruice Diuin, or le Sainct Ser∣uice; and in Italian, il Diuino Seruitio. The Syriak word si∣gnifieth the same more playnely metthchaschpin; & our La∣tin translatour turneth the same Greeke word in other pla∣ces, to Sacrifice; asHeb. 10 v. 11. Omnis quidem Sacerdos praesto est quotidie ministrans, easdem saepe offerens hostias. That is, And euery Priest appeareth dayly ministring, where the word. Ministring, si∣gnifieth to offer vp Sacrifice. It is well knowne to the lear∣ned, that, that which the Latine Church calleth Missa, Masse, the Greeke Church calleth to this day Liturgia, the soue∣raygne worship of God; farre different from that Idoll-ser∣uice of the Ministers of Scotland, wherin they bow down their knees before a peece of bread, giuing therby the true worship of God to a pure creature, directly agaynst the first commaundement, and directly agaynst their Oath sworne and subscribed by them in sundry Parlaments. 4. The 4. place of the Bible is:1. Co∣rinth. 11. v. 29. He that eateth, and drinketh vnworthily, eateth and drinketh his owne damnation, because he discerneth not our Lords body. Where the Apostle presuppo∣seth some to take the body of Christ vnworthily. I argue then thus. To receyue the body of Christ worthily, only Fayth is sufficient, say the Ministers, Ergo, he who hath not Fayth, cannot receyue at all the body of Christ, neyther worthily nor vnworthily; and consequently none can re∣ceyue the body of Christ vnworthily: which is directly a∣gainst the saying of S. Paul. So that the Ministers doctrine, in receauing Christs body only by Fayth, belyeth manife∣stly the holy Apostle, seeing that where Faith is, he is wor∣thily receyued, where Fayth is not, he is no way receyued at all; yet the Apostle putteth as an infallible ground, some to receyue Christs body, and that vnworthily; for the which cause, sayth he,Ver. 30. Many are weake, and sicke among you.
5. Of the premises I inferre, that we Catholikes haue these manifest places for vs, set downe in the Bible: 1. This is my body. 2. This truly is my body. 3. This is my bloud, which is shed for you 4. The bread which we breake is the partici∣pation of the body of our Lord. 5. As they were sacrificing vnto our Lord (speaking of the Apostles.) 6. He that eateth the body of Christ vnworthily &c. I aske now that it might please the Pro∣testants to giue me as playne, and manifest places of the Bible, which make agaynst vs Catholikes, or else to shew this poynt of their Religion in the expresse word of the Bi∣ble. 1. We take the body of Christ by Fayth only, and not really. 2. This is a figure of my body. 3. This is a figure of my bloud. Which the Minute s neuer being able to do, will present their do∣tish consequences for the word of God: but I answere with S. Augustine; That we care not what consequence, this or that Minister makes not set downe in the word of God; but make accoūt what God saith in the expres word of the Bible. Testimonies of the holy Fathers in this second Age, concerning the Reall Presence, and holy Sacrifice of the Masse. The first Section. S. Alexander Pope and Martyr affirmeth the holy Body, and bloud of Christ to be in the holy Sacrifice of the Masse:Alex. Pap. mart. ep. 1. ad omnes or∣thod. extat tomo 1. Conc. & de consec dist. 2. Can. In Sacramen∣torum. In Sacramentorum quo{que} oblationibus, quae inter Missarū solemnia Domino offeruntur, Passio Domini miscenda est, vt eius cuius corpus & sanguis conficitur, Passio celebretur. And a little after: There is nothing so great amongst Sacrifices, as the Body & Bloud of Christ, nor yet any oblation is to be compared with that oblation. 2. S. Telesphorus:Epistl ad vniuer∣sos. Extat tom. 1. Cō∣cil. Nocte vero sancta Natiuiatis Do∣mini Saluatoris Missas celebrent, & hymnum Angelicum in eis so∣lemniter decantent, quoniam & eadem nocte ab Angelo Pastoribus nunciatus est &c. Gloria in excelsis Deo. Which holy custome to say three Masses on Christmas day hath beene famous, and euer kept to this day in the Catholike Church, signifying therby the threefold generation of Christ: first, from all e∣ternity, as God begotten of the Father. 2. In tyme, being borne of the Blessed Virgin Mary at midnight. 3. His gene∣ration
in euery faythfull soule by his grace, & gifts: wher∣of speaketh S. Paul:1. Cor. 4. v. 15. In Christ Iesus I haue begotten you, through the Ghospell. 3. S Higinius Martyr:Tom. 1. Conc. Omnes Basilicae cum Missa de∣bent semper consecrari. 4. S. Pius Martyr:In ep. ad Iustum Epil. vien. Extat tom. 1. Concil. Antequam Româ exijsses, soror nostra Euprepia (si bene recordaris) Titulum domus suae pauperibus assignaut, vbi nunc cum pauperibus nostris commorantes Missas a∣gimus. 5. S. Soter Martyr commaundeth vniuersally that no Priest should say Masse except he be fasting; which cu∣stome was in the Apostles tyme.Extat tom 1. Concil. Nullus post cibum potum{que} siue quodlibet minimum sumpum, Missas facere, nullusque absquè patentis molestiae prouentu Minister vel Sacerdos, cùm coeperit imper∣fecta officia praesumat omnino relinquere. 6. S. Iustinus Martyr one of the most famous, lear∣ned, and holy of this age, speaketh playnely of the blessed Sacrament, and the holy Sacrifice of the Masse, saying: that euen as the Incarnation of Christ was made by the omni∣potency, and power of the holy Ghost, so the changing of the breade, and wine into the body, and bloud of Christ is made by the same omnipotency:Apolog 2. ad Anto. Imper. Non enim vt communem panem ne{que} communem potum ista sumimus: sed quemadmodum per verbum Dei caro factus Iesus Christus Saluator noster, & carnem & sanguinem salutis nostrae causa habuit: Ita alimoniam per precationē verbi ab ipso profecti Eucharistizatam, ex qua sanguis, & caro nostra per mutationem aluntur, incarnati illius Iesu carnem & sanguinem esse edocti sumus. First, he sayth that it is not common bread, as the Protestants bread is. 2. That the flesh, and bloud of Christ Iesus, who became man for vs, is in the blessed Sa∣crament. 3. And a litle before he auoweth: that after the Masse is sayd by the Priest in the presence of the people, the custome was that the Deacon distributed the blessed Sacra∣ment to euery one present. And agayne disputing agaynst a Iew called Tryphon he affirmeth, that only Priests did offer vp the Euangelicall Sacrifice much more noble then that of the Iewes:Dialog. cum Try∣phone. post medium. Ne{que} verò à quoquam Deus hostias accipit, nisi à suis Sacerdotibus. Omnes igitur qui huius nomine sacrificia of∣ferunt
quae Iesus Christus fieri tradidit, hoc est in Eucharistia Panis & calicis, quae in omni terrae loco à Christianis fiunt. 7. S. Irenaeus Bishop of Lions in France, and disci∣ple of S. Iohn the Euangelist:Lib. 4. cap. 34. post mediū. Quemadmodum qui est à ter∣ra panis percipiens vocationem Dei, iam non communis panis est, sed Eucharistia ex duabus rebus constans, terrena & caelesti: sic & cor∣pora nostra percipientia Eucharistiam, iam non sunt corruptibilia, spem resurrectionis habentia. Conforme to the doctrine of this holy Father (who sheweth plainly what Religion was in Frāce in this Centrury, or Age) S. Augustine termeth the holy Eucharist, or Masse,Augu. lib. de ciui∣tate Dei c. 20. & lib. 9. confes. cap. 12. a most true Sacrifice, by which true remission of sinnes is purchased; The Sacrifice of our price, or ransome. S. Cyril of Hierusalem calleth the Masse:Catech. 5. an holy and dreadfull Sacrifice profiting the soules of the departed. And Tertullian to counterpoint the Protestants, calleth it aTert. lib. de ve∣landis vir∣gin. cap. 9. Sacrifice, which no woman can be permitted to offer. With what conscience then can Ministers say that there is no externall Sacrifice except praiers, almes-giuing &c. which are com∣mon to men, and women. 8. Tertullian an auncient, and famous writer, ma∣keth plainly mention of the Reall Presence, and holy Sa∣crifice of the Masse, and of sundry other points of the Ca∣tholike Religion, especially before he fell into the errours of Montanus the heretike: disputing then agaynst Marcion & the Marcionistes (who with our Puritanes made great ac∣count of figures, saying that Christ became not true man, but tooke only the figure, and outward shape of man) pro∣ueth that Christ was true man and God, by reason that he left in the Blessed Sacrament, his true body and bloud.Lib. cont. Mar∣cio. cap. 20. Plauè (sayth Tertullian) de substantia Christi putant & Marcio∣nitae suffragari Apostolum sibi, quod phātasma carnis fuerit in Christo, cum dicit quod in effigie Dei constitutus non rapinam existimauit pa∣riari Deo, sed exhausit semetipsum accepta effigie serui, non veritate (as sayd the Marcionists) & in similitudine hominis, non in ho∣mine, & figura inuentus, non substantia, idest non carne. Where∣vnto Tertullian answereth: quasi non & figura, similitudo, & effigies substantia quo{que} accedunt. Bene autem quod & albi Christū imaginem Dei inuisibilis appellat: Nunquid ergo & hic quâ in effigie
cum Dei collocat? Aequè non erit Deus Christus verè, si nec homo ve∣rè fuit in effigie hominis constitutus. Where Tertullian teacheth two sortes of figures, the one which signifieth the thing figured as absent, & not present with the figure; so Manna is called a figure of the Blessed Sacrament, the red Sea a fi∣gure of our Baptisme &c. The other sort signifieth the thing figured, and which is present with the figure, as our Saui∣our is calledHeb. 1. v. 1. Colos. 1. v. 15. Figura substantia Dei, the figure of the sub∣stance of God the Father; yet the substance of God the Fa∣ther was really present in Christ. In which sense, and mea∣ning Tertullian here, and S. Augustine in some other pla∣ce once calleth the B. Sacrament, the figure of Christs bo∣dy, by reason of the outward shapes of bread, and wine, which in effect are a figure of Christ really there contained, bu not a simple figure of a thing absent as the Ministers dreame. As Christ is said to haue taken the forme & figure of man, and yet he was, and is truly, and really man: so it is in this case; though the B. Sacrament be called a figure sometimes, though seldome, yet it is neuer called a figure of Christ absent, but of Christ present, who is signified to vs by the outward shape, and figure of bread, and wine. 9. The same learned, & ancient Father maketh men∣tion that in his time & Age the custome was to offer the Sa∣crifice of the Masse vpon altars:Lib. ad Saulam cap. . Sacrificamus pro salute Impe∣ratoris sed Deo nostro & ipsius. And againe:Lib. de orat. c. 14 De stationum die∣bus non putant pleri{que} sacrificiorum orationbus interueniendum, quòd statio soluenda sit accepto corpore Domini. Ergo deuotū Deo obsequium Eucharistia resoluit, an magis Deo obligat? Nōne solemnior erit statio tua, si & ad aram Dei steteris? Accepto corpore Domini & reseruato, vtrum{que} salaum est, & participatio Sacrificij, & executio officij. 10. Origen a learned Father of this Age putteth the matter out of doubt, and teacheth vs of the Reall Pre∣sence, and Sacrifice of the Masse foure things; first, that, that which is receyued in the Blessed Sacrament is incorrupti∣ble, and that Christ himselfe intreth into vs:Hm. . in dues Quando sanctum cibum illud{que} incorruptum accipis epulum, quando vitae pane & poclo frueris, mnducas & hbis corpus & sanguinem Domini, tunc Dominus sub tectum tuum ingreditur. Et tuergo humilians te∣metipsum
imitare hunc Centurionē & dicito, Domine non sum dignus vt intres sub iectum meum. 2. He teacheth that the bread is chā∣ged into the body of Christ, which change is called, Transubstan∣tiation, and that the bread is offered vp in the holy Masse be∣fore the change therof:Lib 8. contra Cl∣sum. Nos qui omnium rerum Conditori pla∣cere studemus, cum precibus, & gratiarum pro beneficijs acceptis ac∣tione oblatos panes edimus, corpus iam per precationem factos sanctum quoddam & sanctificans, vt entes eo cum sano proposito. 3. He teach∣eth that the Priests which say Masse should be vnmarryed, and should vow perpetuall chastity:Hom. 23. in Nū. Certum est, quia im∣peditur Sacrificium indesinensijs qui coniugalibus necessitaibus ser∣iunt. Vnde videtur mihi quod illius est solius offerre Sacrificium in∣desinens, qui indesinenti & perpetuae se deuouerit castitati. 4. That the Priests in saying of Masse, and the Catholikes in recea∣uing the B. Sacrament should be very wary, that nothing of the holy Host perish, or fall to the ground:Hom. 13 in Exod. Nostis qui diuinis mysterijs interesse consuestis, quomodo cùm suscipitis corpus Domini, cum omni cautela & veneratione seruatis, ne ex eo parum quid decidat, ne consecrati muneris aliquid delabatur. Reos enim vos creditis, & recte creditis, si quid inde per negligentiam decidit. 11. S. Cyprian that famous, and learned Doctour of Afrike witnesseth lykewise: first, that the bread, and wine is turned into the precious body, and bloud of Christ:Serm. de coena Domini. Panis iste communis in carnem & sanguinem mutatus, procurat vi∣tam, & incrementū. 2. That by the vertue of the wordes pro∣nounced in the person, and authority of Christ, the bread is chāged into his precious body:Eodem serm. quem Dominus discipulis porrigebat, non effigie, sed natura mutatus, omnipotentia Verbi factus est caro; & sicut in persona Christs humanitas videbatur, & latebat Diuinitas, ita Sacramento visibili ineffabiliter diuina se infudit es∣sentia, vt esset religioni circa Sacramenta deuotio, & ad veritatem, cuius corpus & sanguis Sacramenta siut, sincerior pateret accessus, vs{que} ad paricipationem Spiritus. 3. That the selfe same bloudy Sacrifice, which our Sauiour offered vpon the Crosse, is of∣fered vnbloudily by the Priestat Christs commaundement:Epist. 63. ad Cae∣cilium post medium. Si Iesus Christus Dominus & Deus noster ipse est summus Sacer∣dos Dei Patris; & Sacrificium Patri seipsum primus obtulit, & hoc fieri in sui commemorationem praecepit; vti{que} ille Sacerdos vice Chri∣sti
verè fungitur, qui id, quod Christus fecit, imitatur; & Sacrifi∣cium verum, & plenum tunc offert in Ecclesia Deo Patri, si sic incipiat offerre secundum quod ipsum Christum videat obtulisse. 4. That Priests, and Churchmen who offered the holy Sacrifice should not medle thēselues with worldly things, as to take vpon them to be Tutors, cōdemning therin the fact of one Geminius Victor, for whome (now being departed) S. Cyprian would not suffer, by reason of that fact, the Sa∣crifice of the Masse to be offered:Epist. ad Clerum & plebem. Singuli diuino Sacerdotio honorati, & in Clerici ministerio constituti, non nisi Altari & Sa∣crificijs deseruire, & precibus atque orationibus vacare debent. Scri∣ptum est enim, Nemo militans Deo implicat se molestijs secularibus, vt possit placere ei qui se probauit. Quod Episcopi antecessores nostri reli∣gio sè considerantes, censuerunt nequis frater excedens, ad tutelm & curam clericum nominaret; ac si quis hoc fecisset non offerretur pro eo, nec Sacrificiū prodormitione eius celebraretur: ne{que} enim apud altare Dei meretur nominari in Sacerdotum prece, qui ab altari Sacerdotes & Ministros voluit auocare. That Ministers haue falsified the Bible in sundry places, which proue the Reall Presence, and holy Sacrifice of the Masse. The Second Section. THe holy Scripture maketh mention that Melchisedech King and Priest was a figure of our Sauiour Christ Ie∣sus:Psal. 110. v. 4. Thou art a Priest for euer according to the order of Melchise∣dech. For as Melchisedech was Priest, and King, so was our Sauiour; as Melchisedech offered vp Sacrifice in bread and wine, and then presented both to Abraham, so our Sa∣uiour offered vp a Sacrifice of his body, and bloud vnder the formes of bread, and wine sayth Eusebius:Euseb. lib. 5. de∣monst. E∣uang. c. 3. Euen as he, who was Priest of Nations was neuer seene to offer corporall Sa∣crifice, but only bread, and wine, when he blessed Abraham: so first our Lord, and Sauiour himselfe, then Priests that came from hm, exercising the spiritual office of Priesthood in all nations, after the Ec∣clesiasticall ordinances, do present the msteries of his body, & health∣full bloud in bread and wyne. As the Bible it selfe witnesseth in
playne termes:Gen. c. 14. v. 18. Erat enim Sacerdos Altissimi  Melchisedech King of Salem, bringing forth bread and wyne, for he was the Priest of God most high, blessed him and sayd &c. Signifying, that because he was a Priest he of∣fered vp bread, and wine: for he was the Priest of God. The Ministers to shew that he offred vp no Sacrifice, do translate agaynst the Hebrew, Chaldean, and Greeke copies thus: Melchisedech King of Salem brought forth breade, and wyne: & he was a Priest, not Signifying that he offered vp any Sacrifice, though the Hebrew word,Iud. c. 6. v. 18.19. Hotsi, brought forth, is a word pertayning to sacrifice, and importeth that the bread, and wine was first offered in Sacrifice, and then presented to A∣braham: and the wordes, for he was a Priest, can haue no other sense, but that he did the office of a Priest in offering vp the bread, and wine: and the Greeke word, , signi∣fieth the cause wherefore he offered; and the Hebrew par∣ticle, ve, sundry tymes signifieth causam, as,Gen. c. 20. v. 4. Thou art but dead for the womans sake, which thou hast taken: for she is a mans wife: according to the Ministers own translation, who here haue translated faythfully this same Hebrew word ve, into for; though aboue they translated it into and, only to fauour their heresy. I demaund of the Ministers; if Christ fulfilled not Melchisedechs figuratiue Sacrifice offered in bread, & wine, in offering vp his owne body, and bloud in his last supper; what other figuratiue Sacrifice of Melchisedech can they find performed by Christ? And when performed he such a Sacrifice? It is not in their power to name any other. 2. Why do the Ministers translate here, Therefore he blessed him, saying, Blessed art thou Abraham? Why translate they not the word, blessing, into thankes-giuing, as they do inMatth. c. 26. v. 26. S. Matthew; for they say to blesse, and to giue thankes is all one: so that Melchisedech in blessing Abraham, gaue thankes to Abraham: can there be greater absurdities imagined? 2. For the better vnderstanding of the second corru∣ption it is to be remarked: that our Sauiour Christ Iesus, as man, was blessed in the first instant of conception; in such sort that his blessed soule was glorified, & saw God intuiti∣uè, face to face euen as now he seeth him in heauen: which is the reason wherefore Christ was on earth both viator, and
comprehensor: & wherefore also Christ being on earth could not walk by Faith: because his blessed soule seeing on earth all things in God, as now he seeth, could not know things by Fayth, which is a great imperfection in respect of the blessed soules in heauen, who haue charity, but not hope or Fayth, as1. Cor. c. 13. v. 13 S. Paul teacheth playnly: seeing then our Sauiour had not Diuine Fayth in this world, he could not re∣ceyue the Sacrament by Fayth only, as the Ministers teach, but really, as we say. Now, to signify that our Sauiour re∣ceyued not the B. Sacrament neyther by Fayth, nor really, the Hugenots in France haue corrupted that of S. Luke. Adonc il leur dit,Cap. 22 v. 15. lay grandement desiré de manger cet Agneau de Pasque auec vous deuant qe ie souffre: Where they haue ioyned to the text the word, Agne. u, a Lambe, which is not in the Greeke; to signify that our Sauiour speaketh not of the last supper, wherein he gaue his precious body, and bloud to his disciples, and to himselfe, as witnesseth the holy Father S. Chrysostome:Chrysost. Hom. 83. in cap. 26. Matth. Christ drunke his owne bloud, to the end that the Apostles should not be amazed, astonished, and troubled: He did that then himselfe the first, to induce his Apostles to the communication of those holy mysteries, for that cause he drūke his owne bloud: . The same sayth Tertulliā explicating those words: desiderio desideraui hoc Pascha māducare vobiscum: where he saith:Lib. 4. contra Marcion. Professus se concupiscentia concupiuisse edere Pascha vt suum; Indignum enim erat quod alienum concupisceret Deus; accep∣tum panē corpus suum fecit. And S. Hierome:Epist. ad Hedibiam quast. 2. nec Moyses dedit nobis panē verum, sed Dominus Iesus ipse conuiua & conuiuiū, ipse co∣medens & qui comeditur.in psal. 33. Finally S. Augustin is of the same opinion, & it carryeth reason, because our Sauiour sayd; I haue earnestly desired to eate this Pasch with you before I suffer; which cannot be vnderstood of the Paschall Lambe, which seuerall tymes he had eaten before with his Apostles. 2. The 14. verse of this same chapter, And when the houre was come, he sate downe, and the twelue Apostles with him, sheweth manifest∣ly that those foresayd wordes cannot be referred to the ea∣ting of the Paschall Lamb, which behooued to be eaten standing, and not sitting, as witnesseth the 12. of Exodus v. 11. as Caluin himselfe auoweth in the 26. of S. Matthew v.
20. True is, that some heady Minister would thinke this to be absurd, of whome I would learne, how can he conceiue the selfe same diuine nature, numero, to be in three persons distinct really? The one is as hard to be conceyued as the other, yet both must be belieued. Is not the selfe same voice of the Minister, when he preacheth in his owne eare, and in the eare of all those that are in the Church? Wherefore may not the body of Christ be in sundry places together miraculously, seeing the voice of man is in sūdry places na∣turally, and seing vnto God there is nothing impossible? 3. Now because the Ministers of France auowe that Christ is receyued in the Sacrament onely by Fayth, and since Christ had not diuine Fayth, they corrupt the Bible, by adding vnto it the word Lambe, to signify thereby, that those wordes, I earnestly desired to eate this Pasche, should be referred to the typicall supper, and not to the mysticall & last supper, wherein he gaue his precious body the night before he suffered; the English Bible doth insinuate the same corruption of the French Bibles, in turning, I haue ear∣nestly desired to eate this passeouer, meaning therby the eating of the Paschall Lambe. 4. The third corruption is in the 7. psal.Psalm. 71 v. 16. alias Psal. 72. v. 16. There shal be an handfull of corne in the earth, euen in the top of mountaynes, & the fruite thereof shall be extolled farre aboue Libanus. Where the Prophet foretelleth that the Sacrifice of the Masse offred in the formes of bread made of corne, shal be aboue the tops of Mountaynes aboue Libanus, that is, as R. Ionathas expoū∣deth: & erit Sacrificium panis in capite monium Ecclesiae. Which prophecy, to deface and disgrace it, the Ministers turne thus: The fruite thereof shall shake lyke the trees of Libanus. Doth not the Greeke worde playnely signify to be extolled?. doth not the Chaldean parap. Iehi Sahir Lathama, erit substantificus pa∣nis, plainely witnes that the Prophet vnderstandeth the ho∣ly bead of the B. Sacrament, which is called substantificll bread by reason that one-substance is turned into another? Doth not RabbyIn hunc psalmum. Salomon expoūd this of the B. Sacra∣ment, Ieh pissath bar, id est, erit placenta frumenti, signifying that the bread vsed in the holy Sacrifice, should not be ba∣ked
in the ouen as prophane bread is, but otherwise: so it is sayd that Christ brake the bread, and not cut it, because that bread was made after the forme of wafers, and not of loaues. Doe not the Rabbins expound those wordes of Deutro∣nomyCap. 16 v. 10. Missath Nidbath (where the very word Missa, Masse, by reason that it is a voluntary Sacrifice is as it were named) witnes, that in the dayes of the Messias, and in the law of grace there shall be perpetuum Sacrificium carnis pane inuolutum, that is, a perpetuall Sacrifice of flesh couered with bread, by reason that the blessed body of Christ is vnder the shapes of bread in the Blessed Sacrament? 5. The fourth corruption is in S. Marke:Mark. cap. 14. v. 22. and Ie∣sus tooke bread, and blessing brake, & gaue it to them. Where the Ministers haue scraped out the word, blessing or blessed: And Iesus tooke the bread, and when he had giuen thankes. If to blesse, and giue thankes be all one, when the word blessing is referred to creatures,Heb. 7. v. 7 why doe they translate thus: And with∣out all contradiction the lesser is blessed of the greater? Were it not more conforme to their sophisticall fashion of translating to say: And without all contradiction the lesse is thanked of the greater▪ The 3.4. and 5. Article. 1. That holy Images. 2. The signe of the holy Crosse. 3. Holy Reliques were with reuerence in vse among the Catholikes in the second Age. CHAP. III. I Did teach before in the first Age spea∣king of the Inuocation of Saints, that the holy Scripture maketh mention of three forts of worshippe, the first due to God only, which is called adoration, or diuine worship; the second is an infe∣riour Religious worship which is due to the holy Saints in heauen, or holy persons on earth, as also to
their holy Reliques, as hauing bene, or being actually in this world the temples of the holy Ghost. This Religious worship was giuen by King Saul to the soule of Samuel:1. Sam. cap. 28. v. 14. And Saul vnderstood that it was Samuel, and he bowed himselfe vpon his face on the earth, and adored. Which place (though cor∣rupted by the Ministers in leauing out the word adored) pro∣ueth manifestly first, that the worship giuen to the soule of Samuel was not diuine, nor yet ciuill, Samuel being dead; then it must needs haue beene religious. That it was the true soule of Samuell which appeared, S. Augustin witnesseth:Aug. de cura pro mortuis c. 15. Samuell the Prophet being dead, fortold future things to Kinge Saul yet liuing. Yea the Scripture it selfe witnesseth the same speaking to the prayse of Samuel:Eccles. cap. 46. He slept, and certified the King, and shewed to him the end of his life. The same is euident by the religious honour giuen to the Propet Elias yet aliue by Abdias the chiefe gouernour of the house of Kinge A∣chab:1. Reg. cap. 18. v. 7. And when Abdias was in the way, Elias met him; who when he knew him, fell on his face, and sayd, my Lord art not thou E∣lias? This worship of Abdias could not be ciuill, for it were ridiculous to say that so great a Prince should ciuilly wor∣ship Elias, farre inferiour in ciuill dignity to Abdias. Like∣wise Nabuchodonosor adored Daniel, that is, worshipped Daniel religiously; for to say that so great a King should prostrate himself at the feete of his captiue DanielDaniel. . in respect of his ciuill and secular dignity, were very ridiculous. It was then an holy and religious worship, which for the ho∣lynes, and sanctity of the lyues of Elias and Daniel, for the excellency of their supernaturall giftes was iustly exhibited vnto them.Iosue 5. As Iosue worshipped the Angell not with a di∣uine worship, for he knew him to be an Angell only, not of a ciuill, for such is giuen only to ciuill and mortall persons; it followeth then, with a religious worship, which the An∣gell likewise commaunded Iosue to giue to the earth it selfe where he was, in putting of his shoes. This worship of the earth of Ierico a prophane field could not be ciuill but rather religious in regard of the Angell, for which it challenged righteously a holy, reuerent, and religious honour. 2. The Arke of the Testament was in such honour a∣mong
the Iewes that Dauid commaunded them to adore it, (for the word Adore, is sundry tymes taken in the Scripture for a religious worship) and the Bethsamites curiously be∣holding the Arke were slayn by God to the nūber of 5000. men. Would God (who is goodnes it selfe) haue so seuere∣ly punished with death such a great number of men for a meere act of discourtesy, or inciuility? It is folly to thinke, and blasphemy to say it. Wherof I inferre, that the holy Re∣liques, and Monuments of Saints, may be lawfully wor∣shipped with religious honour, or reuerence, without any de∣rogation of Diuine honour due to God only. As witnesseth plentifully the auncient and holy Father S. Basil:Basil. Hom▪ de martyr. The Church by honouring them that are departed, encourageth such as are present And S. Gregory playnly witnesseth, that the ho∣nour giuen to the holy Martyr S. Theodore is aboue ciuill honour:De Theodoro. Martyre. To what King is such honour exhibited? What Empe∣rour hath euer bene so famous, and renowned as this poore champion? S. Paul witnesseth, that Glory and Honour are due to euery one that doth well. The Saints in heauen then hauing accomplish∣ed so many vertuous acts should be honoured. If to holy∣nes of life honour be due, superiour vnto ciuill as to perfe∣ction of supernaturall dignity, the Saints in heauen are so perfectly holy that they are admitted in the company of the Holy of holyes. If to wisdom honour be due, they are so wise now in heauen, as they are wise in an higher degree of wis∣dome, for they see in God whatsoeuer they can wish or de∣sire. If to nobility honour be due, they are enobled to be the children of God, and the inheritours of the kingdome of heauen. If to soueraygne dignity honour be due, they sit with God in that heauenly throne, and haue power ouer nations, and so they are to participate of his honour in an higher degree, as they participate in higher degree of his power and glory. And if the Saints in heauen should be thus honoured, shall not their holy tombes and Reliques be honoured? 3. I desire to know of the Ministry of Scotland, what honour they giue to the Sacrament of the Lords supper re∣ceyued by kneelinge? The Scottish Clergy of the last
Parlament answereth:In the last Parla∣ment at E∣denb the 4 of Aug. 1621. n. 1. Considering withall that there is no part of diuine worship more heauenly, and spirituall then is the holy receyuing of the blessed body, and bloud of our Lord, and Sauiour Ie∣sus-Christ &c. Then diuine honour which is onely due to God, is giuen to that action of the receyuing of the supper; which in them is manifest Idolatry, as I proue thus: When diuine honour is giuen to a Creature it is manifest Idolatry, but the action of the receiuing of the Lords supper is a meere Creature. Ergo, it is meere Idolatry to giue a diuine honour thereunto. Is not this intollerable ignorance in the clergy, which was present at the Parlament to say, sweare, and sub∣scribe, that there is no part of diuine worship more heauenly then is the holy receyuing? Is it not a greater act of heauēly worship to adore immediatly God himself, then the figure therof? how can the holy receyuing be diuine honour? How can a crea∣ture (as your action of receyuing is) be diuine honour? Di∣uine honour may be giuen by a creature to God, but that this your outward action of kneeling (which very often is indifferent to diuine, religious, & ciuill honour) in it selfe be diuine honour, is palpable I dolatry, & intollerable igno∣rance. 2. Eyther the action of kneeling is referred to the bread in the Lords supper, or els to Christ his body in hea∣uen? If to the first, eyther that worship giuen by knee∣ling is diuine, Ciuil, or Religious. Diuine it cannot be without manifest Idolatry, as I sayd before. Not Ciuill; for what is that, but to prostrate your selues ignorantly to dead, and sensles creatures of bread, and wine, which in that respect haue no preheminence aboue man, who is a reasonable creature of God? If you say that there is some su∣pernatural quality in the bread, & wine, wherūto you pro∣strate your selues, I aske: either you giue diuine, ciuil, or reli∣gious worship to the bread considered with this quality or not? If Diuine, conforme to the wordes of the Parlamēt, it is manifest Idolatry, for this quality though supernaturall, is a creature, and not God? If Ciuill, then you giue Ciuill, worldly, and transitory honour, to a supernaturall thing, which is absurd, and a manifest sacriledge. If yee exhibite religious honour, acknowledge then the same, and remaine
not still in your palpable ignorance. If this action of knee∣ling be referred to Christ in heauen, thē yee must acknow∣ledge a horrible blasphemy to be committed in the foresaid words, that Diuine worship is in the receyuing &c. And since the bread of the Lords supper is a figure, and Image of Christs body (say yow) what is this but to kneele to Images, and before Images, in kneeling before the bread, and wine of the Lords supper? what is sacriledge if this be Religion? What is impiety if this be not, in making the poore people to commit manifest idolatry, at this your Idol seruice of the Lords supper? 4. Finally the care, which S. Michael the Archan∣gel had to preserue the dead body of Moyses from iniury, and dishonour, which the Deuill was to do therunto, proueth manifestly the religious honour due to the body of Moyses, as to a holy Relique, and temple of the holy Ghost; the words are:Iud. c. 1. v. 9. Yet Michael the Archangel, when he stroue agaynst the deuill, and disputed about the body of Moyses, durst not blame him with cursed speaking, but sayd: The Lord rebuke thee. Likewise the shadow of S. Peter, much more S. Peters owne per∣son, was an instrument, and holy Relique, whereby God wrought many miracles, as witnesseth the Bible:Act. c. 5. v. 15. So that they did bring forth the sicke into the streetes, and layd them in beds, and couches, that as Peter came his shadow at the least might ouer-shadow any of them, and they might be deliuered from their infir∣mities. Out of the which place S. Augustine proueth both the honour due to Reliques, and S. Peters intercession after his death for vs:Ser. 29. de Sanctis. If (sayth S. Augustin) the shadow of his body could help, how much more now the fidnes of his power? And if thē a certayne little wind of him passing by did perfect them that humbly asked, how much more the grace of him now permanent and remay∣ning? The Scripture also witnesseth the religious honour, which was giuen to S. Pauls napkins by the Catholikes in his tyme.Lib. quod Christus sit Deus tom. 1. cōt. Gent. And God wrought by the hand of Paul miracles not com∣mon; so that there were also brought from his body napkins, or hand∣kerchers & laid vpon the sicke▪ and the diseases departed from them, & the wicked spirits went out. Which place proueth playnly, as witnesseth (g) S. Chrysostome, the honour due to Reliques, by
reason of the infinite miracles, which God worketh dayly, when it pleaseth him, by them, as sundry other most aun∣cient, and holy Fathers witnes. S. Hierome of the mira∣cles of S. Paul the Eremite, and of S. Hylarion: of the mi∣racles of S. Martin, Seuerus Sulpitius: S. Chrysostome in a whole booke to this purpose against the Gentiles, & infi∣dels, who denyed impiously the honour due to Reliques, as our Protestants do: S. Augustine in his bookes de Ciuita∣te Dei, and sundry others, who all did constantly belieue, and say with S. Hierome:Hiero. ep. 17. c. 50 We reuerence, and worship euery where Martyrs sepulchers, and putting the holy ashes to our eyes, and if we may we touch it with our mouth also. But our Protestāts ra∣ther will follow Iulianus the Apostata, and sundry infidels sworne enemies to the holy Reliques of Saints, then the holy Doctours, and Fathers of the Church of God, who are grounded vpon the expresse word of the Bible. Doth not the Ministers Bible (though corrupted) specify in ex∣presse words a miracle wrought by the dead body of Eli∣saeus the Prophet:2. Reg c. 13. v. 20. 21. So Elisaeus died, and they buried him, and certayne bands of the Moabites came into the land that yeare; and as they were burying a man, behold, they saw the souldiers; therefore they cast the man into the sepulcher of Elisaeus, & when the man was downe, and touched the bones of Elisaeus, he reuiued, and stood vpon his feete. 5. In the which doctrine it is to be remarked, that we Catholikes belieue not with Diuine Fayth euery miracle wrought by God at the holy Reliques, and monuments of Saints, as the Ministers impiously seduce, and teach the simple people; but only we affirme with the Scripture, & holy Fathers, that honour is due to Reliques; and that to misbelieue those miracles, which the holy Church hath confirmed, and auowed, which so many, and diuers na∣tions haue piously, and wisely acknowledged these sixtene hundred yeares, is manifest madnes, and impiety. To con∣clude then, I aske of the Ministery to giue me as playne pla∣ces out of their owne Bible, as manifest words, and for∣mall texts, against the honour due to Reliques, & miracles wrought by them, as I haue produced to the contrary; which they
not being able to doe, must needs in place of the expresse word of the Bible, giue vs their consequences, that is their ministeriall inuentions, traditions, yea abominable super∣stitions, whereunto the holy doctrine of the Fathers of this second age or Century, and their consequences, and exposi∣tions should be preferred by any wife, yea indifferent man. Testimonies of the Fathers, that holy Images, the signe of the Holy Crosse, and holy Reliques, were in vse with reuerence amongst the Catholikes of this second Age. The first Section. S. Pius an holy and famous Martyr, ordayned that who∣soeuer should foresweare himselfe vpon an hallowed Crosse (for the custome was then, as now, to sweare by the holy Crosse) should do penance three yeares, and who vpon any other vnhallowed Crosse, should do penance one yeare:Extat tom. Concil. Qui peierat se in manu Episcopi, aut in cruce con∣secrata, tres annos poeniteat: si verò in cruce non consecrata, annum vnum poeniteat. And writing to Iustus Bishop of Vienne in France, commaundeth him to be carefull that the holy Re∣likes of Martyrs (by reason they were the temples & mem∣bers of God) be honoured:Pius Pont. op. 2. ad sustū Extat in Biblioth. Pat. tom. 1. & apud Bar. ad an. 166 n. 3. Cura autem Sanctorum Marty∣rum corpora, sicut membra Dei, quemadmodum curanerunt Aposto∣li Stephanum. Conforme to the which receyued doctrine S. Hierome auoweth, that in his tyme the reuerence, & wor∣ship of holy Reliques, was the vniuersall doctrine, non vnius vrbis, sed totius orbis. 2. S. Iustine Martyr, who being famous among the Gentiles for the quicknes of his wit, his learning, his noble extraction,Contra Vigilant. and pedegry, became afterward Catho∣like, and wrote diuers Apologies for the Catholikes: he then writing agaynst the Gentiles proueth, that the holy tombes and Reliques of the Martyrs worke Miracles:Ad quast. 18. Gentil. Quoanodo non absurdissimam est hac quidem munda habere ob vtili∣tatem, quaexeis capitur? he meaneth that the Gentiles thought
some beasts, as fowles, and such, to be cleanly by reason of the vtility they had of them: Gracos autem detestari Sanctorū Martyrum corpora, at{que} sepulchra, quae vim habent & tuendi homi∣nes a demonum insidijs, & curandimorbos quimedicorum arte curari nequeunt? And a little after this holy Father giueth the rea∣son, wherfore the chiefe Aultars of the Catholike Churches are builded towards the East, and wherefore the Catholiks consequētly pray their faces being towards the East. Which doctrine is conforme to that of S. Chrysostome, who wri∣ting concerning the holy Relikes of Iuuentius, and Maxi∣mus sayth:Chyso. serm. de SS. Iuuent. & Max. Let vs of en visite them, let vs adorne their tombes, let vs touch their Reliques with a strong Fayth, that we may receyue some blessing from thence. And S. Basil.Basil. i psal. 115. He who handleth the bones of a Martyr, draweth a certayne touch of sanctification from the grace resident in the body. S. Ambrose answering to this ob∣iection which the Protestāts make with the infidels against vs:Ambr. serm. 93. de SS. Naz. & Ceso. What dost thou honour in resolued, and decayed flesh? I ho∣nour (sayth he) in the flesh of the Martyr the wounds or Markes re∣ceyued for Christ: I honour the memory of the lyuing by perpetuity of vertue; I honour ashes sacred by the confession of our Lord; I honour in the ashes seeds of eternity; I honour the body, which instructeth me to loue our Lord, which hath taught me for his sake not to be daunted with the horrour of death. And why should not the faythfull worship that body which the very deuills do reuerence? Could this holy Fa∣ther chalenge more playnly the impiety of the Protestants, the Antichristian doctrine of the Ministry? 3. Tertullian playnly, and plentifully maketh men∣tion of the custome among the Catholikes to make the fi∣gne of the Crosse going out of their houses, going to their worldly busines, at their in coming, at the table, at diuers exercises, at going to bed, and sundry other occasions:Lib de coron mil. c. 3. Ad omnem progressum at{que} promotum, ad omnen aditum & exi. um, ad vestitum & calceatum, ad lauacra, ad mensas, ad lumina, ad cubilia, ad sedilia, quaecum{que} nos conuersatio exercet, frontem cru∣cis signaculo erimus Harum & aliarum eiusmodi disciplinarum si le∣gem expostules Scipturarum, nullm inuenies: Traditio tibi praeten∣ditur auctrix, consuetudo confirmatrix, & fides obseruatrix. And agayne he auoweth, that the Catholikes in his tyme and
before were calledApol. . 6. Crucis religiosos, that is, Deuotes, or re∣ligious worshipers of the holy Crosse. Writing likewise to his wife he testified, that the Catholiks vsed the holy custom,Lib. ad vxorem n. 26. Reptandi in carcerem ad osculanda vincula, that is: to crepe to the prison, where the holy Martirs were, to kisse their bōds: like to that of S. Hierome, speaking of the wood of the Crosse of our Sauiour:Lib. 2. ep. fam. ep. 8. Will that day once come when it shal be lawfull for vs to enter ino our Sauiours denne? and to licke the wood of the Crosse. 4. Of the vse of Images Tertullian likewise maketh mention in his bookeLib. de Pudicit. c. 7. De pudicitia, teaching that the cu∣stome was, in his tyme, to engraue or paint vpon the holy chalices, and else where, the picture of our Sauiour carry∣ing a sheepe on his shoulders, conforme to that of the Bi∣ble:Luke c. 25. v. 5. And when he had found it, he layeth it on his shoulders with ioy. Finally he maketh mention of annuall Masses, & obla∣tions offered vp for the faythfull departed, and on the daies wherin the Martyrs shed their bloud for Christ, praysing therby God for their constancy:Lib. de coron. mil. c. 4. n. 26. Oblationes (sayth he) pro defunctis, pro natalitijs annua die facimus. It is true, that Tertul∣lian a most famous, and learned writer of this age had sun∣dry erroneous opinions, wherof he is accused by the holy Fathers of the ensuing Ages, which errors of his cā no way be preiudicious to the Catholike doctrine, and opinions, which he teacheth to haue beene vniuersally belieued in his tyme and age, and wherof no auncient Father accuseth him as of erroneous doctrine; accusing him neuertheles of sun∣dry particular errours, which as then, so now are agaynst the doctrine of the Catholike Church, whereunto if he submitted his iudgement (as other holy Fathers haue done) in all his bookes, and writings, such doctrine may be cal∣led erroneous, though not hereticall. 5. Let vs ioyne Origen to the foresayd Fathers, who witnesseth, that the deuills feare nothing more, then the signe of the Crosse, knowing well to haue bene vanquish∣ed, and ouercome by the holy Crosse. His wordes are:Hom. 6 in Exod. Quid timent Damones? Quid tremunt? sine dubio crucem Christi, in qua triumphati sunt, in qua exuti sunt principatu corum & potestate.
Timor ergo & tremor cadem super eos, cùm signum in nobis viderint Crucis fideliter fixū. 2.Lib. 6. in ep. ad Rom. He teacheth that the Crosse deuout∣ly beheld, hath a great force agaynst temptations.Hom. 2 in psal. 38. That the custom was among the Catholiks before, & in his time to make the signe of the Crosse vpon their forhead. Final∣ly that the holy Crosse was euer in great honour among the Catholikes,Hom. 8. in diuers. Euang. loc. Gaudentes leuemus hoc signum in humeris no∣stris victoriarum vexilla portemus: Immortale lauacrum portemus in frontibus nostris: cùm daemones viderint contreurscent▪ Qui aurata capitolia non timent, crucem timent &c. Exultemucita{que} fratres cha∣rissimi, & ad Crucis similitudinem sanctas in caelum leuemus manus: cùm sic nos daemones armatos viderint, opprimentur. 6. S. Cyprian is plentifull euery where in this matter especially in his booke de vnitate Ecclesiae, and else where: his words be:Lib. 2. cont. lu∣daeos c. 22 Qòd in hoc dicit Dominus, Transi mediam Ierusa∣lem, & notabis signum super frones vtrorum, qui ingemunt, & moerent ob iniquitates, quae sunt in medio eorum &c. And agayne, he doth insinuate the custom to mak the signe of the Crosse vpon our forhead:Serm. de lapsis. Frons cum signo Dei purae Diaboli coronam ferre nō potuit, coronae se Domini reseruauit. Finally cōparing the circūcision of the old law with the signe of the Crosse vsed in the new law, saith, that circumcision was not a remedy instituted for all (as for women) but the signe of the Crosse was instituted for all both for men, and women:Lib. 1. contra Iud. cap. 8. Illud signaculū feminis non profecit: signo autem Domini omnes signantur. He auoweth likewise that Moyses holding his hands and armes (making therby the forme of a Crosse) did ouerthrow Amalech:Lib. 2. cont. Iud. cap. 11. Hoc signo Crucis & Amalech victus est ab Iesu per Moysem: which victory the Bible witnesseth:Exod. c. 17. v. 11. And when Moyses held vp his hands, Israel preuayled: but when he let his hands downe, Amalech preuayled. I omit sundry other testimonies of the Fathers of this Age or Century, to be short.
That the Ministers haue corrupted the Bible in sundry places, to make Images odious to the people &c. The second Section. THe Ministers by their corrupted Bible shew plentiful∣ly that they will euer take Antichrists part in denying the honour, and worship due to the Saints in heauen, the true friends of Christ; for the which cause they deny their merites, their good workes, their Reliques, their Images agaynst their owne Bible, which witnesseth that the Saints in heauen (as hauing bene, and being actually the speciall seruants and friends of God) should be honoured, & had in perpetuall memory:Psalm 3. v. 7. The iust shalbe in eternall memory, saith Dauid. Agayne,Psal. 10 v. 7. The memory of the iust shalbe blessed. To this end then they haue corrupted sundry places of the Bible, to make the Images of the Saints odious, as that of the Acts of the Apostles:Act. c. 19 v. 15. Quis nesci∣at Ephesio∣rum Ciui∣tatem, cul∣tricom esse magnae Di∣anae Iouis∣que prolu. . Then the Towne-Clerke, when he had stayed the people, sayd: Yee men of Ephesus, what man is it that knoweth not, how that the Citty of the Ephesians is a worshipper of the great God∣desse Diana, and of the Image which came downe from Iupiter? Where the Ministers impiously, and maliciously haue put in the word Image which is neyther in the Greeke, nor in the Latin, to discredit therby the vse of holy Images. This forme of proceeding of the Ministers, in adding vnto the text, as it is most abominable before God, so in due tyme it will be punished with eternall damnation, cōforme to that of their owne Bible:Reuel. cap. vlt. v. 28. If any man shall adde vnto these things, God shall ad vnto him the plagues that are written in this booke. S. Augustin was farre different in Religion frō the Protestants, who witnesseth that in his tyme the custome was to see at Rome the Images of S. Peter, and S. Paul paynted and ioyned together with the Image of Christ:Aug. lib. 1. de consens. E∣uang. c. 10. Credo quod pluribus lo∣cis simul eos cum illo pictos viderunt, quia merita Petri, & Paulietiam propter eundem passionis diem celebriùs, & solemniter Roma commen∣dat. Declaring therby, that the Saints in heauen are honou∣red
in their Images; yea those holy Apostles Peter, and Paul, the Patrons of Rome are there more honoured then euer Romulus the builder of Rome, sayth the same holy Doctour:Tom.  ep. 44. Shew me I pray you any Temple of Romulus of such honour at Rome, as I shall there shew the memory of Peter: who is ho∣noured in Peter but Christ, who dyed for all? 2. The second corruption is in that place of S. Paul:2 Co∣rinth. cap. 6. v. 16. And what agreement hath the Temple of God with Idols? Which place at the first casting down of the Churches in Scotland by the Lords of the Congregation was turned otherwise:In the Bible 1502. And what agreement hath the temple of God with Images? If the Ministers had any conscience, any feeling of God, any de∣sire to teach the truth, any zeale to saue soules, and not to blind them lewdly; they would willingly learne, what difference is betweene Images, and Idols of S. Augustine that auncient holy Father, who sayth:In Psal. 133. Ipsa simulacra quae gracè appellantur , quo nomine iam vtimur pro Latino, oculos habent & non vident, & caetera qua de his ideo dicuntur, quia omni sensu carent. If any man would say to my Lord Bishop of S. Andrews: My Lord, you are created to the Idoll of God, and you must ayme to perfit this Idoll of God in you, and to haue a particular care of your children, which are your Idols, insteed of saying: You are created to the Image of God &c. Would not such a man be thought foolish, & dol∣tish? Let vs speake more playnly. Idols, and Images are all one say the Protestants; but the Protestants giue honour to the Kings Images, at the least ciuill honour, Ergo the Pro∣testants are Idolaters, seing that no sort of honour can be gi∣uen to Idols: Agayne, euery King in his Kingdome is an Image of God, that is, an Idoll of God, Ergo, the Pro∣testants in that they worship, and serue the King, worship and serue Idols: can there be greater absurdities? 3. The third corruption is in the Epistle to the Ro∣manes:Rom. c. 11. v. 14. But what sayth the answere of God to him? I haue re∣serued vnto my selfe seauen thousand men, which haue not bowed their knee to the Image of Baal. Beza and sundry Bibles of the Hugenots in France do thus trāslate, putting to the text the word Image, which is neyther in the Hebrew of the old Te∣stament
(whereout this place is taken) nor in the Greeke of the new Testament; yet our gentle Maisters by the in∣ternall motion of the holy Ghost may adde, and take away to the written word as it pleaseth them: but the article, , sayth Beza,In cap. 11. ad Rom. sheweth that  should be vnderstood: wher∣in Beza is a manifest ignorant, for as much as that, rather Astartes Iezabel her Goddesse should be vnderstood, as pro∣ueth manifestly the first of Kings Chap. 18. 19. 2. Because the word Baal being generall to all Idols, Gods or God∣desses, is now and then of the masculine or feminine gen∣der, as witnessethAd cap. 12. Ierem. Theodoretus: And the Hebrew word it selfe Bahbal, which signifieth properly to commaund, to go∣uerne, is diuersly attributed, now to one God or Goddesse, then to another, asNum. cap. 25. v. 3. And Israel coupled himselfe vnto Baal-peor, called so from the hill Peor, wheron that false God was ho∣noured. The like is in the second of theCap. 1. v. 3. Kings where he is called Beelzebub; that is, Lord of the Flyes, by reason of the great multitude of flies, which commonly were vpō the Gentiles Altars in regard of the beasts there immolated. 4. The Puritans accuse vs Catholikes of Idolatry for the vse of Images; but I intreate the Christian reader to set aside passion, and to consider, how that the doctrine, and Religion of the Puritans, is nothing else but manifest, and abominable Idolatry. For the better vnderstanding hereof it is to be remaked, that the holyTertul. lib. de Ido∣lu cap. 2. S. Cyprian in exhort. ad Marty∣res. S Aug. lib. 1. de Trinit. c. 6. & alij passim. Fathers with one con∣sent do auow, that Idolatry then is committed, when the ho∣nour due to God only is giuen to the creatures, as to the Sunne, to the Moone, to Hercules, to Mercury, and such lyke. Now there be two sorts of this Idolatry, say the same holy Fa∣thers, the outward, visible, and materiall Idolatry, which is giuen outwardly to the visible Idols, and Gods; and so the Persians, and Chaldeans adored the Starres for their Gods; the Aegiptians adored sundry beasts, plants, & other pictures; the Graecians their Captaynes, and the foure Ele∣ments; the Romanes as they ouercame any nation, or king∣dome, they worshipped lykewise the Gods of that king∣dome, hauing made, and builded in Rome to such an in∣finite multitude of Gods a place yet extant, and called Pan∣theon,
that is, to all the Gods. The other sort of Idolatry is cal∣led spirituall, inward, and inuisible; which is then, when a man doth imagine with himselfe inwardly, and in his mind a God different from the true God, and defendeth ob∣stinatly erroneous opinions agaynst the true God. The outward Idolatry was in Salomō perhaps without the in∣ward:1. Reg. cap. 11. v. 5. For Salomon followed Ashtaroth the God of the Cydoniās, & Milcom the abomination of the Ammonites. It is very lykly that Salomon after so many blessings, & guiftes of God thought not those Idols truly in his mind to be God. The inward, is in all those, who with passion, and obstinacy of mind de∣fend, or follow any opinion agaynst the true Church of God. So the Prophet Samuell called King Saul his trans∣gression, and rebellion agaynst God, Idolatry:1. Sam. cap. 15. v. 23. For rebel∣lion is as the sinne of witchcraft, and transgression is wickednesse, and Idolatry. Because thou hast cast away the word of the Lord, ther∣fore he hath cast away thee from being King. For who disobeyeth God or his Lieutenant, or Gods true Pastours (wherefore our Sauiour sayd playnlyLuk. 10. v. 16. He that heareth you heareth me, & he that despiseth you, despiseth me,) leaueth the Counsell, and Will of God, and honoureth, and adoreth his owne pro∣per iudgement, and fantasie. Conforme to which doctrine S. Hierome sayth of the Iewes:S: Hier. in cap. 8. Hose. As the Gentiles adored their corporall Idols, euen so the Iewes do hold for Gods the Idols which they haue made in their soule, and minde, and therefore are Idolaters. And S. Augustin explicating those wordes of Iosue:Cap. 2 v. 23. Then put away (sayth he) the strange Gods which are among you, and bow your harts vnto the Lord God of Israel, sayth:Lib. 6. qq. in Iosua cap. 2. Thinke not that when Ioshua vsed such wordes, that the Iewes had any Pagan Idols among them, since a little before he praysed their obedience: But the Prophet Ioshua then did see that the Iewes had in their harts many er∣roneous opinions of God, and against Gods Maiesty, which as Idols the Prophet Ioshua commanded to be put away. Likewise, S. Paul calleth the inward, and sinnefull motions of the minde, I∣dolatry,Colos. cap. v. 5. Fornication, vncleannesse, the inordinate affection, euill concupiscence, and couetousnes, which is Idolatry. 5. The Turkes, and the Iewes in these our dayes haue no outward Idols, yea they belieue God to be Crea∣tour
of heauen, and earth: yet by reason that they haue left the true Church, and Religion, forging vnto themselues a God and Religion according to their owne fantasie, are called true Idolaters: Conforme to which doctrine S. Hie∣rome, with the rest of the Fathers auowe constantly, that those, who haue left the Catholike & Roman Church for∣ging vnto thēselues new opinions, are Idolaters:Hier. in cap. 11. Hosee. All he∣retiks haue their Gods, & whatsoeuer they haue forged, they adore the same as sculptile, and constatile, (that is) as a grauen, and molten Idoll. And agayne he auoweth, that whatsoeuer is spoken in the Scripture agaynst Idols, or Idolatry, is spoken lykewise against the he∣retikes as spirituall Idolaters. For as much as that in denying the authority of the holy Church, the vniuersall consent of the holy Fathers, they tye themselues to the Idoll of their owne fantasie, and iudgement, as the Protestants, and Pu∣ritanes do:Hier. in 5. Amos. Whatsoeuer according to the letter, is spoken against the Idolatry of the Iewes, thou must needs referre all this vnto them, which vnder the name of Christ worship Idols, and forging to them∣selues peruerse opinions, carry the tabernacle of their King the deuill, and the Image of their Idols; for the worship not one Idoll, but for the variety of their doctrine they adore diuers Gods: And he put in very well (which you made vnto your selues) for they receyued them not of God, but forged them of their owne minde. And speaking of the Idoll of Samaria he sayth: We alwayes vnderstand Samaria, and the Idoll of Samaria in the person of the heretikes, of whome it is said:In 8. Amos. Woe be vnto them that despise Sion, and trust in the mont of Sa∣maria, for heretikes despise the Church of God, and trust in the fals∣hood of their opinions, erecting themselues agaynst the knowledge of God, and saying, when they haue deuided the people (by schisme) we haue no part in Dauid, nor inheritance in the sonne of Isai. Which comparison of heresy, and Idolatry, is grounded in good reason: for as Idolatry was the ground, and spring of all vices among the Pagans, so is heresy the sinke of all abomi∣nations among the Christians. 2. Idolatry came first in when the world was full of corruption and vice, as of am∣bition, auarice, ignorance, and pride; euen so the heresies of this our age were planted by Luther, Caluin & Knox in a most corrupted time, & in an age infected with all sort
of vice, and abhomination, especially of pride, and igno∣rance. 3. Idolatry tooke away the true worship of God vn∣der pretext of naturall liberty; so the heresies of this our age doe take away the true worship of God vnder the pretext of the Ghospell, and reformation, teaching for iustice, iniu∣stice, for saluation perdition, perfidie vnder the pretext of Fayth, and Antichrist vnder the name of Christ, as wisely sayth S. Augustine:Devra Relig. c. 30 There is another sort of worshipping Idols much more wicked then this outward, which is then, when men adore their owne fantasies, and call Religion all that which is forged in the fornace of pride, and temerity. Wherfore the Puritanes leauing the path of the holy Church, not being able to proue, no not one debatable point of Religion by the expresse word of the Bible, refusing the constant, and vniforme doctrine of the holy Fathers, not making account of the Catholike Religion, which hath bene among all nations these six∣teene hundreth yeares, and forging to themselues new opinions, new translations of the Bible, new expositi∣ons of the word of God, and a new Religion; are conuic∣ted of manifest Idolatry, and of manifest Superstition, wherewith they seduce the poore people, vnder the cloke and pretext of Reformation.
The 6. and 7. Article. That the custome of the Catholike Church in this second Age, was vniuersally to honour the Saintes in heauen, and to pray vnto them. CHAP. IIII. HAuing taught before the honour due to God, to the Saints, and to things aper∣tayning to them, it is easy to see that the Protestants in denying the honour due to the Saints the friends of God, deny likewise and refuse the honour due to God himselfe; and consequently doe play the Antichrist, and do agaynst that common and naturall saying among vs in Scotland; Loue me, and loue mine, that is, if yee loue me truly, yee must also loue my friends: and we see by experience, when we loue a friend sincerely, we loue for his sake his friends also, yea his seruants, yea his Ring or his Image, and whatsoe∣uer hath bene deare, and beloued of him. Conforme to which natural light the Catholiks, out of the great loue they carry to God, they loue those who haue bene Gods speci∣all friends, as the blessed Virgin Mary, the holy Apostles, the holy Martyrs, and such: who as they haue bene speci∣all and constant friends of God in this world, and do ray∣gne now with him in heauē; so we should loue them spe∣cially, and loue those things which doe appertayne vnto them. Wherof I inferre, that the Protestants in denying the honour due to the Saints in heauen, deny in lyke manner the honour due to God himselfe, as is manifest by this ex∣ample. Put the case, that a particular Gentleman in Scot∣land
should professe great loue and honour to his Maiesty, yet could not abide to heare a good word of his glorious mother B. Queene Marie the Martyr; yea would reuile her, miscall her, vnder the pretext, & colour that he will haue al honour to be giuen to his Maiesty alone, that the honour which is giuen to the mother is taken from the sonne: put the case, that this proud, and lofty-minded Puritane passe by my Lords Chauncellour, President, Treasurer without mouing his cappe, and appeare before his Maiesties honou∣rable Councell, without mouing body, cappe, or knee, & being demanded of this his barbarous forme of proceeding should answer: All honour should be giuen only to his Maiesty, none to his Lieutenants, fauourits, and friends; for that which is giuen to his friends is taken from his Maiesty. Put the case, that whensoe∣uer he do find his Maiesties Image he should deface and de∣file it, vnder the pretext that he giueth all honour to his Maiesties owne person, none to any thing that appertay∣neth to his Maiesty: would you take such a Gentleman to be a loyall subiect to his Maiesty? For would you not sus∣pect such loue towards his Maiesty to be nothing else, but playne hypocrisy and disloyalty? So do the Protestants in Scotland: they professe all honour and affection, say they, to Christ, but they reuile his mother, and will haue no ho∣nour giuē vnto her; they beare no respect to Christs fauorits the Apostles, and Martyrs; which is all agaynst the law of friendship, and agaynst the common Prouerbe, loue me, and loue my friends. 2. But the holy custome of the Catholikes hath euer bene to professe mutuall society with the Saints of heauen, mutuall communion, and participation of benefits; in to∣ken whereof we say in the Creed, I belieue the Communion of Saints. We of duty should honour the Saints; they of chari∣ty pray for vs; we honour, and prayse their felicity, they help, and relieue our misery; we declare vnto them our pouerty, and wants; they supply the same by their merits. But let vs heare the Bible:Iob. c. 42. v. 9. Goe to my seruant Iob, and offer vp for your selues a burnt-offring, and my seruant Iob shall pray for you. God commaundeth those persons to addresse themsel∣ues
to Iob, to the end he should pray for them, though Iob was yet liuing in misery, and doth not God much more commaund vs now to pray to Iob, and the Saints raigning in glory? If it was commendable in S. Paul (and no wayes derogating to the mediation of Christ) to desire the Ro∣manes yet lyuing in misery to pray for him:Rom. c. 15. v. 30. Also brethren I beseech you for our Lord Iesus-Christs sake, and for the loue of the Spirit, that yee would striue with me by prayer to God for me; shall it not be lawfull to pray to S. Paul now liuing in glory, since they areAmbr. l. de viduis. beholders of our life and actions? They see out distresse, & heare the complayntes we make; they know our estate, sayth S. Augustin, by the report of the An∣gells our faythfull Guardians, who haue dayly inter∣course betweene them, and vs. As Cornelius his good An∣gell witnesseth:Act. c. 10. v. 4. But when he looked on him, he was affrayd, & sayd, who art thou Lord? And he sayd vnto him, thy prayers, and thine Almes, are ascended into remembrance in the sight of God. Which place is corrupted by the Ministers. 3. But how doe the Saints, and Angells in heauen know our prayers, and the present estate wherein we are? Besides the report, and relation of our good Angells, there is other meanes, wherby the Saints in heauen haue certaine knowledge of our outward actions, and inward thoughts, so farre forth as it is needfull for vs, and expedient to them; for as much as that the Saints do see, and behold our actions, and prayers, in the brightnes of God, as in a faire resplendent glasse, in which the beames of all creatures, their nature, & per∣fection more clearly shine, then in themselues, sayth S. Gregory:Lib. 12. moral. cap. 13. & 15. What can the Saints be there ignorant of, where they know him who knoweth all things? The third meanes whereby the Saints in heauen know our prayers, and actions, sayGreg. Naz. orat. fun. in so∣rorē Gorg. S. Gregory, andS. Au. lib. de cura pro mortu∣is cap. 15. S. Augustine, is, by a speciall fauour, & re∣uelation of God, who openeth to them, as to our speciall friēds whatsoeuer is behoouefull for them to know. Doth not the Bible witnes, that the holy Angels in heauē know, and re∣ioyce at the conuersiō of a sinner:Luk. 15. v. 10. There is ioy in the presēce of Angels of God for one sinner that conuerteth? Doth not the Bible likewise witnesse that the Saints in heauen S. Peter, S. Paul
and such, are like vnto the Angells:Mattb. 22. & Mark. 12. v. 25. In the resurrection they neyther marry wiues, nor wiues are bestowed in marriage, but are as the Angels of God in heauen? Wherfore then euen as the Angels know the estate of their Pupils, know their prayers, and miseries; so do the Saints in heauen know our estate, and things belonging vnto vs. If many holy men, euen in this mortall life, either by the guift of prophecy, or by the extra∣ordinary fauour of God haue disclosed the hidden thoughts of mens harts, sundry things to come, and thinges done farre distant from them, much more should this priuiledge be graunted to the Saints in heauen, since the excellency of that happy estate challengeth much more. So Elisaeus, be∣ing a mortall man and far distant from Giezi, knew of the bribe which Giezi tooke:Reg, 2. v. 26. Went not mine hart with thee, when the man turned agayn from his chariot to meete with thee? Is this a tyme to take money and receyue garments &c. Likewise S. S. Peter disclosed the inward Sacriledge of Ananias, and Saphira:Act. 5. v. 3.. Then sayd Peter: Ananias, why hath Satan filled thy hart, that thou shouldst lie vnto the holy Ghost, and keepe away part of the price of the possession? Vpon the which words S. Augu∣stine sayth in commendation of vowing of chastity:Aug. serm. 10. de diuersis. If it displeased God, to withdraw of the money, which they had vowed to God; how is he angry, when chastity is vowed, and is not performed &c? If then S. Peter, yet a mortall man, did know the in∣ward thoughts of Ananias, much more is he able, now be∣ing glorified, to know our prayers; which reason S. Augu∣stin learnedly prosecuteth in Elizaeus, and consequently in S. Peter his fact, saying:Aug. lib. 21. de ciuit. c. 29. If the Prophet Elizaeus absent in body did see the bribe, which his seruant Giezi receyued of Naaman Syrus; how much more shall the Saints see all things when God shall be all in all vnto vs? I might to the same effect produce sundry other authorityes of the Fathers, which to deny is nothing else but an impious, and abominable contumacy of the Prote∣stants. 4. I will end with this place of S. Peter exceedingly corrupted by the Ministers, and whereby S. Peter promi∣sed to pray after his death for the Catholikes:2. Pet. cap. 1. v. 15. And I will do my diligence, you to haue often after my decease also, that you may
keepe a memory of these thinges. Which wordes seeme to haue bene more playne in the Greeke copies, extant in S. Chry∣sostomeOrat. in Princip. Apostol. . his tyme, who readeth thus: I will endeauour after my coming to heauen to remember you.In psal. 101. Oecumenius likewise auoweth that sundry holy Fathers proued by this place, that the Saints in heauen after their death did pray for vs mor∣talls yet in life. Yea S. Leo the Great one of Peters succes∣sors in the Apostolike Romayne Sea, often attributeth the good administration thereof to S. Peters prayers:Serm 3. in aniuers. die assumpt. ad Pontifi. We are much bound (sayth he) to giue thankes to our Lord and Redeemer Ie∣sus-Christ, that hath giuen so great power to him, whome he made the Prince of the whole Church: that if in our tyme also any thing be done well, and be rightly ordered by vs, it is to be imputed to his worke, and his gouernement, to whome it was sayd, And thou being conuer∣ted confirme thy brethren: and to whome our Lord after his resurre∣ction sayd thrise, Feede my sheepe; which now also without doubt the godly Pastour doth execute, confirming vs with his exhortations, and not ceasing to pray for vs, that we be not ouercome with any tempta∣tion &c. Besides these ancient Fathers, sundry learned, & fa∣mous doctours of late, proue out of this place the Inuocatiō of Saints, as Catherinus, Clarius, Franciscus Suarez, Grego∣rius de Valentia, Franciscus Turrianus, and others; whose consequences, testimonies, and explications should be pre∣ferred by any wise man to the explications, & consequen∣ces of the Ministers, who shall neuer be able to proue by the expresse word of their own corrupted Bible, that, The Saints in heauen do not pray for vs: that, we should not pray vnto the Saints, and such. But with vs Catholikes concerning this poynt of Religion, and all others,Augu. lib. 10. con∣tra Crescō cap. 11. The verity of the Scrip∣tures is holden of vs, when we do that which pleaseth the vniuersall Church, which the authority of the same Scripture commendeth. Let vs then heare the consequences of the Church of God made manifest vnto vs by the holy Fathers of this second Age, or Century.
Testimonies of the holy Fathers of this second Age, That we should honour the Saints in heauen, and that they pray for vs. The first Section. S. Iustine a famous, and holy Martyr, witnesseth that the Catholikes worshipped the true God with Diuine worship only, and worshipped the Angells with a religi∣ous worship called Dulia:Apol. 2. ad Anto. Pium Imp. Quinimò & illum verum Deum, & Filium qui ab eo venit, nos{que} haec docuit, & aliorum sequentium, assimilatorum{que} bonorum Angelorum exercitum, & spiritum prophe∣ticum colimus & adoramus, verbo, & veritate venerantes; id{que} omnibus, qui dicere velint, vt edocti sumus, candidè tradentes. And agayne he witnesseth that goodAd quaest 30. Gentil. Angells are giuen vs by God to assist vs, help vs, heare our prayer, pray for vs, & defēd vs from dangers of body & soule, & to accompany at our dying day our soule to that eternall felicity, where the Saints in heauen pray for vs. Truly no reason can be giuen why mortall men may be prayed vnto, and not immortall Saints in heauen, whose charity is greater without compa∣rison, then ours heere, sayth S. Bernard:In vigil SS. Petri & Pauli. That blessed coūtry doth not change charity, but augment it. S. Hierome:Hier. aduers. Vi∣gilantium. If the A∣postles, and Martyrs dwelling in corruptible flesh could pray for others, when they ought to be carefull for themselues; how much more after their crownes, victories, and triumphes? 2. S. Irenaeus a holy Martyr, and famous writer of this age could not more playnly auowe the Inuocation of Saints, then calling them our Aduocats, and Intercessours, which title he giueth in playne termes to the Blessed Vir∣gin mother of Christ:Irenae∣us lib. 5. c. 19. Sicut Eua seducta est (sayth he) vt effugeret Deum, sic Maria suasa est obedire Deo, vti Virginis Euae Virgo Maria fieret Aduocata. That is, as Eua was seduced to disobey God, so Mary was persuaded to obey God, to the end that of the Virgin Eua, the Virgin Mary might be Ad∣uocate. Which is conforme to that famous saying of S. Ber∣nard:Bern. serm. de B. Virgine quae inci∣pit Signū magnum. We need a Mediatour to our Mediatour, and who more profitable then the Blessed Virgin Mary? Not that we need any
mediatour besides God, in respect of his inhability or litle power, but in respect of our imbecillity, indignity, and base vnworthines: & thus meaned some auncient Fathers saying, that we should not call vpon the Saints in heauen as thinking God not to be sufficient to help vs. 3. Yea it was a common custome in the primitiue Church amongst the Catholikes, to make a couenant in their life tyme, that whether of them went to heauen be∣fore the other, he should pray for his fryend yet in life, as witnesseth S. Cypriā who speaketh to the Catholikes thus:Epist. 57. Let vs pray mutually one for another, and whether of vs two shall by Gods clemency be first called, let his loue continue, and his prayers not cease for his brethren, and sisters in the world. And againe this holy Father exhorteth the holy Virgins and Nunnes in his tyme to pray for him after their departure:Lib. de disciplina & habitu Virginum Only then haue vs in remembrance, when your virginity shall begin to be honoured: that is in heauē. Conforme to the which custom the Vir∣gin and MartyrEuseb. l. 6. cap. 4. Potamiaena promised at the houre of her Martyrdome, that after her death she would procure mercy of God for Basilides, one of the souldiers that led her to execu∣tion: and so she did.Lib 5. de Baptis. cōt. Donat. c. 17. S. Augustine lykewise in playne termes desireth to be helped by S. Cyprians prayers. AndIn epita. Paulae. S. Hierome intreateth the holy Matron Paula after her death to pray for him in his old age, affirming that she will the more easily obtayne, the nearer she is now ioyned to Christ in heauen. It is well knowne that the receyued cu∣stome among the Iewes, before the comming of Christ, was to pray to the Saints deceased, as witnes those wordes of the Bible: Iudas thought that,2. Ma∣chab. v. 11. He saw Onias (which had bene the high Priest, a vertuous, and a good man, reuerend in behauiour▪ and of sober conuersation, well spoken, and one that had bene exercised in all points of godlines from a child holding vp his hāds towards heauen, and praying for the whole people of the Iewes. A∣gayne, Onias speaking of Hieremy the Prophet who was dead foure hūdreth yeares before, said thus:2. Mac. c. 15. v. 14. This is a louer of the brethren, who prayeth much for the people and for the holy citty, to wit, Hieremias the Prophet of God. Which place auncient O∣rigen, with other Fathers, citeth to proue the Inuocation
of Saints: which holy custome being familiar and vsuall, made the Iewes to thinke that our Sauiour Christ Iesus be∣ing on the Crosse did inuocate the Prophet Elias saying,Matth. 27. v. 46. Eloi, Eloi, & some of the Iewes when they heard Christ vse those wordes sayd,Matth. 27. v. 47. This man calleth Elias. Finally a fa∣mous Protestant witnesseth:VVhit gift in his defēce &c. pag. 471. That almost all the Bishops, and writers of the Greeke, and Latin Church for the most part were spotted with the doctrine of Free-will, of Merite, of Inuocation of Saints. 4. Origen speaketh playnly, and plentifully of this matter teaching vs first the custome, which was in his time to pray for those in Purgatory, and that those in heauen do pray for vs:Lib. 3. in Iob. Propterea & memorias Sanctorum facimus, & Pa∣rentum nostrorum, vel amicorum in fide morientium deuotè memoriā agimus, tam illorum refrigerio gaudentes, quàm etiam nobis piam con∣summationem in fide postulantes. 2. He auoweth that this point of Faith was out of doubt amongst the Catholikes:Hom. 26. in Nū. Quis enim (sayth he,) dubitat, quòd sancti qui{que} Patrum, & orationi∣bus nos iuuent, & gestorum suorum confirment, atque hortentur ex∣emplis. 3. In conformation of this, he citeth the bookes of the Machabees as canonicall, and true Scripture:Hom. 3. in Cant. Sed & omnes Sancti (sayth he,) qui de hac vita de cesserunt, habentes ad∣huc charitatem erga eos qui in hoc mundo sunt, si dicantur curam ge∣rere salutis eorum & iuuare eos precibus suis, at{que} interuentu suo apud Deum non erit inconueniens. Scriptum est nam{que} in Machabaeorum li∣bris,Macha. 15. v. 14. Hic est Ieremias Propheta Dei, qui semper orat pro populo. 4. Origen himselfe praieth to the holy Angels after this forme:In la∣mento in fine. Obsecrat te Dominus omnis Angelorum chorus propter me qui pessima consummaui, vt miserearis super ouem, quae errauit. 5. Not only he prayeth to the Angels, but also to holy Iob then in heauen saying:Lib. 2. in Iob. O beate Iob viuens in per∣petuum apud Deum, & victor permanens in conspectu Regis Domini, ora pro nobis miseris, vt etiam nos terribilis Dei misericordia protegat in omnibus tribulationibus &c. 6. Not only he prayeth to Iob to pray for him, but lykewise to all the Saints in heauen:Initio lamenti▪ Inciptam me genibus prosternere, & deprecare vniuersos Sanctos, vt mihi non audenti petere Deum proper nimietatem peccati, succur∣rant: O Sancti Dei, vos lachrymis, & fletu pleno dolore deprecor, vt
procidatis misericordijs eius pro me misero, and in especial he prai∣eth to S. Abraham thus: Hei mihi Pater Abraham, deprecare pro me, ne de sinibus tuis aliener, quos valde cupiui, nec condignè quidem propter ingens peccatum meum. 5. S. Cyprian auoweth lykewise the constant, and Catholike beliefe of this Age concerning this point saying, that the holy Innocents, which were put to death by He∣rod, in heauen pray for vs:In lib. de stella, Magis, & Innocentū ce. In ordine Sanctorum Protomar∣tyres primum habent locum, & secretorum conscij diuinorum propin∣quitate familiarissima clementiam Dei pro nostris exorant laboribus, quae vs{que} hodie funestus Herodes prosequitur, quorum sanguine mor∣te Diabolus delectatur. Agayne, he witnesseth that the dayes of the departure of the holy Martyres, and of others, who dyed in prison for the Catholike Religion were remarked, and in regard therof Sacrifices offered to God in thankes∣giuing:In epist. ad Clerum 37. Quanquam Tertullus fidelissimus, & doctissimus frater noster pro caetera solicitudine, & cura sua scripserit, & scribat, ac significet mihi dies quibus in carcere beati fratres nostri ad immortali∣tatem gloriosae mortis exitu transeunt, & celebrentur hic à nobis O∣blationes, & Sacrificia ob commemorationes eorum, quae ciò vobiscum Domino protegente celebrauimus. This is then the beliefe & Re∣ligiō of our holy, & auncient predecessours of the Church of God through the whole world. Now,Aug. op. 118. c. 5. any thing that the whole Church doth practice & obserue throughout the whole world, to dispute therof, as though it were not to be done, is most insolent mad∣nes, sayth S. Augustine. That the Ministers haue falsified the Bible in sundry places, which prooue the Inuocation of Saints. The second Section. THat place of Iob, where Eliphaz desireth Iob to call vpon some of the holy Angels, proueth manifestly the inuocation of the holy Angells:Iob. 5. v. 1. Call therfore if there be that will answere thee, and turne to some of the holy Angells. Where S. Augustine auoweth, that holy Iob did inuocate the Angells:In cap. 5. & 19. Iob. tom. 4 It seemeth, sayth he, that Iob doth pray the An∣gels
to pray for him, or else the Saints to pray for him as for a sinner. The wordes of Iob in the three and thirtith chapter witnes this plainly:Ver. 2 There shall be an Angell speaking for him, one of the thousands to declare mans equity. By reason that these two places do make forcibly agaynst the Ministers, they haue corrupted them impiously, turning the first by way of in∣terrogation: Call now if any will answere thee, and to which of the Saints wilt thou turn? and taking out the word Angels, which is in the Greeke text, as the Caldaicke word Mikdoschim sheweth lykewise playnly. It is certayne, that in putting in this interrogation, the sense is fully changed, and the words haue another meaning; for the selfe fame sentence made by way of interrogation, & read absolutly, wil haue diuers meanings, as is manifest in many sentences vsed in familiar talke, as also in that sentence of S. Augustin: He who made thee without thee, shall not saue thee without thee. Qui fecit te sine te, non saluabit te sine te. Signifying that mans coopera∣tion of free will is necessary to saluation: which place the Lutherans doe corrupt to signify the plaine contrary, only by reading the same sentence (to proue that man had no free-will concerning his saluation) with an interrogation thus: He that made thee without thee, shall he not saue thee with∣out thee? In the second place of Iob, the Ministers haue ta∣ken out the word Angell, turning thus:Iob. c. 33. v. 23. If there be any Mes∣senger with him &c. putting the word Messenger, insteed of Angell to make the sentence obscure. After this forme a Iew or Turke may turne all the Bible vpside-down, as that:Matth. 4. v. 11. Then the Diuell left him and the Messengers came, and ministred vno him Agayne:Matth. 13. v. 40. The Messengers that goe forth, and seuer the bad from among the Iust And infinite such places, where it were impiety to turne Messenger for Angell. Can there be a greater sinne before God, then to corrupt after this forme without conscience, or shame the word of God? Is it mar∣ueyle that the Ministers effrontedly corrupt the holy Fa∣thers, since they are not affrayd to do the same to the Bible, the holy Scriptures, the sacred word of God? Is it not the right way to Atheisme to turne for Angell, Messenger; for Church, Congregation; for Priest, Elder; for Sacrament, Secret, & for Hell, Graue?
2. The second place corrupted by the Ministry, is that saying of the Prophet Dauid:Psal. 119. v. 63. I am partaker of all that feare thee, and that keepe thy commaundements. Wherby is signifyed that all true, and sincere Catholikes are partakers of all the prayers, good workes, and merites of the whole militant Church, as likewise of the prayers of the triūphant Church that is, of the Saints of heauen, which is called in our Creed, The Communion of Saints. The Greeke text is directly for vs a∣gainst the Ministers. The Hebrew, Chaber, and the Chal∣daick, Chabera, signify cleerly to any vnpassionate man, I am partaker.Serm. 8. in hunc psalmum. S. Ambrose,In Cō∣ment. in haec verba. S. Hierome, andSerm. 16 in psal. 118 S. Au∣gustine, and others, turne the same place, I am partaker. But I pray yow how do our Ministers disguise, and deface this place? I am, say they, companion of all that feare thee, and keepe thy precepts. And in their merry metre they singe: Companion am I to all them, which feare thee in their hart &c. Is it a great ho∣nour to King Dauid to be Cōpanion to some of the Tron-Lords of Edenbrough, who bragge to feare God? How could Dauid accompany, or be Companion to all those that feared God? And since none can keepe the comman∣dements, as the Ministers, sayth he, how could the holy Prophet be their Companion? Are not the Ministers in coining such new translations to fauour their new opini∣ons, conuicted by S. Augustine to be manifest heretiks? forDe vti∣lit. creden∣di cap. He is an heretike, sayth he, who for some temporall commodity & especially for his glory, and principality, coyneth, or els followeth false or new opinions, false or new translations. 3. The third place corrupted by the Ministers, is this of Ieremias:Ierem. 15 v. 1.1. If Moyses, and Samuell shall stand before me, my soule is not towards this people. Where, as before Chap. 7.11.14. God forbad Ieremie to pray for the Iewes, so here he saith; that though not only Ieremy, but also though Moyses and Samuel, (departed from this world longe before) shall pray for this people, yet they shall not escape the punishment for their sinnes. By necessary consequence whereof it fol∣loweth, that Moyses, and Samuel after their death both could and did somtymes pray for the Iewes; otherwise the particular mention of these Prophets were not to the pur∣pose
if they ner did, nor could pray for them, as learned∣ly proueIn his comment. vpon this pace. S. Hrome,Hom. 1. in 1. Ths. 1. S. Chrisostome, &Lib. 9. Mor. cap. 12. S. Gregory the great; and the Prophet Baruch confirmeth the same saying:Baruch cap. 3. v. 4. O Lord Almighty, the God of Israel heare now the pray∣ers of the dead of sraell, and of their children which haue sinned be∣fore thee. Then the dead of Israell, prayed for the liuing; the Hebrew word mahhamod in the future tense maketh for vs, and sheweth both the malice, & Ignorance of the Mi∣nistry, in turning one tense for another, for they turne thus: Though Moyses and Samuel stood before me &c. The Chaldean Paraphrast maketh playnly for vs: Im Iacum Mosche. &c. If Moyses, and Samuel shall stand before me to pray. &c. And the Greeke text also maketh for vs agaynst the Ministers, who in corrupting thus the Bible, inuenting Nouelties, & new translations in so waighty a matter, as is the matter of our Saluation, the word of God, and in speakinge peruerse thinges, do shew consequently that they are manifest here∣tiks. 4. The fourth place corrupted by the Ministers, is that of S. Peter:2. Pet. cap. 1. v. 2. I will do my diligence, you to haue often after my decease also, that you may keepe a memory of these things. Where S. Peter promiseth to pray after his death for the Christians, hauing promised before in the thirteenth verse to remem∣ber them, and to stirre them vp by admonitions, so long as he was in life: and after in the fifteenth verse promiseth consequently to remember them after his death; as with the rest the Greeke, and Latine Fathers playnly witnes∣seth S. Chrisostom, saying:In na∣tli beaco∣rum Apost. Petri & Pauli. Reioyce Peter the Rock of Faith: reioyce Paul the honour of the Church: reioyce Peter the entry of true Religion: reioyce Paul the caire of Churches: reioyce euer in our Lord and offer vp your prayers for vs without interruption; fulfill your promise, for thou O Peter sayst: I will do my diligence, you to haue of∣ten after my decease also The Ministers to take away the force of this place of the Bible haue first put in the word alwayes, in place of the word often. 2. They haue taken away all points, to make the sentence obscure. 3. They haue trans∣posed, and changed the words to the same end agaynst the Greeke text, putting the words, After my departing, after
the wordes, to haue remembrance, to deceyue therby the rea∣der, and to persuade him, that S. Peter only sayth, that he shall with such diligence exhort the Christians so long as he is in life, that they shall remember him after his death; not that he personally shall remember them after his death; to the which end the Ministers most viciously translate thus: I will endeauour therfore alwayes that yee also may be able to haue remembrance of these thinges after my departing. Cā there be a more manifest marke, that the Ministers are here∣tikes, then thus to corrupt the word of God to proue their owne errours? which while they follow, they seeme to follow the Bible, saith S. Augustin: (r) All heretikes which receyue the Scriptures, and their authority, will seeme to follow them, whereas indeed they follow their owne errours and are therfore here∣tikes, not because they condemne them, but because they do not vnder∣stand them, or do viciously translate them. 5. The fifth place which the Ministers haue corrupted for the great hatred they haue agaynst the Blessed Virgin Mary, is in S. Luke, where the Blessed Virgin sayth:Luke c. 1. v. 48. Because he hath regarded the humility of his handmayd: for behould from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed. Which prophe∣cy of the blessed Virgin is dayly fulfilled (by the Catholi∣kes, not by Puritanes, who haue scraped out the word Gene∣rations, agaynst the force of the Greeke word) when the Church, and the faythfull Christians keeping her festiuall dayes, and saluting her say, Aue Maria, and other such holy Anthymes: which place lykewise declareth the great hu∣mility of the blessed Virgin, who as she was full of the grace of God; so she was of all vertues, & especially of humility, wherby she pleased God more (say the Doctours) thē by her virginity. But the Ministers cānot suffer her to be praised by reason of her humility, for the which cause they haue thrust out the word humility, translating thus: for he hath looked on the poore degree of his seruant, for behold from henceforth shall all ages call me blessed.. In the Greeke text, the word signifieth humility: as the Ministers being better aduised haue trāslated the same Greeke word in other places:Matth. cap. 18. Whosoeuer therfore shall hūble himself as this litle child, the same is the greatst in the kingdom of hea∣uen.
And againe:1. Petri cap. 5 v. 5. Ioan. cap. 4. v. 9. Rom. 12. v. 16. God resisteth the proud, & giueth grace to the humble. The Siriack text likewise is for vs Catholikes, dechor bemuceco dametheth &c. that is, because he hath regarded the humi∣lity &c. The auncient Fathers both of the Greeke and La∣tin Church, with one consent, all read, Because he hath regar∣ded the humility &c. And not content to haue shewed this litle lyking of the humility of the Blessed Virgin, they seeme willing to dissemble the inward humility of hart, a chiefe vertue in our Sauiour Christ Iesus, the Blessed Virgins sonne, for they haue thus translated that famous sentence of his,Math. c. 11. v. 29. Learne of me, because I am meeke and humble of hart, with leauing out the accustomed word, humble: and this newfanglenes in vsing new inuented wordes and pro∣phane noueltyes agaynst the forme of the Catholike Fayth, agaynst the phrase of the old and Apostolyke wri∣ters, come to vs by tradition of all ages and Churches, hath beene euer an infallible marke of new Ministers, and heretikes, of whome therefore S. Paul commaundeth vs to beware:1. Tim. c. 6. v. 20. Auoyde prophane nouelties of wordes. In S. Augu∣stine his daies, when any good thing hapned to Catho∣likes, or when they entred into any mans house, or met a∣ny friend by the way, they vsed alwayes to say, Deo gratias, thankes be to God: but the Donatists, and Circumcellians, impious heretiks of that tyme, being alwayes giuen to no∣uelties of wordes, forsooke the old phrase of the Catholiks, and would alwayes say, Laus Deo, praysed be God: from which kind of ordinary salutation (though good yet new∣ly inuented) the Catholikes did so shunne (saythIn psal. 132. S. Au∣gustin) that they had as willingly haue met a theefe, as one who would say Laus Deo, insteed of Deo gratias: so we Ca∣tholikes should keep constantly our Forefathers words, so we may the more easily keep our old, and true Fayth re∣ceyued of them. Let vs not therefore vse with the new mi∣nistry of the Protestants, profane nouelties of wordes, as, amendment, for pennance; abstinence, for fasting; the Lords sup∣per, for the Blessed Sacrament; Superintendent, for Bishop; Con∣gregation for Church; sobeit, for Amen; prayse the Lord, for Alle∣luia; Elders, for Priests; Mystery, for Sacrament; Idol, for Image;
Instructions for traditions; and such. Thus if we do, the very wordes will bring vs to the Fayth of our forfathers, & keep vs therin, auoyding alwayes prophane noueltyes of words a. S. Paul commaundeth vs to do. Truly those very aun∣cient wordes yet vsed in Scotland, Candlemasse, Michaelmasse, Andersmasse shew euidently that the holy Masse was in vse in Scotland from the first conuersion thereof to the Catholike Religion, that is, fourteene hundreth yeares since, or rather sixteene hundreth yeares since; for at such festiuall and re∣marked dayes, the holy Masse was sayd with such great so∣lemnity, that sundry gentlemen and commons came from abroad to see the celebration thereof. Do not lykewise the wordes we vse, S. Giles Church, S. Patrickes Church, S. Cuthberts Church, the Lady of Grace, Hallowmasse, and infinite such witnes the honour, and inuocation, which our forefathers vsed towards these Saints? What wit∣nesseth I pray you the wordes, All soules day, holy-Roode day, Shirfthursday, Palme-sunday, Corpus Christi day; Imber dayes, but the antiquity of our Catholike and Romane Religion? Which Religion, as the wordes themselues, did continue without any debatable contradiction vntill the comming of Luther, and Caluin, and yet are in vse; so the Catholike Apostolike, & Roman Religion, did euer continue in En∣gland, Ireland, and Scoland without any debatable con∣tradiction vntill the comming of Luther, Caluin, Knox, & Paul Meffen a Minister. 6. Their small deuotion vnto the Blessed Virgin Mary, may likewise appeare by their translating those wordes;Math. c. 1. v. 25. And he knew her not till she brought forth her first born sonne, and called his name Iesus; wth thrusting in the word he, thus, And he called his Name Iesus, giuing away the honour of the Imposition of the name solely to Ioseph, against the ex∣presse text of the Bible where the Angell sayd vnto her:Luke c. 1. v. 31. For loe thou shalt conceyue in thy wombe and beare a sonne, and shalt call his Name Iesus: Yea the Ministers considering the matter without passion, turne with vs that of Isay:Isa. cap. 7. v. 14. Behold the Virgin shall conceyue and beare a sonne, and she shall call his name Emmanuel, the Hebrew word being of the feminine gen∣der,
and referred of necessity by the Rabbins to the blessed Virgin.Rabby A∣braham, Rabbi Da∣uid, and o∣thers. Since then S. Mathew speaketh indifferently with∣out limitation to Ioseph, is it not abuse of Gods word, and partiality agaynst the blessed Virgin, to giue the honour of the imposition of that holy name to Ioseph, only; since both the Prophet Isay, and S. Luke put the matter out of doubt, in giuing it to the blessed Virgin Mary? But let vs Catholikes euer honour the blessed Virgin, as mother of our Sauiour, and speake reuerently of her with the holy Fathers, especially with S. Ephrem (who was thirteene hundreth yeares since.)Ephrē. Hom. de laudibus B. Virginis. O Marie mother of God (saith he) vndefiled Queene of all, the hope of all sinners, my lady most glorious, higher then heauenly Spirits, more honourable then the Cherubims, holier hen the Seraphims, the hope of the Fathers, the glory of the Prophets, the prayse of the Apostles: by thee we are reconciled to Christ my God, thy sonne: thou art the helper of sinners, thou the hauen for them that are tossed with stormes, the solace of the world, the deliuerer of the imprisoned, the helpe of orphanes, the redemption of captiues, vouchsafe me thy seruant to prayse thee: Hayle Lady Mary full of grace, hayle Virgin most blessed among women. 7. To disguise the holy virginity of the Blessed Vir∣gin Mary, and to signify that she had not made a vow of virginity, and that she was not Iosephs true wife, before the Angell appeared vnto him and sayd:Matth. 1. v. 20. Ioseph sonne of Dauid seare not to take Mary thy wife, for that which is borne in her is of the holy Ghost: The Ministers haue corrupted the for∣sayd place thus: Ioseph Sonne of Dauid seare not to take Mary for thy wife, adding the word, for, which is not in the Greeke nor Syriak text, where it is, Lemariam anthetoc, Mary thy wife, and not Mary for thy wife: which particle, for, is added against the holy, and auncient. Fathers, who witnesse that the Blessed Virgin Mary was espoused to Ioseph before she was found to be with child, and before the Angell appeared to Io∣seph. Secondly the Ministers themselues (alwayes addicted to the Spirit of contradiction) shew cleerly that before the Angell appeared to Ioseph, Mary was Ioseps wife: Then Io∣seph her husband. 3. Ioseph could not haue beene minded to put her away, if she had not bene already marryed. 4. The
Hebrew word, which is in the Prophet IsayIsa. 7. h halma, si∣gnifieth properly a true Virgin, & hauing with it (as it hath  Hebrew text of Isay) he haiedigha, signifieth a Virgin  aes, a pure Virgin in body, minde, and affe∣ yea a perpetuall Virgin; though without the sayd haudigha, it signifieth aGe  xod. Exod. . v. 8. Virgin also, yet not one, who remayneth perpetually in her virginity, as it doth in Isay, who speaketh only of the Blessed Virgin, whome to haue made a vow to God to keep perpetually her viginity wit∣nes the holy FathersOrat. de ntiuit. Domini S. Gregory Nazian.Serm 4. in Missus est. S. Bernard, & others. The which holy exaple of the B. Virgin Mary in vowing perpetuall virginity hath being imitated by an in∣finite multitude of men, and women of all nations, yea by Kinges, and Princes of diuers Nations. And of our Na∣tion of Scotland, we haue the example of holy King Mal∣colme the Virgin, of S. Richardis Empresse, S. Fiacre, S. Guthagon, S. Mungo, S. Edmond, S. Fridelinus, S. Ma∣thildis, and many others, of whome I make mention plen∣tifully in my booke intituled Menologium Sanctorum regni Sco∣tiae. But the Ministers drowned in flesh, and blood, and sensuall pleasures, cannot vnderstand such things: no mar∣uayle because,1 Cor. cap. 2. v. 14 A sensuall man perceyueth not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishnes vnto him: neyther can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned: which place the Mi∣nisters haue likewise corrupted to hide their turpitude and fleshly sensuality, putting natural, for sensuall; knowing wel that those wordes, a naturall man, are taken in a good part, for any wise, and iudicious man, and not for a sensuall man. 8. We Catholikes do cal the B. Virgin Mary Queene of heauen with S. Chrysostome, S. Basil, and the holy an∣cient Fathers, who do pray vnto her after this fort:In the Greeke Masses of S. Iames S Basil and S. Chrysost. Most holy, vndefiled, blessed aboue all, our Queene, our Lady, the mother of God Mary, a Virgin for euer, the sacred Arke of Christs Incarna∣tion, who didst beare thy Creatour: holy mother of vnspeakeable light, we magnify thee with Angelicall hymnes: all things passe vnderstan∣ding, all things are glorious in thee, O mother of God. The Ministers I say, to dishonour the Blessed Virgin Mary, and to make
her odious with the common people, haue corrupted im∣piously that place of Ieremias:Ierem. cap. 19. v. 13. All houses in the toppes whereof they haue sacrificed to all the host of heauen, and haue of∣fered lybaments to strange Gods: Vnderstanding by the host of heauen, the Moone, and the starres, whereunto impiously the Iewes offered Sacrifice. Now the Ministers insteed of these wordes, the host of heauen (which are conforme to the Hebrew, and Greeke) put in their first printed Bibles, but now lately corrected, Queene of heauen. Because we Catholikes worthily doe honour, and call the Blessed Virgin Queene of heauen. What is impiety if this be not? And what is hatred agaynst the Mother of God if this be not? Are not the Ministers not only voyde of wit, lear∣ning, and common sense in discouering so diuelish a hatred agaynst the Blessed Virgin; but also voyd of shame, and modesty, and more to be blamed then Turkes, and Sara∣cens, who honour greatly the Blessed Virgin Mary?
The 8. and 9. Article. 1. That the Catholike Church in this second Age, belieued vniuersally, that there was a Pur∣gatory. 2. And that it was accustomed to pray for the soules detayned in Purgatory. CHAP. V. THe most famous writers in this second Age Tertullian, Origen, and S. Cypriā witnesse plentifully not only the Fayth of the Catholik Church concerning Pur∣gatory, but also the chiefest, yea almost all the points of Religion, which we Ca∣tholiks now a dayes belieue, asTertul. apud Cen∣tuiatores. Cent. 3. Col. 131. the cu∣stome to receyue the Blessed Sacrament fasting,Cypr. serm. 5. Tertul. ib. 2. ad vxo. Reser∣uation of the Blessed Sacrament, Sacrifice for the dead,Cypr. lib. 2. ep. . Sacrifice according to the order of Mechisedech, mingling of water with wine in the chalice,Cypr in serm de vnctione Chrismat. Chrisme and Con∣firmation, & diuers of our Sacramēts, as witnes those words of S. Cyprian speaking of the Sacraments of Baptisme, and Confirmation: Tunc planè sanctificari & filij Dei esse possunt, si Sacramento vtro{que} nascuntur. And againeExam. part. 2. pag 58. Chemnitius wit∣nesseth that S. Ciprian reckoneth vp fiue Sacraments in his sermon de ablut. pedum. Lykewise those holy and auncient Fathers do make mention, that ordinary succession of Pa∣stours doth euer accompany the true Church;Lib. 2. epist. they do auow also the inferiour orders of Deacons, Subdeacons, Acolites, Exorcists; thatCypr. de singulare Cericor. Priests might not marry; that neyther Priest, Deacon nor professed widdow might be Bvgam; the vow ofCypr. l. 1 ep. 9. & 11. Tertul. lib. de vetandis virginibus. Cypr. de ha. virginum. chastity of Virgines; the religious habite of sacred Virgines; theCypr l. 3. ad Quiri∣num. necessity of Baptisme:Origen hom. 2. vsage of
the Crosse in Baptisme; Vnction, and other ceremonies of Baptisme; the vertue of the signe of the Crosse; the erecting of Crosses in priuate houses, and publike places; the neces∣sity of satisfaction and pennance; Confession of sinnes, ab∣solution giuen as now, with imposition of hands Iusti∣fication by good workes; merite of workes; Freewill; the possibility of the commaundements; Lymbus Patrum, Prayer for the dead, Purgatory, prayer to Saints, Prayer to Angels, Apostolike and vnwritten Traditions, Fasting-dayes (Sunday euer excepted) Canonicall houres of prayer, prayer towardes the East, and finally the Primacy of S. Pe∣ter, and of the Romane Church. Which points of Religion the forsayd Fathers constantly auow to haue bene vniuer∣sally in their time, that is, in the second Age (as now in our tyme) belieued by the Catholike Church; and no holy Fa∣ther did euer reprehend eyther Tertullian, Origen, or S. Cypriā for belieuing the forsayd points of Religiō, though for other particular errours they were greatly reprehended (especially Origen, and Tertullian) by the holy Fathers; which is an infallible argument that those forsayd points of Religion, were in this second Age vniuersally belieued in the Catholike Church, without any debatable contradi∣ction. 2. As concerning Purgatory in particular, besides the proofes that I haue set downe in the first Age, this is to be remarked: that two sorts of persons depart this life, the one who hath led a holy life many yeares, and hath fully satis∣fied for his offences past, gounded alwayes vpon the satis∣factions of Christ: another who hath runne a wicked race all his dayes, and committed innumerable sinnes, yet through the mercy of God, repenting in the end is pardo∣ned, in the houre of his death, of his sins, by reason of the great contrition he hath had of them, not hauing leysure to make any satisfaction for them. Now I say, if this second person dying at the same instant with the former, enioy the blisse of heauen as soone as he, me thinkes that it were not conforme to the iustice of God, to reward him equally with the other, who before his death performed great sa∣tisfaction,
and therfore he must be delayed for a season of his felicity, vntill the penalty of his sinnes be payed in Pur∣gatory, since it is the will, & pleasure of God,Rom c. 2. v. 6. to reward euery one according to his workes. 3. Suppose then three seuerall sortes of persons departe this world. The one dyeth pure and cleane from all kind of sinne, as the Blessed Virgin Mary; the o∣ther guilty of diuers mortall sinnes, and dyeth therein; the third only spotted with some veniall sinnes, as many reli∣gious men by a special grace of God: the first without doubt goeth to heauen immediatly; the second to hell; the third goeth not to hell, because he is departed in the fauour of God, yet he goeth not to heauen immediatly, becauseApoc. cap. 20. v. 27. Thither shall not enter any vndefiled thing. Of this third sort of persons speaketh S. Augustine, when as he sayth:Lib. 21. de Ciuit. Dei cap. 24 It is manifest that those who are purged before the day of Iudgement by tē∣porall paynes are not deliuered to the punishments of eternall fire. And agayne:Aug. lib. 2. de Gen. cont. Manich. c. 20. He who hath not happily tilled his field, but hath suffe∣red it to be ouergrowne with thornes, hath in this life the malediction, and curse of the earth in all his workes, and after this life he shall haue eyther the fire of Purgatory, or euerlasting payne. The Mini∣sters cite, to disgrace S. Augustines doctrine in this poynt, that place of his,Lib. 5. hypogn. The third place we are vtterly ignorant of: Where S. Augustine denyeth only any third place of euer∣lastinge Ioy, or euerlastinge payne, agaynst the Pelagi∣ans, who graunted to the vnbaptized infants, a third place of euerlastinge Ioy. But let vs come to the wordes of the Bi∣ble. 4. S. Paul writing to the Corinthians maketh mentiō of the custome then vsed among the Catholikes to afflict themselues for the soules of their departed friends, which affliction the Apostle calleth Baptisme; in the which signifi∣cation our Sauiour also taketh the word Baptisme:Luke 12. v. 50 I haue a Baptisme to be baptized with. And,Mark 10. v. 38. Can you drinke the Cuppe that I drinke, or be baptized with the Baptisme, wherwith I am bap∣tized? meaning his future Passion on the Crosse: yea diuers holy Fathers doe call bodily afflictionCypr. serm. de sae. Rom. Greg Naz orat. in SS. lumina. Baptisme of teares, and Pennance: S. Paul then alluding to the ancient custome
of the Catholikes in his tyme, who did pray, make pil∣grimages, afflict their bodyes, giue almes for their departed soules, which they belieued to be in Purgatory, saith:1. Cor. 15. v. 29. Otherwise what shall they doe that are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not agayne at all? That is; what doth it auayle the Christians, and the Iewes to punish, fast, pray, and afflict themselues for the soules of the departed, if the dead rise not agayne to receyue the fruite, and benefite of their prayers? That the Iewes prayed for the dead, it is manifest by the book of the Machabees cited in the first Age; which booke as the Ministers must needs credit, as much at least as an hi∣storiographer, so S. Augustine sayth playnly therof:Aug. l. 18. de ciuit. cap. 33. The bookes of the Machabees, not the Iewes but the Church of God e∣steemeth canonicall. The Ministers seing the force of this place to proue corporall afflictions vndertaken for the departed, haue corrupted it so impiously, that it will be difficile to vnderstand their translation, wherein they haue taken a∣way, to make the sense obscure, two seuerall tymes the greeke article, which is in all the greeke copies; their words be: Else what shall they do which are baptized for dead &c. Why are they then baptized for dead? Which impious trāslation hath no more sense or meaning, then if a man should say: Let vs conuey the dead to buriall. Is this to translate their Bibles faythfully according to the Greeke copyes? Is not this forme of cor∣rupting the word of God abhomination before him? Is not this a sinne agaynst the holy Ghost, to corrupt thus the Bi∣ble, the Sacred Text, the word of God, the holy Scrip∣ture? 5. The other place, which proueth Purgatory, is that of the Prophet Baruch, who was scribe to Ieremy the Pro∣phet. This Prophet then in playne termes prayeth for the departed Iewes, saying:Baruch 3. v. 5. Remember not the iniquities of our Fathers, but remember thy hand, and thy name in this tyme. And by reason of these manifest words of praying for the depar∣ted Iewes, and consequently of Purgatory (whereof the one is so linked with the other, that by the proofe of the former, the latter necessarily ensueth) the Ministers deny this Booke to be canonicall, as lykewise that of the Macha∣bees.
But since they cannot shew any authority they haue, by the expresse word of their owne corrupted Bible, to preach and teach, farre lesse haue they authority to make, testify, or declare Canonicall, or Apocriphall bookes, Certes a world of holy and auncient Fathers, besides the Councells ofCanon vltimo. Laodicea, ofDe vni∣one Arme∣norum ses∣sione 4. Florence, and of Trent expresly obserue, that Baruch is Canonical Scripture: and the whole Catholike Church hath euer so belieued. NowEpist. 118. cap 5. Whatsoeuer the whole Church of God doth practise and obserue throughout the world, to dispute thereof, as though it were not to be done, is most insolent madnes, sayth S. Augustine. 6. The third place, is that prayer made by the good theefe to Christ vpon the Crosse,Luke 23. v. 4. Remember me when thou shalt come vnto thy Kingdome. Of the which place sayth S. Au∣gustinAug. l. 6 contra Iulianum cap. 5. it is manifest, that there be some sinnes, which are forgi∣uen after this life, as constantly the good heefe belieued, otherwise he would not haue prayed Christ, to haue remembred him after his death. 7. The fourth place is that of S. Paul to the Philippi∣ans:Philip cap. 2. v. 10. At the name of Iesus euery knee shall bow, of those in hea∣uen, of those in earth, and of those vnder the earth. That is, the Name of Iesus should be honoured by the Angels in hea∣uen, by the Christians on earth, and by those of Purgatory vnder the earth. Conforme to which Apostolike doctrine the Catholikes when they heare the Name of Iesus, do re∣uerence the same, for the respect and relation which it hath to our Sauiour Iesus-Christ, who is honoured in his name; not that the Catholikes honour the syllables of that name, (as the Ministers slaunderously teach the people) but the thing signified by the name, that is, Christ Iesus. Of the which holy custome S. Augustine maketh mention, wit∣nessing to haue carryed a particular deuotion to the name of Iesus:Lib. 3. Confes. c. 4 This name of my Sauiour (saith he) did so piously enter into my hart from my tender age, that whatsoeuer was wihout this ho∣ly name (though true & polished) yet it did not fully delight me. Since then those wordes vnder the earth, cannot be refered to deuils in hel, it must needes be referred to those of Purgatory, as the holy Fathers, and late writersIn hūc locum. witnesse. Yea the Mini∣sters
forseeing the force of this place to proue Purgatory, haue corrupted the same impiously thrusting into the text seuerall wordes which are not in the Greeke text, making thereby the sense obscure, and turning thus: At the Name of Iesus should euery knee bow, both of things in heauen, and thinges in earth, and things vnder the earth. Where those wordes, both of things, are no wayes in the Greek. Can things kneele at the Name of Iesus, or be there any sensles things in heauen, in earth, or vnder the earth which kneele at the name of Ie∣sus? 8. Finally that place of S. Luke, where our Sauiour raysed from death to life the Prince of the Synaguogue his daughter, proueth a third place different from heauen, and hell:Luke c. 8. v. 55. He holding her hand cryed, saying, Mayde arise. And her Spirit returned, and she rose incontinent. The soule of this Mayd as likewise the soule of Lazarus (who had beene dead foure daies) after the departure, was neyther in heauen, nor in hell, Ergo, in some third place. Notwithstanding al these forsayd places a stubborne Protestant will not yield by rea∣son of his passion and lofty mind, who not being able to giue one place of the Bible, which maketh in expresse words agaynst Purgatory, will bragge, and boast of his necessa∣ry consequences, leauing therby the expresse word of the Bible, and tying himselfe to his owne expositions and cō∣sequences, alleaging euer that the inward persuasion of the holy spirit guideth him, or rather blindeth him, But to these dreames of his and diabolicall consequences, let vs preferre the consequences of the holy Fathers of this second age, or Century. Testimonies of the holy Fathers of this second Age, in proofe of Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead. The first Section. TErtullian one of the most famous and learned writers in this secōd Age witnesseth that the holy Masse was in vse to be sayd for the departed Christians:Lib. de corona mi∣litis. cap. 4. Oblationes
(sayth he) pro defunctis annua die facimus. And a litle after he teacheth, that this holy custome to say Masse for the dead came by tradition from the Apostles, though there be not expresse wordes in the Bible therefore:Lib. de corona mi∣litis cap. 4. Harum & alia∣rum eiusmodi disciplinarum si legem expostules Scripturarum, nullam inuenies; Traditio tibi praetendetur auctrix, consuetudo confirmatrix. And againe in that booke of Monogamia (where he teach∣eth how a widdow should behaue her selfe) he exhorteth that she should pray for the soule of her departed husband, otherwise she doth not the duty of a true widdow sayth he:Lib. de Monoga. c. 10. Enimuero & pro anima eius orat, & refrigerium interim adpo∣stulat ei, & in prima resurrectione consortium; & offert annuis die∣bus dormitionis etus: Nam haec nisi fecerit, verè repudiauit, quantum in ipsa est. And his booke de Resurrectione carnis, he teacheth accordingly, that, Martyrs goe directly to heauen, others doe satisfy in the fire of Purgatory. 2. S. IrenaeusLib. 1. cap. 2. & Peuarden∣tius annot. 3. in dictū librum. a holy Father & Martyr witnesseth the same, to wit, that certayne persons, as infants, dying in the grace of Baptisme, & in state of Innocency go dire∣ctly to heauen without Purgatory: Others there be, sayth he, who must needs be cleansed after this life, before they enter into that e∣ternall felicity. The same holy Father citeth another most an∣cient writer called Pastor (as witnessethLib. 5. hist. c. 8. Eusebius) who maketh mention of the paynes suffered in Purgatory: which auncient doctrine of both Pastor, and Irenaeus is conforme to that of holy S. Chrysostome, who auoweth that the of∣fering vp of Sacrifice for the dead was enacted by the very Apostles themselues. Heare his wordes:Hom. 69. ad po∣pulum. It was not with∣out good cause enacted by the Apostles, that in the celebration of the reuerend mysteries a commemoration of the dead be made; for they knew that great profit, and much commodity redounded therby vnto them. Which holy custome of the Catholike Church gaue occasion toEuseb. in vita Constant. Constantine the great (whome our Soue∣raigne King Iames cleareth from all superstition) Empe∣rour to desire vehemently to be buried in a famous Church, that he might therby partake the benefit of many deuout praiers after his decease. Which holy Emperour was imitated by another godly Emperour Theodosius the yonger: who
Theodo∣retus hist. Eccles. ab. 5. cap. 25. Prostrated himself at the Reliques of S. Chrysostom, & made sup∣plication for the soules of his parents Arcadius & Eudoxia The same appeareth manifestly out of the Greeke Liturgy, or Masse extant in the workes of S. Chrisostome, where there is ex∣presly mentioned sacrifice of praise offred for holy Martirs, Prophets, Apostles, and Sacrifice offered for others detay∣ned in Purgatory. Which S. Augustine in lyke manner ex∣cellently describeth, saying:Tract. 84. in Io. Therfore at the table we do not so remember Martyrs, as others departed, who rest in peace, that we may also pray for them, but that they may pray for vs. And againe:Aug. in Euchr. cap. 110. When the Sacrifices of the Altar, or whatsoeuer other Almsedeeds are offered for all the Baptized departed, for those that be perfectly good, they be thankesgiuings, for such as be not very euill, they be pro∣pittations, for them that be passing naught, although they be not any helpes or refreshments of the dead, yet they be some comforts, & con∣solations of the liuing. Declaring therby that the self same Sacri∣fice of the Masse is a pr itiatory, & thanks-giuing Sacrifice. 3. Finally, the mony of our gratious Soueraigne King Iames putteth the matter out of doubt, since his Ma∣iesty freely protesteth:Casau∣bon in the answere to the Ep. of Card. de Peron. That is was a very auncient custome in the publike prayers of the Church, to make commemoration of the deceased, and to desire of God rest for their soules, who dyed in the peace of the Church, few are ignorant. What? Do not the ve∣ry auncient monuments of Scotland witnes this holy cu∣stome of saying Masse for the dead? Doe not the very sta∣tues of many noble mens houses, the Immunities, Char∣ters, and decrees of many noble men: such a greate mul∣titude of Deaneries, Chanonries, Monasteries, Nunne∣ries, Churches, Chappels haue beene erected by our forfa∣thers to no other end then to haue prayers, and Sacrifices offered for their soules? To this end the Monastery of Pasly was erected by the famous and Royall house of Steward; to this end the Monastery of Newbottel, the Abbay of Holy-Rood-house, the Abbay of Kelso, the Abbay of Lundors, the Abbay of Dere, the Abbay of Coldingam, the Abbay of Killos in my country of Murray: to this end many others haue beene builded in our countrey, whose sumptuous buildings or decayed ruines yet remayning, accuse the Ministers of
horrible Impiety, to haue thus ouerthrowne the most fa∣mous, and auncient monuments of their forfathers. 4. Origen giueth sufficient occasion to the Ministers to belieue that there is a Purgatory, since he spake four∣teene hundreth yeares agoe so playnly thereof:Hom. 14. in Le∣uiticum. Natura peccati similis est materiae quae igni consumitur, quam aedificari Paulus Apostolus à peccatoribus dicitur,1. Cor. cap. v. 13. qui supra fundamentum Chri∣sti aedificant ligna, foenum, stipulam. In quo manifestè ostenditur esse quaedam peccata ita leuia, vt stipulae comparentur, cui vti{que} ignis el∣latus diu non potest immorari. Alia vero foeno esse similia, quae ipse non difficulter ignis absumat, verum aliquanto tardiùs, quàm in stipuli immoretur. Alia verò esse, quae lignis conferantur, in quibus pro qua∣litate criminum, diutinum & grande pabulum ignis inueniat. Ita ergo vnumquod{que} peccatum pro qualitate, vel quantitate sui poenarum iusta persoluit. Likewise explicating those words of S. Paul.1. Cor. cap. 3. v. 15 If any mans worke burne, he shall loose, but he shall be safe him∣selfe neuerthelesse, yet as it were by the fire, inferreth this conse∣quence of Purgatory:Hom. 6. in Exod. Idcirco igitur qui saluus fit, per ignem saluus fit; & si quid fortè de specie plumbi habuerit admixtum, id i∣gnis decoquat, & resoluat, vt efficiantur omnes aurum bonum. And speaking of the space that euery man remayneth in Purga∣tory, saith very learnedly with the Catholike Church that, that space of tyme is only knowne to God: (e) Verùm (saith he) haec ipsa purgatio, quae per poenam ignis adhibetur, quantis tem∣poribus, quantisue saeculis de peccatoribus exigat cruciatus, solus scire potest ille, cui Pater omne iudicium tradidit. 5. S. Cyprian explicating those wordes of S. Matthewe.Matth. c. 5. v. 27. Thou shalt not goe out from thence till thou repay the last farthing, inferreth thence Purgatory, saying:In Epist 52. ad Aut. Aliud est ad veniam stare, aliud ad gloriam peruenire, aliud missum in carcerem non exire inde donec soluat nouissimum quadrantem, aliud statim fidei, & virtutis accipere mercedem, aliud pro peccatis longo dolore cruciatum, emen∣dari & purgare diu igne, aliud peccata omnia passione purgasse, aliud deni{que} pendere in die iudicij ad sententiam Domini, aliud statim à Do∣mino coronari. He speaketh lykewise largly of Purgatory, & prayer for the dead in his Epistle ad plebem & clerum Furnita∣norum, which omit to be short. 6. But what if the Ministers themselues in their Con∣fession
of Fayth sworne, subscribed, and susteined by the three Estates of Scotland at seuerall tymes, do acknowledg a third place betwixt heauen and hell, where the soules of the elect departed remayne? Heare their wordes: The elect depared are in peace, and rest from their labours; not that they sleep,In the Cō∣fession of fayth rati∣fied by the three Estats of Scotland anno 1560. the 17. of August. n. 17. and come to a certayne obliuion, as some Phantastickes do affirme, but that they are deliuered from all feare, torment, and temptation, to which we and all God his elect are subiect in this life &c. As con∣trary the reprobate, and vnfaythfull departed haue anguish, torment, and payne that cannot be expressed; so that neyther are the one, nor the other in such sleepe, that they feele not their torments. If ney∣ther the elect nor the reprobate are empty, and voyd of tor∣ments, it followeth of necessity that the soules of the elect be not in heauen, where there can be no torment at all. If not in heauen then in some third place, which we call Pur∣gatory. 2. In the Ministers opinion the elect do not go im∣mediatly to heauē after their departure, for heare they speak neuer a word of heauen. 3. They cite the text of S. Luke; but let any man read the chapter, and he shall neuer find, no not a word of such abominable blasphemies, or Phari∣saicall superstitious doctrine. And this is the Clergy of our Puritane Ministry. That Ministers haue corrupted and falsified the Bible in sundry places which proueth Purgatory, or a third Place. The second Section. IT is a wonderfull matter to see how the Ministers haue corrupted the Bible, of hatred they carry to Purgatory, or of any third place betwixt heauen and hell. As in speci∣all that of the Prophet Hoseas, who fortelling that our Sa∣uiour after his death was to deliuer the soules of the iust who remayned in that third place called Lymbus Patrum, and Purgatory, conforme to the expresse word of S. Peter, who sayth, that Christ,1. Pet. 3. v. 9. & 20. Preached to them that were in prison, which had bene incredulous somtyme, when they expected the patience of God in the dayes of Noe. Of the which words, S. Augustine infer∣reth
this consequence,Aug epist 9. Therfore who but an infidell will de∣ny that Christ was in hell? The wordes of Hoseas be:Hos. 23 v. 14. Out of the hand of death I will deliuer them: from death I will re∣deeme them. I wilbe thy death, O deah; thy bitte will I be, O hell, which words being vnderstood by the holy Fathers of that third place where the soules of the holy Fathers were de∣tayned, the Ministers haue fully corrupted thus: I will re∣deeme them from the power of the graue. I will deliuer thē from death. O death I will be thy death. O graue I will be thy destruction. Where they haue turned the word hell into graue, directly agaynst the Hebrew word Scheol, and the Greeke word, which the Ministers shamelesly haue turned agaynst the iudge∣ment and vse of all sort of writers. And this they call Re∣formed Religion, to vse words agaynst the meaning and vse all auncient Authors, Fathers, Councels, Nations, & king∣domes. 2. The second place which the Ministers haue cor∣rupted, is that of the Prophet Zacharie:Zacha. 9. v. 11. Thou also in the bloud of thy testament hast let forth thy prisonners out of the prison wherin is no water. Signifiyng thereby, that Christ after his Passion, in vertue of his holy bloud, relieued the soules of the holy Fathers who were in a pit or prison, where there was no water, that is, no tribulation or penalty, as wit∣nesseth S. Paul:Ephes. 4. v. 8. When he ascended vpon high, he led Captiuity captiue.Lib 2. cont. Mar. cap 4. Tertullian,Lib. cō∣tra Felicia∣num Arria∣num cap. 15 . S. Augustin, and other holy Fa∣thers testify the same: & the Hebrew word Bor, as also the Greeke signifieth a prison, as the Ministers themselues do witnesse in Exodus:Exod. 12. Vnto the first borne of the captiue which was in prison. Where the same Hebrew, and Greeke wordes are. The Ministers to take away the force of this place, not only haue mangled the words, but lykewise haue added three seuerall words shalt be saued, which are not in the He∣brew or Greeke, translating thus: Thou also shalt be saued through the bloud of thy conuenant, I haue loosed thy prisoners out of the pit wherin is no water. Notwithstanding all this impious changing and corrupting of the text, the Ministers do Pro∣test and sweare to the simple people that they haue transla∣ted conforme to the Hebrew and Greeke originalls.
3. The third place is that of S. Matthew:Math. 12. v. 40.  As Ionas was three dayes and three nightes in the whales belly: so shall the Sonne of man be three dayes and three nightes in the heart of the earth. Wher∣by is signified that our Sauiour after his passion wēt down to Lymbus Patrum, or Purgatory, which is in the hart of the earth. Conforme to the Greeke and Hebrew, and to the Holy Fa∣thersEpist. 99. ad Euo∣dium. S. Augustine,De my∣sterio Pas∣chae cap. 4. S. Ambrose,Lib de anima c. 55 Tertullian & sundry others. Some Bibles of the Hugenots of France & of the Ministers of Scotland, to signifie that this place is on∣ly to be vnderstood of the graue, haue takē away the word heart, thus: Ainsi serale Fils de l'hōme dedās la terre trois iours & trois nuicts. So shall the sonne of man be three dayes and three nights in the earth. So great is the hatred they haue agaynst Purgatory, yet they will be thought and called Puritanes, as purged and cleansed from all sinne, not hauing any need of Purga∣tory. 4. The fourth corruption is that of the Acts, where S. Peter declareth that Christs soule after his death was not left in hell, as the Prophet Dauid fortold,Act. 2. v. 31. Who forseeing spake of the Resurrection of Christ, for neyther was he left in hell, neyther did his flesh see corruption. Conforme to the which place S. Hierome saith, that death is the separation of the soule from the body, and that hell is a place wherin the soules are con∣teyned, eyther tormented with paynes or without paynes conforme to the quality of their merits. His wordes be:In cap. 13. Hoseae. Infernus locus est in quo animae recluduntur, siue in refrigerio, siue in poenis, pro qualitate meritorum. The place without paynes is, Lymbus Patrum. SeeSerm. de defūctis. Aug. lib. de cura pro mortuis c. 15. & 17. Damascene, and S. Augustin, who teacheth that it is an intollerable impudency to deny that the soules of the departed haue appeared sometymes to those of this world by Gods permission, and he giueth example of Moyses and Elias whoMath. 17. v. 3. appeared vnto Christ. The Ministers haue impiously corrupted the foresayd place, a∣gainst the Syriake and Greeke text, saying: He knowing this before, spake of Christ, that his soule should not be left in the graue. Putting the word graue for hell, signifying thereby that the soule of Christ, and consequently of all men,. is mortall and corruptible, for whatsoeuer is put in the graue, must needs
be corruptible & mortall. The impiety of the Ministry is to be marked in this, that in other places of the Bible (where there is no mention of any third, as of Lymbus Patrum, or Purgatory) they translate the same self Greeke word as we do. As that of S. Matthew:Matth. 11. v. 23. And thou Capharnaū, which art lifted vp to heauen, shalt be broght downe to hell: They do not trā∣slate, down to the graue. What great threatning of Christ were it, I pray yow, to say that those Citties or indwellers ther∣of were to be brought downe to the graue, since they were all mortall? The Syriake text of the foresayd Chapter of the Acts condemneth the Ministers of Infidelity, Eschthebek baschioloph. lo pagreh: neyther was his soule left in hell. 5. The fifth place is that of S. Paul:Ephes. 4. v. 8. And that he as∣cended, what is it, but because he descended also first into the inferiour parts of the earth? Signifying that the same Christ who ascē∣ded vnto heauen, first descended into the most low parts of the earth, as it is in the Greeke and Syriake, Lukedam lethach thuoteh.. Out of the which wordsLib. 5. contra hae∣res. S. Irenaeus inferreth this consequence; That our Sauiour descended to the infe∣riour parts of the earth to relieue the soules of the iust who were there: andIn haec verba. S. Ambrose likewise out of those words inferreth, Christ to haue relieued the soules of Adam, Abra∣ham, Isaac, and Iacob, and others. Which doctrine was cō∣stantly belieued by the Church of God sayth S. Augustine:Serm. 14. de verb. Apost. Hoc habet authoritas Matris Ecclesiae, hoc fundatus veritatis obti∣net canon, contra hoc robur, contra hunc inexpugnabilem murum quisquis arietat, ipse cōfringitur. The Ministers to take away th strēgth of the forsayd place in some of their Bibles do turne thus: Now in that he ascended, what is it, but that he had also des∣cended first, into the low parts of the earth. Which place in some Bibles is corrected. 6. The sixt place is in the Epistle to the Hebrwes where S. Paul teacheth that the Patriarkes and holy fathers were not admitted to heauēly ioyes in heauē, til those of the new Law were associated to thē, because the way of euer∣lasting glory was not as yet opened by the death of Christ, so that all those holy Fathers of the ancient law,Hebr. 11. v. 39. Being approued by the testimony of Fayth, receaued not the promise, God for
vs prouiding some better thing, that they without vs should not be con∣sumate; conforme to the Syriake, Delo belhhadin nete Gam∣roun. Which words, notwithstanding their euidency, the Ministers haue obscurely translated thus: That they without vs, should not be made perfect. Yet they haue translated with vs the same Greeke word in that of the Reuelation:Reuel. 10. v. 7. Euen the mistery of God shall be finished. 7. The seauenth place is that of the Prophet Dauid, where the Prophet speaking in his owne person, or in the person of the auncient Fathers (whome Christ after his death was to relieue out of hell) sayth thus:Psal. 4 v. 15. in . Müad sche ol naphbi min gehen∣nā. Neuertheles God will redeeme my soule out of the hand of hell, where he shall take me. But how haue the Ministers impiously falsified this pla∣ce? God shall deliuer my soule from the power of the graue. Dire∣ly agaynst the Greeke, Hebrew, and Caldaick, which v∣seth the word gehenna, which cannot be taken for the graue, as witnesseth playnlyMatth. 5. v. 29. . S. Matthew. Nor yet heer for the hell of the damned persons, out of which there is no re∣demption, conforme to that common saying: Ex inferno nul∣la est redemptio. 8. The eight place is that of the Machabees, where it is sayd, that Iudas Machabaeus a godly and valiant Cap∣tayne hauing compassion of his godly souldiours who were slaine in the warres:2. Ma. 21. v. 43.44.45. & 46. . Hauing made a gathering, sent twelue thousand drachmes of siluer to Ierusalem for sacrifice, to be offered for the sinnes of the dead. Well and religiously thinking of the Resurrection (for vnlesse he hoped that they that were slayne, should rise agayne, it should seeme superfluous and vayne to pray for the dead) and becaus he considered that they had taken their sleep with godlynes, had very good grace layed vp for them. It is there∣fore a holy and healthfull cogitation to pray for the dead, that they may be loosed from sinnes. The which wordes S. Augu∣stine explicating saith, that a Sacrifice was offered vp heer for the Dead. Let vs heer his wordes:Lib.  de cura pr mortuis.  1. In Machabaeorum li∣bro legimus oblatum pro mortuis Sacrificium &c. Non parua est vni∣uersae Ecclesiae quae in hac consuetudine claret authoritas, vbi in preci∣bus sacerdotis quae Domino Deo ad eius altare funduntur, locum suum hahet etiam cōmendatio mortuorū. The Ministers to disgrace this
passage which maketh playnly for vs Catholikes; first they deny the authority of these bookes, wherein S. Augustin and the Church of God contradicteth & belyeth them. 2. They haue scraped out, those wordes, to be offered for the sins of the dead. 3. They haue turned and mangled the words in such sort, that it is very hard to a witty and naturall man to vnderstand them. 4. They haue fully taken away the last verse which is the strength & conclusion of the words be∣fore. And all this new forme of dealing, of falsifying the Bible, of changing the words thereof, the Ministers do cal Reformation, and the reformed Religion. The tenth Article. That the holy Sacrament of Confession, was vniuersally in vse, and practise in this second Age. CHAP. VI. IT is not sufficient we disburthen our harts to a lawfull Priest by cōfession a∣lone (whereof I spake in the first Age) but we must returne to the fauour of God by contrition & satisfactiō, which are the parts of sacramentall confession. Cōtritiō is that, wherby we fully detest the offense cōmitted against God. Absolution is that, wher∣by actually we receaue remission of our sinnes. And Satis∣faction is that, wherby we seeke to recompense the wrong made to God, according to our imbecility, grounding al∣waies our satisfaction vpon the satisfactions of Christ. The reason wherfore God will haue vs make some satisfaction for our sinnes is, because two thinges are included in eue∣ry mortall sinne (as wisely with the rest of the Catholike Deuines teacheth our famous and learned countryman,
In 4. sent. dist. 46. quaest. 4. Ioannes Duns, called Scotus from our countrey, & Doctor subtilis for his meruailous wit & subtility) a disloyall auer∣sion from Gods goodnes, & an inordinate conuersion to the transitory creatures, wherin the sinner taketh delight; to which a double punishment belongeth: to the auersion is due the payne or penalty of dammage, that is, the losse of that eternall felicity, which is called poena damni, answering to malum culpae. To the conuersion is due the paine or punish∣mēt of sense, that is, the eternall fire of hell, called poena sensus, answering to malum poenae. As for the guiltynes of the fault, called malum culpae, it is taken away in vertue of Confession and the Priests absolution, which applyeth the force and vertue of the bloud of Christ vnto the penitent sinner. As for the guiltines of the punishmēt called malum poenae, though it be vtterly released in respect of the eternall duration, in vertue of Sacramenall absolution: yet oftentimes after the absolutin, som temporall punishment remayneth to be suffered, greater or lesse according to the pleasure taken in sinne, as witnesseth he Bible in playne termes:Reuel. 18. v. 7. In as∣much as she glorified her selfe, and liued in pleasure, so much giue yee her torment and sorrow. Which is more cleerly set down in the example of the King and Prophet Dauid, to whome God pardoned his murther and adultery, and pronounced abso∣lution by the mouth of the Prophet Nathan:Samuel 12. v. 17. Our Lord hath taken away thy sinne, thou shalt not die. Notwithstanding this absolution, God imposed to Dauid this pennance and satisfaction:2. Sam. 12. v. 14. Neuertheles because thou hast made the enemies of our Lord to blaspheme, for this thing the sonne that is born to thee, shal dye; directly conforme to the former doctrine of the holy Fathers who do teach, that notwithstanding the absolution giuen by the Priest, we should do pennance and satisfactiō for our sins:Aug. in Enchir. ad Laurent. c. 71. It is not inough (sayth S. Augustin) to change our maners to the better & decline from euills, vnlesse God be also sa∣tisfied for those things which we haue done by the griefe of pennance, by the mourning of humility, by the Sacrifice of a contrite heart, almes∣deeds cooperating therto. And agayne: By almesdeeds for offenses past God is to be made propitious and fauourable. And S. Cy∣prian:Tract. de opere & eleemosin. By Good workes God ought to be satisfyed, by merits of
mercy sinnes should be purged. And S. Ambrose:Lib. de poenit. cap. 5. He that doth pennance should not only wash away his offence with teares, but with perfecter workes ought to couer and hyde former faults, that sinne may not be imputed vnto him. AndLib. 2. cont. loui. cap. 2. Indeed great were Gods iniustice if he would only punish sinnes, and would not receaue good workes and satisfaction for sinne, sayth S. Hierome. 2. This being presupposed let vs proue out of the Bi∣ble the holy Sacrament of Confession, whereof S. Luke speaketh thus:Act. 19. v. 18 & 19. And many of them that belieued, came confes∣sing and declaring their deeds: and many of them that had followed curious things, brought togeather their bookes and brunt them before all.. The Greeke and Syriake word importeth, numbring their sinnes in particular: vmauedim bemodem. Yea the Greek word exomologesis is taken among the Greeke and Latin Fa∣thers, for sacramentall confession. Also the word deeds, sheweth that they declared in particular their deadly sinnes; and the Greeke word lykewise sheweth that they confessed their sinnes secretly, as witnesseth S. Basil, who sayth:Basil. 1. reg. ex bre∣uior.  & , that is, to decla∣re inward thoughts outwardly. Heere the Scripture teacheth that we should confesse our sins, yet not to eue∣ry one, but to him who hath receaued power to absolue vs. Hence it followeth that S. Pul to whom this confessiō was made caused them who confessed to burne their books. 2. It fol∣loweth that in the very tyme of the Apostles Sacramentall Confession was in vse, and that S. Paul himself heard confes∣sions, as witnesseth besides the holy Fathers, Gregorius de Valentia, Henricus, Lindanus, à Castro, Hosius, Tapper, Eckius, Petrus Soto, Baronius, Salmeron, and sundry o∣thers: and before them, the space of twelfe hundreth yeares since, S. Victor a learned and holy Father writing of the miserable persecution made then by the Vandals agaynst the Catholikes in Afrike, auoweth that the Catholike and common people lamented greately that their Priests be∣ing banished by the Arrian heretiks, they could not get the benefit of Confession, weeping and crying:Victor. lib. 2. de persec. Vā∣dal. Who shall baptise those infants? Who shall Minister pennance vnto vs, and loose vs from the bonds of sinnes. And therforeEp. 54 S. Cyprian cal∣leth it great cruelty (and such, as Priests shall answere for at the later day) to suffer any man that is penitent of his sins
to depart this life without sacramentall absolution: to whome ioyneth S. Augustin saying:Ep. 180 Aut non regenerati aut ligati. That it is a pitifull case whē by the absence of Gods Priests men depart this life eyther not regenerated, or fast bound. That is, not absolued by the Sacra∣ment of Confession, because they are in euident danger of eternall perdition, dying in their sinnes committed against God. 3. The second place of the Scripture is that of Leui∣ticus:Leuit. 5. v. 5. When he hath sinned in any of those things, then he shall cō∣fesse that he hath sinned therein. If the Iewes were obliged to confesse in particular their sinnes to sinful men, much more Christians who are vnder the law of grace and of perfecti∣on, since that Christ himself sayth:Matth. 5. v. 17. I came not to break the law or the Prophets, but I came to fulfill the law. The Ministers do reply. The Priests be men, how can they then forgiue sins? I answere. Euen as Almighty God hath giuen power to men to worke miracles, to rayse the dead, cure the blind &c. so he may also giue, and hath giuen authority to par∣don sinnes, saying to the Apostles who were sinfull men:Iohn. 20. v. 23. Whose sinnes yee forgiue, they shalbe forgiuen &c. Truly if the Protestants could withdraw themselues from the fleshly li∣berty which their Religion affoardeth, & haue patience to consider a little the manifold fruits and singular commodi∣ties which plentifully flow to the Catholikes by reason of Confession, they should be forced to auow it to be a most godly and heauenly institution, as dayly experience doth teach vs: and we see lyke wise sundry men greately ve∣xed and grieued in their conscience with the combersome load and burthen of sinne, and yet so soone as they haue receaued the benefit of Absolution, we see them depart from the Priest so blyth, so gladde, so content, so full of inward comfort, that it is vnspeakeable to man. We haue seene o∣thers after many iniuries done to their neighbour, after the Sacrament of Confession, go & reconcile themselues & craue pardō with al humility for the wrōg they had done: we see lykewise dayly proud and lofty men humbled, the dissolute reclaymed, the lasciuious become chast, and such other changes. Whereof we may say with the Prophet Da∣uid.
This is the mutation of the right hand of God. Many publike a∣buses, which neyther by the seuerity of lawes, nor vigilācy of Magistrats can be hyndred, are oftentymes reformed by the help of Confession, many wronges satisfied, wicked en∣terprses stopped, good purposes furthered, much vertue aduanced, and much vice suppressed:In psal. 66. And to this end (saith S. Augustine) God exacteth confession to free and release the hum∣ble, to this end he condemneth the sinner not confessing, to chastise the proude. Wherfore since the Protestants will not acknow∣ledge neither the expresse words of their own Bible, which make for Confession, (as I haue declared before) nor yet the infinite commodities which confession frameth, nor yet the ancient custom of the Catholik Church; I addresse vn∣to them that fearfull and terrible sentence of S. Augustine grounded vpon the wordes of our Sauiour Christ Iesus:Ep. 50. Whosoeuer he be that belieueth not mans sinnes to be remitted in Gods Church, and therefore despiseth the bountifulnes of God in so mighty a worke, if he continue in that obstinat mind till his lyues end, he is guilty of sinne agaynst the holy Ghost. Let vs see what was the Religion of the holy Fathers of this second Age, cōcer∣ning the Sacrament of Confession. The testimonies of the holy Fathers of this second Age, prouing the vse of Confession. The first Section. TErtullian a famous and learned writer in this second. Age, hath writen a whole booke of Confession, where he calleth it with the Greeke and Latin Fathers, Exomolo∣gesis, describing the very particular circumstances of that Sacrament: as to kneele in confessing our sinnes before the Priest, to weepe and mourne for our sinnes, to fast and chastise our body therfore, and such lyke. His wordes be:Lib. de poenit. c. 9 Ita{que} Exomologesis prosternendi & humilific andi hominis disci∣plina est, conuersationem iniungens misericordiae illicem. De ipso qu{que} habitu at{que} victu mandat, sacco & cineri incubare, corpus sor∣dibus
obscurare, animum moeroribus deijcere, illa quae peccauit tristi tractatione mutare; caeterùm, pastum & potum pura nosse, non ven∣tris scilicet, sed animae causa: plerum{que} verò iciunijs preces alere, ingemiscere, mugire dies noctes{que} ad Dominum tuum, presbyteris ad∣uolui, & charis Dei adgeniculari &c. After he sheweth that there is no other remedy in the Church of God (besides Baptisme) to take away mortall and deadly sinnes, then Confession.Cap. 12 Igitur cùm scias, aduersus tegeheunam post prima illa intinctionis dominicae monimēta, esse adhuc in Exomologesi secunda sub∣sidia, cur salutem tuam deseris: Cur cessas aggredi, quod scias mede∣ri tibi &c. Lykewise he threatneth those who for shame & worldly respectes, do choose rather to be damned in not confessing then to be saued eternally in cōfessing their sins:Cap. 10 Adeòne existimatio hominum & Dei conscientia comparantur? An melius est damnatum latere quàm palam absolui? Miserum est sic ad Exomologesim peruenire. He sayth, palam absolui, because the custome in the primitiue Church was, and now is, to con∣fesse our sinnes not priuatly in corners and chambers, but publickly in Churches and chappells, vnles the greatnes of persecution, or other lawfull cause doth hinder. 2. S. Irenaeus speaking of certayne women, who (deceaued and seduced by Marcion, then a famous heretik) reconciled themselues and returned to the holy Church, confessing their sinnes and doing pennance therefore, saith:Lib. 1. cap. 9. Ipsae saepenumero cùm ad Ecclesiam Dei redijssent, confessae sunt. And a little after he sheweth the very fashion vsed then in the Church at the reception of any heretical person, who was first absolued from excommunication; then after his priuate confession, was absolued from his sinnes: finally pennance beinge enioyned, a notable changement of his life from bad to good was easy to be remarked. Deinde cùm non sine magno labore fratres eam conuertissent, ipsa omne tem∣pus in Exomologesi consummauit, plangens & lamentans ob hanc, quam ab hoc mago passa est corruptelam. Calling thereby Marciō the heretike a Magician & witch, because cōmonly heresy and witchcraft are ioyned together. 3. Origen a learned writer of this Age, threatneth bitterly those who receaued the Blessed Sacrament, not ha∣uing
before confessed their sins to the Priest:Hom. 2. in Leuit. Cùm anima tua aegrotet, & peccatorum langoribus vrgeatur, securus es, contem∣nis gehennam at{que} ignis aeterni supplicia de spicis & irrides? Iudicium Dei paruipendis, & commonentem te Ecclesiam despicis? Commu∣nicare non times corpus Christi, accedens ad Eucharistiam quasi mun∣dus & purus, quasi nihil in te sit indignum, & his omnibus putas quòd effugias iudicium Dei? non recordaris illud quod scriptum est, quia properea in vobis infirmi & aegri, & dormiunt multi? Quare multi in∣firmi? quoniam non seipsos dijudicant, ne{que} seipsos examinant, nec intelligunt quid est communicare Ecclesiae &c. And agayne he a∣uoweth that we are obliged not only to confesse our sins to God; but lykewise to those who haue receaued power from God to absolue vs.Hom. 17. in Luc. Si enim reuelauerimus peccata nostra non solùm Deo, sed & his, qui possunt mederi vulneribus nostris at{que} peccatis, delebūtur peccata nostra ab eo qui ait:Isa. 44. v. 22. Ecce delebo vt nu∣bem iniquitates tuas, & sicut caliginem peccatae tua. Finally he de∣clareth the custom of the primitiue Church which was first to heare the confession of sick persons, & then to giue them the Sacrament of Extreme-Vnction (which he acknow∣ledgeth to be the seauenth Sacrament, or the seauenth way wherby our sinnes are forgiuen vs) in annoynting them with oyle:Hom. . Leuit. Est adhuc & septima, licet dura & laboriosa, per poenitentiam remissio peccatorum, quum lauat peccator in lachrymis stratum suum, & fiunt ei lachrymae suae panes die ac nocte; & cùm non crubescit sacerdoti Domini indicare peccatum suum, & quaerere medicinam, secundum eum qui ait: Dixi, pronunciabo aduersum me iniustitiam meam Domino, & tu remisisti impietatem cordis mei. In quo impletur & illud quod Apostolus dicit:Iames 5. v. 4. Si quis autem infirma∣tur, vocet presbyteros Ecclesiae, & imponant ei manus, vngentes eum o∣leo in nomine Domini &c. Do the Ministers vse this annoin∣ting of the sicke as the Apostles did? If not, how can they so shamfully affirme, that their Religion the same with that of the Apostles? 4. S. Cyprian speaketh so playnly of this matter, that his words being read without passion, the Ministers wil see easily the newfanglednesse of their Religion. His wordes be:Serm. de lapsis. Confiteantur finguli, quaeso vos fratres, delictum, dum ad∣huc qui deliquit in saeculo est, dum admitti confessio eius potest, dum
satisfactio & remissio facta per sacerdotes apud Dominum grata est. And agayne, he setteth down the fashion to make a good Confession: to wit, to confesse with humility of mynd & simplicity of words, with an inward contrition of heart, and not only of deadly sinnes but also of veniall:Eodem Sermon. Hoc ip∣sum apud Sacerdotes Dei dolenter & simpliciter confitentur, Exomo∣logesim conscientiae faciunt, animi sui pondus exponunt, salutarem tuedelam paruis licet & modicis vulneribus exquirunt, scientes scrip∣tum esse, Deus non deridetur. Lykewise in a certayne Epistle of his to the holy Martyrs, he testifieth that if a man be in dan∣ger of his life, by reason of his corporall infirmities, he should incontinent haue care to confesse his sinnes:Epist. 11. ad Mar∣tyr. confes. & epist. 14. ad Cle∣rum. Si premi infirmitae aliqua & periculo coeperint, Exomologesi facta, & manu eis à vobis imposita in poenitentiam cum pace à martyribus sibi promissa ad Dominum remittantur. See his tenth Epistle to the clergy, where he setteth downe the very particular circum∣stances vsed now-adayes in administring the Sacrament of Confession. That the Ministers haue falsified sundry places of the Bible which do proue the Sacrament of the Catholike Church, to haue bene in vse vniuersally. The second Section. THe Catholik Church teacheth vs, that originall sinne is not a Phisicall quality descending from Adam to vs, but rather a morall spot wherewith the soule of man is de∣filed so soone as it is vnited with that body, which descen∣deth from the corrupted stock or root of Adam; wherby, as all those who descend of Adam are corrupted with this originall sinne, so it is wholly taken and washed away by the Sacrament of Baptisme, though some effects, as concupiscence, inclination to sinne, and such (which are not sinne) remayne after Baptisme, as playnly S. Paul teacheth saying:Rom. 5. v. 12. As by one man sinne entred into the world, and by sinne death, and so vnto all men death did passe, in whome all sinned. Directly agaynst the Ministers, who do teach, that
Christian mens Children are holy from their Mothers wombe by reason of the parents Fayth, and consequently such children (say they) haue not absolute necessity of the Sacrament of Baptisme (which is called regeneration) a∣gaynst the expresse words of the Bible:Iohn. 3. Except a man be borne of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdome of God. 2. The Ministers do teach, that originall sinne is not only that forsayd mortal spot, but lykewise that concupis∣cence and bad inclination without consent of our will, is truly and properly originall sinne, which consequently e∣uer remayneth truly in vs, & is neuer washed away in this life. To the which end they haue falsified the foresayd place of S. Paul, thus: As by one man sinne entred into the world, and death by sinne, & so death went ouer all men, forasmuch as all men haue sinned.. Putting the word for asmuch, for the word in whom, (Adam) directly agaynst the Greeke, where it is, in whome; directly agaynst the Syriake, behaideculle then chatan, where the words in whom are referred withAug. de peccat. me∣rit. & rem. cap. 10. S. Augustin to Adam. The Pelagian Heretikes, who denyed with our Ministers that baptisme tooke away originall sinne, translated this place to strengthen their heresy, as the Ministers do. Wher∣ofLib. 6. cont. Iulia. cap. 12. S. Augustin bitterly accused the Pelagians in turning quatenus into quantum, forasmuch, for that, in place of in quo, in whome, condemning the Pelagians of manifest heresy and of Lese-maiesty diuine, for such impious translations.Beza in hunc locū. Beza himself condemneth the Ministers of impiety for tur∣ning in quo, in whom, referring it to the words before, as by one man. Shall the Ministers be able to shew any other place of the Bible, where they haue translated those Greeke words, in quo, forasmuch? No truly to my knowledge. Doe they translate those wordes, as we do, in other indifferent places? That they do, as in S. Marke:Mark. 11. v. 14. They let downe the bed, wherin the sicke of the palsy lay. And doth not such double and deceitfull forme of translating shew the Ministers to be infected with the spirit of contradiction,. errour and here∣sy? Now, that baptisme taketh away from the child origi∣nall sinne, and that the child cannot be saued without the Sacramēt of Baptisme, S. Paul auoweth: (g) Not by the works
of Iustice (he meaneth the workes done before Iustification) which we did, but according to his mercy he hath saued vs by the lauer of regeneration and renouation of the holy Ghost, whome he hath pow∣red vpon vs aboundantly by Iesus-Christ our Sauiour &c. Which place the Ministers haue filthily corrupted. And agayne:Act. 22 v. 16. Aryse and be baptized, and wash away thy sinnes, inuocating the name of the Lord Which place the Ministers haue lykewise falsified. And S. Peter playnly teacheth that we are saued and clensed from our sinnes by the Sacrament of Baptisme:1. Pet. 3. v. 20. While the arke was preparing, wherein few, that is, eight soules were saued by water, wherunto baptisme being of the lyke forme, now saueth yow also. But let vs try & examine the very wordes of the Ministers set downe in the articles of their fayth, where they teach plainly that Baptism taketh not away wholy o∣riginall sinne (to take away the half therof, is it not follie to thinke?) for in their articles of Fayth rehersed publickely euery sonday in the Churches of Sotland, they affirme, that Baptisme,48. son∣day. Representeth vnto vs the remission of our sins. They wil not say, that it taketh away originall sin. And agayne the Minister asketh:94. son∣day. Thow meanest not that the water is the washing of our soules? That is, thou meanest not that Baptisme giuen in water, washeth away the sinnes of our soules? C. No, for that be∣longeth to the bloud of our Sauiour Christ Iesus alone &c. Finally the ministry concludeth that Baptisme is but a figure wher∣unto verity is conioyned? What verity is conioyned? what verity I pray yow, if grace and remission of sinnes be not ioyned thereto? The Ministers then to proue and vphold this heresy and blasphemy haue manifestly falsified those wordes of S. Peter thrusting the very word Figure into the pure text of the Bible thus:1. Pet. 3. v. 20. Wherin (to wit, in the Arke) few, that is eight soules, were saued in the water, to the which also the figure that now saueth vs, Baptisme agreeth &c. Directly against the Greeke text which auoweth Baptisme to saue vs,. and cleanse vs of originall sinne, alwayes grounded vpon the bloud of Christ: As the Ministers auow of Fayth which saueth vs, not as a figure but grounded vpon the bloud of Christ. The Ministers take so great delight in figures that I feare they shall get finally heauen in a figure, and hel real∣ly.
The Syriake text maketh no mention of a figure, but ra∣ther sheweth,Turphesa graecè . that euen as Noe with some others were sa∣ued truly & not figuratiuely from the deluge of the waters; so Baptisme saueth vs in taking away originall sinne, and not as a figure; as plainly S. Paul witnesseth writing toTit. 3. v. 5. Titus. But let vs leaue these figuristicall Ministers. 2. In the lyke manner the Ministers to take away the effect of Baptisme (which is the clensing of originall sinne) they haue corrupted that of S. Paul:Ephes. . v. 25. Hushands loue your wyues, as Christ also loued the Church, and deliuered himselfe for it, that he might sanctify it, cleāsing it by the lauer of water in the word. Where the wordes, lauer of the water, signify the material parts of this Sacrament, the words, in the word, signify the forme of the Sacrament, which is, I Baptize thee in the name of the Father, &c. Which being dewly applyed, do sanctify & clense vs, sayth the Apostle, and that in such sort, that after Baptisme,Ephes. 5. v. 27. There remayneth no spot or wrinkle, or any such thing of Originall sinne. Yea rather we are made by Baptisme holy and without blame. The Ministers I say haue falsified the place and do read thus: That he might sanctify it, and cleanse it by the washing of water through the word. Signifying therby the prea∣ching of the word to forgiue vs our sinnes, & not Baptisme, directly agaynst the Greeke text, where it is, in the word, & not,. through the word. Yea the Ministers shall neuer be able to name me any holy Father, where the Greeke word is taken for through:. which corruption was first inuented by Caluin & Beza who do trāslate impiously, vt eā sanctificaret ab eo purificatam lauacro aquae per verbum.Beza hic. Thrusting in three se∣uerall words, which are not in the Greeke text. 3. The Catholik Church teacheth that there be three Sacraments which cannot be reiterated by reason that they leaue after them a certayne signe or character, which per∣petually remaineth in him who hath receaued them, which are, Baptisme, Confirmation and Order: as witnesseth S. Paul, speaking of the Sacrament of Confirmation:2. Cor. 1. v. 2. And he that confirmeth vs with yow in Christ, and that hath annointed vs, God: who also hath sealed vs, and giuen the pledge of the Spirit in our harts. Which wordes the Minister haue falsified, in puting
the word earnest (which can haue no signification in that place) for the word pledge, which signifies the foresayd cha∣racter. The same verity witnesseth S. Paul to theEphes. 1 v. 13. & 14. Ephe∣sians, where in lyke manner they haue falsified the Bible, as the learned Reader may easely perceaue. Finally S. Paul witnesseth this character in the Sacrament of Confirmatiō, writing thus:Ephes. 4 v. 30. And contristate not the holy Spirit of God, in which you are signed vnto the day of redemptiō. As explicateth ma∣nifestlyHom. de baptism. S. Basil,Cathec. 3. & 17. S. Cyril Hierosol.Hom. 2. in ep. ad Ephesios. S. Chrisostom & sundry other ancient Fathers, accordingly with ancient and famousin Psy∣comachia. Prudentius, who twelue hundreth yeares since spake thus of the Sacrament of Confirmation. Post inscripta oleo fronti signacula, per quae Vnguentum regale datum est, & Chrisma perenne. It were tedious to set downe the infinite multitude of the Ministers corruptions of the Bible concerning the holy Sacraments of Confession, of the Blessed Sacrament (wher∣of I haue spoken a litle now and then) of the Sacrament of holy Orders: only I wil touch by the way the corrup∣tion they vse speaking of the Sacrament of Mariage, wher∣of S. Paul sayth thus:Ephes. 5. v. 32. For this cause shall man leaue his Fa∣ther & mother, and shall cleaue to his wife, & they shall be two in one flesh. This is a great Sacrament, but I speake in Christ, and in the Church. Meaning, that as Christ left, as it were, his Father, exinaniting himselfe by his incarnation, and left the Syna∣gogue his mother, and ioyned himself to the Church; so the maryed must needs forsake Father & mother & cleaue vnto his wife. And as Christ in his incarnation ioyned his Godhead indissolubly with our manhood in one hyposta∣sy (for, quod semelassumpsit, nunquam dimisit, say the Do∣ctours) euen so the knot & band of Marryage is indissolu∣ble sayth S. Paul:1. Cor. 7. v. 1.10. Let not the wife depart from her husband. But if she depart, let her remayne vnmarryed, or be reconciled vnto her husband. Which is the cause that the Apostle sayth:Ephes. 5. v. 32. In Christ, and in the Church. To signify the double and indis∣soluble vnion which is in Christ with our manhood, and with the true Church of God. 4. The Ministers contrary to this doctrine; to signi∣fy
that marriage is not indissoluble, and that it is not a Sa∣crament, hath with Beza and Caluin filthily corrupted the Bible, thus: This is a great secret, but I speake concerning Christ and concerning the Church. Directly against the Greeke word, which (being taken as hath been in vse these sixteene hū∣dreth yeares among the holy Grecian Fathers,Epist. ad Philip. Ignatius,Orat. ad Antoniū Ptum. Iustin martir,Lib. 3. Strom. Clement Alexandrinus,Hom. 11. Exod. Origen,Serm. cont. hae∣reticos. Athanasius,Lib. de vera virgi¦nit. cap. 8. Basil,Hom. 20. in cap. 5. id Ephes. Chrysostome and all others lear∣ned of that nation) fignifieth manifestly a Sacrament insti∣tuted by Christ in the law of grace. Should not the Greeke Fathers be more belieued in the explication of a Greeke word (as the word mystery is) then our Ministers, of whom few do vnderstand the Greeke, fewer the Hebrew? S. Augustine amongest the Latine Fathers calleth marriage a Sacrament, saying:De bo∣no cōiuga∣li cap. 14. The good of Marriage among the people of God is in the holynesse of a Sacrament. And agayne.Lib. 1. de nup. & concupisc. cap. 10. Huius proculdubio Sacramenti res est, vt mas & femina connubio copulati, quamdiu viuunt, inseparabiliter perseuerent: nec liceat excepta cau∣sa fornicationis à coniuge coniugē dirimi; hoc enim custoditur in Chri∣sto & Ecclesia, vt viuens cum viuente in aeternum nullo diortio sepa∣retur. And long afore S. Augustin, Tertullian auoweth the same:Lib. de de Mono∣gam. c. 5. Christus vnam habeus Ecclesiam sponsam, secundum Adae & Euae figuram, quam Apostolus in illud magnum Sacramentum inter∣pretatur in Christum & Ecclesiam competisse, carnali monogamiae per spiritalem. Our sensuall Ministers seeme to commend ma∣riage aboue all things, so farre as it feedeth their concupis∣cence and fleshly lustes, but to teach that it is a Sacrament hauing grace ānexed therto, to sanctify the parties married, to mak them to liue together in mutual fidelity, binging vp their children in the Fayth and feare of God, they will no wayes do, nor suffer to be done. I aske, in what part of the Bible is the word Sacrament to be found (which the Mini∣sters belieue) if it be not heere? 2. By what Greeke word in vse among the holy Fathers, shall they signify our La∣tin word, Sacrament, if not by the word mystery? Is it not abhominable impiety to giue more credit to Caluin and Beza in the explication of these words of the Apostle, then to the ancient and holy Fathers, who proue out of this
place the holy Sacrament of Marriage? Doth not the Sy∣riake word Arra, vsed heere signify a Sacrament? If not, what other Syriake word vsed in the Bible, signifieth the same? 5. The second corruptiō of this place is in those words, But I speake concerning Christ, to signify that Marriage is disso∣luble, conforme to the abhominable practise dayly vsed a∣mongst the Ministers, directly agaynst their owne Bible:1. Cor. 7. v. 39. The wyfe is bound by the law, as long as her husband liueth, but if her husband be dead, she is at liberty to marry with whome she will. Againe,Rom. 7. v. 3. If while the man liueth, she take another man, she shalbe called an adulteresse. The Ministers wil not translate, in Christ, as it is in all the Greeke copyes, wherby is signified the per∣petuall knot of marriage, by the indissoluble vnion of the manhood of Christ with his Godhead, of Christ with the Church, but rather they will translate, concerning Christ, di∣rectly agaynst the Greeke text. Why do the Ministers tran∣slate the same Greeke proposition elswhere otherwayes, as,Rom. 5. v. 12. Wherefore as by one man sinne entred into the world, and not concerning the world? Yea a thousand such places they tran∣slate rightly as we do: why this I pray you? But only to confirme and giue way to their new inuented doctrine,. to new ministeriall traditions, in a word, to their manifest & abhominable heresies. 6. The other place which the Ministers haue falsified is that of S. Paul:1. Tim 3. v. 11. . The women in lyke manner chast, not detrac∣ting, sober, faythfull in all things. Where the Apostle exhorteth that as men, Deacons, and such should be honest, not double-tounged, so, women in lyke manner chast. The Ministers contra∣ry, to signify that Churchmen should be marryed haue falsi∣fied the place, thus: Lykewise their wyues must be honest, not euill speakers: Thrusting in the text the word wyues for women, & all to feed their fleshly liberty, wherby they persuade them∣selues that none can be fit to be a Churchman, but he,Hieron. aduers. Vi∣gilant. c. 1. who seeth his wife haue a great belly, and children wayling at their mothers beasts. Are not such Ministers chosen to be Bishops?Hiero. ep. 73. ad Ocean. c. 4. Whose care is not, how to suck out the marrow of the Scriptures, but how to sooth the peoples eares with florishing declamations. The
The Syriake text maketh for vs Catholikes, Achano apli nesche &c. the women in lyke manner chast. 7. Another of their falsifications is that of S. Paul:1. Tim. 3. v. 2. It behoueth therfore a Bishop to be irreprehensible, the husband of one wyfe, sober, wyse, comely, chast, a man of hospiality, a teacher, not giuen to wine &c. In lyke manner speaking of Deacons he sayth: Tym. 3. v. 12. Let deacons be the husbands of one wife. Where the A∣postle neyther commendeth, nor counselleth, nor wish∣eth Bishops or Priests to marry (as the fleshly Ministers do thinke) but that none should be admitted to be a Bishop or Priest, hauing bene twise married, or hauing bene Bygamus: which exposition as it is agreable to the practise of the holy Church, the definition of ancient Councels, the doctrine of all the Fathers without exception: so I do proue it thus. First, if S. Paul wished by these words, Bishops & Church∣men to marry, he himself would haue contradicted his own command and law. For Timotheus and Titus both Bish∣ops and Priests were neuer marryed, as is manifestly wit∣nessed by the holy Fathers afterEp. ad Philadelph. S. Ignatius, S. Iohn his disciple. 2. S. Paul himselfe both a Bishop and Priest was neuer marryed as he witnesseth of himselfe:1. Cor. 7. v. 8. Therefore I say vnto the vnmarryed, and vnto the widdowes, it is good for them if they abide euen as I doe. How could he then counsell or cō∣mand Bishops to do that which they could not remarke in himselfe. 3. S. Paul commēdeth the office of a Bishop as a most noble, holy, and sublime office, yet hard and difficile; and in effectAug. ep. 148. There is nothing in this life, and specially at this tyme, harder, more laborious, or more dangerous then the office of a Bishop, Priest, or Deacon: But before God nothing more blessed, if they be in such sort as our captayne commandeth. How then could S. Paul, yea thinke only, that it were expedient to a Bish∣op or Priest to marry? since marriage alone bereaueth a mā wholly of al his wits, by reason of the great burthen, & vn∣speakeable cares of marriage, as witnesseth S. Paul spea∣king to lay men:1. Cor. 7. v. 18. If thou takest a wife thou sinnest not, neuer∣theles such shall haue trouble in the flesh. Wherby S. Paul wit∣nesseth that diuers marryed persons are a thousand tymes more troubled with fleshly pleasures and tentations, then
Virgins or vnmarryed persons, as S. Augustin wysely re∣marked saying: Minùs virgo quàm vidua, minùs vidua quàm nup∣ta. 4. S. Paul sayth:1. Cor. 7. v. 34. That the vnmarried woman and virgin careth for the things of our Lord, that she may be holy both in body and spirit. But she that is married careth for the things of the world, how she shal please her husband. Since then the office of a Bishop re∣quireth, as S. Paul teacheth, so great holynesse in body and spirit, how could he coūsell or cōmand that Bishops should marry? 5. (and this argument is to be remarked) S. Paul declaring after how widdowes should be chosen sayth:1. Tym. 5. v. . Let a widdow be chosen of no lesse then threescore yeares, which hath bene the wife of one husband. Meaning thereby that a widdow who hath bene twise marryed should not be chosen at all, for it was neuer the custom amongst the Christians, yea not amongst the Pagans for a widdow to haue two husbands together. Euen so S. Paul speaketh heere of a Bishop, to wit that he who should be chosen to that high office, should not haue bene twise marryed, but rather to haue bene, not to be actually, the husbād of one wife: as witnesseth plain∣ly with all the rest of the Fathers, S. Hierome:Contra Vigil. c. 1. What shall the Church of the East do (sayth he) what they of Aegypt, of the Apostolike sea, which take to the clergy eyther virgins or vnmar∣ryed, or such who hauing had wyues cease to be husbands? The rea∣son of this saying of S. Paul, is because in the tyme of the Apostles the persecutiō was so great & the lacke of Bishops in lyke manner so great, that it was forced to choose to that holy office, not only those who had neuer bene marryed, but lykewise those who had beene once mar∣ryed.
The 11. and 12. Article. 1. That man hath Freewil, not only in naturall, and ciuill Actions: 2. But also in morall, and supernaturall Acti∣ons. CHAP. VII. ALbeit the whole decision of this Con∣trouersie may be easily gathered out of the doctrine taught in the first Age, yet I will adde some things in this second Age. The question the betwixt vs and the Ministers, is whether mā couered & burthened with sinne, and before he be iustified, hath any freedome of will to lift vp his heart, and giue assent to Gods heauenly motions, when God of his in∣finite goodnes doth giue them to him? It is certayne that mans will is much weakned since the fall of Adam, his vn∣derstanding much diminished, and all the powers of his soule & body made feeble and weake: for the which cause the condition of man is compared with reason to him, who descending from Ierusalem to Ierico (as witnesseth theLuc. 10 v. 30. Bible) fell among theeues, who robbed him of his tempo∣rall riches, and mayned him in his corporall members: So man by the sinne of his first parents, is spoyled of his super∣naturall gifts, wounded in his naturall powers, and left not dead, nor wholy alyue, but as the Bible sayth,Luc. 10. v. 30. half dead. Aliue, because (as the holy Fathers do say) he had remorse of conscience & liberty of freewill: dead, because he lay bu∣ried in the sepulcher of sinne, out of which he could neuer haue risen, vnles it had pleased our Sauiour Christ Iesus with his precious bloud to haue healed his wounds, & re∣stored
the perishing powers of his soule; so that freewill in man was not vtterly lost (as the Ministers ignorantly do teach) but lesse able to worke; not fully taken away, but mayned; not altogether bound, but vehemently inclined to the corruption of sinne; in a word,Conc. Trid. sess. 6. cap. 1. non extinctum, sed extenuatum, not extinguished but extenuated: yet being moued and strengthned by Christ, it is able to accept his grace or good motions, as it is by nature apt to refuse them, and therefore is free: which I proue by the very wordes of the Bible it selfe. 2. First, I proue it by all those places of the Bible, which inuie and exhorte vs to forsake sinne, to gayne∣stand sinne, & to repaire to God,Ierem. 4. v. 1. O Israel if thou returne to me, sayth the Lord, and if thou put away thy abhominations out of my sight. Againe:Ierem. 3. v. 14. O yee disobedient children turne agayne, sayth the Lord. And agayne:Amos 4. v 6. Whereupon I also haue giuen you dulnes of teeth in all your cityes & lcke f bread in all your places, & yee haue not returned to me saith he Lord. Againe:Daniel 13. v. 22. Susāna sighed & said, Perplexi ies are to me on euery side: for if I shall do this, it is death to me, & if I do it not, I shall not escape your hands. Doth not Susan∣na testify that she had freewil to choose the one or the other? Somtymes the Bible witnesseth, that God intreateth vs vpon a condition, declaring thereby a Freewill we haue to accept of the condition or not:Isa. 1. v. 19. & 20. If yee consent and obey, sayth God, yee shall eat the good thinges of the land: but if yee refuse and be rebellious, yee shall be deuoured with the sword, for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. Sometymes God see∣meth to stay and expect the consent of our freewill, as:Reuel. 3. v. 20. Behold I stand at the doore and knock, if any man heare my voyce and pen the doore, I will come to him, and will supp with him, and he with me. And agayne:Rom. 2 v. 4. Despysest thou the riches of his boun∣tifulnes and patience, and long sufferinge, not knowing that the bountifulnes of God leadeth thee to repentance? Sometymes God complayneth of vs that we remayne so long in sinne, de∣claring thereby the freewill we haue eyther to remayne in sinne or to ryse from sinne, asEzech. 18. v. 30. Therfore I will iudge yow, O house of Israel, eueryone according to his wayes, saith the Lord God: returne therfore, and cause others to returne away from all your trans∣gressions:
so iniquity shall not be your destruction. Cast away from you all your transgressions, wherby yee haue transgressed, and make you a new heart, & a new spirit, for why wil yee die, O house of Israel? for I desire not the death of him that dieth, sayth the Lord God: cause therfore others to reurne, and liue yee. Should not the Ministers blush to renounce as it were these playne wordes of their owne Bible which make for freewill? should they not be ashamed to impugne that which they call the word of God? What? doth not the very proceeding of the Ministers against vs Catholiks, proue manifestly freewill? for they blame, and seuerely punish all such Catholiks as refuse to subscribe to their assertions and Idolatrous doctrine, & to this purpose they labour to disgrace vs priuatly and publi∣ckly: they dayly make seuere lawes against vs, they cast down our houses, confiscate our goods, imprison our per∣sons, and punish vs with all sort of afflctions, and all this they performe to no other end, but to enforce our freewill to belieue their Religion: for if we want freedome of will, as they hold, are not their lawes wicked, their conference in vayne, their persuasions foolish to compell vs to that which lyeth not in our power freely to choose, or to do? Sometymes God putteth the full blame of our impenitence to our owne froward and stubborne will, as our Sauiour witnesseth:Math. 23.37. Ierusalem, Ierusalem which killest the Prophets & stonest them which are sent to thee, how often would I haue gathered thy chldrē togeather as the hen gathereth her chickens vnder his wings and yee would not. In vayne truly should God exhort vs to returne to him, if we had not freewill. In vayne should he expect our consent, or complayne of our delay, if we had not freewill. In vayne should he blame vs of obstinacy, if we had not freewill. To the which places I will ioyne this of S. Iohn:Iohn 1. v 1. As many as receaued him, to them he gaue power to be the sonnes of God, euen to them that belieue in his name. And ac∣cordingly S. Augustine:Lib. 50. Hom. hom 16. God hath left it in thy owne free choyse, to whome thou wilt prepare a place, to God, or to the Diuell. When thou hast prepared it, he that inhabiteth, shal beare sway therin. Man prepareth his heart, yet not without the aide of God, who tou∣cheth the heart. To the which purpose is rightly applyed
that of S. Paul which proueth vs to be freewilled, coadiu∣tors, and collabourers:1. Cor. 15. v. 10. I haue laboured more abundantly then all they, yet not I, but the grace of God with me: which S. Au∣gustine exponeth thus:Augu. lib. de grat. & lib. arb. cap. 15. Neyther the grace of God alone, nor he alone, but the grace of God with him. Conforme to that fa∣mous saying of the Wiseman, who speaketh of wisdome, thus:The booke of wisdome cap. 9. v. 10 Send her from thy holy heauens, and from the seat of thy greatnes, that she may be with me, and may labour with me, that I may know what is acceptable with thee, which place the Mini∣sters haue corrupted. 3. The reason wherfore Freewill must needs be graūted to man, is grounded in the inward nature of ver∣tue and vice, by reason that no action can be morally good or morally bad, except it be voluntary, conforme to that famous saying of S. Augustine. Sinne is so voluntary, that except it were voluntary, it were not sinne. Where the word voluntary, is taken for that which is freely done, and which was in the liberty of man to do or not to do, directly contrary to that which is done of necessity. So S. Augustine in another place:Lib. 83. qq. 24. Neyther sinne nor well doing can be iustly imputed vnto any man, who of his proper will doth nothing. Therefore both sinne & weldoing is in the free arbitrement of the will. According to the which saying of S. Augustine, I aske of the Ministers: Ey∣ther it is in the power of man to eschew sinne or not? if it be, he hath freewill and is not bound to sin: if not, he ne∣cessarly sinneth, and can not be charged with the imputatiō of sinne. To the which argument I may ioyne that of our learned coūtreyman Ioannes Duns, who affirmeth that no man should dispute with words against him who denyeth freewill, but rather with a good baston beating him, & ar∣gumenting after this forme: Eyther I haue freewill to beat thee or I haue it not? if I haue it, then thou auowest free∣will; if not, then I beat thee of necessity, and necessarly and consequently I cannot offend in beating thee thus: forAugust. cont. For∣tunat Ma∣nich. disp. 1. He that is forced by necessity to do any thing, doth not sinne: And he who doth any thing necessarily, doth it not sin∣fully. 4. I will omit other reasons and proofes, vntil I
come to the testimonyes of the holy Fathers of this age; content for the present to aske of the Ministers, in what part of the expresse word of their owne Bible are these points of their Religion found, Man after the fall of Adam hath not freewill? Is there such a distinction in all the Bible? Man sinneth of necessity; Man cannot but sinne: Man continually doth transgresse the commandments. Are such propositions to be found in the expresse word of the Bible? no truly. Shall we then belieue them because the Ministers do teach them without any warrant of the expresse word? No reason. But the Ministers (say the Protestants) will deduce them out of the Bible by necessary consequence. What is that but their owne inuentions,Ierem. 14. v. 14. A lying vision, and diuination which they prophesy vnto vs? That is not to preach the Ghos∣pell but to preach their owne heresies, enobled with the name of the Ghospell. Let vs then prefer the consequen∣ces of the holy Fathers of this second age or Century con∣cerning freewill, to the consequences of the Ministers, who are children without parents, and schollers without Mai∣sters. The testimonies of the holy Fathers of this second Age, prouing man to haue freewill in maters con∣cerning his Saluation. The first Section. S. Irenaeus witnesseth plainly, that man hath freewill, by reason of the dayly exhortations, precepts and repre∣hensions made to euery one of vs: for who maketh lawes to fooles, to mad, men, or little babes by reason they want freewill? his words are:Irem. lib 4. cap. 92. Id quod semper erat liberum & sua potestatis in homine semper seruauit Deus, & suam exhortationem, vt iuste damnentur qui non obediunt, & qui obedierunt, & credunt ej, honorentur incorruptibilitate Directly against the Ministers who say that man by the fall of Adam lost freewill: yea this holy Father auoweth that man hath yet frewil, as the
Angels had before their fall.Lib. 4. c. 7. Posuit autem in homine potesta∣tem electionis, quēadmodum & in Angelis. To the which purpose he citeth that of our Sauiour:Matth. 23. v. 37. Ierusalem Ierusalam, how often would I haue gathered thy children togeather &c. and thou wouldst not. Vpon the which words I frame this argument: Freewill hath of it selfe eyther some strength or none at all: if any, then yee grant frewill: if none, then Christ said not true (which is a blasphemy) in saying the Iewes would not cōforme to this holy doctrine of Irenaeus, which he plen∣tifully teacheth in the fourth booke & ninth chapter and in sundry other places) S. Augustine wysely auoweth that he who denyeth freewill should be banished out of the company of men:Lib. 3 de libero arbi∣trio cap. 1. Vnles the motion, wherby the will is led to and fro, were voluntary, and rested in our owne power, man should neyther be prayse-worthy, turning as it were the hinge of his will to heauenly things: nor worthy of blame, winding it downe to ear∣thly: nor to be admonished at all &c. But whosoeuer thinketh that man is not to be admonished, &c. deserueth to be banished out of the company of men. 2. Iustinus martyr auoweth likewyse, that if man had not freewill, he would be without blame of vice, or prayse of vertue.Apol. 2. ad Anto∣nium Im∣peratorem. Ac nisi libero arbitrio, sayth he, at{que} iudicio genus humanum & res turpes fugere potest, & pulchra ac bona sequi, extra causam culpam{que} est eorum, qui quoquomodo aguntur. Sed ip∣sum libero arbitrio, libera{que} voluntate & rectè facere & peccare do∣cemus hoc modo. The same he teacheth answering the questi∣on of the Gentills who denyed Freewill with the Prote∣stants; in lykemanner in his booke de monarchia, and his di∣alogues with Triphon he teacheth plentifully freewill.Quaest. 103. 3. Tertullian also writeth abundantly of this matter agaynst Marcion the heretike, auowing, that man is called the image of Go, specially in regard of his freewill:Lib. cōt Marcion c. 5. Liberum, sayth he, & sui arbitrij & suae potestatis inuenio hominem à Deo institutum, nullam magis imaginem & similitudinem Dei in illo animadertens, quàm eiusmodi status formam. The Protestāt replyeth that saying of our Sauiour, without me yee can do no∣thing: agayne, it is not in him that willeth, nor in him that ranneth &c. I answere to these, and such places of Scripture, that
freewill of it selfe hath no stength to worke our conuersi∣on without the grace of God, wherwith being inwardly enlightned, confirmed and quickened, it hath force and a∣bility to worke with God, & bring forth the fruit of piety. Wherfore S. Paul who sayd:2. Cor. 3. v. 5. We are not sufficient to thinke any thing of our selues, as of our selues, but our sufficiency is of God. The same Apostle sayd lykewise:Philip. 4. v. 13. I can do all things in him that strengthneth me. As the eye in darknes cannot see, yet with the benefit of the light it can see; so the earth of it self bringeth foorth no corne, yet tilled, watered with raine, and quickned with seed, and the sunne, it bringeth foorth corne. To the better vnderstanding wherof the doctours of diuinity do teach a threefold grace, wherby the freewill of man is greatly helped, confirmed and quickned. 4. The first is called a preuenting grace, that is, gratia prae∣ueniens, wherof the Bible speaketh:Psal. 59. v. 10. His mercy shall go before me. And S. Paul,Rom. 9. v. 16. It is not in him that willeth, nor in him that runneth, but in God that sheweth mercy. Secondly it is necessary that God assist & help our freewil to imbrace his holy inspi∣rations, & this is called concomitant grace, that is, gratia con∣comitans, wherby God accompanieth and cooperateth with vs. The which grace King Dauid asked of God:Psal. 70 v. 1. Incline vnto my help, O God, O Lord make hast to help me. And S. Paul:Rom. 8. v. 28. To them that loue God all things cooperate vnto God. The one and the other grace is fitly explayned by those wordes of the Bible:Reuel. 3. v. 20. I stand at the doore and knocke, if any shall heare my voyce and open the gate, I will enter in vnto him, & will sup with him, and he with me. To stand and knock at the doore of out freewill, is the office of Gods preuenting grace; to open the doore of our freewill to God, is both the worke of man and the worke of God: it is mans worke, in giuing his free consent to opē the doore of his heart; it is Gods, in that he worketh and helpeth man, to open his heart, with his cooperating grace: for the which cause the self same actions which in way of our conuersion, are giuen to God by the Bible, are lykewise giuen to man. As to God King Dauid prayed:Psal. 51. v. 10. Create a cleane heart in me, O God. To man Eze∣chiel witnesseth:Ezech. 18. v. 31. Make to your selfe a new heart, and a new
spirit. Of God S. Paul testifyeth, that he doth work all in all things of man:Philip. . v. 12. worke your saluation with feare and trembling. Which place the Ministers haue falsified thus: so make an end of your saluation. The third grace, distinct from the former, giuen to man by God, is called a subsequent grace, that is, gratia subsequens. Wherby God giueth oportunity to execute the good which we intended before: the first grace God is sayd to worke in vs without vs, that is, without our free consent. The second in vs with vs, because God worketh therby with vs. The third in vs by vs, that is, putting, by vs, our holy pur∣poses in execution. 5. This holsome and Catholike doctrine witnesseth Tertullian, who sayth that man (notwithstanding the fall of Adam) hath freewill:Lib. c. 8. contra Marcionē. Eumdem hominem, eamdem sub∣stantiam animae, eumdem Adae statum, eadem arbitrij libertas & po∣testas victorem efficit hodie de eodem diabolo, quum secundum obse∣quium legum eius Dei administratur. And agayne:Lib. 2. cap. 6. Oportebat igitur imaginem & similitudinen. Dei, liberi arbitrij & suae potestatis institui, in qua hoc ipsum imago & similitudo Dei deputaretur, arbi∣trij scilicet libertas & potestas: in quam remea substantia homni ac∣commodataest, quae huius status esset afflatus, vti{que} liberi, & suae po∣testatis. It were superfluous to cite more places of Tertullian who is so ample, so playne and pithy in all his works con∣cerning freewill, that no reasonable mā can doubt of Tertul∣lians opinion and Religion in this matter. 6. Origen speaketh in the lyke manner so playnly a∣gaynst the Ministers, that the attentiue reading of his words will giue great comfort to the constant Catholike: first thē wryting on those wordes of the Scripture:Deut. 10. v. . And now Is∣rael what doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but to feare the Lord thy God, to walke in all his wayes, he saith thus:Hom. 12. in Num. Erubescant illi ad haec verba, qui negant in homine liberum esse arbitrium: Quomo∣do poscere ab homine Deus, nisi haberet homo in sua potestate, quod poscenti Deo deberet afferre? And agayne:Hom. 20. in Num Sui arbitrij est ani∣ma, & in quam voluerit partem est ei liberum declinare: & ideo iu∣stum Dei iudicium est, quia sponte sua sine bonis siue pessimis monito∣ribus paret. 2. He witnesseth, that a man may be the cause (vnder God) of his owne saluation, and lykewise the
cause of his eternall perdition by reason of his freewill,Hom. in Ezecb. Tu verò homo quare non vis arbitrio tuo te derelictum? Quare aegrè fers niti, laborare, contendere, & per bona opera teipsum causam tuae fie∣ri salutu? An magis te delectabit dormientem & in otto constitutum aeterna prosperitate requiescere? 3. He witnesseth that freewill (not only as it is opposed to constraint and force, as Cal∣uin dreameth, but also as it is opposed to necessity) was constantly belieued in the Catholike Church in his tyme:In prae∣fat. lib. 1. de principijs. Est & illud definitum in Ecclesiastica praedicatione, omnem animā rationabilem esse liberi arbitrij & voluntatis Finally writing a∣gaynst a famous Pagan and Epicurean of his tyme, called Celsus, who denied freewill with the Protestants, teaching that al things were done by necessity good or bad, by rea∣son of the forsight or forknowledge of God, framing his ar∣gument with our Protestants after this forme:Lib. 2. cont. Cels. Whatsoeuer a man doth good or euill, is forseene by God. Ergo, it must needs be done of necessity, otherwise Gods forsight and prescience would be inconstāt and changeable. Wherunto Origen answereth learnedly with vs Catholikes, that man doth not this or that good or euill action, because God forsaw it (as if the forsight of God were the necessary cause of mans actiōs) but rather God doth for∣see our actions, because we out of our freedom shal do them, so that our actions are, as it were, the cause of Gods forsight or forknowledge, & not Gods forsight the cause of our ac∣tions: Euen as a man is not reprobate or condemned eter∣nally to hell, because God forsaw him to become repro∣bate, but because he will euer remayne in sinne, and in a false religion for worldly respectes, God doth forsee, that he is to be eternally in the number of the reprobate. Origēs wordes are:Lib. 2. cont. Cels. Videamus quid dicat postea. Haec, inquit, cùm Deus esset praedixit, & omnino oportebat fieri quod praedixerat Deus: Ergo, suos discipulos & Prophetas, cum quibus cibum & potum sumebat, eò necessitatis adduxit, vt contra ius ac pietatem facerent, &c. Respon∣debimus & ad haec, quando iubes vt ne ista quidem argumenta prae∣teream, quae mihi videntur friuola, Celsus puta▪ quòd aliquis prascius pradixit ideo fieri quia praedictum est. Nos verò hoc modo non concedentes, aimus non praedictorem causam esse futuri, sed futurum illud, quod omnino euenturum erat, etiam nomine praedicente, prae∣cognitori
causam praedicendi praebuisse. Which is conforme to that of the Bible:Hosea 13. v. 9. Thy perdition, O Israel, is of thee, in me only is thy help. Which wordes as prouing freewill, the Ministers haue falsified impiously. 7. S. Cyprian auoweth the same doctrine of freewil saying:Epist. ad Cornel. Conuersus ad Apostolos suos dixit, numquid & vos vulis ire? seruās scilicet legem qua homo libertati suae relictus & in arbitrio proprio constiutus sibimet ipse vel mortem appetit vel salutem. And agayne:Lib. 3. ad Quirin. cap. 52. Credendi vel non credendi libertatem in arbitrio positam in Deuteronomio legimus:Deut. 30. v. 19. Eccededi ante faciem tuam, vitam & mortem, bonum & malum; elige vitam & viues. Item apud Isaiam: (h) Si volueritis & audieritis me, bona terrae edetis: si autem nolueri∣tis & non audieritis me, gladius vos consumet: Os enim Dominilocu∣tum est ista. I omit to cite other holy fathers who all are playne and plentifull in this matter, and consequently do condemne the Ministers of manifest heresy, Idolatry and infidelity. That the Ministers haue falsified the Bible in sundry places, wherby Freewill is proued. The second Section. I Being in Edinburgh in prison, and conferring there with two Ministers (as I did at seuerall tymes with sun∣dry, though destitute of all sorts of bookes) and seing the Greeke new testament in the hand of one, I asked of him. Be you content to be tried by the Greeke new Testament? Yea sayd he. By what Greeke new Testament, said I, for there be sundry copyes? By all Greeke copyes of the new testament answered the Minister. Will yow then, said I, allow that Greeke copy which speaketh to the prayse of good works, thus:Pet. 1.10. . Wherfore Brethren labour the more that by good workes you may make sure, your vocation and election. For sundry Greeke copyes haue those words as witnessethn hunc locum. Beza, and all the Latin copyes without exception. The Minister answered, no: I appeale to that Greeke copy, which hath not those words, by good works. Well said I, if
you wil haue it so, take your pleasure, wil yee then be tryed by this Greeke new testament which is in your hand? cō∣tent sayth the Minister. Let vs see then that of S. Luke who sayth, that all the kinred of Ioseph were,Act. 7. v. 14. . Threescore and fifteene soules: yet Moyses in the booke of Genesis sayth that they were not so many in number, to wit:Genes. 46. v. 26. All the soules that came with Iacob into Egypt, &c. were in the whole threescore and six soules. Here appeareth as it were a contradiction, the one place saying, threescore & fifteene soules, as all the Greeke Bibles do witnesse, the other, threescore & six soules; you say that Ministers haue the particular spirit to interprete the Scripture, let vs see, if this particular spirit may make yow to agree these two places. Which of the two places is more to be belieued? that of Genesis, said the Minister, for that of the Acts to be false witnesseth learnedly Beza, whose words are.Beza in this place printed an∣no 1560. Ita{que} ingenuè profieor editionem Graecam eo loco vi∣deri mihi deprauatam. I replyed, then the Greeke new Testa∣ment which ye haue in your hand cannot be the word of God: for granting one errour therin, the authority of the word of God (who cannot lye nor erre, no not once) is taken from it: as if one errour or lye be foūd in a Charter or contract, it looseth the force of a true contract, though the rest be true. Truely a learned man, said I, might make a greater volume without comparison then your Bible is, concerning your falsifications, Blasphemyes, shiftes and turnings therof, all to couer and vphold your palpable er∣rous and heresies. 2. The other place which they haue corrupted is that of S. Paul:Rom. 2. v. 27. Shall not vncircumcision, which is by nature, fulfilling the law, iudge thee who by the letter and circumcision art a preuaricator of the law? Declaring therby that the Gentil & vncircumcised keeping the law, by the grace of God and light of nature, as holy Iob did, is to be preferred before a circūcised Iew, who keepeth not the law, confirming that which he had said before:Rom. 2. v. 13. Not the hearers of the law are iust with God, but the doers of the law shallbe iustified. Wherof he gi∣ueth the reason in the verse following. Now the Ministers to insinuate craftily to the reader that neyther Gentil, Iew.
nor Christian can keep the law, they haue corrupted the text, thus: Shall not vncircumcision which is by nature (if it keep the law) iudge thee, which by the letter and vncircumcision &c. Where the Ministers of an absolute proposition of S. Paul do make a conditionall, thrusting into the text the word, if, which changeth wholy the force of the Apostles saying,. and which is not in any Greeke copy, yea the most corrup∣ted Greeke copyes printed at Geneua haue not the particle si, which is in the verse before, but not in this, speaking first conditionally and then absolutly, and declaring by the first that we may keep Gods commandements; by the se∣cond, that in effect some of the Gentils, much more of the Iewes and Christians haue (being assisted by Gods grace) kept Gods commaundements: as vpon this place learned∣lyHom. 6 in 2. ad Romanos. S. Chrysostome teacheth with the rest of the Fa∣thers, of whom S. Augustine directly counterpoynts the Ministers heresy in this, saying:De nat. & gra. c. 43. Non igitur Deus impossibilia iubet, sed iubendo admonet &c. The Syriake text lykewise readeth absolutly, without the word in, which signifieth if. Could the Apostle speake more plainly in the prayse of good works then to say,Rom. 1 v. 6. God will reward euery man accor∣ding to his works? Yet the Ministers will not giue eare to those expresse words: they will not submit their iudgment to the holy doctrine of the Catholike Church, but will alwayes be contentious, rendring themselues therby inex∣cusable in the day of iudgement, as the Apostle sayth:Rom. 26 v. 8. vnto them that are contentious, and disobey the truth, and obey vn∣righteousnes shall be indignation and wrath. The second corrup∣tion in this place is that they haue translated, and vncircumci∣sion, manifestly against the Greeke text, where it is, and cir∣cumcision. 3. The third place is that of S. Paul to the Romans:Rom. 5 v. 6. For why did Christ, when we  yet were weake, according to the tyme, dye for the impious? Declaring that mankind by the originall sinne of Adam, became weake and wounded in his vnderstanding, will, and memory,. as in the treatise of freewill I declared at large before. The Ministers to persuade the ignorant and simple people, that man though baptized
and regenerate, hath no freewil, nor strength to good, con∣forme to that common saying of theirs: So that in vs there is no goodnesse, for the flesh euermore rebelleth agaynst the spirit, wher∣by we continually transgresse thy holy precepts and commaundements: They haue turned, I say, thus: for Christ when we were yet of no strength. Directly agaynst all the Greeke texts printed at Geneua which haue no negatiue at all, as the Ministers thē∣selues auow in turning the same Greeke word in other places, as we doe, as:Acts. 20. v. 36. . I haue shewed you all things, how that so labouring, yee ought to support the weake. Agayne: (o) To the weake I become as weake, that I may winne the weake. And in sun∣dry other places. Can there be greater impiety vsed agaynst God, then thus so willingly and wittingly to corrupt the true word of his heauenly Maiesty? Had not our gratious and most learned Soueraygne iust occasion to say in the summe of the Conference before his Maiesty, &c. That the Geneua translation of the Bible, wherunto the English Bibles are conforme, is the worst of all, and that in the Marginall notes anne∣xed to the Geneua translation, some are very partiall, vntrue and seditious? Doth not a famous English Minister called M. Carliel say of all the English and Scots Bibles and transla∣tours:In his booke that Christ des∣cended not into hel. p. 116. & 118. They haue depraued the sense, obscured the truth, & de∣ceyued the ignorant, and in many places they do detort the Scripture from the right sense, they shew themselues to loue darknes more then light, falshood more then truth? How can then such Bibles be the ground of saluation? How can they be the word of God? And how can they beget true diuine fayth in the harts of the Readers, since they are wholy full of errours, corruptions, sacriledges and blasphemies? As for their psal∣mes which they sing so sweetly in their Churches, and so merryly in their houses, how can God take any pleasure in such singing, since they themselues do speake thus of thē:In the Treatise intituled a petition di∣rected to her most ex¦cellent Ma¦iesty, pag. 76. & 75. Our translation of the Psalmes comprised in our booke of common prayer, doth in addition, substraction, and alteration differ from the truth of the Hebrew in two hundreth places at least: in so much, that we do therfore professe to rest doubtfull, whether a man with safe con∣science may subscribe therto. Which innumerable multitude of errours & sacriledges conteyned in the English Bible gaue
occasion to our gratious soueraygne to say, that,In the summe of the confe∣rēe before his Maiesty He could neuer yet see a Bible well translated into English. As for the vulgar edition of the Bible, which the Catholike Church vseth, Inimici nostri sint iudices, let our enemies be iudges thereof: Speci∣ally Beza:Beza in annot. in cap. 1. Lu∣cae. The old Interpreter seemeth to haue interpreted the iuly bookes with meruailous sincerity and Religion. And Molinaeus a learned Hugenot:In no∣uum Tes∣tam. part. 30. I can very hardly depart from the vulgar accustomed reading, which also I am accustomed earnestly to defend. And D. Couell:In his answere to M. Iohn. Bourges pag. 94. The vulgar Latin edition was vsed in the Church a thousand three hundreth yeares ago, & I prefer that tran∣slation before others. The 13. 14. and 15. Article. 1. That man with the grace of God, may keep his Commaundements. 2. And that the kee∣ping therof is meritorious of euerlasting life. 3. And that Fayth only doth not iustify, was cō∣stantly belieued in this second Age. CHAP. VIII. HAuing spoken sufficiently in the for∣mer age of keeping of Gods comman∣demēts, & of the merits of good works, it resteth to speak of Fayth. To the bet∣ter vnderstanding wherof it is to be re∣marked, that the Ministers do make two sorts of Fayth (besides their historicall Faith, whereof there is no mention in the Bible) to wit, a Fayth whereby they belieue general∣ly that God will faythfully accomplish all his promisses, will giue remission of sinnes to all true belieuers: & a par∣ticular and speciall Fayth, wherby euery Protestant persua∣deth and assureth himself (as an essentiall point of his Faith
to be belieued vnder the payne of eternall dānation) that his sins are forgiuen him, inferring consequently that this on∣ly Fayth doth iustify him. And in this solifidian, foolish, & childish persuasion the Protestants do place their iustifying Fayth, agaynst the which I make this argument. The Pro∣testant who by this Fayth is iustified, may after fall into for∣nication and other damnable sinnes, or not? That he can not fall, no man will say, by reason that they continually transgresse the commandements: if he may fall, I aske, whether falling into those horrible sins he loose that par∣ticular Fayth or retayne it stil? To graunt that he looseth it, is to make all sinners Atheists and Infidels, for he who is bereft of Fayth must needes be infected with atheisme and infidelity: if he still retayne his true Fayth, notwithstan∣ding the infinite multitude of such sinnes, is to hold, that he abydeth still in the estate of saluation, and may enioy the kingdom of heauen dying in such a miserable estate, which is directly agaynst the Bible.1. Cor. 6. v. 9. & 10. Do not erre, neyther fornica∣tors nor seruers of Idols, nor adulterers, nor the effeminate &c. shall posesse the kingdome of God. 2. The second argument agaynst the iustifying Faith of the Protestants may be taken out of S. Iames who saith:Iames 2. v. 14. What shall it proffit, my brethren, if a man say he hath Fayth, but hath not workes? Shall Fayth be able to saue him? Agayne:Iames 2. v. 17. So Fayth also if it haue not workes, is dead in it self. Agayne,Iames 2. v. 20. & 21. But wilt thou know, O vayne man, that Fayth without workes, is idle? Abraham our Father was he not iustified by workes, offring I∣saac his sonne vpon the Altar? Agayne.Iames 2. v. 14. Yee see then how that by workes a man is iustified, and not by Fayth only. Which words shew playnly that Fayth alone cannot iustify. 2. That the Apostle speaketh of true Fayth, presupposing that true fayth (though not liuely Fayth called by the Doctors Fides formata) may be without good workes, which good works the Apostle opposeth as it were, to Abraham his Fayth, which was a true Fayth, as the Scripture witnesseth. 3. The Apostle prayseth in a certayne forme that Faith which may be without good workes, saying:Iames 2. v. 19. Thou belieuest that there is a God, thou doest well, the diuells also belieue it, and tremble.
How could he haue answered, thou doest well, it such were not a true Fayth, though not liuely; as when a tree in win∣ter is bereft of her blossomes and fruit, yet is a true tree, though without fruit: in lyke manner the sunne ouerclou∣ded giueth not his naturall beames vnto vs, yet remayneth alwaies the sunne: the fire couered with ashes, is truly yre: euen so Faith wherof the Apostle speaketh heer, is truly Fayth though not liuely. The Ministers will say, that S. Iames speaketh heere of Fayth outwardly professed only, not of in ward Fayth, wherby we are iustified in the sight of God. I answere, that to be false, because he speaketh of the Faith wherby we belieue in God which is inward Fayth. 2. He speaketh of Abrahams Fayth, which was a true and inward iustifying Fayth. If yow say in lyke manner that, that testi∣mony of Saint Paul, maketh for the Ministers iustifying Fayth:Galath. 2. v. 16. Know that a man is not iustified by the works of the law, but by the Fayth of Iesus-Christ. I answere that the Apostle saith only, that man is iustifyed by the workes of the law, that is, by the ceremonies of the law of Moyses, which is most true. Some Fathers do say sometymes, that man is not iustifyed by workes absolutely, meaning the workes of nature, of morall vertues without the grace & knowledge of Christ, or els workes done in the state of sinne before iustification, but neuer say the Fathers, that workes proceeding from a liuely fayth, and done in the grace of God, do not iusti∣fy. 3. The third argument, when a Protestant persua∣deth himselfe or belieueth infallibly his sinnes to be forgi∣uen him, by this his particular and iustifying Faith; eyther he hath his sinnes by that Fayth remitted to him before, or after he thus belieues: if after, then his persuasion is false & deceitfull, belieuing the remission of his sinnes which was not when he made that act of Fayth: if before that act of Fayth his sinnes were remitted, it followeth that iusti∣fication was before his beliefe, which cannot be, for with∣out Fayth it is impossible to please God. If the Minister say, that his beliefe causeth immediatly the remission of his sin∣nes which he belieueth, it is lykewise false; for after that
forme, the Ministers beliefe were omnipotent, in ma∣king the obiect which it knoweth, the mystery it be∣lieueth. As if a man by belieuing himselfe to be a great Do∣ctor in Phisik, should consequently be a perfect Doctor by reason of his beliefe, directly agaynst that famous saying of S. Augustin:Lib. 4. Gen. ad lit. cap. 32. That no knowledge or beliefe can be, vnles things knowen & belieued precede, and be before. Because as our know∣ledge is true or false, by reason the obict which we know is true or false; so our beliefe is certayne & true, because the thing is infallible which we belieue. As by example, God is omnipotent, not because I belieue him to be omnipotēt, but because he is omnipotent in himself, I belieue him to be so, the obiect of Faith alwaies being before the act of Faith, as the obiect of science is alwaies before the habite of sciēce. Plaine contrary to this, the Ministers in belieuing infallibly, & as a point of Fayth their sins to be forgiuen them, do make the obiect of their Faith in belieuing, which is a manifest absur∣dity. 2. The Ministers in belieuing infallibly their sinnes to be forgiuen thē, do keep in that the command of God, or breake the command of God. If the first, eyther they keep it perfectly (in that act of Fayth) or imperfectly, & with ble∣mish? If perfectly, it followeth that a man may sometymes and in some things perfectly keep the commaunds, which they will not graūt. If imperfectly, that imperfection being a deadly sin (for al are deadly sinnes in the Ministers opini∣on) it followeth of necessity that the Protestants are iustified by a deadly sinne, which is a palpable absurdity. 4. The fourth argument is framed out of those wordes of the Bible:Mark. 26. v. 16. He that shall belieue and be baptized, shall be sa∣ued, but he that will not belieue, shall be damned. Whereof fol∣loweth that infants being baptized are iustified before God, yet not by an act of the speciall Fayth of the Ministers, be∣cause they can haue none such, being infants, but rather they are iustifyed by the habituall qualityes or inward habits of Faith, hope, & Charity and consequently all others are iu∣stifyed by the lyke habit, and not by the speciall Faith of the Ministers, which is no other thing but a diuelish Idoll in∣uented by Caluin, and adored by the Protestants.
5. The fifth argument. This proposition of the Ministers,In the Confession of Fayh pinted at Geneua & approued by the Church of Scotand We receaue free remission of sinnes, and that by sayth only &c. sworne and subscribed a seuerall tymes by the three estats of Sotland, is directly against those wordes o the Bi∣ble:Iames 2. v. 24. Yee see then how that by workes a man is iustifyed, and not by sayth only. Finally there is no part of the Scripure which maketh mention of this presumptuous Fayth of the Mini∣sters, no not when it speaketh of the Fayth of Abel, Noe, Abraham, whose Fayth was not an infallible persuasion of their sinnes, but an assent and credit they gaue to the re∣uelations which God made to them, as lykewise in those wordes wherin S. Iohn doth place our saluation, saying:Iohn. 20 v. 31. These things are written that yee might belieue that Iesus is Christ the sonne of God, there is neuer a word of this particular Faith of the Ministers. And in that of S. Paul:Rom. 10 v. 8. & 9. This is the word of Faith which we preach, for if thou shalt confesse with thy Lord Iesus, and shalt belieue in thy heart, that God raysed him vp from the dead, thou shalt be saued: heere I say is neuer a word of the Ministers presumptuous Fayth. 6. I being in prison, a certayne Minister affirmed, that true Fayth wherby we are iustifyed is that which alwayes hath charity and good works ioyned therto. I replied thus, how is charity inseparable from true Fayth? Or is it separa∣ble as the fruit of the tree is separable from the tree, which remayneth a true & perfect tree without the fruit, or is cha∣rity an accidentall quality, or inseparable passion which floweth from Fayth, as the power of laughing from the na∣ture of man? If so, it would follow, that charity could not be in heauen without Fayth which is false. Or is charity an essential forme which is required to the integrity of this iu∣stifying Fayth? If so, then Fayth alone doth not iustify, which is directly agaynst your confession of Faith. If Faith together with charity iustify, as that Fayth is imperfect and mingled with deadly sinne, so is that charity; and conse∣quently it followeth that we are iustifyed by Fayth and charity which conteyne in themselues deadly sinnes. 7. Of this forsayd discourse I inferre, that our iustifica∣tion cōsisteth in the habit of charity, that is, in Faith & cha∣rity
linked together. So that Fayth is the entry as it were to iustification, Hope the progresse, & Charity the consuma∣tion of this happy vnion with God, wherof the Bible saith thus:Iohn 4. v. 16. He that abydeth in Charity, abydeth in God, and God in him. Which is the reason wherfore when the Scripture spea∣keth of our iustificatiō, it attributeth the same now to Faith, now to charity, not to fayth alone, not to charity alone, but to Fayth and charity ioyned together. Of Faith it saith:Rom. 1. v. 17. The iust lyueth of Fayh Of charity it sayth the lyke:1. Iohn. 3. v. 4. We know that we are translated from death to lyfe, because we loue the Brethren: he that loueh not his broher, abydeth in death. Of Fayth it sayth:Act 1▪ v. 19. Euery one tha belieueth is iustified. Of charity it sayth the same:Iohn 14. v. 21. He that hath my commandements and keepeth them, is he that loueth me: and he that loueth me, shalbe loued of my Father, and I will loue him. Of Fayth we read:Heb. 11. v 6. Without it, it is impossible to please God. Of charity:1. Cor. 13. v. 2. If I had all Fayth, so that I could remoue moūtaines, & had not charity, I were nothing Which gaue occasion to S. Augustine to say:Lib. 15. de Trinit. cap. 18. Nothing but charity maketh Fayth it selfe auaylable, for Fayth may be without charity, but it profyteth not without charity. Finally S. Paul himself sayth:Galat. 5. v. 6. In Christ Iesus neyther circumcision auayleth ought, nor prepuce, but it that worketh by charity. Wherfore if Fayth by reason of these testimonies be not the fruit but the true cause of our iu∣stification, say the Ministers, why should not charity lyke∣wise be the cause of our iustification, and not the fruit on∣ly, since it hath the authority of the Bible for it? Yea with greater priuiledge then Fayth, since S. Paul playnly pre∣ferred Charity before Fayth, saying:1. Cor. 13. v. 13. Now there remayneth Fayth, hope, and charity, these three, but the greater of these is charity. Where it is to be remarked, that the Ministers haue corrup∣ted the Bible almost in all those foresayd places in putting the word loue for charity, to make the sentence more obscure to the disprayse of charity, and that maliciously. For the word loue is taken in a good or euill sense, but the word charity is alwayes taken in a good sense. Now the reason wherfore charity is more perfect then Fayth, is because the loue of supernaturall things, which exceedeth the compas of our nature heere, is more perfect then the knowledge
of them which is by Fayth. For we know them only ans∣werable to the proportion of restrayned formes, which re∣present thē to vs; but we loue them according to the ful sea of goodnes, which is included in them: which gaue occa∣siō to the Philosopher to say: To speculate diuine things, doth pu∣rify the soule, but to loue thē doth deify the soule, or turne the same as it were into God. But let vs com to the testimonies of the Fathers. The Testimonies of the holy Fathers of this second Age, prouing that with the grace of God, we may keep Gods Commandements; and that the keeping therof is meritorious &c. The first Section. ORigen teacheth playnly that our iustification cōsisteth in Faith and keeping the commands of God; that is, in Faith & charity together, and not in Fayth only:Tract. 30. in Mat. Regnum calorum assimilatur virginibus decem, etsi quidem in ijs qui rectè cre∣dunt & viuunt, & ideo iustè assimilatur quinque prudentibus: qui autem profitentur quidem fidem in Iesu, non autem praeparant se bonis operibus ad salutem, reliquis quinque assimilantur virginibus fatuis. 2. He auoweth, that true Fayth may be without charity (which before he called fides in Iesu) and that God is to ren∣der to euery man according to his workes, presupposing al∣waies that true Faith in Christ may be without good wor∣kes, directly agaynst the Ministers opinion:In lib. 2. in cap. 2. ad Rom. Nunc requi∣ramus de iusto iudicio Dei, in quo reddet vnicui{que} secundum opera sua. Et primò quidem excludantur haeretici, qui dicunt animarum naturas bonas vel malas, & audiant, quia non pro natura vnicui{que} Deus, sed pro operibus suis reddit: secundo in loco aedificentur fideles, ne putent si∣bi hoc solùm sufficere posse, quod credunt, sed sciant iustum iudicium Dei reddere vnicui{que} secundum opera sua. And finally cōcludeth, true Fayth without good works is not accompted of before God, & true workes without a liuely Fayth likewise is not accompted of:Sub fi∣nem eiusdē libri. Alterum nam{que} sine altero reprobatur, quia & fides sine operibus mortua dicitur, & ex operibus sine fide nemo apud Deum iustificatur. 2. S. Cyprian sayth lykewise, good workes & the keeping of Gods cōmandments are easy by the grace of God
& in our power, speaking specially of almes-giuing, which is conforme to the command of God:Lib. de opere & eleemosina. Praeclara & diuina res, Fraties charissimi, salutaris operatio, solatium gande creden∣tium, saecuitatis nostrae salubre praesidium, munimentum spei, tute∣la fidei, medela peccati, & res posita in potestate facientis, res gran∣dis & facils &c. 2. He auoweth that good workes are meri∣torious of eternall lyfe, writing to the holy Martyrs who were in prison for the Catholike Religion, and suffred ma∣ny things therfore:Epist. ad Menefi∣anum. An ego possum tacere & vocem meam silen∣tio premere, cùm de charissimis meis tam multa & gloriosa cognoscam, quibus vos diuina dignatio honorauit; vt ex vobis pars iam martyrij sui consummatione praecesserit, tormentorum suorum coronam de Do∣mino receptura: pars adhuc in carcerum claustris, siue in metallis & vinculis demoretur: exhibens per ipsas suppliciorum moras corroboran∣dis fratribus & armandis maiora documenta; ad meritorum titulos ampliores tormentorum tarditate proficiens, habitura tot mercedes in caelestibus praemijs, quot nunc dies numerantur in poenis: quae qui∣dem vobis fortissimi ac beatissimi fratres, promerito religionis ac fi∣dei vestrae accidisse non miror, vt vos sic Dominus ad gloriarum subli∣me fastigium clarificationis suae, honore prouexerit, qui semper in Ec∣clesia eius custodito fidei tenore viguistis, conseruātes firmiter Domini∣ca mandata. Yet the Ministers do teach that no man hath euer kept, nor can keep the commandements. 3. S. Iustin martyr auoweth that those persons on∣ly are acceptable to God who imitate him in goodnesse, iu∣stice, humanity and other vertues, declaring therby that our iustification consisteth not in only Fayth, but in Fayth & good workes togeather, which do merit greatly before God:Apol. 2. ad Anton. Pium. Deum illos tantum charos habere docuimus, nobis{que} persua∣simus & credimus, qui ea, quae in eo insunt imitantur temperantiā iustitiam & humanitatem, at{que} omnia quae Dei sunt propria. And agayne:Apol. 2. ad Ant. Homines, qui dignos se eius voluntate & consilio, operi∣bus praestiterunt, cū eo victuros esse meritis suis accepimus ac regnatu∣ros: sic vt ab omni interitu perturbatione{que} sint liberi Vt enim eos cùm non essent principio, effecit: sic fore speramus, vt ex eo quod sponte secu∣ti erunt ea quae illi, probantur eos & immortalitate, & consuetudine dignetur. And a litle there after: Censemus vnumquem{que} salutem consecuturum pro operum dignitate. Which is conforme to that of
S. Chrysostome who speaketh of Fayth thus:Lib. 1. contra vi∣tuper, mo∣nast. vitae What pro∣fit will Fayth affoard vs, if our life be not sincere and pure? And S. Basil:In psal∣terio psal. 110. Fayth alone is not sufficient, vnlesse there be added conuer∣saion of lyfe agreable therto. 4. S. Irenaeus in lyke manner auerreth, that God maketh great accompt of our good workes and rewardeth vs therfore, not by reason of our Faith only, but by reason of our Fayth & good Workes togeather:Lib. 4. cap. 34. Sicut Salomon, ait,Prou. 19 v. 17. qui miseretur pauperi foeneratur Deo. Qui eum nullius indigens est Deus in se assumit bonas operationes nostras, ad hoc, vt praestet nobis re∣tributionem bonorum suorum. Sicut Dominus noster ait,Math. 25. v. 34. Venite benedicti Patris mei, percipite vobis praeparatum regnum. Esuriuienim & dedistis mihi manducare &c. 5. Tertullian teacheth vs manifestly, that Fayth only doth not iustify, and that our good workes do merit before God: Let vs heare his wordes:De Re∣surrect. car¦nis cap. 48 Si enim sicut in Adam om∣nes mortuntur, ita & in Christo viuificabuntur; Carne viuificabun∣tur in Christo, sicut in Adam carne moriuntur Vnusquis{que} autem in suo ordine scilicet quia & in suo corpore: Ordo enim non aliud quàm meritorum dispositor. Merita autem cùm corpori quo{que} adscribantur, ordo quo{que} corporum disponatur necesse est, vt possit esse meritorum. And agayne:In Ap. cap. 48. Tunc restituetur omne humanum genus ad expū∣gendum quod in isto aeuo boni seu mali meruit, exinde pendendum im∣mensam aeternitatis perpetuitatem. It were tedious to me to cite all the places (they being so many in number) whereby Tertullian proueth that true Fayth may be without good workes, and that Fayth only is not sufficient to saluation: in like manner that good workes grounded vpon the grace of God are meritorious of saluation. I will adde this only place to the forsayd:In Scor. aduersus Gnosticos cap. 6. Quomodo multae mansiones apud patrem, si non pro varietate meritorum Quomodo & stella à stella distabit in gloria, nisi pro diuersitate radiorum? Are not all these renowned and ancient Fathers sufficient to persuade the Protestants that they wander out of the trodē path of so many our holy and learned predecessours, and do fellow rather the croo∣ked turnings of Caluin & Luther manifest Apostata's, who bring them to the labyrinth of eternall perdition?
That the Ministers haue falsified the Bible in sundry places, which do proue, that Fayth only doth not iustify &c. The second Section. BEza one of the most famous amongst the Puritans hath set out long since a Bible in Latin, which as it is full of blasphemies, corruptions and sacriledges; so Castalio, a learned Puritan lykewise, hath written a booke agaynst Beza, whose Bible our Scots or English Bible followeth commonly, leauing the trodden path of all antiquity and of other nations. Beza then to make his reader belieue that man iustifyed by Fayth only, turneth that of S. Paul:Rom. 1. v. 17. Beza his new Testa. printed an∣no 1598. . Hababuk 2. v 4. The iust shall lyue by Fayth. Beza I say hath translated: qui verò ex fide iustus est, viuet; he that is iust by Fayth, shall lyue. Directly agaynst the Greeke, directly agaynst the Syriake, where the word ha, which signifyeth is, is not at all; dire∣ctly likewise against the Caldaike text, where it is, Vetsadi∣kaiahhal kuschetehun. Directly agaynst S. Augustin who ex∣plicating this place sayth:Lib. 3. cont 2. ep. Pelag. Of what Fayth speaketh heere the Apostle? Of the Catholyk Fayth, which makeh a iust man, & distin∣guisheth between the iust and the vniust, for it is not a reprobate Fayth that we speake of, but that which worketh by Charity. In the He∣brew text likwise it is, the iust shal liue by Fayth. To the which purpose learnedly S. Augustin, doth explicate those words of the Bible:Rom. 2. v. 28. We accompt a man to be iustifyed by Fayth with∣out the workes of the law.Aug. lib. de fide & operibus cap. 14. Non hoc agit Apostolus, sayth he, vt percepta ac professa fide opera iustitiae contemnantur, sed vt sciat se quis{que} posse per fidem iustificari, etiamsi legis opera non pracesserint; sequntur enim iustificatum, non praecedunt iustificandum &c. That is: The Apostle meaneth not by the workes of the law, those which follow iustification, but those which goe before iustification. Should not S. Augustin his exposition, and consequence drawen out of this, be preferred before the Ministers consequences for their solifidian iustification, which by all antiquity hath bene to this day esteemed as a manifest heresy and pont of
Idolatry, directly against the expresse words of sundry pla∣ces of the Bible:Matth. 6. v. 15. If yee do not forgiue men their trespasses, no more will your Father forgiue you your trespasses. Then Faith only is not sufficiēt. Truly since there be so many deadly hatreds amongst the Puritanes and Protestants, very few of them can obteyne remission of sinnes, or haue true fayth: since they remaine in perpetuall hatred one against another. 2.Iohn. 13. v. 17. If yee know these things, blessed are yee if yee do them. Fayth alone then is not sufficient. 3.Iohn. 13. v. 14. Yee are my friends if yee do whatsoeuer I command you, he sayth not, If yee belieue only in me. 2. The second corruption is that of S. Paul to the Ro∣manes:Rom.  v. 18. The wrath of God from heauen is reuealed vpon all im∣piety & iniustice of those men, that deteyne the verity of God in iniu∣stice. Where the Apostle condemneth men of impiety, spe∣cially those who do deteyne the verity of God in iniustice, not absolutly all men. Yet the Ministers to insinuat to the reader that all sorts of men are condemned heere by the A∣postle, & that all sorts of men do euer remaine in impiety & iniustice, asIn hunc locum. & in 1. Ioan. cap. 5. Beza playnly teacheth, and consequently that no man can keep the commandements, they haue trā∣slated thus: For the wrath of God is reuealed from heauen, agaynst all vngodlynes and vnrighteousnes of men, which withold the truth in vnrighteousnes: making the Apostle to speake absolutly. Was not S. Paul a faithfull and godly man, & consequently not conteyned vnder this his owne saying: for he speaketh of himselfe thus:1. Cor. 4. v. 4. I am not guilty in conscience of any thing, but I am not iustifyed therin? Yet the Protestants are assured, say they, that they are iustifyed, though their conscience do accuse them of all impiety, of all sort of vices, and sins. But how, I pray you, do the Ministers translate this last place of S. Paul, I know nothing by my selfe? Is it then all one to say,. I am not guilty in conscience of any thing, and to say, I know no∣thing by my selfe? May not the most sinfull Minister say with truth, that he knoweth nothing by himselfe, but by the as∣sistance of God; yet may he say, I am not guilty in conscience of any thing? Can there be greater impiety committed? Can there be a more heynous sinne in the sight of God then to translate after this forme the holy Bible? making by such diuelish and abhominable translations, God to be the au∣thor,
teacher, and sayer of all their abhominations, and sa∣criledges? 3. The third falsification of the Ministers is that of S. Paul to the Corinthians:1. Cor.  v. 27 I chastice my body, and bring it into seruitude, least perhaps, when I haue preached to others▪ my self become reprobate. Where the Apostle teacheth vs, to worke our saluation with feare & trembling, as he himselfe wit∣nesseth, saying:Philip 2. v. 12. Therefore my dearest &c. with feare and trē∣bling worke your saluation. Which place as it playnely impu∣gneth the Protestants presumptuous and solifidian Iustifi∣cation,. and certitude of their predestination; so by them it is impiously corrupted thus: Make an end of your owne salua∣tion with feare and trembling. Directly agaynst the force of the Greeke word, which in other places they translate as we do, labour, or work: as (1. Cor. 4 v 12. We labour working with our owne hands. And agayne:Philip. . v. 13. For it is God which worketh in you. Is this to translate the Bible faythfully according to their oath and conscience, or rather impiously to fortify their heresies and belye God himselfe in falsifying his word? Let vs returne to the disproofe of the former third falsification, which is thus: I beat down my body and bring it into subiection, least by any meanes, after that I haue preached to others, I my selfe should be re∣proued. Hath not this sacrilegious translation wholy ano∣ther sense, specially read by the common people? The first falsification heere is in putting, I beat downe, for, I chastize. The second in putting, least by any meanes, for, least perhaps, the third in putting, I my selfe should be reproued, for, my selfe should become reprobate. Remarke the Ministers treachery & craft to eternall perditiō. castigo,  ne for∣tè,  reprobus. For in other places, which make no wayes agaynst them by reason that they are indifferent places, they turne as we do the word reprobate, and not reproued. As that of S. Paul:2. Cor. 12. v. 5.  351. Know yee not your selues, how that Iesus-Christ is in you, except yee be reprobates? Agayne:2. Tim. 3. v. 8. Men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the Fayth. The Syriak word, Esthele, signifieth a reprobate, à radice Sela, which si∣gnifieth to reprobate: doth not the Apostle himselfe in o∣ther places manifestly cōdemne the Protestants of this their infallible assurance of their predestination and saluation,
when he writeth:Rom. 15▪ v. 6. Thou standest by Fayth, be not high-minded but feare. Where playnly S. Paul teacheth, that a man may fall from the true Faith, and consequently he cannot be in∣fallibly sure that he is predestinat and is to be saued. Againe S. Paul as it were forwarned the Protestants of the great danger of this their opinion and Religion:1. Cor. 10. v. 12. Therfore, saith he, he that thinketh himselfe to stand, let him take heed least he fall. What excuse shall the Protestants pretend in the day of iud∣gement, since so many euident places of their Bible do cō∣demne that presumptuous security of theirs cōcerning their saluation? How can the Protestants be infallibly sure that they are predestinate, since predestination dependeth on the will of God, & the will of God cannot be infallibly knowē to vs in particular, without a particular reuelation? 2. Our Sauiour saith:Matth. 24. v. 1. He that shall perseuere to the end, shall be saued. But no Protestant can be infallibly sure that he is to perse∣uere to the end. Ergo, &c. See we not euery day now pre∣sently in France many Ministers and Gentlemen of worth abandon the Hugenots Religion and become Catholikes? what infallible assurance then could they haue had being Hugenots to perseuere in their Religion? And what grea∣ter then they, can any other haue? 3. Sundry Protestants who haue become Catholikes and dyed Catholikes, ey∣ther were predestinat being Protestāts or not? If they were how then could they become, and dye Catholikes? If not, what abhominable doctrine is that to make them to belieue as a poynt of Religion that they were predestinat? We Ca∣tholikes belieue, that by the grace of God we may haue a morall certitude and assurance, that we are his children, shal perseuere vnto the end, be saued; but we can not be in∣fallibly certain, nor so certain that we may not still feare the successe of our weaknes. The which doctrine the Bible tea∣cheth vs:2. Iohn v. 8. Looke to your selues, that yee loose not the things which yow haue wrought, but that yow may receaue a full reward. If they could haue lost them, truly they could not be infallibly sure of them. Agayne,Reuel. 3. v. 11. Hold that which thou hast, that no man take thy crowne. AndPsal. 2. v 11. Serue our Lord in feare and reioyce in trembling. Agayne:Prou. 28. v. 14. Blessed is the man that feareth alwayes: but he that
hardneth his heart shall fall into euill. Do not the Protestants in this poynt, and in all harden their hart agaynst the Bible, agaynst reason, agaynst all antiquity, agaynst the holy Fa∣thers, and agaynst the very light of naturall reason? The 16. 17. and 18. Article. 1. The custome to fast Lent. 2. And some other dayes. 3. And to abstayne some tymes from certayne meates, was vniuersally in vse in this second Age. CHAP. IX. AFter the first iustification, which is per∣formed by charity wherof I spake in the former verity; followeth, as it were, a second iustification, that is, the increase and augmentation of the first by good works, in which holy men dayly walk and go forward by the grace of God, as the wyseman teacheth in his prouerbs:Prou. 4. v. 28. The way of the iust shyneth as the light, and shineth more and more vnto the perfect day. That is, as the dawning appeareth brighter & brighter, vn∣till it come to Noone, or to the fulnes of the day; so the iust man increaseth by good workes, going alwayes forward in the way of perfection, till he come to the full state ther∣of, conforme to that of the Bible:Reuel. 22. v. 11. . He that is iust, let him be iustified yet. Which is more plainly signifyed in the Greeke text, thus: He that is iust let him do iustice yet. Signifying ther∣by the increase of iustice by good works; which place the Ministers haue falsified, to signify that there is no increase of iustice by good worke, translating thus: And he that is right∣ous, let him by righteous still. Moreouer they who proceed in outward good workes of iustice, increase therein, and be∣come
more gratious vnto God: euen as when they were su∣iect to sinne, by often and continuall sinning they augmē∣ted their wickednesse, and became more odious to God: so the Godly by good workes increase in iustice, sayth S. Paul:Rom. 6. v. 9. As you haue exhibited your members to serue vncleanes and iniquity, vnto iniquity: so now exhibit your members to serue iustice, vnto sanctification. As the same Apostle speaketh yet more playnly exhorting the Colossians:Coloss. 1. v. 10. That they might walke worthy of our Lord and please him in all thinges, fru∣ctifying in all good workes, and increasing in the knowledge of God. Which wordes S. Augustine fitly explicateth saying:Augu. serm. 16. de verb. Apo. That we are iustified, and that iustice it selfe increaseth, when we proffit and go forward in all good workes. Meaning an inward, inherent and true iustice, not that imputatiue and outward iustice of the Ministers, which the Bible condēneth as im∣pious, since it may remayne with all sort of inward abho∣mination. And accordingly the holy Apostle S. Iohn spea∣king of that iustice wherby we are iust, meaneth an inward and inherent iustice, not a imputatiue or outward. The words of the Apostle are:1. Iohn 3. v. 7. He that doth iustice is iust, euen as he also is iust. But he, to wit Christ, is truely iust before God by an inward and inherent iustice, worthy of heauen, ther∣fore he that doth iustice is also iust before God, by the lyke inherent iustice, or else the similitude of S. Iohn maketh not to the purpose: yea the Apostle warneth vs to beware of the Ministers who teach this their iustice, for the fashion only, saying:1. Iohn 3. v. 7. Little children, let no mā seduce you. 2. The fasting in holy Lent and abstinency from cer∣tayne meates is one of those good workes, wherby a man increaseth in iustice, wherof I haue spoken in the former age more at length, desirous, specially in this age, to proue by the holy Scipture that the Catholike Church may or∣dayne certayne fasting-dayes to the spirituall proffit of the Catholiks, which I proue first by the example of Hester & Mardochaeus, whereof the word of God sayth, that:Hester. 9. v. 31. (h) To confirme those dayes of Purim according to their seasons, as Mardo∣chaeus the Iew and Hester the Queene had appoynted them, and as they had promised for themselues, & for their seed, with fasting & prayer.
If Hester & Mardochaeus might institute particular fasting dayes, much more the Church of God, which is infallibly assisted by the holy Ghost for euer, as the Scripture sayth:Iohn 14 v. 26. But the Cōforter, which is the holy Ghost, whome the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things to your remembrance which I haue told yow. Of the which power receaued from God, the Catholike Church gaue a manifest proofe in that generall Councell and Assembly made in the tyme of the Apostles, where that which was ordeyned by that Councell (which represented the Church) is sayd to haue bene ordeyned by God himselfe as the Scripture testifyeth:Act. 15. v. 28. For it seemed good to the holy Ghost, & to vs, to lay no more burthen vpon you, then these necessary things, that is, that yee abstayne from things offred to Idols and bloud, and that which is strangled. The Catholike Church then ordeyned that we should absteyne from bloud and strangled: and shall not the true Church now haue power to command to absteyne from certayne meates, to the end we may serue God the better? 3. S. Paul maketh mention of fasting then vsed in his tyme in the Church of God, saying:Act. 27 v. 9. So when much tyme was spent &c. because also the fast was now passed, Paul exhorted them: And shall not the same Church of God vse much fa∣sting, and command to her subiects the vse thereof? Of the which doctrine I inferre, how ignorantly Whitaker a prime English Puritan chargeth Pope Calixtus to haue beneCont. Duraeum lib. 7. The first that ordayned ieiunium quatuor temporum. By reason that Whitaker alledgeth no ancient writer, who chargeth thus Calixtus, it is only an inuētion of Whitaker his own. Besides that I haue shewed in the former age the institutiō of such a fast to haue beene long before Victor, much more before Calixtus, yea to haue proceeded, from the doctrine of the holy Ghost, as witnesseth S. Leo, saying:Serm. 8. Ecclesiastica ieiunia ex doctrina Sancti Spiritus, ita per totius anni circulum di∣stributa sunt. As for that of S. Paul:Tim. 4. v. 1. & 3. In the later tymes some shall depart from the Fayth &c. forbidding to marry, to absteyne frō meates which God created, to receaue with thanksgiuing for the faith∣full. Where the Ministers haue corrupted the Bible, putting in the word commanding, which is not in the Greeke text: &
where the Apostle speaketh not of the fasting of the Catho∣like Church, but rather agaynst the Manichees, Encratites, Marcionists, and such heretikes, who affirmed that marri∣age was of Sathan, and the act of Matrimony was institu∣ted by an euill God. Lykewise they taught that men might not eat of certayne sorts of meats, by reason that they were not made (sayd they) by the good God, but by the euill, as witnesseth the ancient Fathers vpon this place,Lib. 1. cap. 22. Irenae∣us,Hom. 12. in 1. ad Tim. Chrysostomus,In hunc locum. Ambrosius,Haeres. Manich. 46. Augustinus and o∣thers. Yea M. Hooker an English Protestant witnesseth the same:In his Ecclesiasti∣call policy. lib. 5. sect. 72. Agaynst those Heretikes which haue vrged perpetuall absti∣nence from certayne meates, as being in their very nature vncleane, the Church hath still bent her self as an enemy, S. Paul giuing charge to take head of them &c. Doh not the foresayd place of S. Paul speake playnly agaynst the Ministers? For they are come in the later tymes; they haue departed from the Fayth which was in vse before their comming: They forbid to mar∣ry lawfully, when they teach that Mariage is not a Sa∣crament; when they teach that once marryed persons may marry to others, their partie yet being alyue; when they teach that the Fayth and promise giuen in Mariage cannot be kept, because, say they, no man can keep the commaundements of God. The Ministers command to absteyne from meats on the sunday from morning til night, which none but heretikes were accustomed to do. Finally hauing confirmed the holy custom of fasting by sundry pas∣sages of the Bible, by the exemples of Hester, of the Recha∣bites, as witnesseth theIerem. 35. Prophet Ieremy,Numb. 6. of the Na∣zarites,Ionae 3. of the Nininites,Exod. 34. of Moyses,Matth. 3. of S. Iohn Baptist,Matth. 4. and of Christ himselfe; I aske and challenge the Ministers to cite as manifest testimonyes agaynst fasting, which they not being able to do by the expresse word of God, let them giue glory to God, and confesse plainly that they teach nothing lesse thē the word of God, thē the Scri∣pture giuing in place therof their owne inuentions, tradi∣tions, superstitions and foolish consequences, wherunto let vs Catholikes preferre the consequences of the holy Fa∣thers of this Age.
The holy Fathers of this second Age, do witnesse that the custome was vniuersally in the Church of God, to keep the fast of Lent, and to absteyne sometymes from certayne meates &c. The first Section. TErtullian writing to his bed-fellow witnesseth, that it is a great hindrance to a Catholik, married with one of another Religion, to keep the fasting dayes of the Catho∣like Church, by reason that a Catholike gentlewoman being marryed with such a one:Lib. 2. ad vxorem cap. 4. Domino certè (sayth he) non potest pro disciplina satisfacere, habens in latere diaboli seruum, procuratorem Domini sui ad impedienda fidelium studia & officia. Vt fi statio facienda est, maritus de die conducat ad balneas; si ieiunia obseruanda sunt, maritus eadem die conuiuium exerceat; si procedē∣dum erit, nunquam magis familiae occupatio adueniat. 2. He auow∣eth that the fast before Pasche, which we cal the fast of Lēt, and which he callethLib. de ieiuijs c. 2. & 13. Paschatis ieiunium, was in vse in his tyme. 3. He setteth down the forme & fashion, which was kept in fasting, to wit, to absteyne from flesh, say∣ing:Eod. li∣bro cap. 1. Xenophagias obseruamus, siccantes cibum ab omni carne &c. Which yet more playnly he signifieth by these wordes:De eo¦dem libro cap. 1. Sublato, dimiuuto, demorato cibo. Signifying by the first and second word, that fasting consisteth in abstinēce from flesh, & taking one meale in the day: which last circumstance he signifyeth, by the word diminuto, as by the third demorato, he signifyeth, that it is lawfull to change the tyme of taking of that one meale for a iust cause. 2. Origen speaketh plentifully to the prayse of fasting in diuers homilies, and in particular maketh mētion of the fast of Lent, & of wednesday and fryday, his word: be:Hom. 10. in Le∣uit. Nec hoc tamen ideo dicimus, vt abstinentiae Christianae fraena laxemus. Ha∣bemus enim quadragesimae dies ieiunijs consecratos, habemus quartam & sextam septimanae dies, quibus solemniter ieiunamus. 2. He af∣firmeth that it was lawfull to euery man to fast priuatly according to his deuotion, & that fasting was instituted, to
chastize our body and to make vs therby more fit to prayer and deuotion:Ibidem. Est certè (sayth he) libertas Christiano per omne tempus ieiunandi, non obseruantiae superstitione, sed virtute continentiae. Nam quomodo apud eos castitas incorrupta seruatur, nisi arctioribus continentiae fulta subsidijs? quomodo scripturis ope∣ram dabunt? Quomodo scientiae & sapientiae studebunt? Nonne per continentiam ventris & gutturis? The care of wyfe & chil∣dren maketh the Ministers ignorant in their calling, greedy and auaricious in their doings, lewd in their conuersation, carelesse in preaching, and couetous in their neighbours possessions. 3. S. Cyprian in lyke māner auerreth that no man hath euer attained to the perfectiō of vertue without fasting:Tract. de ieiunio & tentat l Christi. Quotquot (sayth he) viros virtutum vidimus, sine ieiunio non legi∣mus ascendisse, nec aliquid magnum moliti sunt, nisi prius abstinentia pracessisset. Quoties aliquid à Deo obtinere conati sunt, ieiunijs incu∣buere & lachrymis, & pernoctantes in orationibus, cilicijs carni hae∣rentibus supplices beneficia postularunt. 2. He auowethIbidem. that the custome to fast fourty dayes of Lent came from the ex∣ample of our Sauiour who fasted lykewyse fourty dayes. 4. S. IrenaeusExtat. apud Euse. lib. 5 histo. cap. 24. in a certayne letter of his written to S. Victor Pope and Martir, witnesseth playnly and plentiful∣ly the ancient custome of the Catholikes to fast Lent and o∣ther dayes, according to the command of the holy and Ca∣tholike Church. 5. S. TelesphorusExtat tom. 1. Cō∣cil. in lyke maner maketh mention in a letter of his directed to the Catholiks, how that the cu∣stome was to keep exactly the fasting of Lent, specially in absteyning from flesh. But of this controuersy I will speake more at length God willing in the Centuryes following.
That the Ministers haue falsified the Bible in sundry places which do approoue good workes, and the reward thereof, wher∣of Fastinge is one. The second Section. THe first is that of S. Peter who speaking of the holy & iust Lot, sayth:1. Pet. 2 v. 7.8. God deliuered iust Lot oppressed by the iniury and luxurious conuersation of the abhominable men. For in sight and hearing he was iust: dwelling with them who from day to day ve∣xed the iust soule with vniust works. Signifying therby that Lot was iust in sight and hearing, keeping his sight from filthy and vncleane obiects, & his hearing from vnclean speaches, & consequently keeping therby God his commandements. 2. S. Peter calleth Lot his Soule iust, to signify vnto vs the inherent iustice, which enobleth the vpright Catholike soule before God, condemning therby the imputatiue iu∣stice of the Protestants, who to disgrace this place of the Bi∣ble haue first changed the wordes agaynst the order of all the Greeke copyes,. thus: For he being righteous, and dwelling a∣mong them, in seeing and hearing, vexed his righteous soule from day to day with their vnlawfull deedes. 2. The Protestants to signify their imputatiue iustice, they haue turned Righteous soule, which word Righteous they put alwayes commonly in place of the word Iust, to signify that no man, though assi∣sted by Gods grace can be truly iust, and without spot of deadly sins, but only to the outward shew of man, dire∣ctly against the expresse words of their owne Bible, which speaking of Zacharias & Elizabeth saith:Luk. 1. v. 6. They were both iust before God, and walked in all the commandements and ordinances of the Lord without reproofe. Where the Euangelist teacheth vs three things agaynst the Protestants. 1. That iust and holy men do keep all Gods commandments assisted by his grace. That man is not iustifyed by Fayth alone, but by walking in the commandements. 3. That the keeping of the com∣mandements proceding of a liuely Fayth is our iustificatiō.
The Ministers in turning righteous for iust, to take away al inherent and in ward iustice, giue way to the Iewes to de∣ny that our Sauiour is the true Messias, by reason that he is called by those same Greeke and Syriake words Iust, wher∣with others are thus called, as:Matth. 27. v. 19. Haue nothing to do with that Iust man. Agayne:Luk. 23 v. 47. . Truly this man was iust, and many such, where alwayes the same Greeke word is, which word if it signify only an outward and imputatiue iustice, by no pla∣ce of the Scripture can we proue our Sauiour to haue had a true inherent and inward Iustice: which is a horrible blas∣phemy, seing his iustice and goodnesse, is the ground of all our Iustice and merits. 2. The second corrupted place is that of Esdras:Esdras 8. v. 23. And we fasted and besought our God hereby: and it fell out prospe∣rously vnto vs. Where fasting is accompted to be a good and meritorious worke: because it fell out properously to the Iewes by reason of their fasting. The Ministers, to signify the contrary, & that fasting is no meritorious good work, peruert the place thus: So we fasted and besought our God for this: and he was intreated of vs. The French Hugenots adde boldly three wordes, par nos prieres, which are not in the text. The Hebrew is manifest: Waiahhather lanu; & exora∣bilis fuit nobis. 3. The third falsifyed place is that of the Prophet Dauid, who applyed his mynd to keepe Gods commande∣ments (which are called Iustifications, because the keeping of them do iustify vs) for a reward eternally in heauen. De∣claring therby that good workes are meritorious of lyfe e∣uerlasting, & that they haue their reward besides God. The Prophets words be:Psalm. 119 v. 112. prop re∣tributionē. . I haue inclyned my hart to do thy iustify∣cations for euer for reward. Remarke how the Protestants haue falsifyed this place craftily to take away all hope that our good workes do merit or haue any reward, they turn thus. I haue applied my hart to fulfill thy statutes alwaies euen vnto the end. Taking wholly away the word reward, which is in the Greeke, and which they haue turned with vs in other pla∣ces, as:Psal. 1. v. 11. In keeping of them there is great reward. The same Hebrew word being euery where hhekeb. For in effect the
kingdome of heauen is a reward due to our good workes grounded vpon the merits of Christ, by reason of the pro∣mise wherby God hath obliged himselfe to vs; yet all is his mercy and grace, by reason that he hath obliged himselfe to vs; and yet all is without any merit or obligation of ours going before; so heauen is giuen both of mercy, and as a re∣ward. Thus S. Augustin:In psal. 20. Quando facis bonum opus, propter vitam aeternam fac: si ideo facis, securus facis, hoc enim mandauit Deus. 4. The fourth place falsifyed by the Ministry is that of Daniel the Prophet, who speaking to King Darius affir∣meth, that God had so preuēted him with his grace, that he was found iust and innocent before God of any sinne, yea and before man: declaring therby, that a man by the grace of God may keep Gods commandements. His wordes be:Daniel. 6. v. 22. My God hath sent his Angell, and hath shut vp the mouthes of the lyons, and they haue not hurt me: because before him Iustice hath bene foūd in me: yea & before thee, O King, I haue done no offence. How do the Ministers deface and disgrace this place to proue their heresie of imputatiue Iustice, & that the commands are im∣possible to be kept? My Iustice, say they, was found out be∣fore him, and vnto thee, O King, I haue done no hurt. Who seeth not a great difference betwixt these translations? What wise man can thinke the Ministers to haue any conscience, seeing so boldly they corrupt thus the word of God? Is it meruayle they deny the authority of the holy Fathers, of ancient Councels, of sacred doctours, seeing thus they fal∣sify agaynst all antiquity the Scripture, the holy word of God, the Bible it selfe? 5. The fifth corruption is that in S. Luke, where it is sayd, that our Sauiour was sent into this world to preach the Ghospell to the poore, to heale the broken harted, to preach deliuerance to the captiues:Luk. 4. v. 19. To preach the acceptable yeare of the Lord, and the day of retribution. By the last wordes, the day of retribution, is signifyed, that in the law of grace, the good workes of the Catholikes, grounded vpon the merits of Christ, should haue great rewardes, and merits appoyn∣ted for them, which the holy FatherLib. 4. in Lucam. S. Ambrose, and o∣thers
do proue by this place. The Ministers cannot abyde the word merit, or the word retribution, as due of Iustice. For the which cause they haue blotted out of their Bible these last wordes, and the day of retribution, translating thus:. And that I should preach the acceptable yeare of the Lord. Notwithstand∣ding that in all the Hebrew copyes those wordes are found sayth Beza himselfe:An∣not. in hūc locum prin¦ted the ye∣are 1556. Quae verba in Haebraeis quidem habentur & in multis Graecis codicibus. Can there be a greater Impiety before God then thus to falsify the word of God?Ierem. 11. v. 12. O yee heauens be astonished at this: be affrayd and vtterly confounded. For the Ministers haue committed two euills, they haue forsaken the fountayne of lyuing waters, to digge them pits, euen broken pits, that can hold no water: That is, they haue forsaken the foun∣tayne of the Hebrew and Greeke tongues in their transla∣tions, forsaken the translations and expositions of all the holy, learned, and auncient Fathers, to digge to themsel∣ues pits, in following their owne fansies and inuentions, a∣gaynst the cleare water of the word of God and sacred an∣tiquity. Remarke heere the spirit of contradiction (which is familiar to all Heretikes) of Beza who in the first editi∣on of his commentaries vpon this place printed the yeare of Christ 1556. sayth: Quae verba in Haebraeis quidem habentur, & in multis Graecis codicibus. Yet he sayth wholy the contrary in the same commentaryes printed 1598. Quae verba, sayth he, in Haebraeis quidem habentur, sed in nullis Graecis codicibus à me re∣perta sunt. The which fashion of proceeding of the Ministers sheweth it self, forasmuch as the same Greeke word which signifieth heere reward, they haue translated in other places of the Bible; condemning therby themselues, who deny that our good workes can merit, or haue any reward. As that to the Colossians:Coloss. 3. v. 24. . Knowing that of the Lord, yee shal re∣ceaue the reward of inheritance. And S. Paul speaking of Moy∣ses:Hebr. 11. v 26. For he had respect vnto the recompence of the reward. 6. The sixt corruption is that of S. Iohn, where it is sayd, that one of the Ministers gaue a blow to our Sauiour Christ Iesus:Iohn. 18. v. 22. . When he had sayd those things, one of the Ministers stan∣ding by, gaue Iesus a blow: which wicked fact of those Mini∣sters, was a figure of the Ministers doing in this our age:
wherin they haue giuen such a blow to the Church of God to the Saints in heauen, to the Sacraments, to the Scriptu∣res;Vnus Mi∣nistrorum dedit alapā Iesu. that the first they haue cut in pieces, to they second they refuse religious honor, of seauen Sacraments the haue made but two, the Scriptures they haue wholly mangled, corrupted, peruerted, and cut asunder, calling that Apo∣crypha, which all nations euer did accompt as Canonicall. Now to couer this detestable fact of theirs against our Sa∣uiour, they haue translated thus: one of the officers which stood by, smote Iesus with his rod. Putting the word Officers, for the word Ministers, directly agaynst the Greeke word, which in other places of the Bible, when it is to their prayse and auantage they translate the very word Minister, as:Act. 26. v. 16. I haue appeared vnto thee for this purpose, to appoynt thee a Minister &c. Why do yee translate the word Minister in the one, and not in the other? is not the same Greeke word in both places? Is this the fidelity which yee promise to follow the Greeke text precisely?.
The 19. 20. and 21. Article. 1. That the custome of the Catholik Church in this second Age was, that Churchmen should not be marryed. 2. But rather lead a single & chast lyfe. 3. And that the vowing of chastity, pouerty, and obedience was lawfull, and in vse. CHAP. X. BY reason that I haue spokē of this mat∣ter at length in the first Age, & that ma∣ny of the chiefest noble men & Prote∣stants in Scotland and England auow openly, that the Ministers and Bishops should lead a single lyfe, I wilbe short, touching heere only this particular, that many of the Iewes (as testifyeth Iosephus) were much gi∣uen to lead a single and chast lyfe:Ioseph. antiq: Iu∣daic. lib. 18. cap. 2. The righteousnes, sayth he, of the Essenes, is meruailous, they enioy their riches in common, and in this course aboue foure thousand men do lyue, hauing neyther wyues, nor seruants. And elswhere he affirmeth:De bel∣lo Iudaico lib. 2. cap. 7. They are Iewes by nation, and do obserue continency, auoyde marriage, are contemners of riches, and enioy things in common, none being richer then other. And Philo a famous writer who liueth in the A∣postles tyme maketh mention of those Iewes, who being conuerted to the Catholike Religion, andDe vita contemp. Forsaking their goods, did dwell without the walles, louing solitarines. He maketh mention lykewise of their Monasteries, where being solita∣ry, they studyed the Mysteryes of holy lyfe, specially of their wonderfull great fasting from flesh. And to omit sundry o∣ther proofes which I might alledge, besides that of Isay, whome the Protestants acknowledge to fortell vowes which were to be performed in the law of grace, and in the
Catholike Roman Church:Isa. 19. v. 11. In that day they shall do sacrifice and oblation, and shall vow vowes vnto our Lord, and performe them. I will set downe only the testimonyes of two Protestant writers. First M. Hooker, who acknow∣ledgeth,In his Ecclesiasti∣cal policy lib 2. Ananias to haue made a solemne vow vnto God, which strictly bound him to the giuing of his possessions to the Churches vse. Lykewise M. Fenton auoweth the same:In a ser∣mon of his of Simony, printed 1604. pag. 46. Albeyt we had liberty (sayth he) before to vse Ecclesiasticall liuings, as meere tem∣porals; yet after those vowes, our case is the very same with that of Ananias. Yea the very wordes of S. Peter spoken to Ana∣nias witnesseth the same:Acts 5. v. 4. Thou hast not lyed vnto men, but vnto God. Wherupon S. Augustin writeth thus:Serm. 10. dediuer∣sis. If it dis∣pleaseth God to withdraw of the money which they had vowed to God, how is he angry, when chastity is vowed, and is not performed? For to such may be sayd that which S. Peter sayd of the money: Thy virginity remayning, did it no remayne vnto thee? and before thou didst vow, was it not in thy own power? For whosoeuer haue vowed such thinges and haue not payed them, let them not thinke to be condemned to cor∣porall death, but to euerlasting fyre. 2. The other place of the new Testament which si∣gnifyeth the vowing of chastity to haue bene in vse in the Apostles tyme, is that of S. Paul to Timothie, who spea∣king of widdowes who had brokē their vowes, saith thus:1. Tim. 9. v. 11. & 12. But refuse the yonger widdowes, for when they haue begun to wax wanton agaynst Christ, they will marry, hauing damnation, because they haue broken their first Fayth. Where the promise and vow of chastity is called Fayth, because as the promise made be∣twixt marryed persons, is called Fayth, so the promise to keep chastity to God, is likewise called here the first Fayth, in respect of the later promise, which breakers of vowes make to them with whome they pretend to marry, as sayth S. Augustine:In psal. 75. prope What is it to breake their first Fayth they vowed and performed not? And agayne:Lib. de sancta vir∣gin. c. 33. They breake their first Fayth, that stand not to that, which they vowed. Which is yet more playnly set downe by the Fathers in the Councell of Car∣thage where S. Augustin was present with two hundreth and fifteene Fathers. If any widdowes, how young soeuer they were left of their husbands deceased, haue vowed themselues to God, left
of their lay call habit, and vnder the testimony of the Bishop & Church haue appeared in religious weed, and afterward go any more to secu∣lar marriages, according to the Apostles sentence, they shall be damned, because they were so bold to make voyde the Fayth or promise of chasti∣ty, which they vowed to our Lord. Finally all the auncient Fa∣thers that euer wrote cōmentaryes vpon this Epistle, Greeke and Latin Fathers do expone the forsayd wordes of the A∣postle, of the vow of chastity or continence. 3. Out of the foresayd discourse I inferre, that we Catholikes haue the playne words of the Bible for making of vowes of chastity, pouerty and obedience. 1. Vow yee & render your vowes vnto God. 2. Whosoeuer voweth a vow vnto the Lord &c. He shall not breake his promise, but shall do according to all which proceedeth from his mouth. 3. When thou shalt vow a vow vnto the Lord thy God, thou shalt not be slacke to pay it, for the Lord thy God will surely require it of thee. 4. When thou hast vowed a vow vnto God deferre not to pay it &c. It is better that thou shouldest not vow, then that thou shouldest vow, and not pay it. Now I aske of the Ministers to giue as playne and manifest words agaynst the making of vowes. For we Catholikes will euer prefer the expresse word of God and the consequences of the holy Fathers drawne out of the same, to the Ministers manifest heresies. Let vs heare then the consequences of the Fathers of this second Age. The Testimonies of the holy Fathers of this second Age, prouing that Churchmen should not be marryed, but rather lead a single, and chast lyfe. The first Section. TErtullian hath written a whole booke de velandis Virgi∣nibus, where he condemneth of sacriledge those who violate sacred Virgins:In Lib. de velandis virginibus. cap. 3. O sacrilegae manus, quae dicatum Deo habitū detrahere potuerunt? Quid peius aliquis persecutor fecis∣set, si hoc à virgine electum cognouisset? Denudasti puellam à capite &c. What would Tertullian, I pray yow, haue sayd, if he had seen so many Nunnes and Nunryes sacrilegiously vio∣lated
at the casting down of the Churches in Scotland? 2. He teacheth that marriage is good, but to keepe chastity is better.:In lib. 1. ad vxor; cap. 3. Prohiberi (sayth he) nuptias nusquam omnino legi∣mus, vt bonum scilicet: Quod tamen bono isto melius sit accepimus1. Cor. 7. v. 38. ab Apostolo, permittente quidem nubere, sed abstinen iam praeferen∣te; illud propter insidias tentationum, hoc propter angstias temporum. 3. He witnesseth that in his tyme sundry did vow chastity to God from the very instant of Baptisme, which many in the primitiue Church receaued being of good Age: and o∣thers (though marryed) did keep chastity and virginity in the very bond of Marriage, by mutual consent of the par∣ties; which is, and hath bene practised in the Catholike Church by Kings and Emperours, as is well knowne to those who haue read the Ecclesiasticall history:In lib. ad vxorem cap. 6. Qu tquot enim sunt (sayth Tertullian) qui statim à lauacro carnem suam obsignant; quot enim qui consensu pari inter se matrimonij debitum tollunt? Voluntarijs spadonibus pro cupiditate caelesti saluo matrimo∣nio abstinentia toleratur, quanto magis adempto. 4. He answereth the lecherous Nicolaits, heretikes who with our Protestāts giuen to fleshly pleasures, calumniated Catholikes as for∣bidding Marriage, by reason of vowed chastity & virginity performed by many millions of Virgins. He answereth al∣so to Marcion the heretike who condemned Marriage:Lib. 1. cont. Mar∣cion. cap. 0. & lib. 5. cap. 15. Sine dubio ex damnatione coniugij institutio ista (Marcionis) con∣stabit. Videamns an iusta, non quasi destructuri felicitatem sanctitatis vt aliquiReuel. 2. v. 6. & 15. See Pame∣lius and Rhenanus in hunc lo∣cum. Nicolaitae assertores libidinis at{que} luxuriae, sed qui sancti∣tatem sine nuptiarum damnatione nouerimus, & sectemur & praefe∣ramus, non vt malo bonum, sed vt bono melius. Non enim proijci∣mus sed deponimus nuptias, nec praescribimus sed suademus, sanctita∣tem seruantes, & bonum & melius, pro viribus cuius{que} sectando. He meaneth by the word sanctitatem, virginity and chastity. Finally he affirmeth that a vow being made obligeth the maker to performe the same:In lib. de ieiunijs cap. 21. Votum cum à Deo acceptum est, legem in posterum facit per authoritatem acceptoris: exinde enim fa∣ciendum mandauit, qui factum comprobauit. 2. S. Iustinus Martyr in his Apologie for the Ca∣tholikes witnesseth great multitudes of those that vowed virginity to haue bene in his time:In Apo. ad Anton. piū Imper. Ac pleri{que} & plerae{que} sex∣aginta
& septuaginta annos nati, qui à puero in Christi se disciplinam tradiderunt, incorrupti permanent: & glorior quòd in omni hominum genere tales monstrare possim. 3. S. Pius a holy martir sayth concerning holy vir∣gins:Extat tom. 1. con∣cil. & 10. quaest. 1. can. virgi∣nes nō ve∣lentur. Vigines non velentur ante viginti quinque annos aetatis, nisi fortè necessitate periclitantis pudicitiae virginalis. 4. Athenagoras in his Apologie agaynst the gentils for the Catholiks, in lyke manner witnesseth great multi∣tudes of those who had vowed virginity to haue bene in his tyme:In Apo∣log. pro Christianis. Inuenias, sayth he, multos ex nostris & viros & saemi∣nas, qui in caelibatu consenescant, quod Deo coniunctiores se futuros sperent. Quod si perseuerantia in virginitate & in Eunuchismo magis Deo conciliat, cogitatio verò & concupiscentia abducit; certè illa quorum cogitationes fugimus, multo priùs, ne ipso perpetremus faci∣nore, cauebimus. 5. Origen affirmeth the vowing of virginity to be a worke of supererogation, that is, a worke counselled and not commanded:Lib. 7. contra Cel∣sum Caeterum, sayth he, apud Christianos non propter humanos honores, non propter mercedes pecuniarias, non propter gloriolas viget virginitatis studium, &c. And agayne:in lib. 10. in Epist. ad Roma∣nos. Ea verò quae supra debitum facimus, non facimus ex praeceptis: ver∣bi gratia, virginitas non ex debito soluitur; ne{que} enim per prae∣ceptum expeditur sed supra debitum offertur. Audi deni{que} Paulum dicentem:1. Cor. 7. v. 25. De virginibus autem praeceptum Domini non habeo. 2. He affirmeth the custome to haue bene in his time amongst Priests to vow perpetuall virginity or continency:Hom. 23. in tum. Cer∣tum est, sayth he, quia impeditur Sacrificium indesinēs ijs, qui con∣iugalibus necessitatibus seruiant, vnde videtur mihi quòd illius est so∣lius offerre Sacrificium indesinens, qui indesinenti & perpetuae se de∣uouerit castitati. 6. S. Cyprian writeth plentifully in his booke in∣tituled de disciplina & habitu virginum, exhorting the Nunnes and reliious women in his yme, and speaking thus to the prayse of virginity:In lib. de discipli∣na & habi∣tu virgin. Nunc, sayth he, nobis ad virgines sermo est, quarum quo sublimior gloria, maior & cura est. Flos est ille Ec∣clesiastici germinis, decus at{que} ornamentum gratiae spiritualis, laeta in∣deles, laudis & honoris opus integrum at{que} incorruptum, Dei imago respondens ad sanctimoniam Domini, illustrior portio gregis Christi.
2. He auoweth though marriage be good and expedient for many, yet virginity is better, and more fit for others:In tra∣ctatu de natiuitate Christi. Quia etsi bona sunt, & à Deo instituta coniugia, melior tamen est continentia & virginitas excellentior, quam non cogit necessitas aut mandatum, sed perfectionis suadet consilium. 3. He witnesseth the custome to haue bene lykewise in his tyme to make vowes of pouerty, in leauing all they had, as the Apostles did, and after the Apostles many:Sermo. de lapsiis. Vt Apostoli, sayth he, & sub Apostolis multi, & nōnulli saepesecerant, qui & rebus suis & pa∣rentibus derelictis, indiuiduis Christo nexibus adhaeserunt. To be short, I omit many other testimonies, the matter being so playne and manifest it selfe, and grounded vpon the word of God. That the Ministers haue falsified the Bible in sundry places, which do make for good workes, wherof the vowing of Chastity is one. The second Section. CAluin that prime Puritan Minister and Apostata Priest, in his articles of the Faith made in Geneua, and rehear∣sed euery sonday in the Churches of Scotlād (a Treatise ful of blasphemies, sacriledges, and abhominable opinions) speaking of good workes auoweth, first that by good wor∣kes, or merits thereof,In the 19. Sunday We do not prouoke God to loue vs, but much rather we therby do stir him to be more and more angry against vs. 2. He teacheth, that although our workes make a fayre shew to mans fight, yet they be wicked before God. 3. He auoweth, that good workes haue no part in our iustification: Therfore I say, that without any consideration of our owne workes God doth re∣ceaue vs into his fauour. 4. He teacheth that there is no wor∣thines in our good works though proceeding of the fauour & grace of God:In the 20. Sunday How is it (asketh the Minister) that they be not worthy of thēselues to be accepted, since they proceed of the holy Ghost? C. Because there is mixed some filth through the infirmity of the flesh wherby they are defiled. Where I would aske of crafty Cal∣uin
who euer playeth the Sophist, If Fayth be not mingled with some filth, seeing it proceedeth of a sinfull man borne in sinne and iniquity: if it be, then it cannot iustify vs. The Ministers to vphold this blasphemous doctrine of Caluin haue corrupted the Bible in sundry places, as in that to the Romans:Rom. 8. v. 4. That the iustification of the law might be fulfilled in vs, who walke not according to the flesh but according to the spirit. Wher the Apostle teacheth first, that the law, that is Gods com∣mandements, may be kept and fulfilled by the grace of God. 2. That such keeping of the law is iustification, and conse∣quently that our iustification consisteth in keeping of the law, which euer presupposed a true and liuely Fayth. The Ministers to insinuate the contrary to the reader of their Bi∣bles haue translated thus: That the righteousnes of the law might be fulfilled in vs. Taking away fully the word iustification, which is plainly set down in the Greeke,. playnly set down in the Syriake, decinutho donomuso, turned by Tremellius thus, quo iustificatio legis, remarke the Ministers crafty, double and vnfaythful dealing in so weghty a matter: for the same Greeke word, which in this place they turne righteousnes, in other places which do not make so playnly against them, they turne iustification, as that of S. Paul:Rom. 5. v. 16. & 18 . But the gift is of many offenses to iustification. In the which verse the Ministers haue added at least fyue seuerall wordes which are not, no n in one Greeke copy. And againe where the same Greek word is, and doth signify our iustification by good workes playnely, as that, for the sick is the iustification of Saints, they haue turned,Reuel. 19. v. 8. for the fine linnen is the righteousnes of Saints. Be∣ing ashamed of the sacriledges they committed in tearing the silks, and consecrated vestements to the seruice of God, they thrust in the Bible, the words fine linnen. Doth crafty Caluin the sophist proue his forsayd catechisticall doctrine by Scripture? No verily: Yea the holy Bible plainly shew∣eth Caluin to be a Sicophant and ignorant, auowing in playne wordes that man is iustified by good workes:Iames 2. v 21. . Abraham our Father, was he not iustifyed by workes, offering Isaac his sonne vpon the altar? Which place the Ministers haue falsified putting the word through, for by, to make the sentence ob∣scure.
And agayne:Iames 2. v 24. Yee see then how that a man is iustifyed by workes, and not by Fayth only. Where the Ministers to take a∣way the force of the sentence, do put of, for by, yet elswhere the same Greeke word they translate by,Galath. 3. v. 11.  as, The iust shall lyue by Fayth. 2. The second place which the Ministers haue cor∣rupted, is that of S. Paul:1. Cor. 15. v. 49. . Therfore as we haue borne the image of the earthly, let vs beare also the image of the heauenly. That is, as we haue borne the image of the earthly Adam in follow∣ing the pleasures of the flesh, so let vs beare the image of the heauenly, that is, of Christ in confirming our lyfe to his, to our possibility. The Marcionists ancient Heretikes in Ter∣tullians tyme fourteene hundreth yeares since, preached that our Sauiour tooke not our mortall nature vpon him, but rather some heauenly and celestiall matter, & that our bodies after the resurrection would not be of flesh & bloud but of some heauēly matter: to vphold this their heresy the sayd Marcionists corrupted this place, translating thus: As we haue borne the image of the earthly, so shall we beare the image of the heauenly. Translating in the future, and not in the Impe∣ratiue, conforme to the Greeke, of the which corruption of Marcion, Tertullian maketh mention after this forme:Lib. 5. aduersus Marcion c. 10. Et ideò iam ad exhortationem spei caelestis sicut portauimus, inquit, i∣maginem terreni, portemus & imaginem caelestis, non ad substantiam vllam referens resurrectionis, sed ad praesentis temporis disciplinam. Portemus enim inquit, non portabimus, praeceptiuè, non permissiuè &c.Lib. 5. aduers. hae∣res. cap. 9. Irenaeus readeth with vs agaynst the Protestants and Marcionists, together withIn hūc locum. S. Chrysostome. Now the Ministers haue playnly translated this place as the Marcio∣nists did, And as we haue borne the image of the earthly, so shall we beare the image of the heauenly. Referring the matter to the life to come, and signifying that no man possibly can in this life beare the image, and conforme himselfe to the life of Christ Iesus. 3. The third place falsifyed by the Ministers is that of S. Paul to the Corinthians:1. Cor. 15. v. 14. I dye dayly for your glory, bre∣thren, which I haue in Christ Iesus our Lord. Signifying that he suffereth willingly bodily afflictions and mortifications in
satisfaction for the Corinthians sinnes & iniquityes, which being abolished, their glory in heauen may increase and be augmented; which the Apostle teacheth more playnely writing to the Colossians thus:Coloss. 1. v. 24.  qua nesunt passionum Christi. Now I reioyce in my suffe∣rings for you, and fulfill the things which want of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his body, which is the Church. Where the pas∣sions & afflictions of euery member of the Church, are cal∣led the passions of Christ, by reason of the vnion which is betwixt the head and the members. Which gaue occasion to Christ to say to S. Paul, who did not persecute Christ in person:Acts 9. v. 4. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Of the like satis∣factions and afflictions suffered for the Corinthians he spea∣keth:2. Cor. 12 v. 15. And I will most gladly bestow, and wilbe bestowed for your soules. Yet more playnly:2. Tim. 2. v. 10. I suffer all things for the elect, that they also may obtayne the saluation. Which mutual sufferings one for another is grounded lykewise in those wordes of the Creed, The Communion of Saints. And is the ground of Indul∣gēces & pardons which the Church of God dayly dispen∣seth. Of the which ancient custome in distributing pardons and IndulgencesEpist. 11 21. & 22. S. Cyprian maketh mention fourteene hūdreth yeares since, withAd mar∣tyr. cap. 1. Tertullian &Lib. 7. cont. Cel∣sum. Origen. Yea S. Paul vseth the very word Pardon, saying: (x) Whome you haue pardoned any thing, I also: for my selfe also that which I par∣doned any thing, for you in the person of Christ▪ which place though impiously corrupted by the Ministers, the holy Fathers S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostome, S. Thomas, S. Anselme,2. Cor. 2. v. 10. Pri∣masius,Tom. 1. pag. 592. Baronius, and sundry others with the Councel of Nice can. 11. & 12. do vse, to proue the antiquity of Par∣dons and Indulgences. But how haue the Protestants tran∣slated the former place of S. Paul? Thus they: By our reioycing, which I haue in Christ Iesus our Lord, I dye dayly. Put∣ting our reioycing, for your glory,. directly agaynst the Greek and Syriake word Beschube harechun, that is, your glory: As S. Ambrose, S. Hierome and S. Augustin do read, and therby condemne the Ministers of sacriledge and perfidy.
The 22. Article. That S. Peter his Primacy in the Catholike Church was acknowledged in this second Age vniuer∣sally. CHAP XI. HAuing before in the first age demonstra∣ted S. Peters superiority and supremacy aboue the rest of the Apostles and Chri∣stians: it resteth to shew how this same power and supremacy was communi∣cated to S. Peters successours in the Ro∣man sea, which I proue, first by the ex∣presse words of Christ to Peter:Matth. 16. v. 18. Thou art Peter and vpon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of hel shall not preuayle a∣gaynst it. Christ sayth, my Church, generally, not a part or portion of his Church, not that part only, which flouri∣shed in Peters dayes, but all his whole Church which euer was since Christ, or euer shalbe to the end of the world. For this priuiledge granted by Christ to Peter, could not be grā∣ted only to Peter in his owne person, he being a mortall man. Therfore it must needes be graunted to others in∣steed of Peter,Iohn. 22. that is, to Peters successours. 2. When Christ sayd to Peter, Feed my sheepe; Did he not command him to feed all his sheep, seeing he speaketh generally, without any restriction? Did he not lay, and charge vpon Peter which he should neuer forgo? And seeing the office of a Pastour is a perpetuall office during as long as there be any sheep to feed, which because Peter in his own person could not perform these many hundreth yeares past, there must needs be some other Pastour to execute the same in Peters roome, in respect of whome S. Peter may be sayd still to
accomplish his duty, and feed the sheepe committed to his charge, sayth S. Leo speaking of Peter:Leo ser∣mon. 2. In whome the care of all Pastours, with the custody of the sheep committed vnto him still perseuereth, and whose worthy dignity in his vnworthy successours fayleth not. Wherby it is euident that the pastorall priuiledge granted to S. Peter was not restrayned to him, but exten∣ded to others, not giuen him as a priuate, but as a publike person, and consequently to continue with them that suc∣ceed. Euen as a King, being a publike person, still conti∣nueth, and the authority giuen to him still remayneth with his successours. For the which cause it is sayd in the law, The King neuer dyeth. The same is also seene in prerogatiues of honour, in priuiledges of power imparted to Kings, cit∣tyes or publike Magistrates, which neuer fayle: as the wor∣thy title of Protectour of the Fayth, was giuen to King Iames the fourth King of Scotland, by Pope Iulius, and descen∣ded to King Iames the fifth, and now presently in our most dreadfull soueraygne King Iames the sixt. So was the pri∣macy communicated to S. Peter, not personall, but pu∣blike; not proper to him, but common to  successours, in whomIn Ep. ad Eutych. Blessed Peter liueth and gouerneth, in h own proper seat, deliuereth the verity of Fayth to them that seeke it, sayth Chryso∣logus. 2. The reasons which moued our Blessed Sauiour to make some head of the Church, were all tending to the benefite of the same Chhurch, as to preuent schismes and di∣uisions, to appease dissentions, and heresies, to set all the Church in peace, to indow her with a most perfect forme of gouernement, which is Monarchicall, as the Protestant Melanchton witnesseth saying:In Cō. Epistolar. Theolog. epist. 471 The Bishop of Rome is Presi∣dēt ouer all Bishops, & this Canonicall policy no wiseman doth or ought to disallow &c. The same sayth Cartwright:In his second Re∣ply part. This poynt of keeping peace in the Church is one of those, which requireth as well a Pope ouer all Archbishops, as one Archbishop ouer all Bishops in a re∣alme. By experience we see many stryfes and contentions in matters of Religion dayly fall out amongst the Christians, who shall appease them? The Bishops. What if there aryse contentions amongst the Bishops themselues? The Primats
and Patriarches. What if variance be amongst these also, to whome shall we then repayre? To a generall Councell. But who shall summon and order this Assembly, who shall cōpose the dissentions in the Councell, vnlesse one be ap∣poynted by the prouidence of God, whose decree is inuio∣lable, & whose infallible censure ought to be obeyed? Cō∣forme to that of the Bible:Iohn. 10 v 16. There shalbe made one fold, & one Pastour. 3. The Synagogue of the Iewes long triumphed in the lyneall succession of the high Priest, whose prima∣cy first giuen to Aaron, did continue in Aaron his succes∣sours, as in Eleazarus, in Phinees, and in others after him vnto the end and abrogation of the Mosaicall law: And is it not more then reason that the Church of Christ should haue a lyke, if not greater priuiledge, established in better promises, planted by Christ, and not by Moyses, hauing greater necessity then euer the Sinagogue of the Iewes, see∣ing it was to imbrace all nations and Kingdomes (amōgst the which commonly there is no great vnion?) Which do∣ctrine is cleerly confirmed by the testimonyes of the holy Fathers; of S. Chrysostome, who sayth:Lib. 2. de sacerd. Why did our Lord shed his bloud? Truly to redeeme those sheep, the care of which he committed both to Peter, and also to his successours. Of S. Hierom writing to Damasius the Pope of Rome:Epist. ad Damaf. With the suc∣cessor of the fisherman, and with the disciple of the Crosse I speake: I following none chiefe but Christ, hold the fellowship of Communion with your Holynesse, that is, with Peters chayre. Vpon that rocke I know the Church to be builded. Whosoeuer shall eat the Paschall Lambe out of that house, is a prophane person. Of S. Augustin who adresseth these words to our Puritanes:In psal cont. part. Donat. de vtilitate cred. c. 17. Number the Priests euen from Peters seat and see who succeeded one another in that row of Fathers; that is the rocke which the proud gates of hell do not ouercom. And agayne:Lib. 1 cont. 2. ep. pelag. cap. 1 The principality of the Apostolicall chayre, alwaies flourished in the Roman Church. Finally he sayth:Ibidem. The Bishops of that sea haue the preheminence of higher roome in the Pastorall Watchtower, which is common to all Bishops. 4. Besides these authorityes, the continuall practise and consent of al nations approue the supremacy in spiritu∣all
matters of the Pope of Rome, and therfore to him ap∣peales haue bene made frō al parts of the world. In like mā∣ner to the same as to the Oracle of truth, the Christiās were wont to direct the summe of their beliefe, their bookes and writings; yea famous Councells, their Canons and decrees. So Iustinian the Emperour sent the profession of his Fayth to Agapetus the Pope:Cont. 2. epist. Pe∣lag. lib. 1. cap. 1. S. Augustin sent his workes to be examined and amended to Pope Boniface:In ex∣plicat. sym∣bol ad Da∣masum. S. Hie∣rome, sent his workes to Pope Damasus with this peti∣tion, If any thing be heere vnaduisedly set forth, we intreat that it may be amended by thee, who holdest the Fayth and seat of Peter. The Councell of Chalcedon sent their Canons and de∣crees to Pope Leo. 5. To be short, the Popes of Rome haue alwayes had their legats, as presidents in all Oecumenicall Councells, as Hosius in the first Councell of Nice, S. Cyryll in the Councell of Ephesus. The same I may say of sundry others. In lyke manner the Bishops of France, of Spaine, of Grece, of Germany, of Scotland, England and Ireland receaued their Archiepiscopall Palls from the Popes of Rome. Kings and Emperours haue receaued sundry fauours and titles of honour, as the honorable style of most Christian in France, Catholyke in Spayne, Protector of the Fayth in the Kings of Scotland, Defender of the Fayth in the Kings of England. Moreouer the Popes of Rome did prescribe the fashion of crowning of sūdry Kings, which is to this day obserued: for example the King of France is consecrated and annointed by the Arch-bishop of Rhemes, acccording to the ordinance of Hormisda Pope. The King of England by the Arch-bish∣op of Canterbury, by the ordinance of Pope Hadrian the third. The King of Scotland by the Arch-bisshop of S. An∣drewes by the prescripion of Pope Vrban the second. Yea long before PopeApud Henricum Canifium tom. 5. an∣tiq. lectio∣num in vi∣ta S. Colū∣bae. Hadrian, S. Columba or Columbanus a holy mā in the Ile of Iona, twelue hundreth yeares since was cō∣manded by the Angell of God to annoynt and consecrate holy Aidanus King of Scotland, in the which miraculous consecration the Kings of Scotland are no wayes inferior to the Kings of France. The King of Germany is consecrated
by the Arch-bishop of Mentz. The King of Bohemia by the Arch-bishop of Praga, which sheweth manifestly the su∣preme power, in spirituall maters, of the Roman Church. 6. But the Protestants do say that some Kings and Princes hath resisted and deposed the Pope. I answere, that inferiours may resist and persecute their superiours in spiri∣tuall matters, but wrongfully. True it is, that Emperours might call sometymes generall Councells, as Aduocats and helpers of the Church, by reason of their temporall power and authority, not as hauing spirituall authority to do the same. True it is lykewise that Gregory the great writing a∣gainst Iohn the proud Patriarch of Constantinople (who presumptuously called himself Vniuersall Bishop) sayth, that the name of Vniuersall Bishop is a prophane, proud and sacrilegious title: & so it is indeed, as that Patriarch v∣surped it, to wit, to be such an absolute and vniuersall Pa∣triarch and Bishop, as to derogate from all others their Pa∣triarchall dignity, desirous that no other should be called Bishop, but he himselfe, which was in effect a prophane nouelty; but the Pope vseth not thus the name of Vniuersal. Moreouer it is reason that the Pope of Rome should rather inherite (as S. Peters successour) that prerogatiue, then the Bishop of Antioch where Peter first did sit, or the Bish∣op of Ierusalem where our Sauiour dyed, wherof S. Paul giueth this reason:Heb. 7. v. 12. If the Priesthood be changed, then of ne∣cessity must there be a change of the law, yea and of the chiefe pla∣ce, from whence the law proceedeth. And Christ foretold and sayd to the Iewes:Math. 21. v. 43. The Kingdome of God shall be taken from you, and giuen to a nation yielding the fruits thereof. And S. Paul:Act. 13. v. 46. To you it behoueth vs first the speake the word of God, but because yow repel it, and iudge your selus vnworthy of eternall lyfe, be∣hold we turne to the Gentills. But wherfore at Rome?Serm. 2. de Natiuit. Apost. Pet. & Pau. To the end (sayth Leo) that the head Citty of superstition might be made the chiefe seat of Religion. In a word, because so it pleaseth God, whose prouidence hath bene so great towards the Romane Seat in speciall, that notwithstanding many cruel Ty∣rants haue bent their full power to disturbe the Popes from Rome, as Clemens Pope was disturbed by Traiane, Cor∣nelius
by Decius, Liberius by Constantius. Yea notwith∣standing three & thirty Popes, who haue bene put to the sword one after another; notwithstāding I say their remo∣uing for a tyme to Viterbo, Auinion, Rauena; yet the Po∣pes haue still returned and placed their seat at Rome. All o∣ther Patriarchall seates haue bene rent in peeces; but the seat of Rome, no death, no banishment, no Tyranny of men, nor malice of Satan could euer ouercome. No the diui∣sion amongst themselues, the manifold difficultyes & dan∣gers in their elections, not the great vices which haue bene noted in some of their persons. Which is an euident demō∣stration of Gods prouidence in preseruing the Apostolike seat of his Vicar Generall in that holy place, & not at An∣tioch, nor at Ierusalem, where the succession of the Apost∣les hath bene interrupted by Schisme, infected by heresies, and ouerthrowen by Turkes and Infidels. 7. To conclude, it is a most certayne Tradition that the Pope succeedeth to Peter, and that Peter translated his chayre to the citty of Rome, and there continued Bishop the space of twenty fiue yeares, there ended his lyfe with a glorious martyrdom: and whosoeuer denyeth this, gain∣sayth all histories, chronicles, and records of holy Fathers, giuing way to deny in lyke manner effrontedly the succes∣sion of the Kings of Spayne, of England, France, Scotland, which we know only by historyes. Finally we Catholikes haue the expresse words of the Bible for vs concerning S. Peters Primacy. Thou art Peter and vpon this rock I will build my Church. 2. The Gates of hell shall not ouercome the Church. 3. Feed my sheepe. 4. Other sheepe I haue also which are not of this fold: them also must I bring, and they shall heare my voyce, and there shalbe one fold and one Pastour. I aske of the Ministers as playne and ex∣presse wordes of the Bible which make agaynst S. Peters supremacy or speciall authority; or otherwise I aske of them expresse Scripture for these articles of their Religion: S. Peter is not head of the Church. 2. S. Peter was neuer in Rome. 3. The Popes do not succeed to S. Peter. I will admit nothing but the expresse word of God. I will giue place to nothinge except the expresse wordes of the Bible &c. If the Protestants aske of
vs Catholikes for euery article of our Religion the expresse words of the Bible, I answere 1. That there is no place in the Bible forbidding vs to belieue things which are not cō∣teined in the expresse word therof. 2. I answere that the Mi∣nisters haue obliged thēseluesLib. 1. cont. Ma∣xim. Ari∣an. Epist. and not we Catholiks be∣fore God and the world, by solemne oath set downe in the confession of their Faith, in the acts of Parlament, to belieue nothing, but that which is conteyned in the expresse and playne word of God, and consequently are obliged to keep this their oath. Remarke their words speaking of Generall Councels.In the Acts of parlament holden the 17. of Aug. 1568. So far then as the Councell proueth the determina∣tion and commandement that it giues, by the playne word of God, so soone do we reuerence and imbrace the same. 3. I answere with S. Augustin, that:Augu. cont. Cres∣con. lib. 10. cap. 33. The verity of the Scriptures is holden of vs, when we do that, which pleaseth the vniuersall Church, which the au∣thority of the same Scripture commendeth vnto vs. And by reason that we may be deceaued by diuers crafty, and subtile Pro∣testants expositions of the Bible, we aduisedly do follow the counsel of that same holy Father, who sayth:Ibidem. Be∣cause the holy Scriptures cannot deceaue, whosoeuer feareth to be de∣ceaued in the obscurity of any question, let him therof aske counsell as that Church which the holy Scripture without any ambiguity pointeth vnto. The which Church, yea the light of Nature, doth o∣blige vs to preferre the consequences of the holy Fathers of this second Age, to sophisticall consequences and supersti∣tious opinions, and noueltyes of the Ministers of Scotland. 8. But before I set downe in particular the conse∣quences of the holy Fathers, I will briefly aduertise the vn∣passionat Reader, that notwithstanding this spiritual autho∣rity which is in Peters successours, they cannot therfore do things according to their fansie, agaynst Princes and Kings, by reason that their authority was giuen,2. Cor. 13. v. 10. In aedificatio∣nem, & nn in destructionem, to edification and not to destruction. For since God is he,Prou. 8. v. 15. By whome Kings do raygne: and sinceRom. 1. v. 1. All power is from God; it followeth that the temporall power granted by God to Kings is in them absolute and indepen∣dant, and no man whosoeuer can haue power at his plea∣sure to crosse and ouerthrow the same. And this is that ho∣ly
doctrine which our holy mother the Catholike Church doth teach, saying to euery one of vs in particular:Prou. 24. v. 21. My sonne feare the Lord, and the King, and meedle not with them that be seditious. And as God himselfe commanded the Israelites du∣ring their captiuity in Babylon, to pray for the citty where they were captiues, saying:Ierem. 29. v. 7. Seeke you the prosperity of that citty, whither I haue caused you to be carried away captiue, and pray to the Lord for it, for in the peace therof you shall haue peace. In lyke manner God commanded them,Baruch. 1. v. 11. & 12. to pray for the lyfe of King Nabuchodonosor, though an infidel, and for the lyfe of Baltazar his sonne, that their dayes might be on earth as the dayes of heauen &c. Much more doth God command vs Ca∣tholikes (though greatly persecuted) to continue our hum∣ble prayers for our afflicted countreys of Scotlād, Englād, and Ireland, and specially for our Christian soueraygne & and King, for our Princely and hopefull Baltazar, for all the Royall issue, for the Councell of Scotland and Englād, that lykewise their dayes may be on earth lyke the dayes of heauen, and that we may long do them seruice and find fauour in their fight. Which God of his infinite goodnesse grant vnto vs. A∣men. 9. As concerning the disobedience of Puritans and Protestants to their Kings, Princes and Superiours, besides the example of the late rebellion of the Hugenots in Frāce, for the which their owne brethren do confesse, that it is as difficile to find a loyal subiect of the Hugenots & Puritans Religion, as it is to find a white Moore, experience doth teach vs, that wher∣euer this new and reformed Religion of the Puritanes and Protestants hath entred and taken hold, it hath bene by manifest rebellion and sedition, as in Holland, Germany, Scotland, England, France, and Sueden. To the proofe wherof I will set down the very words of the Protestant wryters. Sleydan a Protestant wryter in Germany sayth of the Emperour thus:Sleydan in the 18. booke of his history & lib. 8. ant med. Considering that Caesar doth intend de∣struction of Religion, he giueth occasion wherby we may resist him with good conscience: for in this case it is lawfull to resist &c. And Zuin∣glius a prime Puritane:Tom. 1. in explan. artic. 42. fol. 84. When Princes (sayth he) do any thing agaynst the true Religion, they may be deposed. Possunt hand du∣biè
deponi. To proceed next with Caluin the Prime Puritan Minister of France, of whome and of his fellow Ministers, M. Bancroft a Protestant Arch-bishop of Canterbury sayth thus:In his Suruey of the preten∣ded holy dis∣cipline pag. 12. That the doctrine of Caluin and certayne other Ministers residing at Geneua, teacheth that it is lawfull for subiects to reforme Religion when Princes will not, yea rather then it fayle, euen by force of armes. Of the which Ministers, Knox our Country Mini∣ster was one, as witnesseth Beza writing to him thus:Beza in epist Theol. epist. 74. Ioanni Knoxo, Euangelij Dei apud Scotos instauratori, Fratri & Symmistae obseruando. Lykewise Caluin writyng to a prime English seditious Minister called Goodman (in effect a bad man for England) called him:Caluin epist. 306. Christopho∣ro Good∣mano. An excellent and reuerend brother, and most faythfull adiutor to Knox. Which seditious doctrine of Knox is partly touched in Holinsheads great Chronicle in the history of Scotland the last edition to my knowledge: and by M Bancroft in his booke intituled, Dangerous positions &c. who in lyke manner do report that abhominable doctrine of Buchanan, who in his booke De iure regni apud Scotos, writeth:Bucha∣nan de iure regni apud Scotos. See M. Doue in his defēce of the Churches gouerne∣ment. That it were good that re∣wards were appoynted by the people for such as should kill Tyrants (O abhominable doctrine of a Scots Puritan!) as commmonly there is for those that haue killed wolues. And, That the people may araygne their Princes and Kings. And in speciall Goodman an English Prime Minister in a book of his intituled Obedience, as witnesseth M. Bancroft, and M. Sutcliffe before cited, speaking of Queene Marie of England, sayth,In his booke inti∣tuled Obe∣dience pag. 99. & 103. That it is lawfull to kill wicked Kings and Tyrants, and that both by Gods law and mans law Queene Marie ought to be put to death as being a Tirāt, a monster, and a cruel beast. And that:In his Obedience pag. 100. By the word of God in such a defection, a priuate man hauing some speciall inward motion may kill a Tyrant. I intreat the vnpassion at Reader to peruse Holinsheads great Chronicle, volume 3. pag. 1104. and Stow his Annales printed 1592. pag. 1058. both Prote∣stant writers, and he shall see manifestly the seditious con∣spiracy of Protestants agaynst their soueraygne. Wel inough is knowen to the world that seditions and diuelish doctrine of the Waldenses, Wicklefistes and Hussits (whom our Pro∣testants do call their forfathers) concerning abhominable se∣dition
agaynst their naturall princes in Morauia: of Luther Zuinglius and Carolostadius in Germany: of Caluin and Beza in France: of Knox, Buchanan, and of the Earle of Gaury in Scotland: of Goodman, Gibby, Whittingham in England, & of others of the lyke sort in Sueden, Denmarke, Poland, Zeland, and Holland. The fruits and effects of whose re∣bellion agaynst their naturall Princes vnder the pretext of reformation of Religion, are two much apparent in these our dayes. 10. To what end should I produce history-writers since the very grounds of the Puritans Religion do lead the high way to all sort of sedition. Is not this one of the chie∣fest principles of their Religion preached publickly at the baptizing of euery child in Scotlād:In the order of Baptisme. There is no other but he (Christ) in heauen, nor earth that hath iust authority and power to make lawes, to bind the consciences of men? To what end then are oathes of fidelity made to Princes, if there be no obligation in conscience to keep them? O abhominable doctrine! O seditious & detestable Religiō! The second principle is set down in the Ministers confession of Fayth thus:In the Confession of Fayth of the Mini∣sters. Besides this Ecclesiasticall discipline, I acknowledge to belong to this Church a politicall magistrate who ministreth to euery mā iustice, defending the good and punishing the euill, to whome we must render honour and obedience in all things which are not contrary to the word of God: That is, contrary to the Ministers fansies and superstitious doctrine, and to the Ministers new fangled Religion: which former words are confirmed by an act of Parlament, thus:In the Acts of Par¦lamēt 360. the 17. of August. artic. 4. We confesse and acknowledge not to disobey or resist any that God hath placed in authority, whiles they passe not ouer the bounds of their office. The Hugenots of France (whose pryde God hath daunted now lately) do testify the same in expresse words:Confess. de foy art. 40. Nous tenons (say they) qu'il faut obeir aux Loix des Roys, payer tribute, Imposts & autres debuoirs, & porter le ioug de subiection d'vne boune & franche volonté, moyennant (remarke these words) que l'Empire du Soueraigne demeure en son entiere &c. 3. The Mini∣sters do teach, that it is impossible to keep Gods comman∣dements, whereof these be two of the chiefest:2. Pet. 2. v. 17. Feare God, Honour the King. Agayne,1. Pet. . v. 13. Submit your selues to all manner
of ordinance of man, for the Lords sake &c. And such others set down in the expresse word of God. But if it be impossible to keepe those commandements, how can the Puritanes be faythfull and obedient to their Kings and Princes? 4. The Ministers do excommunicat Kings and Princes and the Po∣liticall Magistratē, & consequently do teach that they haue power aboue them: remarke their words:In the manner of giuing the Lords Sup∣per. Therefore in the name and authority of the eternall God, and of his sonne Iesus-Christ, I excommunicate from this table, all blasphemers of God, all Idolaters, all Murtherers, all Adulterers, and all that be in malice & enuy, all disobedient persons to Father and Mother, Princes or Ma∣gistrates, Pastors or Preachers, all theeues and deceauers of their neighbour &c. charging them as they will answere in the presence of him who is the righteous Iudge, that they presume not to prophane this most holy table. Is it not more dangerous for a King or prince to be subiect to the excommunicatiō of euery light-headed Minister of his owne kingdome, then to the excommuni∣cation of a stranger and forayner? What place of the Bible giueth Ministers power to excommunicate? Their com∣mission is none. Their authority is null. Happy is he who is excommunicat by the instruments of the Diuell and An∣tichrist; happy is he who is at the diuels horne; happy is he who is put out of the Synagogue of the wicked. That man is blest, that hath not bene To such men tyed his eare, Nor led his lyfe, as Ministers teach, Nor sit in Puritans chayre. 5. Can there be a more dangerous, yea diuelish opinion a∣gaynst Kings and Princes then to belieue constantly, that whatsoeuer wicked rebellion is stirred vp agaynst a King is by the will of God? Remarke their own words:In the order of Baptisme in the ex∣plication of the first ar∣ticle. We do cōfesse that God is Creator of heauen & earth, that is to say that heauē & earth & the contents therof are so in his hand, that there is nothing done without his knowledge, neyther yet agaynst his will. So that no rebelliō, no diuelish enterprise of a Minister against his King shalbe agaynst the will of God, but rather conforme to his wil, for that which is not against the wil of God, must needs be cōforme to his will. 6. How can the Hugenots of Frāce
be faythful to their King, & the Puritans to their Princes & Superiours in Germany, since they belieue that all Kings and Princes, that are of a diuers Religion from them, are lymmes of the Diuell and of Antichrist? Which thing they belieue as a point of Religion set down in their confession of fayth in these wordes:In the confession of Faith re∣ceaued and approued by the Church of Scotland. The defence of Christs Church ap∣perteineth to the Christian Magistrat agaynst all Idolaters and here∣tikes, as Papists, Anabaptists, with such lyke lymmes of Antichrist &c. 7. It is a ground of the Puritanes Religion, whatsoe∣uer rebellious course any seditious-dealing-wicked persons (yea the Diuells) take in hand, that it is the will of God, who compelleth them (say they) therunto. And what I pray you is more excellēt then to do the wil of God: which we aske dayly to be done, saying: Thy will be done in earth as it is in heauen. Remarke the Ministers own wordes:In the articles of Fayth the 4. Sunday. What sayest thou, (the Minister asketh) touching the Diuells and wicked persons, be they also subiect to him? (The child answeres thus) Al∣beyt that God doth not guyde thē with his holy spirit, yet he doth bridle them in such sort, that they be not able to stirre or mooue without his permission or appoyntment. Yea and moreouer (remarke the words) he doth compell them to execute his will, although it be agaynst their intent and purpose. Euery seditious enterprise then, shall it be the will of God? So it is indeed in the Puritanes Reli∣gion, who do conclude thus: The knowledge hereof doth wō∣derfully comfort vs; for we might think our selues in a miserable case, if the Diuells and the wicked had power to do any thing contrary to the will of God. 11. Behold O Scotland my deare Countrey, to what impious, seditious, and Idolatrous doctrine the Ministers haue induced thee? Why didst thou leaue that Religion, wherin fourscore wyfe, valiant, and godly Kings of thy owne Nation happily gouerned and commanded? Why didst thou forsak that Religiō wherby thou wast honored abroad by the most famous Kings & Princes of Christen∣dome? wherby thou was blessed by God at home with peace, wealth and grace? Wheron doest thou now rely and ground thy Religion? Not vpon the Bible, the expresse word of God, the playne text of Scripture, as I haue before
proued: but vpon the new fangled expositions, superstiti∣ous sophismes and explications of the Ministers, which be∣ing in themselues nothing els but inuentions of men; of men, I say, without authority & commission, are in effect against all holy Fathers, Councels, Antiquity, and com∣mon Consent of all nations of the world, and of all ages before the comming of Luther and Caluin. Is it not in∣tollerable pryde, for thee to preferre the new fangled ex∣positions of thy Ministers (whose lyfe and conuersation thou seest to be bad, whose commission and authority thou knowest to be none) to the expositions of all the holy and learned, who haue bene these sixtene hundreth yeares?Ierem. 11. v. 16 & 5. For these things, O Lord, I weep; myne eye, euen myne eye casteth out water, because thy enemyes do prosper: and because (O Scot∣land) thou doest follow the stinking puddle, and filthy doctrine of the Protestant, and Puritan-Ministers, thy sworne enemies. The Testimonyes of the holy Fathers of this Age concerning the prima∣cy of S. Peter, and his Successours in the Catholike Church. The first Section. S. Irenaeus Bishop of Lyons in France auoweth first, S. Peter & Paul to haue preached the Ghospell at Rome:Iren. l. aduers. hae∣res. cap. 1. Petrum & Paulum Roma euangelizasse & fundasse Ecclesiam. 2. Writing against the Heretiks called Gnostici, proueth the Primacy, infallibility, & perpetuall succession of the Ro∣man Church, refuting those heretiks therby after this forme:Lib. 3. Sed quoniam valde longumest, in hoc tali volumine omnium Ec∣clesiarum enumerare successiones, maximae & antiquissimae & omni∣bus cognitae à gloriosissimis Apostolis Petro & Paulo Romae fundatae & constitutae Ecclesiae, cam quam habet ab Apostolis traditionem, & an∣nunciatam hominibus fidem, per successiones Episcoporum peruenien∣tem vs{que} ad nos, iudicantes, confundimus omnes eos, qui quoque modo vel per sui placentiam malam, vel vanam gloriam, vel per cacitatem & malam sententiam, praeterquam opertet, colligunt. Ad hanc enim Ecclesiam, hoc est cos qui sunt vndi{que} fideles, in qua semper ab his, qui
sunt vndi{que}, conseruata est ea quae est ab Apostolis Traditio. Fun∣dantes igitur & instruentes beati Apostoli Ecclesiam, Lino Episcopa∣tū administrandae Ecclesia tradiderunt.1. Tim. 4. v. 21. Huius Lini Paulus in ijs quae sunt ad Timotheum Epistolis meminit. Succedit autem ei Anacleus, post eum tertio loco ab Apostolis Episcopatum sortitur Clemens, qui & vidit ipsos Apostolos, & contulit cum ijs, cùm adhuc insonantem praedicationem Apostolorum & traditionem anteoculos haberet. Non solus enim, adhuc multi supererant tunc ab Apostolis docti. Sub hoc igitur Clemente dissensione nō modica inter eos qui Corinthi essent fra∣tres facta, scripsit qua est Romae Ecclesiâ potentissimas literas Corin∣thijs, ad pacem eos congregans, & reparans fidem eorum, & annunci∣ans quam in recenti ab Apostolis receperunt traditionem. 2. S. Victor Pope and Martyr; to whome King Donald of Scotland sent that learned and worthy Abbot Paschasius the yeare of Christ 100. to receaue of his Holynes Doctors to plant publickly the Catholike and Romane religion in Scotland, to the which end two famous & le∣arned were sent, Marcus and Dionisius, who conuerted King Donald, and the rest of the Nobility the yeare of Christ 203. as witnessethIn Vi∣ctore in Chronolo∣gia. Genebrardus,Ad an∣num 429. Baronius,Lib. . Boetius,Passim. Lesleus.In Chro¦nologia sae¦culo tertio. Gualterius, and sundry others: This pope I say in a certayneExtat tom. 1. cōc. letter of his to Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria witnesseth playnly, and plentifully S. Peters primacy, and supremacy aboue the rest of the Churches. 3. S. Sixtus Martyr in a decree of his, witnesseth the same, and sayth:Extat tom. 1. con∣cil. Si quis verò vestrum pulsatus fuerit in aliqua aduersitate, licenter hanc sanctam & Apostolicam appellet Sedem, & ad eam, quasi ad caput, suffugium habeat, ne innocens damnetur, aut Ecclesia sua detrimentum patiatur. 4. S. Pius Martyr in a certayne epistle of his di∣rected to the Catholiks, affirmeth that Christ Iesus gaue Primacy to S. Peter and his successours:Epist. sua ad vni∣uersos. ex∣tat tom. 1. concil. qui & hanc sanctā sedem Apostolicam (sayth he, speaking of Rome) omnium Eccle∣siarum caput esse pracepit, ipso dicente Principi Apostolorum, Tu es Petrus, & super hanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam &c. & tibi dabo claues regni caelorum. 5. S. Anacletus plentifully testifieth the primacy of the Roman Church to haue bene giuen to S. Peter, and
to haue continued in Linus, Cletus, Clemens,Epist. 3. nostro (sayth he) sancto praedecessore & Martyre. 2. He auoweth that this primacy was giuen by Christ himselfe to the Roman Church:Ibidem. Haec verò (sayth he) sacro sancta Romana & Aposto∣lica Ecclesiae, non ab Apostolis sed ab ipse Domino Saluatore nostro pri∣matum obtinuit, & eminentiam potestatis super vniuersas Ecclesias, ac totum Christiani populigregem assecuta est, sic, vt ipse Beato Petro Apostolo dixit: Tu es Petrus, & super hanc petram aedificabo Eccle∣siam meam. 6. Tertullian in his booke de Monogamia, auoweth the Church to haue bene builded vpon S. Peter, and as it were maryed with him as the Head therof, wherof the one and only Mariage of S. Peter (amongst the rest of the A∣postles) was a figure.Lib. de Monog. cap. 8. Petrum (sayth he) solum inuenio maritum, per socrum: Monoganum praesumo, per Ecclesiam, quae su∣per illum aedificata, omnem gradum ordinis suide Monogamis erat col∣locatura. Ceteros cùm maritos non inuenio, aut spadones intelligamus necesse est, aut continentes. 2. He also doth testifie Primacy to haue bene giuen to Peters successours by the Catholike Church, by whome then the Pope was tearmedLib. de pudicitia cap. 1.13. & 21. Pontifex maximus; Episcopus Episcoporum, bonus Pastor, Benedictus, Papa A∣postolicus. 3 He prayseth the Church of Rome, by reason that S. Peter & Paul did preach & shed their bloud there:Lib. de praescrip. cap. 36. Felix Ecclesia, cui totam doctrinam Apostolicam suo sanguine pro∣fuderunt. 4. He affirmeth Marcion and Valentin to be Here∣tiks, for as much as they being first Romā Catholiks, were thrust out of the Roman church by reason of their heresies.Lib. de praescrip c. 30. Marcionem (sayth he) & Valentinum Catholicam primò doctri∣nam credidisse apud Ecclesiam Romanensem, donec sub Episcopatu E∣leutherij benedicti, ob inquietam semper eorum curiositatem, quae fratres quo{que} vttiabant, semel & iterum eiecti. 7. Origen giueth an infallible Rule wherby we may discerne the true doctrine and Religion from the false, to wit, that to be only true which hath the perpetuall succes∣sion of Bishops and Pastors. His words be:In proae∣mio lib de principijs. Cùm multi sint qui se putent sentire quae Christi sunt, & nonnulli eorum diuersa à prioribus sentiant, seruetur verò Ecclesiastica praedicatio per successio∣nis ordinem ab Apostolis tradita, & vs{que} ad praesens in Ecclesiis perma∣nens;
illa sola credenda est veritas, qua in nullo discordat ab Ecclesi∣astica traditione. 2. He teacheth vs, that Peter was the A∣postle, vpon whome the Church was builded.Lib. 5. in Euang. Ioannis. Petrus (sayth he) super quem aedificata est Christi Ecclesia contra quam in∣ferorum portae non praeualebunt. 3. He witnesseth that when pope Zepherinus gouerned the Romā Church as head therof he himselfe went to Rome, as to the head, and most an∣cient Church:Apud Euseb. lib. 6. hist. cap. 12. Romanam Ecclesiam gubernantis Zephyrini tē∣poribus Romam iter suscepisse, quòd ecclesiam Romanam antiquissimā videre exoptaret. 8. S. Cyprian first most learnedly & wysely teacheth vs, that heresies, schismes, and diuersity of Religion do fall out, by reason that one head of the Church is not ac∣knowledged:Epist. 55. ad Cor∣nelium Pa∣pam. Ne{que} enim aliunde haereses obortae sunt, aut nata sunt schismata, quàm inde quòd sacerdoti Dei non obtemperatur; nec vnus in Ecclesia ad tempus Sacerdos, & ad tempus Iudex vice Christi cogitatur: cuisi secundum magisteria diuina ob temperaret fraternitas vniuersa, nemo aduersum sacerdotum collegium quicquam moueret; nemo sibi placens ac tumens seorsum foras haeresim nouam conderet. 2. He teacheth, that God hath a particular care of the Priests, Bishops, and specially of the head of the Church, not suffe∣ring him to erre, when he doth propone to all the Catho∣liks things to be belieued, as matters of faith. For if God hath care of little things, much more will he haue care of the gouernement of his Church:Ibidem. Cum Dominus (sayth he) in Euangelio suo dicat;Matth. 10. v. 29. Nonne duo passeres asse vaeneunt, & neuter eorum cadit in terram sine patris voluntate? Cùm illa nec minima fieri fine voluntate dei dicat, existimat aliquis summa & magna, aut non sciente, aut non permittente Deo, in Ecclesia fieri, & sacerdotes, id est, dispensatores eius, non de eius sententia ordinari. 3. He sayth that primacy of the Church was giuen to S. Peter:Lib. de vnitate Ec∣clesiae. Primatus Petro datur, vt vna Christi Ecclesia, & cathedra vna monstretur. 4. He calleth the Roman Church,Epest. 45. ad Corn. Matricem & radicem Ec∣clesiae Catholicae. I conclude then, that this holy Father with al those of this second age belieued constantly this poynt & matter of religion.
That the Ministers haue falsified diuers places of the Bible, concer∣ning the Blessed Trinity, and the Person of Christ, who gaue infallible power to S. Peter aboue the rest of the Apostles, and consequently gaue infallible power to the Church of God. The second Section. IT were tedious to me, and to the Reader, to set down at length the infinite multitude of Blasphemyes & Ido∣latrous opiniōs which Caluin the Sophist teacheth against the Blessed Trinity, against the Person of Christ in his In∣stitutions, wherof the first word is in french Tout, all, and the last, Iniquitè, iniquity; signifying therby to vs, that all which is cōteyned in those foure books of his Institutions, is nothing els, but playne and manifest iniquity, Idolatry & blas∣phemy. Conforme to Caluin his Institutions, the Confession of faith of the Puritanes of Scotland, was framed in Geneua, brought to Scotland by Knox the Apostata Fryar, and after sworne and subscrybed at seuerall Parlaments. In the which confession it is easie to remarke in like maner dyuers blasphemyes against God: As that in the very frontispice and begining,In the Confession of Fayth v∣sed in the English cō¦gregation at Geneua receaued & aproued by the Church of Scotlād. There was no meanes to bring vs from that yoke of sinne and damnation, but only Iesus Christ our Lord. O horrible blasphemy against the Omnipotency of God, who had in∣finite other meanes to redeme mākynd, but he thought the sending of Christ the fittest, to draw, and allure the loue of man vnto him, as Christ himself witnesseth, saying:Iohn. 12. v. 12. And I, when I shalbe exalted from the earth, will draw all men vnto me. Lykewise can there be a greater Blasphemy inuented then to say, that not only Christ suffered on the Crosse, but also that for a season he suffered the very wrath of God, and torments of the Reprobate, in soule & body? Their words be:In the Acts of Parlament holden at Ednbugh 17. f Au∣gust. 1568. Christ suffered not only the cruell death of the crosse, but also he suffred for a season the wrath of his Father which sinnes had deser∣ued: But yet we auow, that he remayned the only well-beloued and blessed Sonne of his Father, euen in the midst of his anguish and tor∣ment
which he suffered in body and soule. Was there euer any He∣retike, Tuke, or Iew who said Christ to haue suffered in his soule, which was glorified, and saw God face to face (as it doth now) from the first instant of the creation therof? Read in the articles of the Ministers faith from the nynth Sonday to the eleauenth, and yee shall see concerning this poynt horrible blasphemyes against Christ, of whome a∣mongst others, they say thus: That very payne which Christ sus∣steyned for a tyme, the wicked must indure continually. O abho∣mination! O diuelish doctrine! O Idolatrous religion! what can we iudge of the pittyfull estate of all those Puri∣tanes and Protestants, who haue dyed in Scotland within these fifty yeares past in this abhominable belief & Religiō? 2. The first place then which the Ministers haue falsified is that of S. Matthew, where Christ sayth:Matth. 11. v. 27. All things are delyuered me of my Father. Wherby the ancient and holy Doctours proued against Arius and Sabellius heretiks, that Christ was God of God the Father, called therfore the sonne of God the Father; for though the outward actions, as Creation, Conseruation &c. which are called actiones ad extra, are common to God the Father, God the Sonne, and God the Holy Ghost; yet the inward actions called actiones ad intra are peculiar and proper to euery person; as the action of generation is proper to God the Father only; the action of procession to God the Father, & God the sonne only: Caluin and the Ministers to ouerthrow this holy doctrine, and to deny that Christ is the Sonne of God the Father, as hauing receaued his essence from all eternity of God the Father, as he witnesseth heer, saying: all things are delyuered me of my Father: The Hugonots I say, and Caluin haue corrupted the Bible filthily, and most abhominably, ioy∣ning two seuerall wordes which are not in the Greeke copy; All thinges are giuen me in hand by my Father: Their wordes be, Toute chose m'ont estè donné en main de par mon Pere: Thrusting in the text the two wordes, en main, in hand, to signify with the Arrians, (who were in the same heresy with Caluin and Knox) that Christ speaketh nor heer of the inward generation of God the Father, wherby
he receaued all of his Father, but only of the outward go∣uernement. Let vs heare Caluins blasphemous words:Lib. 1. ete instit. c. 13. num. 23. Quicōque dit que le fils de Dieu soit essentié du Pere, il nie qu'il aytestre propre de soy. That is. Whosoeuer sayth that the sonne of God hath receaued his essence frō God the Father, denyeth him to haue a proper being of himselfe. De-Saincts a Catholike Doctour, & Stancarus a Protestāt haue written whole bookes against the impiety and Atheismes of Caluin the sophist. Some English Bibles had the former corruption, but now they haue corrected them, as they haue done many others, wherby it is easie to see that the English Bibles are far different from the Bi∣bles of the Hugenots in France, and from the Lutherans in Germany. In the Blessed Trinity there be three persons, yet not different, but distinguished, not three Gods but one God: the essence of one person is the essence of another, none before other in tyme, nor by nature, sed ordine; none the originall cause of the other, which is directly against that Blasphemy set down in the articles of the Ministers faith of Scotland:In the Articles of the Fayth Sunday 3. Because (say they) that in the substance or nature of God, we haue to consider the father as the fountayne, be∣ginning and originall cause. For God the Father cannot be the originall cause of God the sonne. And if the Ministers vn∣derstand that God the Father is the originall cause alone of all creatures, it is alwayes a blasphemy, for he is not alone the originall cause of such, by reason that Actiones ad extra, sunt communes toti Trinitati. Finally the Doctours do re∣marke these notions wherby we may distinguish the three persons, Innascibility, Paternity, Filiation, Spiration actiue, and Spiration passiue: how many of the Ministers will vnderstād this doctrine? 3. Remarke secondly in the same Articles of the Ministers, another blasphemy against the omnipotency of God:In the Articles of Fayth Sun∣day 3. What meanest thou (sayth the Minister) by that thou callest him Almighty? C. I meane not that he hath a power, which he doth not exercise. May not God create ten thousand worldes, worke infinite miracles, and punish sensibly the Ministers for such blasphemyes? and because he doth not exercise such a power, shall we say that he hath not power
to do it? Remarke thirdly, what good doctrine the Mini∣sters do giue concerning the lawes of Kings and Princes, as touching the oath of Allegiance, or any other such; Remarke diligently I say, their words which are:In the order of Baptisme in the ex∣plication of that article Borne of the Virgin Marie. There is no other but he (Christ) in heauen nor earth that hath iust autho∣rity to make lawes to bind the cōsciences of men. What auayle then the Protestants oathes, since they belieue constantly, that they are not obliged in conscience to keep them? What a∣uayleth it his Maiesty to take the oathes of Allegiance and Supremacy of the Protestants, seing they belieue constātly, as a poynt of faith, that no law of Man man bind and o∣blige them in conscience? 4. The second place which the Ministers haue fal∣sified is that of S. Paul:1. Tim. 2. v. 5. . There is one God, one also mediatour, God and man, which is the man Christ Iesus, who gaue himselfe a Redemption for all men: Signifying therby that we haue but one mediatour of Redemption, though there may be diuers me∣diatours of Intercession, as I proued before. In the which few words the Ministers haue made at least three impious fal∣sifications. First in some of their Bibles they haue put the word only, or alone, saying, there is one alone mediatour, which words they haue also in their Confession of faith, and in the French Bibles, vn scul moyenneur entre Dieu & les hommes, wherin the frēch Bibles do differ from our last printed En∣glish Bibles. 2. They haue put into the text these two words, (which is) which words are neyther in the Greek nor Syriake. 3. They haue taken away the word redemption, by reason that we make a distiction betwixt Mediator of Redēp∣tion, and mediatour of Intercession, grounded specially vpon this place, & they haue put the word ransome insteed therof translating thus: Who gaue himselfe a ransome for all men;. not∣withstāding that in other places they haue turned the same Greeke word in redemption, as we do heere; as in that to the Hebrews,Heb. 2. v. 12. and obteyned eternall redemption for vs: which place likewyse they haue corrupted, putting those two words for vs, which are not in the Greeke. Agayne:Heb. 19. v. 15. That death which was for the redemption, and in sundry other places. Can there be a greater impiety then to with-hold
from the common people the true translation of the Bible? Can there be any sinne compared to this sinne of the Mi∣nisters? Is notRom. 1. v. 8. the wrath of God reuealed from heauen against all vngodlines & vnrighteousnes of such men, who withhold the truth in vnrighteousnes? Is it not a sin against the holy ghost to per∣mit, yea to command the simple and ignorant people to read at dinner & supper, & els where such falsified Bibles, corrupted translations, and venemous doctrine? 5. The third place falsified by the Ministers is that of the Prophet Dauid, who speaking of, and to the prayse of Christ Iesus, sayth:Psal. 8. v. 15. . Thou hast made him a little lower then the Angels; with glory and honour thou hast crowned him. The Greeke and Hebrew text hath the same, Me hat Meeloim: the same hath also the Chaldaean Paraphrase, and the Syriake in the Epistle to the Hebrews, with al the Fathers without exception. The Ministers accustomed euer to follow the doctrine of Caluin the Sycophant, and Knox the Apostata who do teach in sundry places, that Christ is not God, do translate this place thus: for thou hast made him a little lower thē God, turning the Hebrew word Elohim God, which as in sundry places, so heer cannot be translated, without blas∣phemy, except in Angels. Not one of the Iewish Rabbins, no not one of the holy Fathers and learned wryters did euer take the word Elohim, in this place, otherwyse then for Angels, as witnesseth Genebrard. And since the words, thou hast made him, cannot be referred, but to the person of Christ in Caluins opinion, and since the person of Christ includeth both God and man, it cannot be said without a manifest blasphemy,Geneb. in hunc locū. that Christ was made a little lower then God. It cannot be said, that to the shew, during his life tyme heer, that he was a little lower then God. By reason that to the outward shew he was infinitly lower then God. But if we say that Christ, though God & man, to the out∣ward shew was made lower then the Angels, though as man he was aboue all Angels, such a doctrine is Catholike, most true & cōform to the meaning of the holy Fathers, & as S. Paul manifestly witnesseth, & the Ministers thēselues now do translate with vs after this forme:Heb. 2. v. 7. Thou madest
him a little inferior to the Angels. I thought good to set down heer the selfe same doctrine of Caluin the author of the de∣formed religion of Scotland, cōcerning the sonne of God our Sauyour Christ Iesus, but because it is nothing els but a heape of blasphemyes against God, I thinke it expedient to cite his owne french language and proper words, to the end that the Scots or English Reader should not be harmed therewith. 6. The first blasphemy of Caluin against Christ the Sonne of God the Father is, that he denyeth him to be pro∣perly Creatour of heauen and earth. Heare his words:Lib. cōt. Valent. Gētil. pag. 1924. Certes nous confessons d'vn consentement, que Christ est improprement ap∣pellé Createur du Ciel & de la terre. 2. He denyeth the gene∣ration of God the sonne to be naturall and eternall:Ibidem 1930. Il a engendré son fil seulement, pour ce qu'il a voulu. 3. He fauoureth greately the Arrians who denyed the sonne of God to be of the same substance with God the Father: against whom the holy Fathers produced that of S. Iohn,Iohn. 10 v. 30. I and the fa∣ther are one, signifying vnity of substance. Caluin sayth with the Arrians, that it signifyeth only vnity of will: And the Mi∣nisters to insinuat this horrible Blasphemy of Caluin haue corrupted the text, ioyning therunto the word my,. which is not, no not in their owne falsified Greeke copyes, transla∣ting thus: I and my Father are one. 4. Caluin teacheth, that the sonne of God is God of himselfe,Contra Valent. Gent. pag. 1924. & lib. 1. instit. cap. 13. n. 26. de par soy mesme, & n'est point essentié du Pere. This blasphemy is so euident, that as it maketh many Gods, so in making many it ouerthroweth all God-head. 5. Caluin teacheth that the name of God, is giuen specially and by way of prerogatiue to God the Fa∣ther, & not to God the sonne:Eodem libro cont. Valent. Gentil. Nous auons franchement dict, que par prerogatiue le nom de Dieu est attribué au Pere. Which doctrine is the cause wherfore the Ministers do neuer, ney∣ther, in the Article of their faith, neyther in their seuerall confessions of faith, call or name God the sonne, Creator of heauen and earth: Yea rather they do acknowledge him to be a creature with Arius and not the Creator. Heare their owne words rehearsed euery sōday in the Church of Scot∣lād, wher the Minister maketh the chyld to say:In the Articles of Fayth Sunday 3. Because
that in the substance or nature of God, we haue to consider the father as the fountayne, beginning & originall cause of all things &c. For if God the Father be the cause of God the sonne, he beho∣ued to be before God the sonne, for, omnis causa est prior suo ef∣fectu, saltem natura. 6. Caluin teacheth that the feare of dā∣nation did greatly trouble Christ:En son harmon. in 26. Matth. L'abysme & confusion horrible de damnation l'a viuemēt & rudement tourmentè de crainte & angoisse. And a little after: Il a estè saisi d'vne frayeur & es∣pouuentement de la malediction de Dieu. This is the selfe same doctrine of the Ministers, who do say in the articles of their fayth:In the articles of Fayth 10. Sunday. Because he presented himselfe before the iudgement-seat of God to satisfy for sinnes, it was necessary that he should feele this horrible torment of conscience, as if God had vtterly forsaken him, yea as though God had bene his extreme enemy. To this blasphemy they ioyne another, that Christ indured the very paynes and torments of the reprobate in hell. Heare their owne words: That very payne which Christ susteyned for a tyme the wi∣cked must indure continually. Making no difference betwixt the torments, which Christ suffered, say they, after his death (for the Ministers do speake of Christ his descent into hel, which was performed after his death) and in his soule, & the torments which the reprobat in hell do susteyne, except in duration; and consequently the Ministers must needs a∣uow that the passion of Christ vpon the Crosse was not sufficient for our redemption, but that it was likewyse ne∣cessary to suffer those torments after his death. Which blas∣phemy as it is against the holy word of God, against the person of Christ, against all reason and ancient Fathers, so it is the very way to all Atheisme and Infidelity. 7. The Ministers to fortify this their former blas∣phemy haue impiously (conforme to their custome) fal∣sifyed these words of S. Paul:Heb. 5. v. 7. Who in the dayes of his flesh with a strong cry and teares, offering prayers & supplications to him, who could saue him from death, was heard for his reuerence. Wherby the Apostle witnesseth that our Sauiour as man, was ouer heard in his prayers, by reason of the great reue∣rence, respect, and honour he caryed to God the Father: which saying the Ministers haue corrupted thus, Which in
the dayes of his flesh did offer vp prayers and supplications, with strong crying and teares vnto him that was able to saue him from death, and was also heard in that which he feared. Putting in the word feared to fortify their blasphemy, that Christ feared the damnati∣on of the wicked; or wrath of his Father, sayth Caluin:Instit. lib. 2 c. 16. num. 10. . Diros in anima cruciatus damnati & perditi hominis pertulit. He sayth the same explicating this place. Remarke the Syco∣phancy or impious dealing of the Ministers, who haue trā∣slated well and with vs the same Greeke word in other pla∣ces: as,Act. 2. v. 5. . And there were dwelling at Hierusalem Iewes, deuout men of euery nation. Beza: viri religiosi ex omni natione. It is wel knowen that the Greeke word signifyeth a Religious and reuerentiall respect, which our Sauiour caryed to God the Father, conforme to the true translation of the former place, which is, He was heard for his reuerence. I will not defyle Chri∣stian eares with the rest of Caluins blasphemies agaynst God the sonne, which are without number: neyther will I be more tedious to the reader in setting downe the corru∣ptiōs, falsifications and blasphemies of the English or Scots Bible, which are in such number, without number, that if my dayly infirmityes and weaknes did not hinder me, great and many volumes and bookes might be set out of such fal∣sifications and corruptions.
The 23. & 24. Article. That the true Church of God must needes be infal∣lible: and as she hath absolute authority to pro∣pone matters of Fayth; so she cannot erre in proponing such matters to be belieued, as Apo∣stolike Traditions, which euer haue bene belie∣ued. CHAP XII. BEing in prison in Edenburgh I was for∣ced to enter dispute with a Minister (as I did with many others) without books or any other such necessary helpes, cō∣cerning the authority and visibility of the true Church, wherof I made this argument. That is the true Church of Christ which he commanded vs to obey, and threatned vs if we obey not. But he cannot command vs to obey an inuisible Church, nor punish vs if we obey it not. Therfore and inuisible Church cannot be the true Church of Christ. The Minister was incertayne what to de∣ny in this argument; so remayning amazed, another Mini∣ster answered, and denyed the Minor, which I proued in this manner. God cannot commād vs to do a thing impos∣sible, for that is against the very naturall wit of man, who will not command to his seruants impossible things. But it is impossible to heare, & so impossible to obey an inuisible Church. Ergo. The other Minister knew not what to answer to this argument, but went out of the prison in passion pro∣mising neuertheles to come back agayne, which he perfor∣med not. But his fellow Protestants being ashamed of this their ouerthrow, did bring in a few dayes after another Mi∣nister,
agaynst whome I made this argument. The true Church of Christ hath alwayes perseuered: But the Pro∣testants Church hath not alwayes perseuered; Therefore it is not the true Church of Christ. He denyed the Minor which I proued after this forme. If your Church was ex∣tant in any age from the Apostles dayes to the comming of Luther, Caluin, and Knox, the space of a thousand fiue hū∣dreth and fifty yeares, eyther it was visible or inuisible. But neyther can be sayd: Therfore it was not extant at all. The Minister answered, that their Church is, and had bene visible, as witnesseth (sayth he) M. Foxes Cronicle. Wher∣vnto I replyed thus No manifest and knowne heretikes cā constitute the Church of Christ: but all your false Martyrs and pseudo confessors whome Fox nameth, were knowne heretikes. Ergo, they could not constitute the Church of Christ. I proue the Minor. Fox nameth Waldenses, Albi∣genses, Wicklifists & others; but all these were known here∣retiks. Ergo. I proue the Minor againe. Waldenses & Albigēses &c. Hold many articles of Fayth, which yow condemne as heresies, and M. Iewell a Prime-Minister, sayth thus of them:In his defnce of Apology pag. 84. They be none of ours: and Osiander:Centur. 15. The opinion of Waldenses, Albigenses &c. were absurde, wicked, and heretical. To this argument the Ministers could neuer answere, or if they can, let them aduise and answere now. 2. The Reasons (besides the former) which perswade that the Church is infallible, are these following most for∣cible. For what could moue any Infidel, Pagan, or Puri∣tane to forsake his errours, and come to the true Church, if she might also beguyle him with errour and fallibility? What meanes could the true Church haue to condemne an heretike if she could erre in disprouing his errours? How should we know where to rest, whom to consult in doubte of Fayth, if the true Church the highest Iudge might iudge amisse. What assurance can the Protestants haue of their be∣liefe, Religion, Scripture, Sacraments, Preaching, yea of Christ himselfe, if the Church, which teacheth these particles to them, may erre in teaching? The tradition or testimony of the Romane Church, of whome the Prote∣stants
haue receaued the Scriptures, of what accōpt can they make it, if it be fallible and subiect to errour? The Fayth which they gather out of the Scriptures, the Religiō which they ground vpon such Scriptures must lykewise be fallible & vncertaine. For the truth gleaned frō the Scriptures cānot be more sure, then the Scriptures themselues from which it is gathered. If they then be fallible, the Scriptures must needes be fallible (in the Protestāts opinion) by reason that the true Church, who hath deliuered the Scriptures to vs, is infallible, say they. And wheras neither Religiō nor Church can without supernatural Fayth, nor supernatural Faith be attained without infallible certainty of the things belieued; if then the Protestant Preachers & Ministers be fallible, the articles they belieue haue not that infallibility which is re∣quired to the nature of Fayth; Which hath nothing (sayth S. Bernard) ambiguous our doubtful, yea, if it hath any thing ambiguous it cannot be Fayth. Which is the reason wherfore S. Paul wit∣nesseth that God placed in his Church:Ephes. 4. v. 11.12. Some Apostles, some Prophets, and other some Euangelists, and other some Pastors and Do∣ctours &c. Behold heere foure things. 1. Whome he appoyn∣ted: Apostles, Prophets, Euangelists, Pastors, Doctours. 2. To what function did he imploy them: To the consummation of Sainctes, to the worke of the Ministery, to the edifying of the body of Christ. 3. How long was it to continue: Vntill we meete all into the vnity of Fayth and knowledge of the sonne of God. 4. To what end was this: That now we be not children wauering and caryed about with euery wind of doctrine, in the wickednes of men, in craftinesse to the circumuention of errour. If this be the end and drift of God, specifyed in the Protestants owne Bible, is not God fru∣strate of his intent? Pastours spoyled of their assurāce? Do∣ctours incertayne of their doctrine, if the true Church may erre and be fallible? I ioyne to this that infallible warrant of Christ speaking of the true Church:Luk. 10. v. 16. He that heareth you, heareth me, and he that despiseth you, despiseth me. But it were not all one to heare Christ, & to heare his Church, to despise Christ, & to despise his Church, vnlesse the Church and the Pastours thereof were infallibly inspired by God to deliuer all things with such certaynty and infallibility, as
is requisite. Lykewise seeing Christ comandeth vs to heare the Church and our true Pastours as himselfe, he who saith that the Church may erre, must needes lykewyse inferre that Christ himself may erre, which is a horible blasphemy. 3. Moreouer the Prophet I say speaketh in the per∣son of God to the Church, thus:Isa 59. v. 211. My spirit that is in thee, and my wordes that I haue put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, and out of the mouth of thy seed, and out of the mouth of thy seedes seed, sayth our Lord, from this present and for euer. What spirit was there in this Prophet, but the spirit of God? What words in his mouth, but the words of truth? Therfore the spirit of God and wordes of truth shall neuer depart from the Church of God, or the true Pastors therof. Can any thing be written more effectually? can any thing be spokē more pithily? Conforme to the which doctrine Christ cō∣manded vs to follow the doctrine of the Church, as infalli∣ble doctrine, & that vnder the payne of condemnation & excommunication:Matth. 18. v. 17. If he will not heare the Church (sayth Christ) let him be to thee as the heathen and Publican. How could God threaten vs vnder the curse of damnation to heare and obey his Church, if she could erre, and be infallible? To say, that the Church cannot erre so long as she followeth the word of God, is folly: for if the Church may depart from the word of God she cannot but erre: since then she cannot depart from the word of God, she cannot erre. 2. What pri∣uilege I pray you, can that be aboue any hereticall assēbly? for no heretike, Infidell, Iew, or Turke, yea not the Diuel himselfe can erre as long as he speaketh conforme to Gods word. A certayne Minister replyed to this saying of myne, distinguishing two kinds of errour, one curable, and ano∣ther incurable; one to probation and another to damnatiō confessing lykewyse that the Church might fall into cu∣rable errours, but not into incurable. Is this distinction in the expresse word of the Bible? where? in what place? A∣gainst which foolish distinction I frame this argument: Whosoeuer heareth the Church, followeth the comman∣dement of God. Ergo, no error curable or incurable can we incurre by hearing the Church. I proue the Minor thus:
No offence against God can we incurre in following his commandements: but euery error curable or incurable (spe∣cially in maters of fayth) is an offence against God. Ergo, no errour curable or incurable, can we incurre by following Gods commandements. I would aske of the Ministers what be those errourrs; be they fundamentall and such as cannot stand with the integrity of faith; or be they sleight and in∣different things which do not harme the integrity of faith? If they be sleight and indifferent, we need not to be cured of them, we may without losse of Gods fauour remayne and die in them. The new Gospell then of the Protestants was needles, their reformation, in indifferent errours, su∣perfluous, their breach detestable in making so great a schisme for slēder matter not necessary to saluatiō. Why do they persecute vs & trouble vs for so sleight maters? Fun∣damental and incurable they cannot be, vnlesse yee graunt that the Church is fallible, and may erre in fundamentall poynts, which I haue refuted before, and which is directly against the doctrine of the holy Fathers. Irenaeus who spe∣aketh thus of the infallibility of the Church:Lib. 3. cap. 4. & 40. The Apostles haue layed vp in the Church, as in a rich treasure, all truth, that he that will, may from thence draw the water of life. And againe.Lib. 1. cap. 3. She keepeth with most sincere diligence the Apostles faith & prea∣ching. S. Hierome:Lib. 3. aduersus Ruffinum. cap. 8. In the Church is the rule or square of truth. S. Cypryan:Epist. 55. ad Corn. The Church neuer departeth from that, which she once hath knowne. S. Augustine explicating those words of S. Mathew:Matth. 23. v. 2. In the chaire of Moyses the Scrybes and Pharisees, sit: all therefore whatsoeuer they bid you obserue, that obserue and do, but after their works do not, for they say, and do not. Conforme to which place S. Augustine sayth learnedly and wysely:Epist. 266. That, God maketh vs secure of euill gouernours of the Church, least for their cause the chayre of holseome doctrine should be forsaken, in which euen the euill are constrayned to deliuer true things, for they are not their owne things which they delyuer, but Gods, who hath pla∣ced the doctrine of verity in the chaire of Vnity. To conclude then, the true Church of God was, is, and shall be infallible, as the Scriptures and reasons do conuince. And seeing the Pu∣ritanes do confesse that their Church may erre, is fallible &
erroneous: we must needs conclude, that their Church is not the spouse of Christ, wherof the Prophet fortold in the persō of Christ.Hosea. 2. v. 19. I will despouse thee to me for euer, but rather the har∣lot of Sathan, the tēple of Ball, the Synagogue of errour, the assembly of the wicked, & the cōpany of the reprobat. But let vs heare the holy Fathers of this second Age & Century. The Testimonyes of the holy Fathers of this second age; That the true Church of God must needes be infallible, in proponing matters of faith to be belieued, as Apostolike Traditions. The first Section. S. Iustinus Martyr testifyeth that the custome of the Ca∣tholiks in his tyme was to meete vpon Sonday, to say their prayers togeather (without any singing of Psalmes in meeter) to offer vp bread and wyne mingled with water:In Apo∣log ad An∣ton. Pium. Tum consurgimus omnes communiter & preces fundimus, & sicut ante diximus, precibus nostris peractis, panis & vinum & aqua offe∣runtur; is autem qui praest, preces similiter & gratiarum actiones pro viribus fundit, populùs{que} acclamat dicens, Amen. Which custome and holy tradition of the Church doth cōtinue to this day, and hath bene without interruption, and infallibly kept euer amongst the Catholiks. 2. S. Irenaeus teacheth first, that we should be obe∣dient to those Pastors who haue succeded one to another, saying:Lib. 30. aduers hae∣res. cap. 43. Qua propter eis, qui in Ecclesia sunt, Presbyteris obau∣dire oportet, his qui successionem habent ab Apostolis, qui cum Episco∣patus successione Charisma veritatis certum, secundum placita patrum acceperunt. And since Puritane-Ministers haue no succession, no obedience should be granted to them. 2. He recommen∣deth earnestly the traditions of the Catholike Church, which delyuer the same traditions to vs with infallibility:Lib. 31 cap. 3. Traditionem ita{que} Apostolorum in toto mundo manifestatam, in omni Ecclesia adest perspicere omnibus qui vera velint audire, & habe∣mus annumerare eos, qui ab Apostolis instituti sunt Episcopi in Eccle∣sijs, & successores eorum vs{que} ad nos, qui nihil tale docuerunt, ne{que} co∣gitauerunt, quale ab his deliratur. Etenim si recondita mysteria
scissent Apostoli, quae seorsum & latenter à reliquis perfectos docebunt, his vel maxime traderent ea, quibus etiam ipsas Ecclesias cōmittebant, 3. He declareth the Antiquity and inallibility of the Ro∣man Church, to be:Ibidem. Maximam & antiquissimam, omnibus{que} cognitam: ad quam propter potentiorem principalitatem necesse sit om∣nem conuenire Ecclesiam, hoc est, éos qui sunt vndi{que} fideles. 4. He deduceth the succession of the Popes of Rome from S. Pe∣ter to his tyme, and vseth the same as a most forcible argu∣ment to confound Heretiks, saying:Ibidem. Hac ordinatione & successione, ea quae est ab Apostolis in Ecclesia traditio, & veritatis praeconiatio, peruenit vs{que} ad nos, & est plenissima haec ostensio, vnam & eandem viw ficatricem fidem esse, quae in Ecclesia ab Apostolis vs{que} nunc sit conseruata & tradita in veritate. 5. He condēneth Flo∣rinus as an heretike, by reason that he taught dyuers opi∣nions agaynst the Church of God, against the receaued do∣ctrine of the holy Fathers, vsing these most forcible words, which I may addresse to euery Minister in particular:Euseb. lib. 5. hist. Eccles. cap. 19. Ista dogmata, Florine, (Ramsee), vt tecum agam humaniter, sanae sententiae non sunt, ista dogmata sunt Ecclesiae repugnantia, vt∣pote quae eos, qui illis obsequuntur, in maximam impietatem deijciāt: ista dogmata ne Haeretici quidem qui fuere ab Ecclesia exturbati, af∣firmare vnquam ausi sunt. Ista dogmata Presbyteri, qui ante nos fuerunt, qui{que} erant ipsorum Apostolorum discipuli, minimè tibi tradi∣derunt. Haue we not greater reason to say this to the Pro∣testants of our tyme, who cannot proue, no not one con∣trouerted poynt of their religion, by the expresse word of their own Scots Bible? 2. Who cannot improue any poynt of the Catholike religion by the expres word of the Bible? 3. Who cannot possible name any man, who was of their religion before Caluin & Luther? 4. Finally who cannot possible name any King or Prince of any nation, of their religion before Caluin. 6. He affirmeth that the holy tra∣ditions left to vs, by the Apostles or Apostolike men should be followed and imbraced, by reason that there be many things not conteyned in the expresse word of the Bible; & dyuers nations haue professed Christ sincerely and truly without any Bible, Scripture or written word:Lib. 3. cap. 4. Quid au∣tem (sayth he) si ne{que} Apostoli quidem Scripuras reliquissent nobis,
nonne oporteb at ordinem sequi traditionis, quem tradiderunt ijs, qui∣bus committebant Ecclesias? Cui ordinationi assentiunt, multae gentes Barbarorum, eorum qui in Christum credunt, sine charactere vel ae∣tramento, scriptans habentes per Spiritum in cordibus suis salutem, & veterem traditionem d ligenter custodientes, in vnum deum credentes fabricatorem caeli & terrae, & omnium quae in eis sunt, per Christum Iesum Dei filium. Hanc fidem qui sine literis crediderunt, quantum ad sermonem nostrū, Barbari sunt: quantum autem ad sententiam & con∣suetudinem & conuersationē propter fidem perquā sapientissimi sunt, & placent Deo, conuersantes in omni-iustitia & castitate & sapientia. 3. Tertullian wryteth most learnedly of the in∣fallibility of the tradition of the Church, declaring that it was euer familiar to Heretiks to brag & boast of the Scrip∣tures, of the word of God, of the Bible:Lib. de prescript. cap. 15. Sed ipsi (sayth he) & de Scripturis agunt, & de Scripturis suadent, scripturas ob∣tēdunt, & hac sua audacia statim quosdam mouent: in ipso verò con∣gressu, firmos quidem fatigant, infirmos capiunt, medios cùm scru∣pulo dimittunt. Hunc igitur potissimùm gradum obstruimus, non ad∣mittendo eos ad vllam de Scripturis disputationem. Si hae sunt vires eorum: despici debet cui competat possessio Scripturarum, ne is admit∣tatur ad eas, cùm nullo modo competit. 2. He auoweth that it is folly to cite the Scriptures, or to take the Scriptures for iudge in disputing with the Heretikes, because first they only admit such Scriptures as pleaseth them, for Canoni∣call. 2. Those which they admit, they turne and explicate according to their fansy.Eodem lib. cap. 17. Nihil enim proficit congressio Scrip∣turarum, nisi planè, vt aut stomachi quis ineat euersionem aut ce∣rebri. Ista enim haeresis non recipit quasdam Scripturas, & si quas reci∣pit, adiectionibus & detractionibus ad dispositionem instituti sui in∣teruertit, & si recipit, non recipit integras: & si aliquatenus integras praestat, nhilo minus aduersus expositiones commentat ac conuertit. Tantum veritati obstrepit adulter sensus, quātum & corruptor stylus. 3. He concludeth giuing vs a holsome lesson how to dis∣pute with the Protestants:Ibidem cap. 19. Ergo non ad scripturas prouo∣candum est, nec in his constituendum certamen, in quibus aut nulla, aut incerta victoria est, aut parum certa, &c. Ordo rerum deside∣rabat illud prius proponi, quod nunc solùm disputandum est: quibus competat fides ipsa, cuius situ Scripturae, & quo, & per quos, & quā∣do,
& quibus sit tradita disciplina qua fiunt Christiani. Vbi enim ap∣paruerit veritatem esse disciplinae & fidei Christianae, illic erit veritas Scripturarum & expositionum, & omnium traditionum Christiana∣rum. 4. He giueth lykewyse a holesome instruction how the Catholiks (who are not well acquainted with contro∣uersies) should answer the Protestāts who do obiect oftē the Scriptures: They should answere, I say, and aske of the Protestants:Ibid. ca. 19. Edant ergo origines Ecclesiarum suarum: euoluant ordinem Episcoporum suorum, ita per successiones ab initio decurren∣tem, vt primus ille Episcopus aliquem ex Apostolis vel Apostolicis viris, qui tamen cum Apostoliis perseuerauerint, habuerit authorem & an∣tecessorem: hoc enim modo Ecclesiae Apostolicae sensus suos deferunt: sicut Smyrneorum Ecclesia habens Polycarpum à Ioanne collocatum refert, sicut Romanorum Clementem à Petro ordinatum edit: confin∣gant tale aliquod Haeretici &c. That is, when the Protestants do aske of vs places of the Bible in proof of Purgatory, In∣uocation of Saintes, we should aske of them agayne, say∣ing, To whom haue yee, Ministers, succeded lawfully, and with imposition of hands? who sent you? who gaue you power to preach, and expone the Bible? What part of the Bible auoucheth your new Religiō? What part of the Scri∣pture speaketh of your extraordinary calling &c. 5. He re∣koneth the Apostolike Churches, and amongst the rest the Roman Church, wherof he sayth:Ibidem cap. 32. Si autem Italiae adiaces, babes Romam, vnde nobis quo{que} authoritas praesto est. Statu selix Ec∣clesia, cui totam doctrinam Apostoli cum sāguine suo profuderunt, vbi Petrus passioni Dominicae adaequatur, vbi Paulus Ioannis exitu corona∣tur, vbi Apostolus Ioannes posteaquā in oleum demersus, nihil passus est, sed in Insulam relegatur. 6. He teacheth that in disputing with the Protestans or Heretiks; First of all we should aske of them:cap. 37. Qui estis? quando & vnde venists? quid in meo agitis non mei? quo deni{que}, Marcion, iure syluam meam caedis? quae licentia, Valentine, fontes meos transuertis? qua potestate, Appelles, limites meos commoues? mea est possessio. Quid hic caeteri ad voluntate ve∣stram seminatis & pascitis? Mea est possessio, olim possideo, prior pos∣sideo, habeo origines firmas ab ipsis auctoribus, quorum fuit res. Ego sum hares Apostolorum, sicut cauerunt testamento suo, sicut fidei com∣miserunt, sicut adiurauerunt, ita teneo: vos certè exhaeredauerunt
semper & abdicauerunt vt extraneos, & inimicos. Finally he affir∣meth that the infallible auctority of the Church should be acknowledged in the Apostolike traditions, which though not conteyned in the Scripture expresly, should be belie∣ued and receaued. Of the which traditions he setteth down these in particular:Lib. de corona mi∣litis. Deni{que} vt à Baptismate ingrediar, aquam adituri ibidem, sed & aliquanto prius in Ecclesia sub Antistitis manu, contestamur nos renunciare diabolo, & pompae, & angelis eius. De∣hinc ter mergitamur, amplius respondentes, quam dominus, in E∣uangelio determinauit; inde suscepti lactis & mellis concordiam prae∣gustamus. Ex{que} ea die lauacro quotidiano per totam hebdomadam ab∣stinemus. Eucharistiae sacramentum, & in tempore victus, & omni∣bus mandatum à Domino etiam antelucanis coetibus, nec de aliorum manu quàm praesidentiū sumimus. Oblationes pro defunctis, pro nata∣litijs, annua die facimus: die Dominico ieiunium nefas ducimus, vel de geniculis adorare. Eadē immunitate à die Paschae in Pentecosten vs{que} gaudemus. Ad omnem progressum at{que} promotum, ad omnem aditum & exitum, ad vestitum & calceatum, ad lauacra, ad mensas, ad lumina, ad cubilia, ad sedilia, quaecun{que} nos conuersatio exercet, frontem crucis signaculo terimus. And a little thereafter:Cap. 4. Ha∣rum & aliarum eiusmodi disciplinarum si legem expostules scriptura∣rum, nullam inuenies: Traditio tibi praetenditur auctrix, consuetudo confirmatrix & fides ob seruatrix, rationem traditioni, fidei, consue∣tudini patrocinaturam aut ipse perspicies, aut ab aliquo, qui perspe∣xerit disces &c. His igitur exemplis renunciatum erit, posse etiam non scriptam traditionem in obseruatione defendi, confirmatum con∣suetudine idonea, teste probatae tunc traditionis, ex perseuerantia ob∣seruationis. Consuetudo autem etiam in ciuilibus rebus pro lege susci∣pitur, cùm deficit lex: nec differt Scriptura, an ratione consistat, quādo & legem ratio commendet. Porro si lex ratione constat, lex erit om∣ne tam quod ratione constitrit &c. 4. Origen in like maner teacheth vs, that when the Heretiks or Protestants do obiect their Bible vnto vs, we shuld reply, preferring the antiquity of our religion and the holy antiquity of our Church:Tract. 29. in Mat. Quoties autem Canoni∣cas proferunt Scripturas, in quibus omnis Christianus consentit & credit, videntur dicere: Ecce in domibus verbum est veritatis. Sed nos illis non credere debemus, nec exire à prima & Ecclesiastica traditio∣ne,
nec aliter credere, nisi quemadmodum per successionem Ecclesiae Dei tradiderūt nobis. 2. He teacheth, that there be many things done and belieued in the Catholike Church, wherof the commons cannot giue reason.Hom. 5. in Num. In Ecclesiasticis obseruationibus sunt nonnulla huius∣modi, quae omnibus quidem facere necesse est, nec tamen ratio eorum omnibus patet. 5. S. Cyprian setteth down the antiquity of that tra∣dition in mingling water with wyne in the holy sacrifice, saying thus:Epist 63. ad Cae∣cilium. Admoni os autem nos scias (vt in calice offerendo Dominica traditio seruetur, ne{que} aliud fiat à nobis, quàm quod pro nobis Dominus prior fecit) vt calix, qui in commemorationem eius of∣fertur, mixtus vino offeratur. He declareth also, how great & abhominable is the sinne of the Heretikes of our tymes to prefer their iudgemēt to the iudgement of the holy church, which hath continued these sexteene hundreth yeares; to the iudgement of the holy Fathers and of all antiquity:Epist. 69. ad Flo∣rentium Pumpianū. Nec haec iacto (sayth he speaking to Florentius, as I lykewise speake to euery Minister in particular) sed dolens profero, cùm te iudicem Dei constituas & Christi, qui dicit ad Apostolos, ac per hos ad omnes praepositos qui Apostolis vicaria ordinatione succedunt:Luk. 10. v. 16. Qui vos audit me audit & qui me audit, audit eum qui me misit. Vnde enim schismata & haereses obortae sunt & oriuntur, nisi dum Episco∣pus qui vnus est & Ecclesiae praest, superba quorundam praesumptione contemnitur, & homo dignatione Dei honoratus ab indignis hominibus iudicatur? Quis enim hic est superbiae tumor, quae arrogantia animi, quae mentis inflatio, ad cognitionem suam Praepositos & Sacerdotes vocare? That the Ministers haue falsified the Bible in sundry places, which do proue, that as God cannot sinne, erre, nor lye; so he will continue to performe his promises in assisting the true Church infallibly. The second Section. THE Ministers as they haue brought in a new Religiō, a new doctrine, a new faith and profession; so they haue made a new Bible, a new Scripture vnknowen to all
Christendome the space of fyfteene hundreth yeares, and this they call Reformatiō. To this end they haue vsed in the translation of their English Bibles new & prophan words against the vse and custome of all antiquity, translating in their Bible, for Priest Elder, for Idol Image, and infinite o∣thers, giuing alwayes for reason of this abhominable pro∣ceeding: That words should be taken not according to the custome of all wryters, but in their owne signification, that is, according to the Ministers fansy. Conforme to this abhominable fashion of the Ministers, let vs take these words in their owne signification; Baal, for Lord, Beelze∣bub, Lord of a fly, Diabolus for staunderer, Angels for Messen∣gers,  for a wind (for thus the Ministers translate it Iohn 3. v. 8.) Eucharisty for thanks-giuing, Baptismus for wa∣shing, Infernus, or hel for a graue, Anima, or the soule for a Carcasse, Ecclesia or Church for Congregation or Synago∣gue, and Superintendent for Bishop. Conforme to these new forged and inuented prophane words, let a Minister prea∣ching in S. Giles Church in Edenburgh say thus to his au∣ditors: Faithfull brethren, I that am yourSo the Ministers do translate Iames 5. v. 14. Elder, or Su∣perintendent, placed in thisIn the Bibles prin∣ted 1560. Synagogue & Congrega∣tion of Edenburgh, by the holyIohn. 3. v. 8. wind, for the feeding of yourBeza in 1. Acts. v. 27. carcasses, do preach vnto you in the name ofCastalio the Purit. Baal; that except ye come to receaueIdem passim. thanks giuing with more deuotion, and performe better your promise made to God inIdem passim. washing, you shall be condemned body & car∣casse to theThe Kings Bi∣bles in the 2. of Acts. graue, with the staunderers, I say with theCastal. Lord of a fly, and hisIdem. messengers. How deeply, I pray you, would such words sinke into the harts of the Bur∣gesses of Edenburgh, and how far different would such a prophane exhortation be, from this other made by a Ca∣tholike Bishop or Priest: I that am your Bishop and Preist placed in this Church of Edenburgh by the holy Ghost, for the feeding of your soules, do denounce vnto yow in the name of our Lord, that except yee come to receaue the B. Sacrament,Castalio. & performe better your promise made to God in Baptisme, you shall be body & soule condemned to hel, your portion shalbe with the diuels, yea with Beelzebub,
and his Angels. I might giue sundry like examples to proue the absurdityes and great inconuenients which ensue of the English corrupted translation of the Bibles, which (as some Protestants and Puritans do say):Carl. in his booke that Christ went not down to hell. lead men the high way to very Atheisme, worse then gentility, or the schoole of Epi∣cure. Thus M. Carlile, adding this other iudgment of his of the English Bibles, wherin the translation is corrupted, the sense and meaning depraued, the truth obscured, the ignorant deceaued, and the simple supplanted. And againe speaking against the Mi∣nisters who haue translated the Bible, sayth: That in many places they detort the Scriptures from the right sense, they them selues do loue darknes more then light, and falshood more thē truth. Let vs come to the corruptions in particular. 2. The first place corrupted by the Ministers is that of the Prophet Dauid:Psalm. 5. v. 4. In the morning I will stand by thee, and will see; because thou art not a God that wilt iniquity. Wherby the Prophet testifyeth, that God cannot be the author or cause of any sinne; for God can do nothing contrary to his owne will, but rather he hateth iniquity, & all that worke iniquity. The Hebrew word Chapets, signifieth volens, that will: As the Protestants do translate in other indifferent places, as,Prou. 8 v. 9. they are playne to him who will vnderstand. Omnibus volentibus ea; chepet se hem. The Greeke translation in like ma∣ner is manifest.. Contrary to this holy doctrine the Mini∣sters haue taken away the word wilt out of the Bible, to signify that detestable doctrine of theirs, That God willeth sin, that God is the author of sinne, and of all iniquity and abho∣minatiō. To the which end they translate thus, Thou art not ae God that loueth wickednes. For ther is a great differēce betwixt to will a thing, and to loue the same: and though the difference might seeme not to be so great, yet it is a detestable forme of proceding of the Ministry to trāslate thus the Bible against the practise and custom of al the ancient and holy Fathers. To the end that the Ministers be not offended with me, I will set down their own words touching this point, whe∣ther or not God be author and cause of all sinnes and abho∣minations. First then it is certayne, that he who will sinne, and taketh pleasure therin, is author and cause therof: So
is God in the Protestants religiō. Heare their owne words preached and pronounced at seuerall tymes by the Mini∣sters in the order of Baptisme:In the order of ba∣ptisme of the Mini∣sters ioined with the psal. book. God is creator of heauen and earth (say the Ministers) that is to say, that heauen and earth & the contents therof are so in his hand, that there is nothing done with∣out his knowledge, neyther yet against his will. This is that horri∣ble and diuellish doctrine which Caluin did teach, and Knox did learne in Geneua.Lib. 1. institut. c. 17. num. 5. Il ne se fait (sayth Caluin) ny larcin, ny paillardise, ny homicide, que la volontè de Dieu n'entre∣uienne. O destable doctrine! O abhominable religion! 2. The minister & superiour iustly is called author and cause of that sinne wherunto he induceth his seruant and subiect. In lyke manner God is author of sinne in the Ministers re∣ligion specified in the articles of their faith, thus:In the Articles of the Mini∣sters Fayth of Scotland. Sunday 3. So then by thy saying (sayth the Minister to the Chyld) the power of God is not idle, but continually exercised: that nothing (remarke the words) is done but by him and his ordinance. YeaIn the 4 Sunday. God doth compell the diuels to execute his will, although it be against their in∣tent and purpose. O horrible blasphemy & worse thē Turkish doctrine! Eyther he compelleth them to do good or to do bad? good they cannot do, because they are confirmed in a reprobat sense and state: if bad, yet against their intent, is not God more the cause of the wickednes they do, yea more then they themselues in the Protestants Religion? 3. As he is iustly the cause of a mans death, who willingly and wittingly delyuereth him into his enemyes hands, by whom he is killed; So the Ministers do make God to be author of al the sinnes & abhominations of the wicked, their words be:In the Article of Faith. Sun∣day 43. As God of his infinite mercy doth preserue his faithfull, so lykewise he doth not only giue vp, cast off, and with draw his grace from such as he will punish: but also he delyuereth them to the diuel committing them to his tyrāny; he stryketh them with blindnes, and giueth them vp into reprobat mynds, that they become vtterly sla∣ues vnto sinne, and subiect to all tentations. Can there be more abhominable words deuysed to make God author & cause of all sinnes, then the former? 4. Sin is more attributed to the chief, then to the instrumentall cause therof, by reason that the instrumentall cause doth worke subordinatly, and
as it were commanded by the chief and principall cause. And in this sense & meaning the Ministers do make God to be more the chief cause and author of all the sinnes and abhominations of the world, then the diuels themselues. Their words be:In the order of Baptisme. We confesse and believe that neyther the Di∣uels nor yet the wicked of the world haue any power to molest or trou∣ble the chosen children of God, but in so farre, as it pleaseth him to vse them as instruments. The same very blasphemous words Caluin the Sophist hath in the first booke of his diaboli∣call Institutions cap. 18. num. 2. Of whom Knox, Willox, Paul Meffen, and such limmes of Satan did learne them in Geneua, the sinke and puddle of Baal, & of the Antichristian Ministers. I call them Ministers, by reason that as the word Menester, in a certaine Lāguage signifieth as it were a hotch-potch of diuers ingredients: so our Scots-Ministers haue put together, as in a hotch-potch, those heresies, which were before condēned in al ages, giuing the name therunto of a Reformed Religion. Such is then the God of Caluin and of the Ministers, set down & descrybed in the former words far different from the God of the Roman Catholiks. The false God of Caluin, and of the Ministers (sayth Castalio, a prime Puritan Minister before cited) is slow to mercy, prone to anger, who hath created the greatest part of the world to destruction, & hath praedestinat them not only to damnation, but also to the cause of dam∣nation, so that neyther thefts, murthers, nor Adulteryes are commit∣ted, but by his constraint and impulsion, so that not the Diuel, but the God of Caluin is the author & cause of al wickednesse. But that God, which the holy Scriptures teach, is altogether contrary to this God of Caluin, and of the Ministers &c. And to proue this their Cal∣uinian God out of the Scriptures, they haue falsified sundry places therof, as amongst others the foresaid: Thou art not a God that wilt iniquity. 3. The second corruption is that of the ProphetPsal. 144. v. 13. protest. 145 Dauid: The Lord is faithfull in all his words, and holy in all his works. Wherby the Prophet assureth vs, that God is most faithfull in all his words set down in the holy Scripture, specially those:1. Tim. 2. v. 4. God will all men to be saued, and to come to the knowledge of the truth. For God hath prouyded a generall
medicine and redemption in the blood of Christ Iesus, for all those who will accept of it, in doing things set down in Gods law. Conforme to that which S. Peter also tea∣cheth:2. Pet. 3. v. 9. Our Lord slacketh not his promise, as some do esteeme it: but he doth paiently for you, not willing that any perish, but that all returne to penance. Which words of the Bible do conterpoint directly that article of the Puritanes Religion set down in their confession of Faith thus:In the confession of Fayth. Who of the lost sonnes of Adam hath ordeyned some as vessels of wrath to damnation, & hath chosen others as vessels of his mercy to be saued. Because then those former words, The Lord is faithfull &c. declare manifestly Gods mercy and goodnes towards vs, and that he cannot be the author of any sinne or wickednes; the Ministers haue thrust them out of their Bibles, against the Greeke text of the Septuagint, and against the ancient Fathers, S. Hie∣rome, S. Chrysostome, S. Augustine, and others, who do read them exactly as we do. What hope of saluation can the Ministers haue, who thus do corrupt the word of God, to vphold their superstitious & abhominable opiniōs against the trew God? since they haue diminished of the Scripture a whole verse, shall not that wofull sentence be accompli∣shed in thē:Reuel. 22. v. 19. If any man shall diminish of the words of the booke of this Prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the booke of life? 4. The third place falsified by the Ministers is that of Ecclesiasticus, where the Ministers do make their God au∣thor of all the sinnes which Pharao cōmitted. Their words be:Ecclesi. 16 v. 15. The Lord hardened Pharao, that he should not know him: yet their french Bibles printed 1610. haue directly the contrary, Le Seigneur a endurci Pharao, a ce qu'il le cogneust. That is: The Lord hardened Pharao that he should know him. Turning affirmatiuely and not negatiuely as the former, which she∣weth the spirit of contradiction very familiar to the Mini∣sters. The true translation is this: The Lord hardened Pharao, so that he did not know him. The first translation maketh God author of Pharao his sinnes; the second, only that God did harden Pharao in taking away his graces from him by rea∣son of his manifold sinnes: of the which hardening ensued
that Pharao knew not God. 5. The fourth place falsified, is that of Hosea:Hosea 13. v. 9. Thy perdition is of thee, O Israell, only in me is thy help. Declaring therby that the perdition, wickednes and sinnes of men do proceeed of themselues; but their good and vertue of God only, not that God can be in any way the author of sinne and iniquity, conforme to that of the Scripture:Ezech. 33. v. 11. I will not the death of the impious, but that the impious conuert from his way and liue. Conuert, conuert yee from your most euill wayes. A∣gayne God speaketh specially to the wicked & sinfull:Matth. 11. v. 28. come ye to me all that labour and are burthened, and I wil refresh you. And againe:Isa. 59. v. 2. your iniquityes haue separated betwene you & your God, and your sinnes haue hid his face from you that he wil not heare. And many such places which declare playnly that God, who is goodnes it selfe, cannot be the author of any wic∣kednes. But the iniquityes and sinnes of men eyther actu∣ally done or foreseene by God from all eternity, to be done freely in their owne tyme, are the cause that God doth re∣probate, hardē, abandon, yea and suffer them to be giuen vp to a reprobat sense; giuing them neuertheles many good & holy inspirations, wherby they may returne, but they will not: which miserable estate of the wicked is called, Obsti∣nacy, and is a sinne against the holy Ghost. The markes & tokēs wherof are easy to be seen in the Puritane Ministers. The first marke of this obstinacy & reprobation as it were, is, A certayne inward and spirituall blindnes, wherin willingly and wittingly men will remaine in their errours, vices, and heresies, eyther for wordly respect or fleshly libertye, as witnesseth Iob:Iob. These are they that abhorre the light, they know not the wayes therof, nor continue in the pathes therof. The 2. marke is, a certayne spirituall deafnes, wherby willingly lykewise some men wil not heare discourses of the feare of God, of true religion, of the later day, and things to come: such men say in effect, though not in word, to God,Iob. 21. v 14. De∣part from vs, for we desire not the knowledge of thy wayes. Of whom the Prophet in the person of God sayth:Isa. 42 v. 19. Who is blind, but my seruant? and deafe, but he to whome I haue sent my Messengers? Which place is corrupted by the Ministers.
6. The third marke is a certayne contempt of God, Godly things, & of Gods seruants, which is so manifestly seene in all the Ministers, who contemne and make no ac∣compt of the holy Doctours, holy Councels, of the perpe∣tuall succession and continuance of the true Church, of the prouidence of God in preseruing the Church from errour; yea not of any solide motiue, which may induce any wyse man to imbrace the truth. Such men God threatneth ter∣ribly, saying:Prou. 1. v. 24.25.26. Because I haue called, and yee refused, I haue stretched out my hand, and none would regard; but ye haue despysed all my counsell, and would none of my correction, I will also laugh at your destruction, and mock when your feare commeth. The fourth marke is the want of any feeling of Gods iudgements, of sinnes committed against God, yea reioycing as it were in sinne, iniquity & wickednes, without any outward shame or inward feeling. You shall see in this bad disposition many Protestants,Prou. 2 v. 14. Who reioyse in doing euill, and delight in the frowardnes of the wicked. And the Prophet:Ierom. 3 v. 3. Thou hadst a whores forehead, thou wouldest not be ashamed. Do not the very grounds and principles of the Protestant religion bring a man to this miserable estate? The fyfth marke is a certayne Stupidity and carelesnes of those things which appertayne to the lyfe to come, specially a carelesnes in see∣king out the true religion, as witnesseth the Prophet:Hosea 4. v. 6. Because thou hast refused knowledge, I will also refuse thee. Of the which carelesnes and the foresaid bad dispositions & mar∣kes, procedeth as it were an impossibility, or rather a great difficulty in such persons to find out the true Religion, the true faith & profession, saith the Prophet:Ierem. 23. v. 23. Can the black-More change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may yee also do good, that are accustomed to do euill. All these former marks are easy to be seen in many Protestantes, and generally in the Ministers, whose sinne is, in that the greater before God, by reason that many of them do know the truth and will neyther imbrace it, nor suffer others to imbrace it. Which detestable sin of theirs,Ierem. 17. v. 1. is written with a pen of Iron, & with the poynt of a diamond, and grauen vpon the table of their hart, and conscience, which shall accuse and condemne them at the
later day. 7. The fifth place corrupted is that of S. Paul1. Tim. . v. 4. God will all men to be saued, and to come to the knowledge of the truth. And consequently he hath created none to be damned and reprobat, as the Ministers did teach before. Who to cōfirme that their blasphemous doctrine, do translate obscurly, yet perniciously, the foresaid sentence thus: God will that all men should be saued, & come to the knowledge of the truth: referring the matter to the future will of God, and not to the present. Beza lykewise vitiously translateth thus: Qui quosuis homines vult saluari.▪ Taking away the force of the generall proposition. In the Greeke, and Syriake decullehun, i. all men. The words are so playne, that playner cannot be: the reason of the Catholike verity is euident, for since1. Cor. 15. v. 3. Christ died for sinnes according to the Scriptures, and not for our sinnes only,1. Iohn . v. 2. but also for the sinnes of the whole world; what profit could it haue bene for the reprobate, if God had created them to damna∣tion, if God had not a will to saue them? Truly since the Ministers haue so boldly and effrontedly falsified those so playne words of the Bible, what can be looked for at their hands, when the words be obscure and indifferent? If they in this their Idolatrous translation do abandon all the holy Fathers and writers, what meruaile they think themselues the only wyse & learned? But in effect professing them∣selues to be thus wyse,Rom. 2. v. 22. & 24 They become fooles, for they haue tur∣ned the glory of the incorruptible word of God to their owne imagina∣tions, wherfore also God hath giuen them vp to their hartes lust, vnto vncleannes, to defyle their owne bodyes betwene themselues, By reason that they turned the word of God into a lye. If I would produce all the places of the Bible which the Mi∣nisters haue falsified, to mainteyne this and other articles of their abhominable Idolatry and superstitious doctrine, whole volumes of Bookes might be framed therof, bigger without comparyson then six Bibles. But since my health is greatly weakned, specially since my last imprisonmēt, I cannot performe that which I intēded, to refute the grea∣test part of the Protestants falsifications: declaring therby consequently that the Scots, or English Bible is no wayes the word of God.
The conclusion of this Second Century, or hundreth yeares. Togeather with a Challenge to M. Andrew Rāsey Minister of Edenburgh, requiring of him a Catalogue to be made of the profes∣sours of his Religion, for these two for∣mer Ages, or Centuryes. HAuing thus set downe the doctrine & Professours of the Catholike Religion for these two former Ages (as godwilling I am to do in the ensuing Ages) I challenge M. Andrew Ramsey Minister of Edenburgh, to deuise and set down the very wordes and sentences of his professours in euery Age as making for the defence of his hereticall Reli∣gion, as I haue set downe in the two preceding Ages the names & sentences of the Professours of the Catholike Re∣ligion, in defence of the same. Which I know he cannot do. For if there had bene any man in any of these former or ensuing Ages, professing the Protestants or Puritans Reli∣gion, assuredly some history-writer had made mention of him by way of prayse or disprayse, since other men and matter of lesse moment, haue bene recorded and noted by history-writers. The reason of this any petition is. Since God hath appoynted Pastours to be alwayes in the true Church & Religion vnto the worlds end, that men should be preserued from wauering in Fayth, and from being car∣ryed about with euery wind of false doctrine; If the Pro∣testants cannot name me, no not one man of their Re∣ligion who was in these two former, or ensuing Ages, vn∣to the coming of Luther; it followeth of necessity that their Religion is nothing else, but a new inuention of Luther & Caluin, and a rapsody or rable of ragged heretikes. 2. If the Ministers will reply that the Apostles were of their Religiō: I answere first, that I haue refuted before that foolish saying at lēgth, & they cannot produce no not one place of all the Apostles writs, wherby in playne termes, expresse wordes and formal text, they shall be able to proue any debatable poynt of their Religion, or improue any de∣batable poynt of our Catholik Religion. 2. I answer, that
all the heretikes who be now a dayes differing amongst themselues in essentiall poynts, as Lutheranes, Caluinists, Anabaptists, Zuynglians, Vbiquitists, Trinitaryes, & such infinite number, they say all that they are of the Apostles Religion, deceauing therby the simple people, condem∣ning notwithstanding one another of manifest heresie and diabolicall Idolatry. 3. I answere that it is in question and debate betwixt vs and the Protestants, whether they be of the Apostles Religion, wherfore ignorantly and beggar∣ly they presuppose which is in question. That which I aske then of M. Ramsey is, that he will name me any wryter of these two former Ages, setting downe his wordes & wri∣tings, as I haue done, who being after the Apostles imme∣diatly, or mediatly, hath made mention of any debatable poynt of this Religion, as professing the same, and consen∣ting with him in that vnity of Fayth, which is required to true Religion. 3. To the better vnderstanding of the which petition of mine it is to be remarked:Vincēt. Lyrin. lib. contra hae∣res. cap 32. That the Church of God is a ca∣reful keeper of true Religiō, which is cōmitted to her charge, for she neuer changeth or altereth it in any thing: she diminisheth nothing, nothing she addeth, because God promised thatIohn. 16. v. 13. the spirit of truth should teach all truth vnto the Church. Wherfore since that all the holy Fathers named in these two former Ages, and to be named in the ensuing Ages, did constantly belieue, that the true Church of God was euer to continue, that she should not erre in matters of Fayth, that all truth in her was to be foūd as in a rich Treasure house: They in lyke manner did be∣lieue constātly, fide saltem implicita, whatsoeuer then & now the Catholike Church doth teach and professe: they did all say with holy Irenaeus:Lib. 4. cap. 43. We must heare and obey that Church, those Priests, who haue succession of their Episcopall function, haue receaued the Charisma of truth. And forasmuch as these former & ensuing holy Pastours were euer ready to submit their particular opinions to the Fayth and Iudgement of the ho∣y Church, to imbrace that as a poynt of Fayth which the Church taught and resolued; neither can particular opini∣on, or errour of some of them hinder their vnity in Fayth
with vs, nor yet can we be sayd to belieue any thing, which they belieued not: because they euer submitted their iudgement to the iudgement of the true Church, which then was visible, & which was euer to continue. Contra∣rywise all heretikes which hath bene and be, as they would neuer submit their iudgement to any Church, which then was, or now is, hauing alwayes for the last ground of their Religion, Their owne particular, and inward spirit, and persuasi∣on, as they haue not, nor euer had any vnity in Fayth; so euery one condemneth another of heresy, of errour and infidelity. This doctrine with the rest of the holy Fathers S. Augustin doth teache:Aug. l. de ciuit. c. 5 Those (sayth he) who in the Church of Christ do hold some vnsound and peruerse opinions, if beyng admonished to come to wholesome and right beliefe, they resist contu∣maciously, and will not amend, but do persist to defend their pestilent and deadly doctrines, they are made heretike. The same sayth O∣rigē:In cap. 3 ad Titū. apud Pam∣ph. in A∣polog. prae¦fat. Origē. That man is to be accompted an heretike, who professeth him∣selfe to belieue Christ, and yet belieueth something which is different from that, which the definition of Ecclesiasticall tradition conteyneth. And Beza himselfe, though a Puritane:Beza in notis super Act. 5. v. 17. He is an hertike who doth so go away from wholesome doctrine, as condemning God, and the iudgement of the Church, persisteth in his opinion and violateth the concord of the Church. Because pertinacy, which is proper to all heretikes consisteth in holding opinions contrary to the knowne opinion of the Church of God. 4. Finally, as I haue set downe in these two former Ages manifestly the beliefe and Religion of the Catholike Roman Church, so the Protestants themselues do auow that the Roman Church the first six hundreth yeares was the only true Church; confirming therby in generall all which I haue set down in particular. Thus Whitaker a prim Minister:Lib. de Antichri∣sto cont. Sanderum pag. 35. & sequent. The Roman Church, sayth he, during the first six hundreth yeares after Christ, was pure and flourishing, and inuiolably taught, and defended the Fayth deliuered by the Apostles. Which purity of the Roman Church gaue occasion to Tertullian to prouoke the Heretikes of his tyme with the succession of the Bishops of Rome, and the Roman Church:In his confutatiō of Purga∣tory pag. 374. For that, sayth M. Fulk, the Church of Rome retayned by succession, vntill
Tertullians dayes, that Fayth which it did first receaue from the A∣postles. The which tyme he extendeth not only to Irenaeus Cyprian, Tertullian, and Optatus tyme and Age; but ly∣kewise to S. Hierome, and Augustins Age, saying thus:Ibid. p. 373. and in his Reten∣tiue &c. pag. 85. That those men specially named the Church of Rome, it was because the Church of Rome at that time, as it was founded by the Apostles, so it continued in the doctrine of the Apostles. And Caluin himselfe:Caluin in his French In∣stittutions anno 1562. It was a thing notorious, & without doubt, that after the Apostles Age, vntill the tyme of those holy Fathers (that is, of S. Augustine, S. Chrysostome &c.) who were 440. yeares after Christ, no change was made in doctrine, neyther at Rome, nor at other cittyes: which verity sundry other Protestants accordingly do teach. If thē the Roman Church, faith and religion was only the true religion the first four hundreth yeares, much more the first two hundreth yeares. Which doctrine of two hundreth or foure hundreth yeares is the selfe same for which we Ca∣tholiks are now persecuted in England Scotland & Irland as is notorious, and which hath continued from the Apo∣stles to our dayes without any interruption at all; and for the which our Blessed Queene Mary, his Highnesse dearest & most holy mother, the last of fourscore Catholike Kings and Queenes of Scotland, suffered martyrdome. Wher∣fore, deare Countreymen, let vs loue our Lord and God, but let vs loue also this his Church: him as our Father, her as our mother: for he who hath not the Catholike and Ro∣man church for his Mother, assuredly shall neuer haue God of heauen for his Father. The end of the third Part, or second Century.
Aduertisement. By reason that these bookes were printed by men who had no great skil in the Scottish language, sundry small errours haue escaped, which the learned and charitable Reader will, I hope, the more easily excuse, and correct. Errata. IN the first Part, in the Preface to the Reader, read Carpere vel noli. In the second Part, line 28. read, these. Pag. 22. in the margent, dele these words, See these words in the Bible. Pag. 23. lin. 3. read, which hath byn vsed. Pag. 27. l. 12. dele these words, Quem & citat Beza. Pag. 44. l. 1. read, these. Ibid. in the margent, dele these words, Serm. de Annun∣tiat. Pag. 45. l. 3. read, Carne sola. Pag. 72. l. 3. read, recludunt. Ibid. l. 7. read additus. Pag. 73. l. 3. read Bruma. Ibid. l. 34. read solo. Pag. 81. l. 30. read Bibles. Pag. 93. l. 30. read meritorious. The Errours of the third Part, if any haue escaped, the Courteous Reader, I trust, will of himselfe correct. FINIS.
