C3994 [ocm]10861669 204820
THE Church Catechism EXPLAIN'D, And PROV'D, by Apt Texts of Scripture. Divided into XXVI Parts. Recommended by His Grace NARCISSUS, Lord ARCHBISHOP of DUBLIN, For the Use of his Diocess. Train up a Child in the way he should go; and when he is old, he will not depart from it. Prov. 22.6. DUBLIN, Printed by and for Joseph Ray, over against the Tholsel, 1699.
Imprimatur. Narcissus Dublin. September. 30th. 1699.
THE PREFACE. THis plain Catechism, was at first composed for the Use of particular Churches in Dublin: And being communicated to the Lord Arch-Bishop of Dublin, His Grace thought it convenient to have it Printed, for the more easie dispers∣ing of Copies in private Families: The care of Parents, Masters and Mistrisses being very necessary to the fitting Children and Servants for publick Examination. And as the shortness of the Answers in this Catechism does render the Task less dif∣ficult to those that Instruct; So it may be reasonably expected, that great Benefit will redound to those who are Instructed: both from their Learning the Scripture Proofs by way of Answer, and also from their Repeat∣ing the Question in the Answer, (where ne∣cessary.) For as by the One, the Answer is made an intire Proposition, whereby they
may the better understand it: So by the Other, being train'd up from Children, in the Knowledg of the Holy Scriptures, they will be the more firmly settled in the Principles of the Christian Religion. Amen.
THE Church Catechism Explain'd, with Scripture-Proofs. Part I. YOU come hither to say your Catechism: Quest. What do you mean by the word Cate∣chism? Answ. By the Word Catechism I mean: An instru∣ction to be learn'd of every Person, before he be brought to be confirm'd by the Bishop. Q. What do you learn by that Instruction? A. By the Instruction in the Catechism I learn the Principles of the Christian Religion. Q. What is it to be a Christian? A. A Christian is one who believes the doctrine of Christ. Q. Where were those that believ'd the doctrine of Christ, first called Christians? A. At Antioch. Q. How do you prove it? A. I prove it from Acts 11. vers. 26. And the Disciples were called Christians first at Antioch. Q. Have you any thing which particularly signifies your being a Christian? A. Yes, my Christian Name. Q. What is your Name? A. M. or N.
Q Why do you call that your Christian Name? A. Because it was given me when I was made a Christian? Q. Have you not another Name? A. Yes, my Sirname, or the Name that I had from my Father. Q Why do you answer by your Christian Name, ra∣ther then your Sirname? A. Because it is more honourable to be related to Christ, then to any Man, tho the greatest upon Earth. Q. Who gave you your Christian Name? A. My Godfathers and Godmothers / in my Baptism / wherein I was made a member of Christ / a Child of God / and an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven? Q. Why do you call them Godfathers and Godmo∣thers? A. I call them Godfathers and Godmothers, be∣cause they presented me to my Baptism, when I en∣tred into the Covenant with Christ, and then in∣gag'd to God, and the Church, to see me brought up in the Christian Religion, to perform my part of the Covenant, and so became my spiritual Parents. Q. Why had you Godfathers, and Godmothers, to answer for you, and give you your Name, rather then your Parents? A. For better security in a case of so great moment. Q What priviledges had you by your Baptism? A. By my Baptism I had three great priviledges. Q What is the first priviledg of your Baptism? A. The first priviledg of my Baptism is, To be a member of Christ. Q What do you mean by being a member of Christ? A. I mean the being united to that spiritual body the Church, whereof Christ is the head, and from whom I derive power to live as a Christian.
Q. How do you prove, that by Baptism we are u∣nited to that Spiritual Body, the Church, whereof Christ is the Head? A. I prove it from 1 Cor. 12.12, 13. For as the Body is one, and has many members, and all the members of that one body being many, are one body: So also is Christ, for by one Spirit, are we all baptized into one body — Q What is the second priviledg of your Baptism? A. The second priviledg of my Baptism is, To be a Child of God. Q. From whence do you prove that Christians are Children of God? A. I prove it from 1 John. 3. vers. 2. Beloved now are we the Sons of God. Q What were you before? A. A Child of Wrath. Q. How were you made a Child of God? A. I was made a Child of God by Adoption. Q What do you mean by Adoption? A. By Adoption is meant not born, but admitted, or taken into the number of Gods Children thro' Christ. Q How do you prove that we are adopted or made the Children of God thro' Christ? A. I prove it from Galat. 3. vers. 26. For ye are all he Children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus. Q. What is the third priviledg of your Baptism? A. The third priviledg of my Baptism is, To be an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven. Q How are you an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven? A. I am an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven, because I have a promise of that inheritance of which Christ has actually taken possession in my behalf. Q Where have you the promise of a heavenly Kingdom? A. In St. Luke 12. vers. 32. Fear not little flock, it is the Fathers good pleasure, to give you the Kingdom.
Q. Is that promise absolute? A. No, the promise is conditional, which I may surely obtain, if I lead a Christian life. Q How do you prove the promise of eternal hap∣piness to be conditional? A. I prove that the promise of eternal happiness is conditional from Rom. 2. vers. 7. where S. Paul say's, That those who by patient continuance in well doing seek for Glory, Honour, and Immortality, shall have eternal life at the day of Judgment, when God shall render to every one according to his Works. Part II. YOU told me what you were made in Baptism, and what you were to expect thereby, if you perform'd the conditions promised for you. Q. What did your Godfathers and Godmo∣thers then promise for you? A. They did promise / and vow / three things in my Name: First, That I should renounce the Devil / and all his Works / the Pomps / and Va∣nities of this wicked World. Secondly, That I should believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith. And Thirdly. That I should keep Gods holy Will and Commandments / and walk in the same all the days of my life. Q. What was the first thing that was promised and vowed in your Name, at your Baptism? A That I should renounce the Devil / and all his Works / the Pomps / and Vanities of this wicked World / and all the sinful lusts of the flesh. Q. What do you mean by the Devil? A. I mean, every one of those envious evil Angels,
or Spirits, who by their disobedience having lost their own happiness, maliciously endeavour to deprive us of ours. Q. How do you prove that there are such evil An∣gels? A. I prove that there are evil Angels from St. Jude vers. 6. And the Angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains, under darkness unto the Judgment of the great day. Q. How do you prove that the Devil endeavours to deprive us of our happiness? A. I prove it from St. Peter 5. vers. 8. Be sober, be vigilant, because your adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lyon, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour. Q What do you mean by renouncing the Devil? A. By renouncing the Devil I mean, to forsake, de∣fy and resist him. Q. What do you mean by the Works of the Devil? A. By the Works of the Devil I mean all sin what∣soever, to which the Devil continually tempts us. Q How do you prove that Sin is the Work of the Devil? A. I prove Sin to be a Work of the Devil from 1 Joh. 3. vers. 8. He that committeth Sin is of the Devil, for the Devil sinneth from the beginning. Q. Ho do you prove▪ you are to renounce the Devil? A. I prove it from St. James 4. vers. 7. — Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you. Q. What do you mean by the wicked World? A. By the wicked World I mean all the customes of the World, that intice to sin. Q. What do you mean by the Pomps thereof? A. By the Pomps of the World I mean Riches, Honours, and Pleasures. Q. Are Riches, Honours, and Pleasures then un∣lawful? A. Yes, Riches, Honours, and Pleasures are un∣lawful, so far as they prove Snares to lead Men to sin.
Q How must you renounce these Pomps of the World? A. I must renounce the Pomps of the World, by refraining from Pride, Ambition, and Covetousness, and from all excess in the use of Gods Creatures. Q. How do you prove that you are thus to re∣nounce them? A. I prove it from 1 John 2. vers. 15, 16. Love not the World, nor the things that are in the World, if any Man love the World, the Love of the Father is not in him. For all that is in the World, the lust of the Flesh, and the lust of the Eyes, and the pride of the life is not of the Father, but is of the World. Q What do you mean by the sinful lusts of the Flesh? A. By the sinful lusts of the Flesh I mean all im∣pure desires disorderly affections, and vitious inclinations. Q. How do you prove that you are to renounce the lusts of the Flesh? A. I prove it from 1 Pet. 2. vers. 11. Dear∣ly beloved, I beseech you as Strangers and Pilgrims to abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the Soul. Q. What further reason have you to renounce the sinful lusts of the Flesh? A. I have further reason to renounce them, because Christ tells us, that they defile or corrupt a Man. Q Where does Christ tells us so? A. In St. Mark 7 vers. 21, 22, 23. For from within, out of the Heart of Man proceed evil thoughts, Adulteries, Fornications, Murders, Thefts, Covetousness, an evil Eye, Blasphemy, Pride, Foolishness: All these evil things come from within, and defile the Man.
Part III. Quest. WHat is the second thing, that your God∣fathers and Godmohers promised for you? A. That I should believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith. Q. Where are these Articles to be found? A. In the holy Scriptures, the chiefest points whereof, are briefly summ'd up in that which is cal∣led the Apostles Creed. Q. What is the third thing promised for you, by your Godfathers and Godmothers? A. To keep Gods holy Will and Command∣ments / and to walk in the same all the days of my life. Q. Where do you find these Commandments? A. In the holy Scriptures, and particularly in the 20th. Chapter of Exodus. Q. What do you mean, by keeping and walking in Gods Commandments / to your lives end? A. I mean, the living in a constant course of obe∣dience to God, and persevering in the same, as long as I live. Q. What obligation lyes on you to this perfor∣mance? A. The Vow made for me in my Baptism? Q. Do you think that you are bound to believe / and do as your Godfathers and Godmothers pro∣mised for you? A. Yes verily / and by Gods help so I will / and I heartily thank our heavenly Father / that he hath called me to this State of Salvation / thro' Iesus Christ our Saviour. And I pray unto God to give
me his grace / that I may continue in the fame to my lives end. Q. But how can the Vow made by your God∣fathers and Godmothers oblige you? A. Because they promised and vowed in my name, and if I do not make it good, I loose the benefit of the Covenant then entred into. Q. But are you able to perform these things? A. I am not able of my self, and therefore I say by Gods help / so I will. Q. How do you prove that you need Gods help for the performance of your Duty. A. I prove it from Philip. 2. vers. 13. For it is God that worketh in you, both  wi and to do, of his good pleasure. Q. By what means are you to obtain Gods Assi∣stance? A. I am to obtain Gods Assistance by Prayer and Thankfulness. Q. But how are you assur'd, that you shall obtain Gods assistance? A. I am assur'd of God's assistance from his graci∣cious promise St. Luke 11. vers, 13. where Christ say's, — your heavenly Father will give the holy Spirit to them that ask him. Q. How do you prove that you ought to give God thanks, for calling you to this State of Salvation? A. I prove it from Coloss. 1. vers. 12, 13. where the Apostle exhorts the Colossians, To give thanks to the Father, who hath made us meet to be partakers of the Inhe∣ritance of the Saints in light; who hath deliver'd us from the power of darkness, and hath translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son. Q. Why do you call your Christian State a State of Salvation? A. Because I have therein all the means of Salva∣tion. Q. How do you prove it?
A. I prove it from Rom. 1. vers. 16. where St. Paul calls the Gospel of Christ, The power of God unto Salvation, to every one that believeth — Q. Why are you to pray unto God to give you his Grace? A. I am to pray unto God to give me his grace / that I may thereby be enabled to continue faithful in his service unto my lives end. Q. How do you prove that you may obtain grace by Prayer? A. I prove it from Hebr. 4. vers. 16. Let us come boldly to the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. Q How do you prove, that you ought to perse∣vere in these duties, to your lives end? A. I prove it from Hebrews 10. vers. 38. — If any Man draw back, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him. Q. Have you another proof? A. Yes, from Revel. 2. vers. 10 — Be thou faith∣ful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of life. Part IV. YOU said that the Articles of your Christian Faith were to be found in the holy Scriptures, and are chiefly summ'd up, in that which is called the Apo∣stles Creed. Quest. Are there any other Creeds? Answ. Yes: But the chiefest of them are those call'd the Nicene, and Athanasian Creed. Q. What difference is there between those Creeds? A. Not any in substance, only these two are an enlargement, and explanation, of some Articles in the Apostles Creed. Q. Why is it call'd the Apostles Creed?
A. Because it contains the Summ of the doctrines preach'd by the Apostles, and there being twelve Articles in it, Some think it was composed by the Apostles themselves, or by Apostolical Men, accord∣ing to the number of the Apostles. Q Rehearse the Articles of thy Belief? A. I Believe in God the Father Almighty / Ma∣ker of Heaven and Earth. And in Iesus Christ / his only Son / our Lord; Who was con∣ceived by the Holy Gost / born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified / dead / and buried / He descended into Hell / the third day He rose again from the dead; He ascended into Heaven. And sitteth at the right Hand of Gd the Father Almighty. From thence He shall come to Iudg the quick and the dead. I believe in the Holy Ghost / the holy Catholick Church / the Commu∣nion of Saints / the Forgiveness of Sins the Resur∣rection of the Body / and the life everlasting Amen. Q. What do you chiefly learn by these Articles of your Belief? A. First / I learn to believe in God the Father / who hath made me and all the World. Secondly / In God the Son / who hath redeemed me and all mankind. And Thirdly / In God the Holy Ghost / who sanctifieth me and all the elect people of God. Q What do you mean, when you say, I believe. A. I mean, that I am fully perswaded of the truth of every Article Q. Are these Words, I believe / to be placed only at the beginning of the Creed? A. No, they are to be carryed through, and un∣derstood, at the beginning of every Article. You say you believe in God. Q. What is God? A. God is an eternal Spirit, infinite in Power, and Wisdom, and all other perfections. Q How do you prove, that God is a Spirit?
A. I prove it from St. John 4. vers. 24. where Christ say's, God is a Spirit. Q. How do you prove the Eternity and Wisdom of God? A. I prove it from 1 Tim. 1. vers. 17. Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God be Ho∣nour and Glory for ever and ever, Amen. But you said, that you learn'd from the Articles of the Christan Faith, to believe in God the Father, and God the Son▪ and God the Holy Ghost. Q. Are there three Gods? A. No, There are three distinct persons in the God∣head, and yet but one God. Q What proof have you that there is but one God? A. I prove it from 1 Corinth. 8. vers. 4. — there is no other God but one. Q Have you another proof? A. Yes, from St. Mark 12. vers. 29. And Jesus an∣swer'd him, the first of all the Commandments is, Hear O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord — Q What proof have you of three Persons in the unity of the Godhead? A. I prove it from 1. John 5 vers 7 There are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are One. Part V. YOU say, you believe in God the Father. Quest. Why do you call him Father? Answ. Because, he is the Father of our Lord Ie∣sus Christ; and the Creator of Angels and Men. Q. How do you prove that God is th Father o our Lord Iesus Christ?
A. I prove it from 2 Corinth. 1 vers. 3. Blessed be God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ — Q How do you prove that God is our Father? A. I prove it from Isaiah 63. vers. 16. Doubtless thou art our Father, O Lord — Q What do you mean, by Almighty? A. By Almighty I mean that God is able to do all things. Q. How do you prove that God is able to do all things? A. I prove it from St. Matth. 19. vers 26 — with God all things are possible — Q Have you no proof from the old Testament? A. Yes, from Gen. 17. vers. 1 — I am the Almigh∣ty God — Q. What do you mean by Heaven and Earth? A. I mean the whole World, and all that therein is. Q How did God make the World? A. By his Word. Q. How do you prove, that God made the World? A. I prove it from Acts 17. ver. 24 — God that made the World, — And also from the History of the Crea∣tion, written at large in the first Chapter of Genesis. Q. How do you prove, that God made the World by his Word? A. I prove it from Hebr. 11. vers. 3. Thro' Faith we understand, that the Worlds were framed by the Word of God — Q How was Man created? A. His body was formed out of the Earth, and his Soul inspired by God. Q How do you prove it? A. I prove it from Gen. 2. vers. 7. The Lord God formed Man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his Nstrils the breath of life; and Man became a living Soul. Q Was Woman created so? A No, she was creared of a Rib taken from Man, Q How do you prove that? A. I prove it from Gen. 2. vers. 22. And the Rib
which the Lord God hath taken from Man, made he Wo∣man — Q. Was Man made like unto any of the Creatures upon Earth? A. No, Man was not made like any of the Crea∣tures upon Earth, but he was made after the Image of God. Q How do you prove that? A. I prove it from Gen. 5. vers. 1 — In the day that God created Man, in the likeness of God made he him. Q. Why; has God a body like Man? A. No, God has not a body, for he is a Spirit, as was proved from St. John 4. vers. 24. Q. Wherein then did Mans likeness to God consist? A. Mans likeness to God consists in having a rea∣sonable Soul endued with righteousness and purity. Q Did Man continue in that State of Innocence in which he was created? A, No, in Adams disobedience all fell from it? Q. How do you prove it? A. I prove it from Rom. 5. vers. 12 — As by one Man sin entred into the World, and Death by sin, so Death passed upon all Men, for that all have sinned. Q. Is there no means of recovery? A. Yes, by Iesus Christ the only Son of God. Q How do you prove that? A. I prove it from St. John 3. vers. 16. God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever be∣lieveth in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. Part VI. Quest. WHat is the second Article of the Apostles Creed? A. And (I believe) in Iesus Christ / his only Son / our Lord.
Q. How do you prove that you are to believe in Jesus Christ? A. I prove it from 1 John 3.23 — And this i his Commandment, that we should believe in the Name of his. Son Jesu Christ. Q How is Iesus Christ the Son of God? A. Jesus Christ is the Son of God by nature, begot∣ten from everlasting of the Father. Q How do you prove that? A. I prove it from St. John 1 vers. 14 — We beheld his Glory, the Glory as of the only begotten of the Father — Q Why is he called Iesus? A. He is called Jesus, because he is a Saviour, for so the word Jesus signifies. Q How do you prove this? A. I prove it from the Angels charge to Joseph, St. Matth 1 vers. 21 — Thou shalt call his Name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their Sins. Q. Why is he called Christ? A. He is called Christ, because he is the promised Messiah, or the anointed of God; for so the words Christ and Messiah signifie. Q. How do you prove that Messiah is Christ. A. I prove it from St. John 4. vers. 25 — I know that Messiah cometh, who is called Christ — Q. How was Christ anointed? A. Christ was anointed not with Oyle, but by the Spirit of God. Q How do you prove that? A. I prove it from St. Luke 4. vers. 18. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me — Q. To what was Christ the Son of God anointed? A. Christ was anointed to three great Offices, of Prophet, Priest, and King. Q. Wherein was Christ a Prophet? A. Christ was a Prophet in revealing and preaching the Will of his heavenly Father. Q How do you prove that Christ was anointed to preach?
A. I prove it from the aforesaid Text St. Luke 4. vers. 18 — He has anointed me to preach the Gospel — Q How is he a Priest? A. Christ is a Priest by offering himself a Sacrifice, and always interceding for us, as our Mediator. Q. How do you prove that Christ is a Priest? A. I prove it from Hebr. 6. vers. 20 — Even Jesus, made an High Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedek. Q. How do you prove that he is a King? A. I prove it from Hebr. 1 vers. 8. But unto the Son he saith, thy Throne O God is for ever, a Scepter of righteous∣ness is the Scepter of thy Kingdom. Q Have you any proof, that Christ, the promised Messiah, was to be a King A. Yes, from the Propet Zachary Chap. 9. vers. 9 — Behold thy King cometh unto thee — lowly, and riding upon an Ass — Q. How is Christ our King? A. Christ is a King in governing, and protecting his Church? whereof we are Members. Q How do you prove it? A. I prove it from Ephes. 1. vers. 22 — And hath put all things under his feet, and gave him to be Head over all things to the Church. Q How is Christ our Lord? A. Christ is our Lord because by the exercise of these Offices, of Prophet, Priest, and King, he has power and dominion over us. Q How do you prove Christ to be our Lord? A. I prove it from Acts 10. vers. 36 — He is Lord of all. Part VII. YOU have already shew'd Christ to be the Son of God, Quest. Is he not also the Son of Man
A. Yes, He is. Q Is Christ then two persons? A. No, Christ is both God and Man in one Person. Q How do you prove that? A. I prove it from 1 Timoth. 3. vers. 16 — God was manifested in the Flesh — Q. How did Christ become Man? A. He was conceived by the Holy Ghost / and born of the Virgin Mary, as it is expressed in the third Article of the Creed. Q. How do you prove that Christ was conceived of the Holy Ghost? A. I prove it from St. Luke 1 vers. 35. The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee; and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee, therefore also that holy thing that shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. Q How do you prove that Christ was to be born of a Virgin? A. I prove it from Isaiah 7. vers. 14 — behold a Vi∣gin shall conceive and bear a Son, and they shall call his Name Immanuel. Q. How do you prove that it was to be the Virgin Mary? A. I prove it from St. Luke 1 vers. 26, 27 — And the Angel Gabriel was sent from God, to a Virgin espoused to a Man whose Name was Joseph — and the Virgins Name was Mary. Q. How do you prove that Iesus Christ was born of this Virgin? A. I prove it from St. Luke 2. vers. 7. and 21. And she brought forth her first born Son, — and his Name was called Jesus — Q To what end was Christ born? A. Christ was born that he might be capable of be∣ing our Redeemer, and making satisfaction for our Sins. Q. How did Christ make this satisfaction?
A. Christ made this satisfaction by suffering for us / as it is express'd in the fourth Article of the Creed. Q. How is it there express'd? A. He suffered under Pontius Pilate / was cru∣cified / dead / and buried / He descended into Hell. Q. Who was Pontius Pilate? A. The Roman Governor of Judea, the Jews be∣ing at that time subject to the Romans. Q. How did Christ suffer under Pontius Pilate? A. He underwent many miseries, and at last death it self, being crucified by his appointment. Q. What do you mean by crucified? A. By crucified / I mean the nailing of his hands and feet to a Cross of Wood, and his body so conti∣nued hanging, till he dyed. Q. How do you prove that Christ was crucified? A. I prove that Christ was crucified from St. Mat. 27. vers. 35. And they crucified him — Q. How do you prove that Christ dyed on the Cross? A. I prove that Christ dyed on the Cross from St. John 19. vers. 30 — And he bowed his Head, and gave up the Ghost. Q. How do you prove that he was buried? A. I prove that Christ was buryed from St. Mat. 27. vers. 59, 60. And when Joseph had taken the body, he wrapped it in a clean linnen Cloath, and laid it in his own new tomb — Q. Why did Christ suffer the death of the Cross? A. Christ suffer'd the death of the Cross to deliver us from the curse and punishment due to our Sins. Q How do you prove, that Christ's suffering on the Cross has deliver'd us from the punishment due to our Sins? A. I prove it from Galat. 3. vers. 13. Christ hath de∣livered us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us, for it is written, cursed is every one that hangeth on a Tree. Q. Have you another proof?
A. Yes from 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own self bare our Sins, in his own body on the Tree — Q. What do you mean by Christ's descending in∣to Hell? A. By Christ's descending into Hell, I mean, that after he was dead and buried / his Soul and Body continued in the State of separation till his Resurre∣ction. Q. Why was he not to continue in that State? A. Christ was not to continue in that State of se∣paration, because death was not to have dominion over him, as the Apostle tells us, Rom. 6. vers. 9. Part VIII. Quest. WHat is the fifth Article of the Creed? Answ. The third day he rose again from the dead. Q. What do you mean by Christs Resurrection? A By Christs Resurrection, I mean, his rising from his grave to life, by uniting his Body and Soul toge∣ther again. Q. How do you prove that Christ did thus rise from his grave? A. I prove that Christ thus rose from his grave from St. Matth. 28. vers 5, 6. And the Angel answer'd and said unto the Women, fear not ye, I know that ye seek Je∣sus that was crucified, he is not here, for he is risen, as he said; cme see the place where the Lord lay. Q. Have you another proof? A. Yes; From Acts 10 vers. 40, 41. Him God rai∣sed up the third day, and shew'd him openly, not to all the people, but to Witnesses chosen before of God, even us, who did eat and drink with him, after he rose from the dead.
Q. How do you prove, that Christ rose again with the same Soul and Body, which he had before? A. I prove it from Christ's own words to his Dis∣ciples, when he appear'd to them, and they were troubled at his presence, St. Luke 24. vers. 38, 39. And he saith unto them, why are ye troubled, and why do thoughts arise in your hearts: Behold my Hands and my Feet, that it is I my self: handle me and see, for a Spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me have. Q. Why did Christ rise again the third day after his Crucifixion? A. Christ rose again the third day, to shew that his body was not corrupted in the Earth, and to ful∣fil what the Prophet and he himself foretold of his Resurrection. Q. What Prophet foretold Christs Resurrection? A. The Prophet David, Psalm 16. vers. 10. Thou wilt not leave my Soul in Hell, neither wilt thou suffer thy Holy one to see corruption. Q. How do you prove that this was spoken of Christ? A. Because it is applyed to him by St. Peter, Acts 2. vers. 31. And by St. Paul, Acts 13. vers. 35. in their discourse to the Jews Q. Where does Christ foretell his rising again the third day? A. He foretells it in St. Mat. 16. vers. 21. And from that time forth, began Jesus to shew unto his disciples, that he must go unto Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the elders, and chief Priests, and Scribes, and be killed, and be raised again the third day. Q Of what advantage is Christs Resurrection to us? A. By Christs Resurrection we are assur'd, that the great work of our Redemption is fulfilled; and that we our selves shall be raised from our graves at the last day. Q. How do you prove that our Redemption was compleated by our Saviours rising from the dead?
A. I prove it from Rom. 4. vers. 25 — who was de∣liver'd for our Offences, and was raised again for our Justifi∣cation. Q How do you prove that Christs Resurrection is an assurance of ours. A. I prove it from 1 Corinth. 15, 20, 22 — Christ is risen from the dead, and became the first fruits of them that slept. For as in Adam all dye, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. Q. What is the sixth Article of the Creed? A He ascended into Heaven / and sitteth at the right Hand of God the Father Almighty Q What do you mean by ascending into Heaven? A. By ascending into Heaven / I man, that our Lord Jesus Christ fourty days after his Resurrection went up bodily into Heaven. Q How do you prove Christ's Ascention? A. I prove Christs Ascention from Acts 1. vers. 9— While they beheld, he was taken up, and a cloud received him out of their sight. You told me formerly, that God is a Spirit. Q How then can you say, that Christ sitteth at the right hand of God? A. This is spoken after the manner of Men, because sitting at the right hand, signifies the highest dignity and authority. Q. How do you prove that Christ is at the right hand of God? A. I prove it from 1 Pet. 3. vers. 22. Who is gone into Heaven, and is at the right hand of God, Angels and authorities and powers, being made subject unto him. Q. What advantage do we receive by our Saviour Christ's ascention into Heaven? A. The advantages that we receive by Christ's As∣cention into Heaven, are his appearing in the pre∣sence of God for us, as our Mediator and Advocate. Q How do you prove that Christ is our Advocate, and interceeds for us?
A. I prove that Christ is our Advocate, from Hebr. 7. vers. 25. Wherefore he is able to save them to the utter∣most, that come unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them. Q Is Christ our only Mediator? A. Yes, He is. Q. How do you prove it? A. I prove it from 1 Tim. 2, 5. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus. Q. Why is Christ alone our Mediator? A. Because he alone dyed and rose up again for us, as appears from Rom. 8. vers 34 — It is Christ that dyed, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makeh intercession for us. Q. What is the seventh Article of the Creed? A. From thence he shall come to judg the quick and the dead. Q What do you mean by this Article? A. I mean, that the Lord Jesus shall come again, in the same Person, in which he was before on Earth, and will judg both those that shall be found alive at his second coming, and also all those that were dead before. Q How do you prove that Christ shall come again, in the same Person that he was on Earth? A. I prove that Christ shall come again in the same Person that he was on Earth, from the Angels Speech to his Disciples at his Ascention, Acts 1. vers. 11. Ye Men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into Heaven; this same Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come in like-manner, as ye have seen him go into Heaven. Q. How do you prove that Christ shall come to judg the World? A. I prove that Christ shall come to judg the World from St. Matth. 16. vers. 27. For the Son of Man shall come in the glory of his Father, with his Angels, and then shall he reward every Man according to his works.
Q. How do you prove. that Christ shall judg both those that are found alive at his coming, and those that were dead before? A. I prove it from Acts 10. vers. 42 — It is he that was ordain'd of God, to be the Judg of quick and dead. Part IX. Quest. WHat is the eighth Article of the Creed? A. I believe in the Holy Ghost. Q. What do you mean by the Word Ghost? A. The Word Ghost signifies a Spirit. Q. Why do you call him holy? A. He is called holy / because he is holy in himself, and by his working on the Soul, is the Authour of all holiness in us. Q. How do you prove that he is holy in himself? A. I prove that he is holy in himself, because he is call'd the Holy Spirit, 1 Thes. 4. vers. 8. Q. How do you prove that the Holy Ghost is the Authour of holiness in us? A. I prove that the Holy Ghost is the Authour of holiness in us, because we are said to be sanctified by the Holy Ghost, Rom. 15. vers. 16. Q. What do you mean by believing in the Holy Ghost? A. I mean, that I believe him to be the third Per∣son in the Holy Trinity, who proceedeth from the Father, and the Son. Q How do you prove that he proceeds from the Father, and the Son? A. I prove it from St. John. 15. vers. 26 — When the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of Truth, who proceedeth from the Father —
Q What is the ninth Article of the Creed? A. I believe the Holy Catholick Church / the com∣munion of Saints. Q What do you mean by Church? A. By Church I mean the Society of Believers in all ages and places, making one body under Christ their Head. Q How do you prove that Christ is the Head of the Church? A. I prove Christ to be the Head of the Church from Ephes 1. vers. 22, 23 — And gave him to be Head over all things to the Church which is his body — Q How do you prove that this Church is holy? A. I prove that this Church is holy from Ephes. 5. vers. 27. That he might present it to himself a Glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy, and without blemish. Q. What do you mean by the Word Catholick? A. The Word Catholick signifies universal, and therefore the Church is not confined either to the Jews, or to Rome, or to any other particular place or Nation. Q How do you prove that the Church is Uni∣versal? A. I prove the Church to be Catholick or Univer∣sal from Revel. 5. vers. 9. And they sung a new Song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the Book and to open the Seals thereof, for thou hast redeemed us to God, by thy Blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation. Q. Why do you add the Communion of Saints to this ninth Article of the Creed? A. Because as Members of the Catholick Church we ought to maintain Communion / or fellowship, in joyning with one another, in the Word and Sacra∣ments, under Pastours lawfully ordained, and in all other offices of Piety and Charity. Q. How do you prove that the Communion of Saints is joyning in the Word and Sacraments un∣der such Pastors?
A. I prove it from the practice of the first Chri∣stians recorded, Acts 2. vers. 42. And they continued stedfastly in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and is breaking of Bread and in Prayers. Q. How do you prove that a fellowship one with another is required from Christians. A. I prove it from 1 John 1. vers. 7. If we walk in the Light — we have fellowship one with another — Part X. Quest. WHat is the tenth Article of the Creed? A. The forgiveness of Sins. Q. What do you mean by forgiveness of Sins? A. I mean by forgiveness of Sins / a release from guilt and punishment, to which we became lyable by transgressing the Law of God. Q Who are capable of receiving this forgiveness of Sins? A. All true penitents. Q How do you prove that? A. I prove that all true Penitents are capable of re∣ceiving forgiveness of Sins, from Acts 3.19. Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your Sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. Q. By whom is this forgiveness of Sins to be ob∣tained? A. This forgiveness of Sins is to be obtain'd by the merits and intercession of Jesus Christ, the only Son of God. Q. How do you prove that? A. I prove that forgiveness of Sins is to be ob∣tain'd thro' Christ, from 1 John 2 vers. 1, 2. — If any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father Jesus
Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our Sins: and not for ours only, but also for the Sins of the whole World Q What is the eleventh Article of the Creed? A The Resurrection of the body. Q. What do you mean by Resurrection of the body? A. By Resurrection I mean, that I believe, that the dead bodies of all mankind, shall be raised out of their graves at the last day, and by the power of God, shall be re-united to their Souls. Q. How do you prove this Resurrection? A. I prove it from St John 5. vers. 28 29. where Christ says — The hour is coming, when all that are in their Graves shall hear his voice, and come forth — Q What is the twelfth and last Article of the Creed? A. The Life everlasting. Q. What do you mean by Life everlasting? A. By Life everlasting I mean that after the Re∣surrection the Righteous shall enjoy glory and hap∣piness both of body and Soul for ever in Heaven. Q How do you prove that the Righteous shall be thus happy? A. I prove it from 1 Pet. 5. vers. 4. When the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a Crown of Glory which fadeth not away. Q. Have you another proof? A. Yes, from St. Mat. 25. vers. 46— the Righteous shall go into life eternal. Q. Must none rise again but the Righteous? A. Yes, both bad and good, shall rise. Q How do you prove this? A. I prove that both good and bad shall rise, from Acts 24. vers. 15 — There shall be a Resurrection both of the Just, and Unjust. Q. What then shall become of the wicked at the Resurrection? A. At the Resurrection the wicked shall be ba∣nish'd
from the presence of God, and be tormented for ever in Hell, with the Devil and his Angels. Q How do you prove this? A. I prove it from St. John 5 vers. 29 — And they that have done evil, shall have a Resurrection unto Dam∣nation Q Have you another proof? A Yes, from St. Matth. 25. vers. 41. and 46. And Christ shall say unto them on his left hand, depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, — and these shall go into everlasting punish∣men — Q Why do you end your Belief with the Word Amen with which you also end your Prayers? A Because the Word Amen is a note of affirmati∣on, that it is so: as well as a note of desire, or wish∣ing that it should be so. Part XI. Quest. YOV said that your Godfathers and God∣moters did promise for you / that you should keep Gods Commandments / tell me how many Commandments there be? A Ten Q. Which be they? A. The same which God spake in the twentieth Chapter of Exodus / saying / I am the Lord thy God / who brought thee out of the Land of Egypt / out of the House of bondage. Q What is the meaning of these Words? A These Words are a preface to all the Command∣ments, and shew the Power and Authority of God, who enjoyn'd them.
Q. Why is the Children of Israels deliverance out of Egypt, particularly mention'd in this preface? A. Because the Children of Israels deliverance out of Egypt by the hand of Moses, was a Type or Re∣semblance of our deliverance from a worse than Egyp∣tian bondage by Christ Jesus. Q Are we oblig'd to observe all the Laws or Commandments deliver'd by Moses? A, No, we are only obliged to keep those Laws, deliverd by Moses, which are called Moral. Q What other Laws did Moses deliver? A The Ceremonial, and Judicial. Q What do you mean by the Moral Law? A By the Moral Law, I mean the universal Law of good and evil, by which all Men are oblig'd to regulate or order their lives and actions. Q Wat do you mean by the Ceremonial Law? A. By the Ceremonial Law I mean that part of the Law of Moses, which orders and appoints the man∣ner of the Jewish worship and sacrifices. Q What do you mean by the Judicial Law? A. By the Judicial Law I mean that which ordered the Civil Government of the Jewish Nation. Q. How do you prove that we Christians are obliged to keep the Moral Law? A. I prove that Christians ought to keep the Mo∣ral Law from St Matth. 19. where our Saviour Christ, repeating the particulars of that Law, con∣tain'd in the ten Commandments, says, at the 19. vers. If thou wlt enter into life, keep the Commandments. Q. How do you prove that we are not to observe the Ceremonial Law? A. I prove that we are not to observe the Ceremo∣nial Law from Ephes. 2. vers. 15 where the Apostle says, Having abolish'd in his Flesh the Enmi y, even the Law of Commandments, contained in Ordinances — Q. What is here meant by Ordinances? A. By Ordinances is here meant the rites of the Ceremonial Law.
Q. Have you not another proof of Christ's requi∣ting our Observance of the Moral Law? A. Yes, from St. Matth. 22. vers. 37, 38, 39, 40. Jsus said unto him, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great Commandment; And the second is like unto it; Thou shalt love thy Neighbour as thy self; on these two Commandments hang all the Laws and the Pro∣phets. Q Why doth our Saviour say, there are but two Commndments when it appears, tha there are ten? A Becaue all the Ten Commandments are con∣tained in those two that Christ mention'd. And they were all written in two Tables of Stone. Q How many Commandments are contain'd in each Tale? A The four first were written in the first Table, and the six other were written in the second. Q What doest thou chiefly learn by these Com∣mandments? A. I learn two things / my Duty towards God / in the first Table; and my Duty towards my Neighbour / in the second Table. Q What is thy Duty towards God? A. My Duty towards God is to believe him / to fear him and to love him with all my heart / with all my mind / with all my Soul / and with all my Strength; to worship him / to give him thanks / to put my whole trust in him / to call upon him / to honour hi holy Name and his Word / and to serve him truth all the dayes of my life. Q What is thy duty towards thy Neighbour? A M Duty towards my Neighbour is to love him as my self / and to do unto all Men as I would they should do unto me / to love honour and succour my Faher and Mother / to honour and obey the King / and all that are put in Authority under him. To submit my self to all my Gover∣nours
/ Teachers / Spiritual Pastours / and Ma∣sters. To order my self lowly and reerently to all my betters. To hurt no body by Word or deed. To be true and just in all my dealings To bear no malice nor hatred in my heart. To keep my Hands from picking and stealing / and my Tongue from evil speaking / lying / and slandering To keep my body in temperance / soberness / and Cha∣stity. Not to covet / or desire other Mens goods: but to learn and labour truly / to get my own liv∣ing / and to do my Duty in that State of life unto which it shall please God to call me. Part XII. YOU have done with the Preface of the Com∣mandments, and you said that the Command∣ments contain'd your Duty towards God / and your Duty towards your Neighbour. Q. What do you mean by duty? A. By the Word duty, I mean our obligation to the doing of whatever is requir'd, and avoiding what∣ever is forbid in each Commandment. Q What is the first Commandment? A. Thou shalt have no other Gods but me. Q. What is forbidden in this Commandment? A. This first Commandment forbids the having of no God, and likewise the owning of false Gods. Q. Are there any that own no God? A. Yes, the Psamist tells us, Psalm 14. vers. 1. That the fool had said in his heart there is no God. Q. Are there any that own false Gods? A. Yes, St. Paul tells the Galatians, that when they knew not God, they did service to them that by nature were no Gods, Gal 4. vers. 8.
Q. Is there nothing else forbid in the first Com∣mandment? A. Yes, in this as well as in all the other Com∣mandments, not only the particular Sin mention'd in each Commandment is forbid, but every degree thereof is likewise forbidden. Q What degrees of Sin are forbidden in the first Commandment? A. The making the belly a God by gluttony and drunkenness, is one breach of this Commandment, and therefore forbid y it, and St. Paul peaks of some of the Philippians, Chap 3 vers. 19. Whose God is their belly. Q Does any thing else come within the degree of Sin, forbid in the first Commandment? A. Yes, Coveouness, for the Apostle calls it Id∣latry, Coloss 3 vers 5. Q Wat is requi'd in the first Commandment? A. The first Commandment requires that we know and acknowledg the true God only; and that we believe in him fear him / love him / and trust in him / before and above all things. Q. How do you prove that we ought to know the true God only? A. I prove that we ought to know the true God only from Hosea 13 vers. 4 — Thou shalt know no Go but me. Q Can you give any other proof that its our duty to know God? A. Yes from St. Pauls reproving some of the Co∣rinhians, for want of this knowledg▪ 1 Corinth. 15. vers. 34 — Some (say's he) have not the knowledg of God, I speak this to your shame. Q How do you prove that its your duty to be∣lieve in God? A. I prove that 'tis our duty to believe in God from Hebr. 11. vers. 6 — He that cometh to God, must believe that he is —
Q. How do you prove that you are to fear God? A. I prove that I am to fear God from 1 Peter 2. vers 17 where we are commanded to fear God — Q How do you prove that you are to love God? A. I prove that I am to love God from St. Mark 12. vers. 30 — Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart. Q. How do you prove that you are to trust in God? A. I prove that I am to trust in God from Proverb. 3. vers 5. Trust in the Lord with all thy heart — You said you were to worship God, Q. How are you to worship him? A. We are to worship God inwardly in our Souls, and outwardly with our bodies. Q What is the inward worship that is due to God? A. The inward Worship due to God is that of the heart and mind, which our Saviour requires, when he tells us, We must worship God in Spirit and in Truth, St. John 4. vers. 24. Q What outward worship are we to give to God? A. The outward Worship due to God is that of Bowing and kneeling with the body, which is for∣bid to be given to graven Images in the second Com∣mandment. Part XIII. YOU said that outward Worship is forbidden to be given to any graven Image in the second Commandment? Quest. What is the second Commandment? Answ. Thou shalt not make unto thy self any graven Image / nor the likeness of any thing that is in Heaven above / or in the Earth beneath / or in
the Water under the Earth. Thou shalt not bow down to them / nor worship them / for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God / and visit the Sins of the Fathers / upon the Children / unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me / and shew mercy unto thousands / in them that love me / and keep my Commandments. Q Was not outward Worship forbid in the first Commandment to be given to any but God? A. Ye, both inward and outward Worship is there forbid to be given to any, but God only. Q What ten is the difference between the first and scn Commandmens? A. The first Commandment shews us the object whom we are to worship, and the second shews the manner how we are to worship. Q Is it not lawful then to make an Image? A. It is absolutely unlawful to make any Image or likeness of God whatoever. Q. How do you prove that t'is unlawful to make any Image or likeness of God? A I prove it from Deuter. 4 vers. 12, 16. where the Israelites are forbid to make any figure or similitude of God, because they saw no similitude in the day that God spke to them. Q Have you any proof from the new Testament, that it is not lawful to make an Image of God? A. Yes, from Acts 17. vers. 29. when St. Paul say's, that we ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto Gold, or Silver, or Stone, graven by Art or Ma device. Q Since its unlawful to make an Image of God, may we make an Image of any thing else? A Yes, its lawful to make, or paint an Image of any visible thing, for ornament; as Solomon caused sevral sorts of Figures to be made to adorn the Temple of Jerusalem, as we read, 1 Kings Chap. 7.
Q. Upon what account then is the making of Ima∣ges forbid in the second Commandment? A. We are forbid in the second Commandment, to make Images to worship them, either by bowing down to them, or praying to them. Q. Are there any guilty of the breach of the se∣cond Commandment by bowing down before, or praying to Images? A. Yes, both the Heathens and the Papists are guilty of this evil practise. Q How are the Papists guilty hereof? A. In making representations of God, and wor∣shipping our Saviour Christ by an Image, or his Cross; and also in worshipping Saints, and Angels, praying to them, and falling down, and kneeling before their Images. Q. What is requir'd or injoyn'd in the second Commandment? A. The second Commandment requires all bodily worship to the true God, as bowing, kneeling, and standing, when we call upon him: and what other outward Ceremonies tend to order, decency, or e∣dification. Q. How do you prove that this outward bodily Worship ought to be given to God? A. I prove, that bodily Worship ought to be given to God, from Psalm 95. vers. 6. O come let us worship and bow down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker. Q. Have you any proof in the New Testament? A. Yes, from our Saviours falling on the ground, when he pray'd in the Garden, St Mark 14. vers 35. and from St. Pauls kneeling at Prayers on the Sea∣shoar, Acts 20. vers. 36. Q. What proof have you, that order and decency must be observ'd in the Worship of God? A. I prove it from 1 Corinth. 14. vers. 40. Let all things be done decently and in order.
Q What reason is there, why this bodily Worship should be given to God only? A. Because he is the Lord our God, and a jealous God / and will not endure that his honour should be deny'd to himself, or given to another. Q. How do you prove this? A. I prove it from Isaiah 42. vers. 8 I am the Lord, that is my Name, and my Glory will I not give unto ano∣ther, neither my praise unto graven Images. Q. What motives does God make use of to enforce the Observance of the second Commandment? A God useth both threatnings and promises, to excite us, to keep this Commandment. Q. What is threatned to those that break this Com∣mandment? A. God threatens to visit the Sins of the Fa∣thers / upon the Children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate him. Q Wo may be said to hate God? A. Such may be said to hate God, as refuse to worship him: or those that give his Worship to ano∣ther. Q What is promised to those that keep this Com∣mandment? A. God has promised to shew mercy to thou∣sands of them that love him / and keep his Com∣mandments. Q Who may be said to love God? A. Tose may be said to love God that keep his Commandments. Q. How do you prove it? A. I prove it from St. John 14. vers. 15. where our Saviour say's, If you love me, keep my Commandments. Q. How do you prove that God is severe to the Disobedient, and merciful to the Dutiful and Obe∣dient? A. I prove it from Psalm 145. vers. 20. The Lord preserveth all them, that love him, but all the wicked will he destroy.
Q Why is it said that God will visit the Sins of the Fathers upon the Children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate him / and that he will shew mercy to thousands of them that love him / and keep his Commandments. A. To convince us that he takes more delight in shewing mercy, then in inflicting punishment. Q. How do you prove, that God does not delight in punishment? A. I prove that God doth not delight in punish∣ment from Ezekiel 33. vers. 11. As I live saith the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked. Q How do you prove that God delights in Mercy? A. I prove that God delights in Mercy from Mi∣cah 7. vers. 18. Who is a God like unto thee, that par∣doneth iniquity, and passeth by the transgression of the rem∣nant of his heritage, he retaineth not his anger for ever, be∣cause he delighteth in Mercy. Part XIV. Quest. IS there no more requir'd in your duty to God, than what you have learn'd in the first and second Commandments? A. Yes, we are to honour Gods holy Name and his Word / according as we are taught in the third Commandment. Q. What is the third Commandment? A. Thou shalt not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord will not hold him guiltless / that taketh his Name in vain Q. What is forbid in this Commandment? A. The third Commandment forbids swearing falsly or on trivial occasions; All mentioning the Name of God, or Christ profanely, or inconsiderate¦ly:
and all irreverent speaking of Gods Word, or any thing relating to him, or his Worship Q. Is then the taking of Oaths here altogether forbid? A No, we may take an Oath when the good of our Neighbour, or the finding out of truth requires it, or when we are call'd to it by the Magistrate. Q. How do you prove that we may swear upon some occasions? A. I prove it from Deut. 6. vers. 13. Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and shalt swear by his Name. And from Jeremiah 4. vers. 2. Thou shalt swear the Lord liveth in Truth, in Righteousness, and in Judgment. Q. Does not our Saviour Christ forbid swearing at all? A Yes, Christ forbids swearing in common dis∣course, St. Matth. 5. vers. 34. But I say unto you, swear not at all — Q How do you prove that this is meant in com∣mon discourse only? A. I prove it from St. Matth. 5. vers. 37. But let your communication be yea, yea, nay, nay, for whatsoever is more then these, cometh of evil. Q How do you prove that swearing may be used under the Gospel on some solemn occasions? A. I prove it from Heb. 6. vers. 10. where St. Paul says, that an Oath for cofirmation, is the end of all strife. Q What is requir'd in the third Commandment? A. The third Commandment requires us to ho∣nour Gods holy Name and his Word. Q What do you mean bp honouring Gods holy Name and his Word? A. I mean that we esteem Gods Name and Word highly, and always speak of them with great reverence and veneration. Q How do you prove that we are to pay so high respect to the Name of God? A. I prove it from Psalm 29. vers. 2. Give the Lord the honour due unto his Name.
Q. Are we likewise to honour and reverence the Name of Christ? A. Yes. Q. How do you prove that we ought to honour the Name of Christ? A. I prove that we ought to honour the Name of Christ, from Phil. 2. vers. , 10 — For God hath given him a Name, which is above every Name, that at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow — Q What do you mean by honouring Gods Word? A. By honouring Gods Word I mean, that we humbly receive it, and diligently observe it. Q. How do you prove that you are thus to ho∣nour Gods Word? A. I prove it from St. James 1. vers 21, 22 — Re∣ceive with meekness the ingrafted Word, which is able to save your Souls, — Be ye doers of the Word, not hearers only — Q. What is the penalty of breaking the third Commandment? A. God there threatens not to hold him guiltless that taketh his Name in vain. Q. What do you understand by not holding guilt∣less? A. By not holding guiltless I understand, that God will look upon the Transgressors of this Command∣ment as very guilty, even so guilty, as to be lyable to the severest punishment for so great a crime. Part XV. YOU said that the third Commandment requi∣res you to honour Gods holy Name and his Word.
Quest. Is there no more requir'd in your duty to∣wards God? Answ. Yes, there is more requir'd, I am likewise to serve God truly all the days of my life. Q Are we to serve God every day alike? A. No: God has set apart one day particularly for his service, in the fourth Commandment. Q. What is the fourth Commandment? A. Remember that thou keep holy the Sab∣bath-day. Six days shalt thou labour / and do all that thou hast to do: but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God. In it thou shalt do no manner of Work / thou and thy Son / and thy Daughter / thy Man-Servant / and thy Maid-Servant / thy Cattel / and the Stranger / that is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth / the Sea / and all that in them is / and rested the seventh day / wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh day / and hallowed it. Q. What is required in this Commandment? A. The fourth Commandment requires the set∣ting apart a certain portion of our time, for Gods immediate Worship and Service. Q What portion of time is required be set apart for Gods Worship by the fourth Commandment? A. The seventh day: Or one day in seven. Q. What reason is there given for keeping holy the seventh day. A. The reason for keeping holy the seventh day is the example of God, because in six days he made all things, and rested the seventh day / and there∣fore sanctified and bless'd it / calling it the Sab∣bath-day / which signifies a day of rest. Q. Are all Men oblig'd to observe this seventh day? A No, all Men are obliged to observe one day in seven, but the Jews only were obliged to keep the seventh day / which is particularly mentioned in the fourth Commandment.
Q. What day are we Christians oblig'd to observe, and keep holy? A. We Christians are obliged to keep holy the first day of the Week. Q. What reason have we to alter the Sabbath-day from the seventh to the first day of the Week? A. We have reason for this Alteration from the nature of the thing, because our Redemption which was compleated by Christ's Resurrection on the first day of the Week, or Lords day, is a greater blessing than our Creation, commemorated on the seventh day by the Jews, Q. Have you any other reason for changing the Sabbath-day? A. Yes, the example of our Saviour Christ, and his Apostles, meeting on the first day? Q. How do you prove Christ and his Apostles meeting on the first day of the Week? A. I prove it from St. John 20. vers. 19. And the same day at even, being the first day of the Week, when the Disciples were assembled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst, and said peace be unto you. Q Have you another proof? A. Yes, from Acts 20. vers. 7. And the first day of the Week, when the Disciples came together to break Bread, Paul preach'd unto them — Q. After what manner are we Christians to san∣ctifie, or keep holy, the Sabbath-day? A. We Christians are to sanctifie or keep holy the Sabbath day, by exercising our selves in religious Du∣ties both publick and private, and forbearing all worldly business, and whatsoever is not of necessity, Charity or mercy. Q. How do you prove that Works of necessity may be done on this day? A. I prove that Works of necessity may be done on this day from St. Luke 13. vers. 15. And the Lord answered and said thou Hypocrite, doth not each one of you
on the Sabbath loose his Ox or his Ass from the Stall, and lead him away to watering? Q. How do you prove that it is lawful to do works of Mercy and Charity on the Sabbath-day? A. I prove that it is lawful to do works of Mercy and Charity on the Sabbath-day from our Saviours Ex∣ample in healing several diseas'd People on this day, and his saying, it is lawful to do well on the Sabbath-days, St. Matth. 12. vers. 12. Q Are we to set apart any other time for Gods service? besides the seventh day. A. Yes, some part of every day ought to be spent in Gods service, and also such Feasts and Fasts as are particularly injoyn'd by the Church. Q What is forbid in the fourth Commandment? A. The fourth Commandment forbids all the works of our usual cllings on the Sabbath-day / which are allowed to be done on the other six days. Q But may we not imploy others on the Lords day, if we do not work our selves? A. No, neither Son / nor Daughter / Man-Ser∣vant / nor Maid-Servant / Cattel / nor Stranger within your gates / are to be employed by us on the Sabbath-day. Q. Is there nothing else forbid in the fourth Com∣mandment? A. Yes. It likewise forbids all Idleness in neglect∣ing the Worship of God on this day, and all sports and recreations, which divert the mind from the Service of God? Q. But why does this Commandment alone be∣gin with the Word Remember? A. Because Men are generally so bent upon their worldly business, that they had need to have a parti∣cular Caution against following it on this day.
Part XVI. YOU have already given me an account of your Duty towards God, which is taught in the first four Commandments, or first Table of the Law: You told me also that the six last Commandments, or second Table, contain'd your Duty towards your Neighbour? Quest. What do you mean by Neighbour? Answ. By the Word Neighbour? I mean all Persons of the same Nature with our selves, whither Friends or Enemies, of what Nation, Quality, or Religion soever they be. Q. How do you prove that the Word Neighbour is to be understood in so large a sense? A. I prove it from our Saviours Answer to the Lawyers question, Who is my Neighbour? in St. Luke 10. vers. 37. where he shews that the Samaritan was Neighbour to the Jew, tho' he differ'd from him in Opinion, and was at Enmity with him. Q. What is the Summ of your duty towards your Neighbour? A. The Summ of my duty towards my Neigh∣bour, is Justice and Charity. Q. What is the rule or measure of Justice toward your Neighbour? A. The general Rule of Justice toward my Neigh∣bour, is to do to all Men, as I would they should do unto me, as Christ has commanded, St. Matth. 7. vers. 12. Q What is the Rule of Charity? A. The Rule of Charity is, To love my Neighbour as my self: as it is enjoyn'd, St. Matth. 22. vers. 34. Q. Are you to love, and do to all Men alike? A. No, tho' I am to deal sincerely with all Per∣sons,
yet I am allow'd o love, and to do good to some, more then others. Q. How do you prove that you may love, and do good to some more than others? A. I prove it from Galat. 6. vers. 10. As we have op∣portunity let us do good unto all Men, especially to them, that are of the houshold of Faith. Q. Is there no special regard to be had to any but those of the same Faith? A. Yes, there are some particular duties, owing to particular Relations, as we may learn from the fifth Commandment Q. What is the fifth Commandment? A. Honour thy Father and thy Mother that thy days may be long in the Land which the Lord thy God giveth thee. Q What do you here mean by Father and Mo∣ther? A. By Father and Mother in this Commandment, I mean not only my natural Parents, but also the King and his Ministers, all my Governours / Teachers / Spiritual Pastors / & Masters / and all my Betters. Q. What is requir'd in the fifth Commandment to your natural Parents? A. The fifth Commandment requires me to love / honour / succour / and obey my Parents. Q. How do you prove this to be your duty toward your Parents? A. I prove it to be my duty from Coloss. 3. vers. 20. Children obey your Parents in all things, for this is well plea∣sing unto the Lord, and from 1 Timoth. 5. vers. 4 — Let Children learn first to shew piety at home, and to requite their Parents, for this is good and acceptable before God. Q What is your duty to the King / and to those in Authority under him? A. My duty is to honour and obey them. Q. How do you prove that? A. I prove it from 1 Peter 2. vers. 13, 14, 17. Sub∣mit
your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the King as supreme or unto Governours, as unto thom that are sent by him—Honour the King. Q. Are you to obey your Governours in every thing that they command? A. Yes, unless their Commands are contrary to the Law of God; for if they are, we ought to obey God rather than Man, as St. Peter teacheth Acts 5.29 — Q. What is your duty to your Teachers / spiritual Pastors and Masters? A. It is my duty to submit my self to them. Q. How do you prove that you ought to submit your self to your Teachers and spiritual Pastors? A. I prove that I ought to submit my self to them from Hebr. 13. vers. 17. Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your Souls— Q. How do you prove that you ought to submit to your Masters? A. I prove that Servants ought to submit them selves to their Masters from 1 Pet. 2. vers. 18 — Ser∣vants be subject to your Masters with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward. Q. What is your duty to all your Betters? A. My duty to all my Betters is to order my self lowly / and reverently towards them. Q How do you prove this to be your duty? A. I prove it from Rom. 13. vers. 7 — Render to all their dues, honour, to whom honour is due — Q Is there no duty requir'd from Superiours to In∣feriours? A. Yes, in every Commandment that concerns Relations, tho' no more but te duty of one side is named, yet the duty of the other is always included and imply'd. Q How do you prove the duty of Governors to Subjects? A. I prove the duty of Governors to their Sub∣jects
from 1 Pet. 2.14. where the Apostle says, that Governors are for the punishment of Evil-doers, and for the praise of them that do well. Q. How do you prove the duty of Pastors to their Flocks? A. I prove the duty of Pastors to their Flocks from 1 Pet. 5. vers. 2, 3. where they are comman∣ded to feed the Flock of God, taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind: neither as being Lords over Gods heri∣tage, but being examples to the flock. Q. How do you prove the duty of Parents to their Children? A. I prove the duty of Parents to their Children from Ephes. 6. vers. 4. Fathers provoke not your Chil∣dren to wrath, but bring them up in the nurture and ad∣monition of the Lord, Q How do you prove the duty of Masters to their Servants? A. I prove the duty of Masters to their Servants from Coloss. 4. vers. 1. Masters give unto your Servants that which is just and equal, knowing that ye have a Ma∣ster in Heaven. Q What is forbidden in the fifth Commandment? A. The fifth Commandment forbids the neglect of any of the foremention'd duties enjoyn'd? Q Give some examples of what is forbidden by this Commandment? A. It forbids Childrens being disobedient to Pa∣rents, and Servants to their Masters; Subjects re∣sisting lawful Authority, and Peoples neglecting the Instructions of their Ministers? Q. Is there any thing else forbidden in this Com∣mandment? A. Yes. hereby is forbid all undecent behaviour towards our Betters, and the mocking or despising those that are aged; and likewise the denying either by Superiours, or Inferiours, that duty towards each other, which this Commandment requires.
Since all this is comprehended in the fifth Com∣mandment, Q. Why is Father and Mother mention'd, rather than the King or any other Superiour? A. Because God did at first settle all that power in Parents, which is now, since (the increase of man∣kind,) derived to others. Q. Is any thing particularly promis'd to those who keep the fifth Commandment? A. Yes, those that keep this Commandment, are promis'd long life, which S. Paul takes notice of E∣phes. 6. vers. 2, 3. Honour thy Father and thy Mother, which is the first Commandment with promise, that it may bo well with thee, and thou mayst live long on the Earth. Q. Is this promise of long life always perform'd to the Observers of this Commandment? A. No, sometimes God is pleas'd to shorten the lives of good and obedient People, and in mercy takes away the Righteous from the Evil to come, as the Pro∣phet Isaiah observes, Isaiah 57. vers. 1. Part XVII. Quest. WHat is further requir'd in your duty to∣ward your Neighbour? Answ. My duty towards my Neighbour does fur∣ther injoyn me, to hurt no body by word or deed / as the following Commandments do particularly teach and shew. Q. What is the sixth Commandment? A. Thou shalt do no Murder. Q What does this Commandment forbid? A. The sixth Commandment forbids the taking a∣way the life of any Person. Q. Is it utterly unlawful to take away the life of any Person?
A. Yes, unless it be done by publick Justice, or in a lawful War, or in our own necessary defence. Q. Is any thing else forbid in this Commandment? A. Yes the sixth Commandment also forbids the doing any outward injury to any Person, and all re∣venge, and the bearing of any malice / or hatred in my heart. Q. How do you prove that we ought not to re∣venge our selves? A. I prove that we ought not to revenge our selves, from Rom. 12. vers. 19. Dearly beloved avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath, for vengeance is mine, and I will repay it, saith the Lord. Q. How do you prove that you ought not to bear malice or hatred in your heart? A. I prove that I ought not to bear malice or ha∣tred in my heart from Ephes. 4. vers. 31. Let all bit∣terness, and wrath, and anger, be put away from you with all malice. Q. Have you another proof? A. Yes, from St, John 3 vers. 15. Whose hateth his Brother, is a Murderer — Q What is requir'd in the sixth Commandment? A. The sixth Commandment requires the doing all good offices of Humanity and Charity, tending to Peace, and the preservation of our own, and other Mens lives and healths. Q. How do you prove this? A. I prove it from 1 Thess. 5. vers. 15. See that none render evil for evil to any Man, but ever follow that which is good, both among your selves, and to all Men. Q. Have you another proof? A. Yes, Rom. 12. vers. 18. If it be possible, as much as lieth in you, live peaceably with all Men. Q. What is the seventh Commandment? A. Thou shalt not commit Adultery. Q. What is forbidden in this Commandment? A, The seventh Commandment forbids not only
Adultery, in the strictest sense; which is the breach of the Marriage-Vow: But likewise all Whoredom and Fornication; and all manner of lasciviousness, in thought, word, or deed; and whatever excites to any uncleanness whatsoever. Q. How do you prove that all manner of un∣cleanness is forbidden? A. I prove that all manner of uncleanness is forbid∣den from Galat. 5. vers. 19. and 21. where St. Paul tells us, that those who are guilty of Adultery, Fornica∣tion, Uncleanness or lasciviousness — shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Q. How do you prove that this seventh Com∣mandment restrains impure thoughts and desires? A. I prove that it restrains impure desires from Christs own explanation of this Commandment, St. Matth. 5. vers. 27, 28. Ye have heard that it hath been said by them of old time, Thou shalt not commit Adultery. But I say unto you, that whosoever looketh on a Woman to lust after her, hath committed Adultery with her already in his heart. Q. How do you prove that you ought to refrain from immodest Words. A. I prove that I ought to refrain from immodest Words from Ephes. 4. vers. 29. where the Apostle says. Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your Mouth — Q What do you mean by the things which excite to lust? A. I mean by the things which excite to lust, all pampering of the body by excessive eating and drink∣ing, all immodesty in behaviour, or apparel, and what ever else administers to lust and uncleanness. Q. Have you any proof that the things which ex∣cite to lust are forbid? A. Yes, I have a proof of this from Rom. 13. vers. 13.14. Let us walk honestly as in the day not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness —
and make not provision for the Flesh to fulfill the lust thereof. Q. What is requir'd in the seventh Command∣ment. A. The seventh Commandment requires, that I keep my body in temperance / soberness and Cha∣stity. Q. How do you prove that this is your duty? A. I prove it to be my duty from 1 Thess. 4. vers. 3, 4, 5. For this is the will of God even your sanctification, that you should abstain from fornication. That every one should know how to possess his vessel in sanctification and ho∣nour, not in the lust of concupiscence, even as the Gentiles which know not God. — For God hath not called us unto uncleanness but unto holiness. Part XVIII. Quest. WHat is the eighth Commandment? Answ. Thou shalt not steal. Q What is forbid in this Commandment? A. The eighth Commandment forbids not only all robbery and open violence, together with secret theft: But likewise all injustice in taking, or with∣holding what of right belongs to another. Q. Is any thing else forbid in this Commandment? A. Yes, this Commandment does further forbid all Oppression, and Extortion, and hardness or seve∣rity to the poor. And also all deceits in weights, and measures, and all manner of cheating and Couse∣nage in our dealings with any whatsoever. Q But may we not offend against this Command∣ment, and do what is forbidden in it by the abuse and mismanagement, of what is properly our own? A. Yes we may, — As by gaming, prodigality, and riotous living, for thereby we wrong our Children
and families, and such evil practices do likewise fre∣quently lead to Injustice and other vices; an exam∣ple of which we have in the prodigal Son, St. Luk 15. Q. How do you prove that Robbery is forbid? A. I prove it to be forbid from Levit. 19. vers. 13. Thou shalt not defraud thy Neighbour neither rob him — Q How do you prove oppression forbid? A. I prove oppression to be forbid from Levit. 25. vers. 14 — If thou sell ought unto thy Neighbour, or buyest ought of thy Neighbours hand, ye shall not oppress one another. Q. How do you prove that you ought not to re∣tain anothers due? A. I prove that I ought not to retain anothers due, from Rom. 13. vers. 7, 8 — where the Apostle says, Render to all their dues, — Tribute to whom tribute is due, and custom to whom custom — Q. Have you any other proof of this? A. Yes, from Psalm 37. vers. 2. where David tells us, that the wicked borroweth, and pays not again. Q. How do you prove that you ought not to use hardness, or severity to the Poor. A. I prove that I ought not to be hard or severe to the Poor from Prov. 14. vers. 31. He that oppresseth the Poor, reproacheth his Maker, and from Prov. 21. vers. 13. Whoso stoppeth his ears at the cry of the Poor, he also shall cry himself, and shall not be heard. Q. How do you prove that deceit in weights and measures is forbid? A. I prove that 'tis forbid from Deut. 25. vers. 13, 14, 15, 16. Thou shalt not have in thy House divers weights, a great and a small. But thou shalt have a perfect and a just weight, a perfect and a just measure — for all that do unrighteously are an abomination unto the Lord thy God. Q. How do you prove that all other kinds of fraud, and cheating in our dealings is forbid? A. I prove that all kind of fraud and cheating in our dealings whatsoever is forbid from 1 Thess 4 vers. 6.
Let no Man go beyond or defraud his Brother in any matter, for the Lord is the avenger of all such. Q. What is requir'd in the eighth Commandment? A. The eighth Commandment requires us to be true and just in all our dealings; to make restitu∣tion for any wrongs we have done, and to relieve the Poor according to our ability. Q. How do you prove that we ought to be true and just in all our dealings. A. I prove that we ought to be true and just in all our dealings from Deut. 16. vers. 20. That which is altogether just, shalt thou follow — Q. Have you another proof? A. Yes, from Micah 6. vers. 8. What does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly — Q. How do you prove that you ought to make re∣stitution to those you have wrong'd? A. I prove that I ought to make restitution to those I have wrongd from Levit. 6. vers. 4 — He that is guil∣ty, shall restore that which he violently took away, or the thing which he hath deceitfully gotten, or that which was deliver'd him to keep, or the lost thing which he hath found. Q. Have you any other proof? A. Yes from Ezekiel 33. vers. 15. there the Prophet exhorts the wicked to restore the pledg, and to give again that he hath robb'd, in order to obtain mercy with God. Q How do you prove that we ought to be chari∣table in relieving the Poor? A. I prove that we ought to be charitable in re∣lieving the Poor: from Levit. 25. vers. 35. If thy Brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay with thee, then thou shalt relieve him: yea, tho' he be a Stranger, or a So∣journer, that he may live with thee. Q. Have you any other proof? A. Yes, from Heb. 13. vers. 16. To do good and to distribute forget not, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased. Q. What is the ninth Commandment?
A. Thou shalt not bear false Witness against thy Neighbour. Q. What is forbid in this Commandment? A. The ninth Commandment forbids not only the accusing our Neighbour falsly, but also all ebil speaking / lying / and slandering. Q How do you prove, that you ought not to ac∣cuse your Neighbour falsly? A. I prove that I ought not to accuse my Neigh∣bour falsly from Exodus 23. vers. 1. Thou shalt not raise a false report; put not thine hand with the wicked, to be an unrighteous Witness. Q. How do you prove that you ought to keep your tongue from evil speaking? A. I prove that I ought to keep my tongue from evil speaking from St. James 4. vers. 11. Speak not evil one of another, Brethren, — And from Titus 3. vers. 2. where St. Paul bids us, Speak evil of no Man. Q. How do you prove, that lying is forbid? A. I prove that lying is forbid from Coloss. 3. vers. 9. Lie not one to another, and from Revel. 21. vers. 8. where all lyars are threatned to have their part in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. Q. How do you prove that you ought not to be guilty of slander? A. I prove that I ought not to slander any one, from Ps. 101. vers. 5. where David says, Whoso privily slanders his Neighbour, him will I cut off. Q. But may we not transgress this Commandment tho' the evil that we say of our Neighbour be true. A. Yes we may, if we speak the truth out of spite or malice, or say any evil thing of our Neighbour, (tho' true) when the glory of God, the good of o∣thers, or the just vindication of our selves does not require it. Q. How do you prove this? A. Because any such speaking is directly contrary
to the great rules of Justice and Charity, and to the Apostles precept, but now mentioned, Speak evil of no Man. Q. What is requir'd in the ninth Commandment? A. The ninth Commandment requires us in eve∣ry thing to deal sincerely, and to speak the truth from our hearts. Q How do you prove that we ought to speak the truth from our hearts? A I prove this to be our duty from Ephes. 4. vers. 25. where St. Paul says, — Putting away lying, Speak every Man truth with his Neighbour, for we are Members one of another. Part XIX. YOU have already gone thro' nine of the Com∣mandments, all which do chiefly respect the out∣ward actions of Men, tho' in whatever Command∣ment any thing is enjoyn'd or forbidden, all inclina∣tions contrary to it, are likewise forbid. But the tenth Commandment is wholly design'd to restrain and regulate the inward motions and desires of the heart. Quest. Tell me therefore, what is the tenth Com∣mandment? Answ. Thou shalt not covet thy Neighbours House / thou shalt not covet thy Neighbours Wife / nor his Servant / nor his Maid / nor his Ox / nor his Ass / nor any thing that is his? Q. What is forbid in this Commandment? A. The tenth Commandment forbids the coveting or desiring other Mens goods / that is any thing our Neighbour is possess'd of, unless we have a just right to it, or his free consent to take it.
Q. Is any thing else forbid in this Commandment? A. Yes, this tenth Commandment also forbids the setting our hearts violently upon this World, and the eager pursuit of riches, the being discontented with our present condition, and distrusting Gods providence, and likewise all sordidness in denying our selves, or our Families, what is necessary and convenient. Q. How do you prove that all Covetousness is forbid? A. I prove that all Covetousness is forbid from St. Luke 12. vers. 15. where Christ says, — Take heed, and beware of Covetousness, for a Mans life consists not in the abundance of the things which he possesseth. Q. Can you prove that discontent and distrust of Gods providence is forbid? A. Yes, I prove it from St. Luke 12. vers. 29, 30, 31. where Christ says, Seek not what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, neither be ye of doubtful mind, — For your heavenly Father knows, that ye have need of these things. But rather seek the Kingdom of God, and all these things shall be added unto you. Q What is requir'd in the tenth Commandment? A. The tenth Commandment requires me to learn and labour truly to get my own living / and to be contented / and to do my duty in that state of life / unto which it shall please God to call me. Q. How do you prove that you ought to labour to get your own living? A. I prove that I ought to labour to get my own living from 1 Thess. 4. vers. 11, 12. where the A∣postle exhorts, that we do our own business and Work with our own hands, that we may have lack of nothing. Q. Have you another proof? A. Yes, from Ephes. 4. vers. 28. where the Apo∣stle says, Let him that stole, steal no more, but rather let him labour working with his hands the thing that is good, that he may have to give to him that needeth.
Q. How do you prove that you ought to be con∣tent? A. I prove that I ought to be content from 1 Tim. 6. vers. 8. Having food and raiment, let us be therewith content. And from the Example of St. Paul who had learn'd in whatsoever state he was, therewith to be content, Phil. 4. vers. 11. Q. How do you prove that you ought to do your duty in that state of life unto which it shall please God to call you? A. I prove it from 1 Corinth. 7. vers. 20. Let every Man abide in the same calling wherein he is called. Part XX. MY good Child / you have told me what God forbids, and what he requires in each of the Ten Commandments. Now know this / that thou art not able to do these things of thy self / nor to walk in the Commandments of God / and to serve him / without his special grace / which thou must learn at all times to call for / by diligent Prayer; And for that reason it is prudently ordered (in the service of the Church,) that after the repeating of every Commandment, we should say, Lord have mercy upon us / and incline our hearts to keep this Law; and at the end of all the Com∣mandments, write all these thy Laws in our hearts we beseech thee. Now since Prayer is so necessary for the obtain∣ing grace to keep Gods Commandments, Q. Tell me what is Prayer? A. Prayer is a calling upon God, either with the heart alone, or else with the heart and voice toge∣ther:
and that either with such expressions, as our minds suggest to us, or in a prescrib'd form of words. Q. What form of words is prescrib'd? A. There are divers forms of Prayer prescrib'd, but the chiefest is that which our Saviour Christ taught his Disciples, which is commonly called the Lord Prayer. Q. Let me hear if thou canst say the Lords Prayer? A. OUR Father which art in Heaven / hal∣lowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy Will be done / in Earth as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread. And forgive us our trespasses / as we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not into tempta∣tion. But deliver us from evil. Amen. Q. How do you prove that you ought to use this form of Prayer? A. I prove that I ought to use this form of Prayer from St. Matth. 6. vers. 9. where Christ says, After this manner pray ye. And from St. Luke 11. vers. 1, 2. And it came to pass as Jesus prayed, when he ceased, one of his Disciples, said unto him, Lord teach us to pray, as John also taught his Disciples; and he said when ye pray, say, Our Father which art in Heaven / &c. Q. What desirest thou of God in this Prayer? A. I desire my Lord God our heavenly Father / who is the giver of all goodness / to send his grace unto me / and to all People / that we may worship him / serve him / and obey him / as we ought to do. And I pray unto God to send us all things that be needful both for our Souls and Bodies; and that he will be merciful unto us / and forgive us our sins; And that it will please him to save and de∣fend us from all dangers ghostly and bodily; And that he will keep us from all sin and wickedness / and from our ghostly Enemy / and from everlasting death. And this I trust he will do / of his mercy
and goodness / thro' our Lord Iesus Christ. And therefore I say Amen. So be it. Q. How many parts are there in the Lords Prayer? A. The Lords Prayer may be divided into these three parts, the Preface, the Petitions, and the Con∣clusion. Q. Which is the Preface of the Lords Prayer? A The Preface of the Lords Prayer is, Our Father which art in Heaven. Q. What do you mean by these Words, Our Fa∣ther which art in Heaven? A. The meaning of these Words is, that God as a Father is the giver of all goodness / and therefore is willing; and as our Lord God and heavenly Fa∣ther, is able to hear and to help us. Q. What do you learn from hence. A. I learn that we ought therefore with an hum∣ble confidence, and awful reverence, upon all occa∣sions, to make our Prayers and Supplications to Al∣mighty God our heavenly Father. Q. How do you prove that God is the giver of all goodness? A. I prove that God is the giver of all goodness / from St. James 1. vers. 17. Every good and every per∣fect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father of Lights— Q. How do you prove that God as our Father is willing to hear and help us? A. I prove that God is willing to hear and help us, from St. Matth. 7 vers. 11. If ye then being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your Children, how much more shall your Father which is in Heaven give good things to them that ask him. Q. How do you prove that God as our heavenly Father is able to help us? A. I prove that God is able to help us, from Ephes.
3. vers. 20. where St. Paul says, that God is able to do exceeding abundantly, above all that we ask or think. Q. But when you pray, why do you say Our Fa∣ther / in the plural number, whereas in the beginning of your Creed you say I believe / in the singular num∣ber? A. When I repeat the Creed, I say I believe / be∣cause every Man is bound to believe for himself: But when I pray, I say Our Father / because Cha∣rity obliges me to pray, that God would give his grace (not only) to me / but also unto all People. Q. How do you prove that we Christians ought to pray for all People? A. I prove that we Christians ought to pray for all People from 1 Tim. 2. vers. 1. where St. Paul says, I exhort that Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be made for all Men. Part XXI. YOU have done with the first part of the Lords Prayer which is the Preface; the next part con∣tains the Petitions. Quest. How many Petitions are there? Answ. In the Lords Prayer there are six Petitions; the three first relate to God, and the other three relate to our selves. Q Which is the first Petition? A. Hallowed be thy Name. Q. What do you pray for in this Petition? A. In this Petition I pray that Gods Name may be acknowledged, worshipped, and highly honoured by us, and all Men, as infinitely holy. Q How do you prove that God is holy, and ought therefore to be honour'd and worshipped?
A. I prove it from Psalm 99. vers. 5. where the Psalmist says, Exalt the Lord our God, and worship at his Footstool, for he is holy. Q What is the second Petition in the Lords Prayer? A. Thy Kingdom come. Q. What do you pray for in this Petition? A. In this Petition I pray, that God would be pleased to inlarge his Kingdom of Grace, by inclin∣ing the hearts of all Men to serve him here. Q Do you pray for any thing else in this Peti∣tion? A. Yes, I pray likewise, that God would abolish the power of Sin, and Satan, in us, and all the World; and that he would hasten, and perfect his Kingdom of Glory, by the coming of Christ hereafter. Q. How do you prove that Gods Kingdom of Grace, is in the hearts of his Servants here? A. I prove it from St. Luke 17. vers. 21. where Christ says to his Disciples, — The Kingdom of God is within you. Q. How do you prove that the power of Satan is to be abolished? A. I prove that the power of Satan is to be abo∣lished, from Rom. 16. vers. 20. where St. Paul says, — The God of Peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly — Q. How do you prove that there will be a King∣dom of God hereafter? A. I prove that there will be a Kingdom of God hereafter, from St Matth. 13. vers 43. where Christ says, that after the day of Judgment, The Righteous shall shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father. Q. What duty may the setting up the Kingdom of God here, and hereafter, and the abolishing the power of Sin and Satan, teach us? A It may teach us, that being under the domini∣on of God, we ought to serve him as obedient Sub∣jects
of his Kingdom, in Holiness and Righteousness all the days of our life: as we read St. Luke▪ 1 vers 74, 75. Q. What is the third Petition in the Lords Prayer? A. Thy Will be done in Earth, as it is in Hea∣ven. Q. What do you pray for in this Petition? A. In this Petition I pray, that God would enable us to obey his Will, with the same readiness, as it is done by the Angels in Heaven; and that we may al∣ways chearfully submit to his good pleasure. Q. How do you prove that the Angels readily o∣bey God? A. I prove the obedience of Angels▪ from Psalm 103. vers. 20. Bless the Lord ye Angels of his, that excell in strength, that do his Commandments, hearkening unto the voice of his Word. Q Can you prove the obedience of Angels any o∣ther way? A. Yes, the ready obedience of Angels may also be proved from Christs Speech to the Officers, that came to take him, St. Matth. 26. vers. 53. where he says, that if he prayed to his Father he would presenly give him more then twelve Legions of Angels — Q What is the fourth Petition in the Lords Prayer? A. Give us this day our daily Bread. Q. What do you pray for in this Petition? A. In this Petition I pray unto God that he would send us all things that be needful both for our Souls and Bodies. Q. Why do you express that which is needful for the Soul, as well as for the Body, by the word Bread? A. I express what is needful for the Soul by the word Bread / because the Word Bread is sometimes in holy Scripture taken in a spiritual sense. Q Where do you find the word Bread taken spi∣ritually? A. The word Bread is taken spiritually in St. John 6.
vers. 33. where Christ is called the Bread of God, which cometh down from Heaven, and giveth life unto the World. Q. Why do you pray give us [this day] our daily Bread? A. I pray, give us this day our daily Bread / to shew our dependance on God for a supply of our dai∣ly wants Q. Why ought we thus continually to depend on God for the supply of our wants? A. We ought thus continually to depend upon God, because we are commanded not to trust in un∣certain Riches, but in the living God, who giveth us all things richly to enjoy, 1 Tim. 6. vers. 17. Q What do you mean by [Our] Bread? A. By [Our] Bread I mean what we get by our own lawful industry, or whatever we have a just title to, and not what is anothers property. Part XXII. Quest. WHat is the fifth Petition in the Lords Prayer? Answ. Forgive us our trespasses / as we forgive them that trespass against us. Q What do you pray for in this Petition? A. In this Petition I pray, that God would be merciful unto us / and forgive us our Sins. Q. Why are Trespasses or Sins sometimes called Debts in the Gospel. A. Trespasses or Sins may be called Debts, be∣cause we are bound to perform the Law of God, and if we transgress it, we become debtors to Gods Ju∣stice, and are lyable to suffer the penalties he has threatned to inflict on the disobedient.
When you pray that God would be merciful un∣to us / and forgive us our Sins / Q. Why do you add as we forgive them / that trespass against us? A, I add these Words, as we forgive them that trespass against us / beuause our Saviour Christ has made our forgiving others, absolutely necessary, in order to our receiving forgiveness from God. Q. How do you prove that our forgiving others, is necessary for the obtaining our pardon from God? A. I prove it from St. Matth 6. vers. 14, 15. For if ye forgive Men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you. But if ye forgive not Men their tres∣passes, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses. Q. What is the sixth and last Petition in the Lords Prayer? A. Lead us not into temptation / but deliver us from evil. Q. What do you pray for in this Petition? A. In this Petition I pray, that God would give us grace to withstand all temptations that intice to Sin, and to deliver us from the evil thereof. Q. Can you prove that God is ready and willing to assist us against temptations? A. Yes, I prove it from 1 Cor. 10. vers. 13. where St. Paul says, God is faithful who will not suffer you to be tempted above what you are able, but will with the temp∣tation also make a way to escape, that you may be able to bear it. Q Do you pray for any thing else in the last Pe∣tition of the Lords Prayer? A. Yes, I pray also, that it would please God to save and defend us in all dangers ghostly and bo∣dily; and that he would keep us from all Sin and Wickedness / and from our ghostly Enemy / and from everlasting death. Q. What do you mean by ghostly (or spiritual) dangers?
A. By ghostly (or spiritual) dangers I mean all Sin and Wickedness, and its evil and necessary conse∣quence, which is everlasting death. Q Who do you mean by our ghostly (or spiri∣tual) Enemy? A. By ghostly (or spiritual) Enemy I mean the Devil, whom I solemnly renounc'd at my baptism; And here I pray God to enable me to resist him, and to preserve and defend me from all his snares and malice? Q. How o you prove that God will save and de∣fend from all evil / as well ghostly / as bodily? A. I prove it from Psalm 121. vers. 7. The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil, he shall preserve thy Soul. Q How do you prove that you ought to trust that God of is mercy and goodness will do this that you desire of him? A. I prove that we ought to trust in God for the graning the Petition that we desire of him, from St Mark 11 vers. 22, 24. where Christ bids his Disci∣ples, Have Faith (or trust) in God, and says, what things soever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them. Q. What is the conclusion of the Lords Prayer? A. The conclusion of the Lords Prayer is, For thine is the Kingdom / the Power / and the Glory / for ever and ever. Amen. Q. Why do you not repeat this conclusion in your Catechism, when you are bid to rehearse the Lords Prayer? A. I do not repeat this conclusion in my Cate∣chism, because it is not added by St. Luke, tho' it be by St. Matthew, and for this reason it is not always used in our Church Service, tho' sometimes it is. Be∣sides this conclusion, is vertually implyed and con∣tain'd in the Preface. Q What may we learn from the conclusion of the Lords Prayer?
A. The conclusion of the Lords Prayer may teach us; that God is infinite in power and Majesty, and of an eternal duration. Q. What may we further learn from it? A. We may further learn, that we ought on the consideration of Gods infinite perfections, to offer up our Petitions unto him, with the greatest humi∣lity and reverence, and may likewise entirely de∣pend on him, for all that we need, or desire of him. Q. Why do you conclude this and all other Pray∣ers with the word Amen / with the which also you ended your Creed? A. The Word Amen at the end of the Creed, is a Note of Affirmation signifying that it is so, for the which reason I there use it. And I make use of it in my Prayers, because the same word is also a Note of Wishing, or Desire, signifying that it may be so, or So be it. Part XXIII. YOU have already given an account of the Creed / which you said was a rule of Faith; and of the Commandments / which you called a rule of practise: you have likewise gone thro' the Lords Prayer. And you told me that Prayer was the means of obtaining the grace of God / to enable us to believe and practise as he requires. Q Are there no other outward means of obtain∣ing Gods grace / but this of Prayer? A. Yes, the Sacraments which Christ hath ordain'd in his Church are also means of obtaining grace. Q How many Sacraments hath Christ ordained in his Church? A. Two / only as generally necessary to Sal∣vation
/ that is to say / Baptism / and the Supper of the Lord. Q. Why do you say that there are but two Sacra∣ments only generally necessary to Salvation? A. I say so, because tho' there are several other things that may be called Sacraments, (which hath oc∣casion'd Errours in the Church of Rome) yet they are not generally necessary to Salvation. Q. What do you mean by these words generally necessary to Salvation? A. By generally necessary to Salvation / I mean, that no Persons are exempt from the obligation of observing them, but such only who are uncapable, or have not an opportunity to receive them. Q What meanest thou by this Word Sacra∣ment? A. I mean an outward and visible Sign / of an inward and spiritual grace; given unto us / ordain∣ed by Christ himself / as a means whereby we re∣ceive the same / and as a pledg to assure us thereof. Q. What particulars are contain'd in this Answer? A. This Answer particularly shews the Author, and the end of the Sacraments, together with the parts whereof they consist. Q. Who was the Authour of the Sacraments in the Church? A. Christ himself was the Authour of the Sacra∣ments in his Church. Q. To what end did Christ ordain the Sacraments? A. Christ ordained Sacraments for a twofold end. First, as a means whereby we receive grace. And secondly as a pledg to assure us thereof. Q. How many parts are there in a Sacrament? A. Two / the outward visible Sign / and the in∣ward spiritual grace. Q. What do you mean by an outward visible Sign? A. By an outward visible Sign I mean that part
of the Sacrament / which is to be seen and discern'd by the bodily eyes. Q What do you mean by the inward and spiri∣tual Grace? A. By the inward and spiritual Grace / I mean that divine benefit, which is communicated to the faithful in the Sacraments. Q What is the outward and visible Sign or Form in Baptism? A. Water; wherein the Person is baptized / in the Name of the Father / and of the Son / and of the Holy Ghost. Q What do you mean by baptizing? A. The word baptize signifies to wash any Per∣son, or thing with Water. Q. Where have we any Command for baptizing? A. We have the Command of Christ for baptiz∣ing / S Matth. 28. vers. 19. (where he says to his Disciples,) Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, bap∣tizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Q. How do you prove it necessary to baptize with Water? A. I prove it necessary to baptize with Water / from Acts 10. vers. 47. where we find that St. Peter commanded Persons to be baptized with Water / which had already received the Holy Ghost: for he said, Can any Man forbid Water, that these should not be baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost as well as we? And he commanded them to be baptized — Q To what end were you baptized / in the Name of the Father / and of the Son / and of the Holy Ghost? A. I was baptized in the Name of the Father / and of the Son / and of the Holy Ghost. To shew that we ought to believe in each Person of the holy Trinity; And that by our Baptism we are de∣dicated unto, and obliged to serve, and worship
the Father / Son / and Holy Ghost / one God, blessed for ever. Part XXIV. Quest. WHat is the inward and Spiritual Grace (in Baptism?) Answ. A Death unto Sin / and a new birth un∣to Righteousness / for being by nature born in Sin / and the Children of wrath / we are hereby made the Children of Grace. Q What do you mean by a Death unto Sin? A. By a Death unto Sin I mean the destroying all evil inclinations, and ceasing from Sin, as a dead Man does from the Actions of life. Q. What do you mean by a new Birth unto Righteousness? A. By a new Birth unto Righteousness / I mean such a change in the Soul, whereby we become new Creatures, and receive Strength and Power to pro∣ceed in all vertue and godliness of living. Q. How do you prove that in Baptism there is such a Death unto Sin / and a new Birth unto Righteousness? A. I prove that in Baptism there is a Death un∣to Sin / and a new Birth unto Righteousness / from Rom. 6. vers. 4. Therefore being buried with him in Baptism unto Death, that like as Christ was raised from the dead, by the Glory of the Father, so we also should walk in newness of life. Q How came you to be born in Sin / and to be a Child of Wrath? A We are born in Sin / and made Children of Wrath / by the disobedience of our first Parents. Q How do you prove that the disobedience of
our first Parents made us lyable to Gods Wrath? A. I prove it from Rom. 5. vers. 12 where St. Paul says, — By one Man Sin entred into the World, and Death by Sin, and so Death passeth upon all Men, for that all have sinned. Q. How do you prove that you were born in Sin? A. I prove that we were born in Sin / from Psalm 51. vers. 5. where David says, Bhold I was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did my Mother conceive me. Q. How do you prove that you are a Child of Wrath? A. I prove that we are Children of Wrath / from Ephes. 2 vers. 3 — And were by Nature Children of Wrath even as others. Q. What do you mean by a Child of Grace? A. By a Child of Grace I mean, a Child of God, which was the second great Priviledg I said I had by my Baptism. Q. How does the use of Water in Baptism re∣present the inward benefit of Spiritual Grace? A. Water in Baptism does represent the inward benefit of Spiritual Grace in this manner, for like as Water cleanses the Body from filth, by it's being washed therewith: So the Grace of God cleanses the Soul of the Person baptized from Sin. Q. What is required in Persons to be bap∣tized? A. Repentance whereby they forsake Sin / and Faith / whereby they stedfastly believe the promises of God made to them in that Sacrament. Q How do you prove Repentance necessary in order to Baptism? A. I prove Repentance necessary in order to Baptism / from Acts 2. vers. 38. where St. Peter bids the Jews to repent that they may be baptized. Q How do you prove that a stedfast belief of Gods promises in Christ are requisite in order to Baptism?
A. I prove Faith in Christ requisite in order to Baptism / from Acts 8. vers. 12. But when they believed Philip, preaching the things concerning the Kingdom of God, and the Name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized both Men and Women. Q. What particular Promise from God have we in Baptism? A. In Baptism we are promised Remission of Sins. Q. How do you prove that Remission of Sins is to be obtain'd in Baptism? A. I prove Remission of Sins to be obtain'd in Baptism from the Speech of Ananias to Saul, upon his Conversion, Acts 22. vers. 16. where he says to him: — Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy Sins — If these be the Conditions required in Baptism / Q. Why then are Infants baptized / when by reason of their tender age / they cannot perform them? A. They promise them both by their Sureties / which promise when they come to age / they them∣selves are bound to perform. Q. What do you mean by Sureties? A. By Sureties I mean my Godfathers and Godmothers / which undertook for me at my Baptism / when I entred into Covenant with Christ, as it is mentioned in the beginning of the Cate∣chism. Q How do you prove that Children are capable of entring into this Covenant. A. Because all that are capable of entring into the Kingdom of God, must necessarily be capable of being admitted into the Covenant thereunto be∣longing. Q. How do you prove that Children are capable of entring into the Kingdom of God? A. I prove it from St. Mark 10. vers. 14. And Je∣sus
said — Suffer the little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of God. Q. What is required of you in order to your per∣forming what your Sureties promised for you? A. I am to ratifie and confirm in my own Per∣son the Vow made for me, by my Sureties at my Baptism / when I come to age, and am capable of understanding it, which is publickly and solemnly done at Confirmation. Part XXV. YOU have already given an account of Bap∣tism / which is the first Sacrament in Christ's Church. Quest. Which is the other Sacrament that Christ ordained. A. The other Sacrament ordain'd by Christ, is called the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Q. Why is it called the Lords Supper? A. It's called the Lords Supper / because it was ordain'd by Christ immediately after he had eaten the Passover, at his last Supper with his Disciples. Q. How do you prove that this Sacrament was ordain'd by Christ? A. I prove that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper was ordain'd by Christ from Matth. 14. vers. 22, 23, 24 — And Jesus took Bread and blessed, and brake it, and gave it to them, and said, Take, eat, this is my Body. And he took the Cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them, and they all drank of it; And he said unto them, This is my Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many. Q. Why was the Sacrament of the Lords Supper ordained;
A. For a continual Remembrance of the Sacri∣fice of the death of Christ / and of the benefits which we receive thereby. Q. Why do you call Christs death a Sacrifice? A. I call Christs death a Sacrifice / because here∣by he made an attonement for Sin. Q How do you prove that Christ by his death has made an attonement for Sin? A. I prove that Christ by his death has made an attonement for Sin, from Hebr. 9. vers. 26 — But now in the end of the World hath he appeared to put away Sin by the Sacrifice of himself. Q. How do you prove that the Remembrance of Christs death is the end of the Sacrament? A. I prove that the Remembrance of Christs death is the end of the Sacrament of the Lords Sup∣per / from Christs own Words to his Disciples at the first Institution thereof, St. Luke 22. vers. 14. where Christ says — Do this in Remembrance of me. Q. What is the outward part or Sign in the Lords Supper? A. Bread and Wine which the Lord command∣ed to be received. Q. How do you prove that the Lord commanded both Bread and Wine to be received in Remem∣brance of his death? A. I prove that Christ commanded both Bread and Wine to be received in Remembrance of his death / from St. Matth. 26. vers. 26, 27. And as they were eating, Jesus took Bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to them — And he took the Cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of this — Q. But how is the Lords Death represented or shewed forth by the Bread and Wine in the Sacra∣ment? A. The Death of Christ is shewed forth in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper after this manner;
The breaking of the Bread / that represents the bruis∣ing, and crucifying of Christs Body; and the pour∣ing forth the Wine / represents the shedding of his precious Blood. Q. What is the inward part / or thing signified (in the Lords Supper?) A. The Body and Blood of Christ / which are verily and indeed taken and received by the faithful in the Lords Supper. Q. What do you mean by taken and received by the faithful? A. By taken and received by the faithful / I mean, that none but good and faithful People, receive any benefit from it: and likewise that Christs Body and Blood are received in this Sacrament spiritually, or by Faith / and not in a gross and carnal manner. Q. What are the benefits whereof we are made partakers thereby? A. The strengthning and refreshing our Souls / by the Body and Blood of Christ / as our Bodies are by the Bread and Wine. Q. How do you prove the great benefits which are receiv'd by this Sacrament? A. I prove the benefits of this Sacrament of the Lords Supper / from 1 Corinth. 10. vers. 16. where St. Paul says, The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ, and the Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? Part XXVI. Quest. WHat is required of them that come to the Lords Supper? Quest. To examine themselves whether they re∣pent them truly of their former sins / stedfastly pur∣posing
to lead a new life: have a lively Faith in Gods mercy thro' Christ / with a thankful remem∣brance of his death / and be in Charity with all Men. Q. How do you prove that we must examine our selves before we come to the Lords Supper? A. I prove examination necessary before receiv∣ing the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; from I Cor. 11. vers. 28. where St. Paul says, Let a Man ex∣amine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup. Q What do you mean by examining our selves? A. By examining our selves I mean, that we try our Lives and Actions by the Laws of God, to see wherein we have done amiss. Q. But what are you do to after you have exa∣min'd your self? A. After I have examin'd my self / I am to repent me truly of my former sins / stedfastly purposing to lead a new life. Q. How do you prove Repentance necessary? A. I prove Repentance necessary, that I may ob∣tain forgiveness of my former Sins, from Acts 3. vers. 19. where St. Peter says to the Jews, Repent and be con∣verted, that your Sins may be blotted out when the times of refreshment shall come from the presence of the Lord. Q. How do you prove it necessary to lead a new life? A. I prove the necessity of a new life from Ephes. 4. vers. 22, 23, 24. where St. Paul says to the Ephe∣sians, — Put off concerning the former Conversation the old Man, which is corrupt, — And be renewed in the Spirit of your mind. And put on the new Man, which after God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness. Q. What else is needful to make us worthy par∣takers of the Lords Supper? A. It is further needful to our worthy receiving
of the Lords Supper / to have a lively Faith in Gods mercy thro' Christ. Q How do you prove Faith necessary? A. I prove Faith necessary, when we approach to God in the Lords Supper / or any other religious duty; from Hebr. 10. vers. 22. where the Apostle says, Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of Faith — Q. What more is required of them that come to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper? A. They that come to the Lords Supper / are also required, to have a thankful remembrance of Christ's death. Q. Why are we to remember Christs death with thankfulness? A. We are to remember Christs death with thank∣fulness, because of the Victory we thereby obtain over Sin and Death. Q. How do you prove it? A. I prove we should be thus thankful from the Example of St. Paul 1 Corinth. 15. vers. 57. who (speaking of Sins and Death) says, Thanks be to God who giveth us the Victory thro' our Lord Jesus Christ. Q. Is there no more required in order to the due receiving of the Lords Supper? A. Yes, It is likewise required to be in Charity with all Men. Q. What do you mean by being in Charity? A. By being in Charity is meant not only the forgiving injuries, but also loving and bearing good will towards all Men. Q. How do you prove that forgiving injuries is necessary in order to our worthy receiving the Lords Supper? A. I prove forgiving injuries necessary from St. Matth. 5. vers. 23, 24. where Christ says, — I thou bringest thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest,
that thy Brother hath ought against thee, leave there thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy Brother, and then come and offer thy gift. Q. How do you prove that we should bear good will towards all People, in order to our worthy par∣taking of the holy Communion. A. To bear good will towards all People, has bin already proved to be the duty of all Christians; but its more especially necessary to fit us for the holy Communion, because we are there particularly u∣nited unto one another. Q. How do you prove this particular union of Christians at the Sacrament of the Lords Sup∣per? A. I prove this union from 1 Cor. 10. vers. 17. For we being many, are one Bread and one Body, for we are all partakers of that one Bread. Q Why is it necessary that we should thus care∣fu ly examine and prepare our selves before we come to the Lords Supper? A. It's necessary that we carefully examine our selves before we come to the Lords Supper / be∣cause of the great danger of coming to that holy Sa∣crament unworthily. Q How do you prove that it is dangerous to come to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper un∣worthily? A. I prove the dangers hereof from 1 Cor. 11. vrs. 29 where the Apostle says, He that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to him∣self not discerning the Lords Body. Q. But is there no other danger from the Sacra∣ment of the Lords Supper / but that of receiving it unworthily? A. Yes, there is also great danger in neglecting the Scrament of the Lords Supper / or wilfully staying away from it.
Q. What is the danger of neglecting it? A. There is as great danger of damnation, from the wilful neglecting the Lords Supper / as from the unworthy receiving it: Because such neglect is a plain contempt of Christ's kind invitation, and also a manifest disobedience of his positive Com∣mand. Q How long is the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to continue in the Church? A. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper is to be continued in the Church, till the coming of Christ to Judgment. Q. How do you prove this? A. I prove the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is to continue till Christ's coming to Judgment from 1 Corinth. 11. vers. 26. where St. Paul says, — As oft as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do shew forth the Lords death till he come, FINIS.
