D2543A 99827753 207623
MOTIONS TO THIS PRESENT PARLIAMENT, FOR REFORMING THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND. Most taken out of Jrenaeus Philadelphus. Printed in the Yeare 1641.
MOTIONS FOR REFORMING the Church of England, in this present Parliament. I. THat since the first Reforma∣tion in King Edwards dayes, was rather of the Doctrine, then of the Discipline, and of the Rites that were palpa∣bly grosse, which yet were retained, with a purpose they should be removed afterwards, and for to unlose by degrees, the fast holds to the Romish Church: now since every Protestant is well informed of the change made in Religion, that whatsoever in Reli∣gion is Popish, or tending to the disturbing of the peace of the Church, and maintaining of Hereti∣call doctrines, be redressed. II. That in that great worke of Reformation which is of moment and consequence, far beyond the setling of civill affaires, there be appointed by both the Houses, a Committee or convocation
and meeting of 40. or 50. English Divines, men that were not of the late Convocation, and such as be unpartiall, learned, and uncorrupt in their lives and Doctrine, such as Dr. Ʋsher Arch. B. of Ar∣mach, Dr. Prideaux, Dr. Twisse, and the like, with 10. Scots Divines, to which be called 8. Forrain Di∣vines of the most Learned and famous; such as Ri∣vetus, Primrose, Moulin, and the like, who may treat and agree upon a setled platforme of Church-go∣vernment, sutable to the Monarchy of great Britain wch ought to be ratified, & enacted by Parliament. III. That the Churches Discipline being esta∣blished, a Nationall Synod be convocated, that may frame a Confession of faith, and reforme, if need be, the English Liturgie, that without excep∣tions it be received all over the Kings Dominions, to which Synod may be called a competent num∣ber of Forraine Divines. However, since so many have been so earnest of late, to be in charity with the Roman Church, that they have beene uncha∣ritable to the Reformed Churches: Let Canons be made in the Synode, and an Act of Parliament for union with other Protestant Churches in mat∣ter of Doctrine: and all the fire-brands of these late innovations in the Church, that have made us a laughing stocke to the neighbour Churches, be sharply censured, if not cut off as banes of the Church, especially the first raisers of Altars, such as Heylin, Pocklington, and the like. IIII. That the pleasure of our late Soveraigne King James of blessed Memory, bee executed, who sent his Divines to the Synode of Dort, that
the Church of England afterwards should bee bound by the decisions made there, and that Ca∣nons be made conformable to the determination of our Divines in that Synod. V. That if Bishops be retained, as it is to bee fear'd, there be no more such distance between a Bishop and an ordinary Minister; and that Bishops be no more clled Lords, and that they be enjoy∣ned to preach diligently, as is the duty of their place and office. VI. That if some of them sit in Parliament, it be upon Wool-Scks, and have no more privi∣ledges by their office and places then the Judges, the Lord Keeper and Treasurer: And that a cer∣taine number of Depuies from the Nationall Sy∣nod, whether Bishops o other, be assisting both in the higher House and lower House, for delivering their advices upon any clauses of Acts, that may entrench upon the Churches priviledges, or are contrary to Doctrine or good manners. VII. That the principall defect of our Disci∣pline, and the spring of all errours in Doctrine and practice, which is the want of Synods, be mended, and hereafter all Visitations of Bishops be Synods, as by right they ought to be, and according to the ancient Constitution, as it appeareth by the Syno∣dalls wch Ministers pay in every Visitation, and that at Synods all Parish Ministers be sitting and cove∣red, and have their voyce in the discussing of the affaires of the Diocesse, and making orders which may not afterwards be altered by the Bishop, but onely by the Nationall or Metropoliticall Synod,
which for the publike Union, is to be kept once every two yeares, neither was ever the Church of late without Synods, but in England. VIII. That the Bishop be censurable by the Synod, whether it be Provinciall of Nationall. IX. That another course be taken for maintai∣ning Ministers and Bishops, then that of Tythes, which still cause suits betweene the Minister and the Parishioners, the Patron and incumbent, keep the Minister from his Church, whle he followes suits in London, and bring the oly Ministry in to obloquy and contempt. Put an honourable competent proportion be appointed for the main∣tenance of each Parishes Ministers by the Parishi∣oners, and rated by the Parliament or Synod, and that the distinction of Deane, Arch-deacon, Par∣son, Curat, Vicar, and Reader be taken away, but let them be coequalls, and more or lesse in num∣ber in one Parish, according to the greatnesse or wealth of the Parish. X. That as Bishops in height of Jurisdiction and place, by act are to be shortned, so an act bee made that from henceforth, all ordinary Ministers, which are too much vilified, shall have more re∣spect and honour then heretofore was given unto them, and that the Ministers sonnes be preferred to the fellowships of Colledges. XI. That the power of the Ecclesiasticall Keyes, such as belongs to Bishops and Ministers, be resto∣red unto them, according to the ancient constitu∣tions of the Primitive Churches; and that there be no censure past upon the Clergy or people from
Synod, Bishop or Presbyterie, but such as is Spi∣rituall, and that the usuall penalties of imprison∣ment and fine be rendered again to the right owner viz. to the civill Magistrate, and the abuse of ex∣communication, and the Oath Ex officio abo∣lished. XII. That the Clergie of the Diocesse shall choose their owne Bishops, or present to the Kings Majesty two, who may choose of them whom he pleaseth: and that every Parish be Patron of its Parish, and have the presentation of as many Mi∣nisters, as the Flocke requireth, to the Synod or Bishop. XIII. That instead of Chancellors, Officers, Apparitours, Registers, and such like Grashop∣pers, there be some Lay-elders, that may sit in Provinciall Synods, and have their voyce in mat∣ters of Discipline and Church-governement, and that in Nationall Synods, there be some Lay-men likewise appointed by the Parliament. XIV. That a better course be taken for provi∣ding for the poore, and that both Ministers and Chiefe of the Parish shall over-see, how Church, Wardens doe dispose of the Church-Treasury, and that they be not permitted under crime of Sa∣criledge to spend it upon themselves, and that e∣very month they give an account of whatsoever is received and laid out. XV. That the griping of Church-duties and buriall-costs, exacted oftner more rigorously of the poore then the rich, be restrained, and that the Minister be content with his yearely Salary, per∣forming
all the branches of his calling, as bapti∣zing, burying, visiting the sicke without any fur∣ther recompence, but such at is tendered to him. XVI. That hereafter none becited by the Sy∣nod, Presbitery, or Spirituall court without the knowledge of the Parish-Minister, who ought to present the delinquent, and have his voyce in the censure. XVII. That it be no more in the power of Bi∣shops to impose what they please upon the Clergy with such rigorous penalties, as they have lately used for the oath of the sixth Canon. XVIII. That the Fountains of Learning, Cam∣bridge and Oxford, be purged from superstitious Rites and Popish doctrines, and Orthodoxe Rea∣ders be provided. FINIS.
