E1422A [ocm]11232506 204943
A DECLARATION OF THE LORDS and COMMONS assembled in Parlia∣ment, for the protection of Sir William Brereton, in the County of Chester, who hath lately been proclaimed a Traytor by His MAIESTY. WHereas His Majesty hath set forth and comman∣ded to be published in the County of Chester, divers printed papers in the forme of Procla∣mations, whereby Sir William Brereton Baronet, a person well affected to the publique, is with∣out processe of law or judgement proclaimed Traytor, who hath carefully performed his duty in assisting the Parliament, and opposing those wicked Councellors and Cava∣lieres about the King, which endeavour the destruction of our Religion, and desolation of this land. The Lords and Commons in Parliament do declare, that the said printed papers in the forme of proclamations, and the pub∣lishing thereof, are against the lawes of this Kingdom; and that such persons as have been, or hereafter shal be proclaimed Trai∣tors by the said printed papers, or any other of the like nature, shal be defended and protected by the power and authority of Parliament, from any dammage or prejudice to their persons or estates, by reason or colour of any such printed papers, or proclamations, heretofore published, or which shal be hereafter published or contrived against them; And the said Lords and Commons do hereby strictly forbid the publishing of any such printed papers or proclamations; And do authorize and re∣quire all Officers and other His Majesties good Subjects to ap∣prehend, and to bring in safe custody to the Parliament, and to seize their goods and profits of their Lands, to be accomptable for the same to both Houses of Parliament, all such persons as have already published, or which shal hereafter publish any such printed papers or Proclamations, to the end they may receive due punishment for their offences. January 12. 1642. ORdered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, That this Declaration be forthwith Printed and published, and read in all Parish Chur∣ches and Chappels in the County and City of Chester, by the Parsons, Vicars, or Curates of the same. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for J. Wright in the Old-baily. 1642.
