E1580 [ocm]12277282 197691
THE HVMBLE PETITION Of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament. Sent to his Excellence ROBERT Earle of Essex, to be presented to his Majestie. Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That this be forthwith printed and published. Hen Elsinge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. LONDON, Printed for Ed. Husbands, and Iohn Francke, and are to be sold at the Kings head in Fleetstreet, 1642.
To the Kings most Excellent Majestie. The humble Petition of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament. WEE your Majesties most loyall subjects, the Lords and Commons in Parlia∣ment cānot without great grieffe and tendernesse of compassion, behold the pressing miseries, the im∣minent dangers, the devouring calamities which do extreamly threaten, and have part∣ly seized upon both your Kingdomes of Eng∣land and Ireland, by the practises of a party pre∣vailing with your Majesty who by many
wicked plots and conspiracies have attempt∣ed the alteration of the true Religion, and the ancient Government of this Kingdome, and the introducing of Popish Idolatry and Su∣perstition in the Church, and tyranny, and confusion in the State, and for the compassing thereof, have long corrupted your Majesties Councels, abused your power, and by sudden and untimely dissolving of former Parlia∣ments, have often hindred the Reformation and prevention of those mischiefs, and being now disabled to avoid the endeavours of this parliament by any such means, have traite∣rously attempted to overaw the same by fcrce, and in prosecution of their wicked designes have excited, encouraged, and fostered an un∣naturall rebellion in Ireland. By which in a most cruell and outragious manner, many thousands of your Majesties subjects there, have bin destroyed, and by false slanders upon your parliament, and malicious and unjust ac∣cusations have endeavoured to begin the like Massacre here, and being through Gods bles∣sing, therein disappointed. Have as the most
mischievous and bloudy designe of all, drawn your Majesty to make war against your par∣liament, and good subjects of this Kingdom, leading in your person an Army against them, and as if you intended by conquest to establish an absolute illimited power over them. And by your power and the countenance of your presence have ransaked, spoiled, impri∣soned, murdered divers of your people, and for their better assistance in these Wicked designes, doe seeke to bring over the Rebells of Ireland and other forces beyond the seas, to ioyn with them, And wee finding our selves utterly de∣priued of your Majesties Protection and the authors, counsellours, and abetters of these mischiefs, in greatest power and favour with your Majestie, and defended by you against the Iustice and authority of your high court of Parliament, whereby they are growne to that height and insolence, as to manifest the rage and malice against those of the nobility and o∣thers who are any whit inclinable to peace, Not without great appearance of danger to your owne Royall person, If you shall not in
all things concur with their wicked and Tray∣terous courses. Have for the iust and necessary defence of the Protestant religion, of your Ma∣jesties person Crowne and dignity, of the laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, and the Privi∣ledge and power of Parliament, taken up Armes and appointed and authorised Robbert Earle of Essex to be Captaine Generall of all the forces by us raised, and to lead and conduct the same against these Rebells and Traitors, and them to subdue and bring to condigne punishment. And do most humbly beseech your Maje∣stie to with draw your Royal presence, & coū∣tenance from these wicked persons, and if they shall stand out in defence of their Rebellious and unlawfull attempts, that you will leave them to be supprest by that power which we have sent against them, And that your Majesty will not mix your owne danger with theirs but in peace and safety without your forces, forthwith return to your parliament, and by their faithfull Councell and advice, compose the present distempers and Confusions aboun∣ding
in both your Kingdomes, and provide for the security and honour of your selfe your Royall posterity, and the prosperous estate of all your Subjects, wherein if your Majestie please to yeild to our most humble and earnest desires, wee doe in the presence of Almighty God professe, that wee will receive your Ma∣jesty with all Honour, yield you all due obe∣dience and subjection and faithfully endea∣vour to secure your person and estate from all danger, and to the uttermost of our power to procure and establish to your self, and to your people all the blessings of a glorious and hap∣py Reigne. FINIS.
