E2138 [ocm]12303051 197661
THE PARLIAMENTS INSTRUCTIONS To the Earl of Essex, Lord Generall of the Army, Agreed on by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, September the 17. Likewise the Resolution of his Excellencie, to ad∣vance his Forees from Norhampton, and march toward the Kings most Excellent Majesty, together with his Desires to both Houses of PARLIAMENT. Also, the Resolution of the Earl of Cumberland, the Earl of New-Castle, and the Lord Strange, to joyn their Forces together in a full Body, and meet the Earl of Essex, with Sir Iohn Hothams Determination concer∣ning the same. C R central circle flanked by the English lion on the left and the Scottish unicorn on the right and containing the initials of King Charles, all of these figures enclosed within a rectangle flanked by angel on the left and right LONDON: Printed for H. Blund. September 20. 1642.
THE PARLIAMENTS INSTRUCTIONS To his Excellence the Earl of Essex, Lord Generall of the Army. Agreed on by the Lords and Commons as∣sembled in Parliament, upon Satterday Sep. 17. THE Great and Honourable Court of PARLIAMENT having out of their Pious and Judicious Wisedomes, taken into serious considera∣tion the great and manifold Oppressions that the true English Protestonts daily groan undes, by Reason of the wicked and inhumane Actions of the Blood-sucking Party, and having had great debate there upon, it was
consented to, and resolved, that a speedy re∣dresse should be had of all such particulars, and although they have incensed his Majesty a∣gainst this great and Honourable Assembly of PARLIAMENT, driving and forcing into his Majesties Royall Breast, such inveterate cru∣elty against the Houses of Parliament, and doth still in a most Trayterous manner, dayly strive and endeavour to possesse His Majesty with such Thoughts, that this Honourable Assem∣blie doth by all possible meanes endeavour to Raise Forces against his Majesties Royall Per∣son. VVhereupon the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, having seriously weigh∣ed and considered the said Particulers, fell into Debate of the Petition of both Houses of Par∣liament to His Majesty, in the behalfe of them∣selves and all the Commons of ENGLAND, the Earl of ESSEX being ordered to march speedily towards his Majesty, and to carry the same with him into the field. VVherein hee is to Declare and lay open to His Majesty, the occasion of their Raifing of Forces, and the true meaning of all their Inten∣tions, that so there may be a good Vnderstan∣ding wrought betwixt His Gracious Majesty, and the Honourable Assembly His High Court of PARLIAMENT. His Excellencie the Earl of Essex, is like∣wise ordered and commanded by both Houses to shew and Declare unto his Majesty, amongst
divers other particulars, that they have no In∣tent or purpose to make VVarre against His Majesty, but to the contrary, that their utmost ayme and endeavour is to maintaine the safety of His Majesties Person, and the true Protestant Religion. The House likewise ordered, and to that end resolved, to send certain Instructions to the Earl of Essex, declaring their will and pleasure that he should forthwith advance his Forces from Norhampton, towards the Kings Maje∣stie, which he is Resolved to doe and performe accordingly. But it is signified by divers Letters from Yorke, to both Houses of Parlia∣ment, that the Forces raised by the Earl of Cumberland and other Lords in the Northern parts, are making of them∣selves ready to march to his Majesties Forces at Nottingham, where they intend to joyn in a full Body, and march a∣gainst the Earl of Essex his Army, Sir John Hotham is resolved to assist the Earl of Essex, and to come again the e∣nemy upon the Arrear, he having now taken the City of Yorke from the Ma∣lignant Party, having beaten the Earle of Cumberlands Forces from thence.
The Earl of Essex his Letter to the High Court of Parliament, Sep. 17. My Lords and Gentlemen, I Remember so great expression of affection from the City of London, at my departure from you, that I can∣not dispaire, but to obtain my suite from you that shall be an advantage to the Common-wealth, upon the true judgment of the condition of our Af∣fairs, and of that of the enemy. I am confident, we may bring a quick and happy conclusion; God doth blesse us with so good successe daily, and the o∣ther Party by their plundering and bur∣ning of towns grow so odious, that they grow weaker, and we stronger e∣very where. Yet are we in one great streight, and such a one, as if it be not speedily re∣mided, may quash all our hopes, and
may endanger the Peace and Liberty we so much strive for, our Treasure which must maintain the Army grows neer to an end, and you well know that our Army consists of such as can∣not be kept one day without pay. What a Ruine would it bring upon us, if a disbanding should happen, I leave to your Judgments. My Desire unto you is, That you would supply us with the speedy sum of one hundred thousand pounds, which I am confident would with Gods Blessing bring these unhappy di∣stractions to an end suddenly. Your City hath hitherto had the Honour (next to God) to be the chie∣fest safety of the Kingdom and Parlia∣ment: This will render you to all posterity, the finishers of this great work, if any thing of particular love or respect to me may be an Argument herein, I shall take it as the greatest honour that hath befallen me, and wil
oblige my selfe to acknowledge it, by the utmost and most faithfull indea∣vour of Your faithfull Friend, ESSEX. From the Rendevouz at Norhampton, Sep. 15. 1642. portrait of the Earl of Essex (?)
