E2410 [ocm]12179727 197235
TWO ORDINANCES Of The LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT. One concerning 23000 li. lately lent by the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of London, which they are willing yet a while longer to forbeare, and have undertaken to doe their utmost endeavour to advance and lend 17000 li. more, to be forthwith sent to the Army to supply the present pressing necessities thereof. The other concerning Debts and Rents of Houses, to be gathered and payd to the Collectors of the weekly Assessement, due to such as refuse to pay, and where there is no sufficient distresse to be found. Die Lunae, 8 Maii, 1643. ORdered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parlia∣ment, that these two Ordinances shall be forthwith Printed and published. John Browne Cler. Parliamento. May 9. Printed for John Wright, in the Old-Bailey. 1643.
Two Ordinances of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament. Die Sabbathi, 6. Maii, 1643 WHeras upon a motion made by a Committee of Lords & Commons, in the name of both Houses of Parlia∣ment, for the sum of three∣score thousand pounds, to be advanced by the Citi∣zens of London, for sup∣ply of the necessities of the Army, the Lord Ma∣jor, Aldermen, and divers of the Commons of the said City by vertue of an Ordinance, of the 28 of February last did advance 43000 li. or thereabouts, which by another Ordinance of the 5. of Aprill was to be repayd together with 40000 li. more or thereabouts, lent and advan∣ced by the Lord Major and Aldermen alone; which consideration for the forbearance, thereof, after the rate of 8. per cent. per annum for the same, out of the first monies to be raysed by the weekely Assessement, in the City of London and Liberties thereof.
And whereas the said Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons, are contented that the first three and twenty thousand pounds that shall be repayd out of the weekely Assessements, shall be set a part to be forthwith sent to the Army, to supply the pre∣sent pressing necessities thereof, and to be repayd the same after the said 4000 li. with the forbear∣ance thereof as aforesaid is fully satisfied, And whereas the Commons of London, in Common-Counsell assembled; have undertaken to doe their utmost endeavour to advance and lend 17000 li. to be forthwith also sent unto the Army, to be re∣payd with the 23000. as aforesaid. All which advance of monies, is understood and taken to be a very acceptable service, and tends very much to the preservation of Religion, Lawes, and Liberties, and the safety of the Parliament, City, and Kingdome. It is there∣upon Ordained and Declared, by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, that as well the said 23000 li. as also such other monies as shall be advanced as aforesaid, shall be repayd with consideration for the forbearance thereof, after the rate as aforesaid, out of the first mo∣nies to be raysed upon the weekely Assessement, to be collected in London and Liberties, after the 40000 li. lent and advanced by the Lord Major and Aldermen is fully satisfied as aforesaid, and out of the first money collected or to be collected out of the weekely Assessements, in the City of Westminster, the Borough of Southwarke, the se∣verall Parishes in the weekely Bills, and in the rest of the Countie of Middlesex, as also in the
Counties of Hertford, Essex, and Suffolke, as also out of the first monies that shall be raysed out of the Assessements, of such persons throughout the Kingdome (not above the 20. part of their estate or the 5. part of their Annuall revenue) as have not contributed upon the Propositions of both Houses, or not proportionably to their Estates, according to an Ordinance or the  of May; And for their further security and encou∣ragement, it is likewise Ordained by the Lords and Commons aforesaid, that as well Sir Gil∣bert Gerrard Baronet Treasurer of the Army, as also Sir John Wollaston Knight, John Warner, John Towes, and Thomas Andrees, Aldermen of the City of London, appoynted Treasurers for the receipt of the said Monies respectively, shall repay the said severall sums as aforesaid, and shall not issue the said monies to any other pur∣pose whatsoever, untill the same shall be fully sa∣tisfied as a foresaid. And it is further Ordained, that such sums of money as were advanced and not repayd, according to an Ordinance of the 29. of November last, shall be repayd out of such mo∣nies as are or shall be raysed by vertue of severall Ordinances passed in and about the said Novem∣ber, for Assessing of such persons within the City of London and Liberties thereof (not above the 20. part of their estates) as have not contribured upon the Propositions of both Houses, or not pro∣portionable to their estates, as also out of such monies as shall be raysed by vertue of the afore∣said Ordinance of the  of May aforesaid.
Die Sabbathi. 6. Maii, 1643. WHereas in and by the Ordi∣nance of both Houses of Par∣liament of the 29. of Novem∣ber last, for Assessements, it is provided that if no sufficient distresse be found to satisfie the summs assessed, then the collectors shall have power to in∣quire of any summe, or summs of mo∣ney, due, or to be due, unto them, res∣pectively so assessed, from any person, or persons, for any Rents, Tithes, Goods or Debts, or for any other thing, or cause whatsoever, and should have power to receive the same, and to com∣pound therefore, and give discharges, which should be good and effectuall to all intents and purposes, and for so much as divers persons in regard of provisionall clauses in their Leases of forfeiture for not-payment of their Rents
and other persons who have given Bonds, Bills, or specialties, or stand charged by booke for payment of such debts, as they owe to persons assessed, have desired explanation of the said Or∣dinance for their indempnity, in the ca∣ses aforesaid. Be it therefore Ordained and Declared, by the Lords and Com∣mons, that all and every such person and persons, as in obedience to the said Ordinance, shal pay any Rents, Tyths, Goods, or Debts, (by them owing to any person or persons, assessed) unto the Collectors, appointed, or to be appoin∣ted, to receive the same, shal be dischar∣ged against his Creditor, Landlord, or Rector, and their Assignes, to whom any such Rents, Tythes, or Debts, shall be due as aforesaid, and shall be pro∣tected and saved harmelesse, from any forfeiture, penalty, or dammage which he, or they may incur by not payment of his, or their said Rent, Tyths, Sums of Money, or other things according to
his or their Lease, Bond, Bill, Booke, Specialty, or other agreement, by the power and authority, of both Houses of Parliament. And if any such Tenantor Tenants, Parishioners, Debtors, or person, or persons, who are indebted or from whom any Rent, Tythes, Debts, shalbe due to any person, or persons, as∣sessed, as aforesaid, shal refuse to pay his or their Rent, or Rents, Tythes, or Debts, to the said Collectors, at such times and places as the same shal becom due and payable, the said Collectors shall have power to distraine, sue for and recover the said Rents, Tythes, and Debts, and to take all other advan∣tages for non-payment thereof, as the Landlord, Rectors, or Creditors, might have done in every respect for and to∣wards satisfaction of the summs of Mo∣ney at which such persons are assessed as aforesaid. FINIS.
