E3331 [ocm]12299050 197666
SEVERAL PROPOSITIONS PROPOVNDED, By his Excellencie, the Earl of Essex, to the Cavaleees, neere Darby-shire, September the 21. 1642. being very fit and necessary to be published throughout the King∣domes of England and Scotland. Together with a true Relation of a famous Sea-fight, performed by Van Trump the Dutch Admirall with ten ships, against the Spanish fleet, being going to assist the Bebels in Ireland, with men and ammunition. With the manner of his obtaining the Victory, and after 11. hours fight took ten of the Spanish ships, and put the rest to flight. Reported to the House of Commons, Septem. 20. C R printer's device consisting of a central circle flanked by the English lion on the left and the Scottish unicorn on the right and containing the initials of King Charles, all of these figures enclosed within a rectangle flanked by angel on the left and right Printed for I White, September 21, 1642.
A true RELATION OF A Famous Sea-fight, performed by Van Trump the Dutch Admirall, with eight sayl of ships, against seventeen Spanish ships that were going to aid the Rebels in Ireland. ON the 20 day of this month Letters came to the Ho∣nourable House of Com∣mons, signifying, that the Hollander hath obtai∣ned a great Victory over the Spanish fleet that were going to aid and assist the Re∣bels
in Ireland, being in number 17. lusty ships, as is manifestly declared in these in∣suing particulars, The States of Holland having received information, that a great Navie of Spanish ships lay at Dunkirke ready to lance forth, which was supposed, either for some De∣sign against England, or else for the reliefe of the Rebels in Ireland, and after some consultation therupon, they fort with dis∣patched a Messenger to Van Trump Admi∣rall of their Navie, desiring his care and vigilancie therein. The said Van-Trump had no sooner re∣ceived this Newes from his Masters the States of Holland, but with all expedition, he sent 10 lusty ships, himself going in person also, and having sayled for the space of 7 hours, he espyed the Spanish fleet, who making after them with full speed, and be∣ing within half a league of them, the Spa∣niard though it a great disparagement to flye, by reason they did exceed them in number. Wherupon the Spanyards prepa∣red themselves, and made them ready for
Battle, and as soon as Van-trump came with∣in Canon-shot, the Spanyards let fly many pieces of Ordnance to welcome him, thin∣king the day their own. But the Hollanders took the same Re∣solution, as they have formerly done in the West-Indies, and divers other places at Sea, resolving to fight it out to the last man, which indeed are brave testimonies for all other Marriners. Van-Trump seeing the Spanyards begin so furiously, caused his Vice-Admirall and two more to play against them with their Broad-side, which made the Spanish Ad∣mirall, and some others, glad to fall backe, and for 8. or 9. hours the fight continued very hot, much blood being shen on both sides, till Van Trump with the Admirall came up, playing with his great Ordnance against them, insomuch that he boorded the Spanish Admirall twice, and at last took 11 of their ships, together with great store of men and ammunition, and put the other 6. to flight.
The Earle of Essex his Proposisions to the Cavalees, Sep. 21. ON the 22. of this month there came a Post from his Excellency the Earle of Essex, declaring many Defeates and Overthrowes given to the Cavaleers, by his Excellency, and that since his first advancing his Army from Norhampton, he hath had very good successe, in all places where he hath bin as yet, the Cavaleers not daring to withstand him. Wherupon, the Earl of Cumberland, the Earl of Lindsey, the Lord Strange, and di∣vers others, have sent out Warrants to all the Cavaleeers now resident in the Nor∣thern parts of this Iland, to make their ap∣pearance upon the 21. of this month at a place called Stokes Green in Lincolnshire, giving them strict Command, not to fayl at the day prefixed.
And the said Commissioners are resol∣ved at the meeting, to joyn their Forces in a full body, and march against the Earl of Essex, otherwise, they feare that their hopes will be quite frustrated. But such is the courage of the London Volunteers, and pious Branches, that their hearts are filled with joy, when they hear that they must go to battell; for they have all with a generall consent set down their Resolution, either to lose their lives, or winne Fame, before they return to London. For they depend wholly upon their cause, although some depends upon their power and strength. His Excellency the Earl of Essex, after he had advanced his Forces from Norhamp∣ton, took his Journey towards Darbishire, but before he came to the said County, hee had information that about 2000 Cavaleers were billeted neer to the said City, where having received this Newes, he marched to the Cavaleers, and propounded these fol∣lowing particulars to them.
1. That they would deliver up their Arms, and resign them to his Excellencies Custody. 2. That in so doing, hee would give every man of them free leave to go home to his own dwelling. 3. That those which did withstand him, and refused to agree to his Demands, should stand to his mercy. These are the Propositions which his Excellency propounded to the Cavaleers at their meeting. FINIS.
