E3555D C.112.f.9[58] R231390 R231398 R231390 99888646 195862
A Brief ACCOƲNT of the Qualifications, Vertues and Use of that Incomparable EXTRACTUM HUMORALE, Called also PANARETON, From that Ʋniversal Operation it hath upon all Humoral Diseases, that is, Proceeding from Evil or Corrupt Humours. Prepared by EDWARD IEWEL Dr. of Physick, and known by the Name of his PILLS. IF there be any Preheminence, if any Excellence in any one thing in its kind, to make it distin∣guishable from others, it must needs consist in the Communicative Good, Vertue and General Ʋsefulness thereof, which (to the ingenuous and un∣prejudic'd Reader) will plainly appear to be true of this Noble Medicine. My PILL, being by two Grand Qualifications deservedly preferred before others. The First of which is that, which is call'd by our Greek Authors ; that is to say, A Working by Election or Choice of Matter, by sepa∣rating, dividing and carrying off such, (and only such) Humours, as being either superfluous, do oppress and indispose the Body, or else being vicious and corrupt, do mix with the Blood, and sweet Nourishing Juices, or Humors thereof, putrifie and corrupt them also, and make them prone to run into infinite sorts of Dis∣eases, of which we see every year produce new ones, And we at this day by sad Experience find the truth hereof, in the Loss of many Lives, both in City and Countrey, both which suffer under the Contagion of a strange, put id and malignant Feaver; To prevent which, it were both safe and necessary for every one who is yet in Health, to take some Doses of my Pills, which if taken before Infection prevents it; so also it doth where the Small Pox, Measles, or other Malig¦nant Diseases do infest any Town or Place. This I I say is the one Qualification of my Pills, that they do after a most admirable manner separate and draw a¦way those Humours, which are prepared to form Dis∣eases, and by that means do Radically Cure them. The other Qualification of this Great Medicine, rest∣eth in the due, Measure of its Working, for therein it holds such a Proportion with the strength of the Body, that it never hazards an Hypercatharsis or over-Work¦ing, but effectually prepares and draws together all superfluous humours, and such as are corrupted and putrid, and carries rhem gently off, without Griping or other churlish Working, leaving the Body refreshed and disposed to a lasting state of Health. These are the two Eminent Qualifications of my Pills, and such they are! as shall not only serve this present Age, but recommend them to the good and benefit of those which are to come. But after this General Account I have given of this Noble Medicine, my Pills, I now come to be more particular, and to let you know how they make their Progress through the Body. First, They cleanse the Sto∣mach, which (as it is design'd by God and Nature, to Concoct the Food, and distribute Nourishment to the whole Body, so) by the Power and Faculties thereof, being hurt and depraved, is the Fountain of most Dis∣eases, which annoy and in time destroy it; For it car∣ries off all its Crucities, and vicious, tough, clammy and waterish Humors, with which it is loaden and stuff'd, and by which many sore Diseases are caused, as Obstructions, Flushings, windy Belchings, Fumes, Head ach, Surfeits, Griping in the Guts, Vomiting, Loos∣ness, Fainting Loss of Appetite & a multitude of others which would be too tedious to mention, and leave the Stomach mightily strengthned, and in good order. When it hath wrought effectually in the Stomach, it passeth (with its Vertue) into the Bowels, cleanseth the Liver, Spleen, Gall, Mesentery, takes away their Obstructions, empties them of all Superfluities, and strengthens their Faculties. By this means, it excel∣lently Cures all sorts of the Dropscy, gently, by de∣grees and with safety, discharging the Belly and other parts of that serous watery humour which affects them: Thus it helps the Scurvey, purging away those salt, briny, melancholy, sharp humours, which so univer∣sally indispose the Body. For a more large Descripti∣on whereof, I refer you to my Book, which shall be Given given with my Pills. So also they help the Jaundies of both sorts, Cholick, Melancholy, Sighing, Pains in the Sids and Back, windy Vapours, difficult Breath∣ing, and others which depend on these Parts; Hence it proceeding through the small Guts, draws from the Reins, Ʋreters, Bladder, Womb and seminal Vessels, all viscous or slimy matter, which causeth Gravel and Stone, Strangury or Diabetes. Also the Malign Humors, which affect the Seminal and Gene∣rative Parts. For, beside its Sufficiencie to help in
all other Weaknesses in those Parts. They have a peculiar Property in Curing the Run of the Reins, though highly virulent; And when it is Heightned into the POX, it Cures that too; For these Pills contain in them the true Antidote against the POX, and do with great Ease and Efficacie dis¦solve and draw away the Malignide thereof, and sel∣dom or never fails to Cure its most inveterate Sym∣ptomes; Provided the Patient have strength and vigour enough left to cooperate with the Medi∣cine; But here is Required more then ordinary di∣ligence in Attending the Cure, both in constant take∣ing the Pills, and observing a slender (but wholesom) Diet during the Cure. They are to be taken at Night going to Bed, and Work the next Morning; Begin with Four or Five, and use more or fewer, as you find them a∣greeable to your strength; You may swallow them in beer, Ale, Apple Pap, or any other thing greateful to your Palate, and the next day go abroad about your Occasions. A more par∣ticular Account is Given of them in a Book which is Given with the Pills, which are put up in Tin Boxes, two Dozen in every Box; And Seal'd with the Crest of my Coat of Armes, being An Eagles Head Eras'd. Price 2 s. 6 d. They are Sold by Mr. Parker bookseller at the Leg and Star against the Royal Exchange. Mr. Northcott bookseller, next St. Peters Alley in Cornhill, and at his Shop at the Anchor and Marriner on New-Fish-street-hill near London-bridge. Mr. Willson Watch-maker in Threadneedle street, by the Exchange. Mr. Lacey Stationer at the Golden Lion in Southwark. Mr. Delves a Cheesemonger in Bishops-gate street near Great St. Hellens. Mr. Parkhurst at the Bible and 3 crowns in Cheapside near Mercers Chappel, bookseller Mr. Clark at his Coffee-house in the Half-Moon Tavern-yard in Cheap-side. Mr. John Miller bookseller at the Rose, at the West-end of St. Pauls. Mr. Heldar bookseller at the Angel in Little Britain. Mr. Battersby bookseller at Thavy's Inn-gate in Holbourn. Mr. Harrison at Lincolns-Inn gate in Chan∣cery-lane. Mr. Heyrick bookseller, at Grey's Inn-gate in Holbourn. Mr. Christopher VVilkinson at the black boy against St. Dunstans Church in Fleet-street, bookseller. Mrs. Bayley at the sign of the Hare in great Turn-stile in Lincolns-Inn Fields. Mr. Waterman Cheesemonger at the Red Cow in Clare-street. Mr. John Dear more at the Coek in Panton street, bookseller. Mr. Halford in the Old Pell-Mell, at the Pay'd Alley going into the Park, bookseller. Mr. Cooper Grocer at the white Lion in Russel-street over against the Coffee-house in Covent-Garden. Mr. Samuel Lowndes over against Exceter Change, bookseller. Mr. Nest at Westminster-hall door his Cof∣fee-house. Mr. John Smith bookseller in great Queen street. Mr. Mills at the pestle and mortar without Temple-bar. Mr. Turner baker without Bishops-gate. Mr. Adam Livinston Fruiterer, on the South side of the Royal Exchange And at mine own Abode at the Golden Ball in Long Acre near St. Martins lane.
