F907 [ocm]12039535 199141
THE Vnnatural Brother: A TRAGEDY. As it was Acted by His MAJESTY's Servants, AT THE THEATRE in Little Lincolns-Inn-Fields. LONDON, Printed by J. Orme, for Richard Wilkin, at the Kings-Head in St. Paul's-Church-Yard. MDCXCVII. ADVERTISEMENT. There are lately published, Ibrahim the XIII. Emperor of the Turks, A Tragedy, and the Spanish Wives a Farce: Both Written by Mrs. Mary Pix. The Younger Brother, Or Amorous Jilt: Written by Mrs. A. Behn. Printed and Sold by Richard Wellington.
THE PREFACE. NOT many daies after the very cold reception which this Play met with on the Stage, as I was walking up and down my Chamber something discontented, tho not much mortified neither, at the unkindness of the Town, I happened to cast my eye on a Book which lay in a Window, and that proving to be the first Volume of Mr. Drydens Plays, I opened it, by meer chance, just on a Prologue of his which begins thus, Self love (which never rightly understood) Makes Poets still conclude their Plays are good: And malice in all Criticks runs so high, That for small Errors they whole Plays decry; So that to see this Fondness, and that Spite, You'd think that none but Mad-men Judge or Write. I was both surprised and pleased with that Chance which had so thrown me on those Verses. For whereas before, I had for some time tortured my Brain, to find out those many imperfections which probably might have occasioned the ill success of this Play, I then began to lay aside some part of that care, and to think that the Malice and ill Nature of the Critick, in catching at every little slip, and improving of every inconsiderable fault, might perhaps have an equal hand in that misfortune, with the weakness or fondness of the Poet. I had no other way to clear this point, and find out the truth of the mat∣ter, but to employ all the Friends and Acquaintance I had about the Town, to inquire into those objections which were generally made against this Play. They did it: and, as I have very good reason to believe, gave me a faithful account of all. And yet all, at last, came to no more than this: That the Play was too grave for the Age, That I had made choice of too few Per∣sons, and that the Stage was never filled; there seldom appearing above two at a time, and never above three, till the end and winding up of the whole.
These are the mighty faults that have so intirely Damned this Play: and yet if these must be thought faults now in our nicer Age, I am sure they were not thought such heretofore by the Antients; for they generally made use of but few Persons, and never made it any part of their business to fill the Stage. Nay, we all know that Horace lays it down as a Rule. —Nec quarta loqui persona laboret. Nor were these thought faults by our more modern Criticks, about Fif∣teen or twenty years ago, when that excellent Play of the Orphan first ap∣peared on the Stage. For that, tho liable to all the very same exceptions which hitherto have been made against this, yet was received with all the applause imaginable. I must confess, foreseeing part of what has since hap∣pened, and meerly to gratifie the Rabble, after I had finished this Play, I ad∣ded a Comical part to it. Wherein, so there were but a smart kind of a hurry and confusion, with a Song or two at the end —His nam plebecula gaudet. I thought it would have passed well enough. But the Comedy being altoge∣ther independent from the Tragedy, and the whole appearing something too long the first time it was acted, I easily consented to have it all left out, and so threw my self wholly on the Men of sense for my Judges. Verum Equitis quoque jam migravit ab aure voluptas Omnis, ad incertos oculos & gaudia vana. For, to my cost, I find that even our men of Sense, have been so long entertained with the gaudy, glaring splendor of our Operas, that nothing now can please their eyes, but what dazels 'em: And that their ears have, of late, been so well belabour'd with Drums, Kettle-Drums, Trumpets, and Hautboys, that they are almost become deaf to Sense, or any thing else, convey'd to 'em in a less Noise, than those their darling-Consorts generally are. But no more of this—which may seem a little tart, and to savour strange∣ly of the vanity of a discontented Poet, who will be sure to find out any other reason for the miscarriage of his Play, than that which was perhaps the only true one, I mean the badness of it. But I had almost forgot to acquaint the Reader with one objection more, against this Play, than what I have yet mentioned. On the third day, there was a certain Lady in one of the Boxes, who thought she could not more ef∣fectually decry it, than by declaring aloud that it was nothing but an old Story taken out of Cassandra. And I readily grant it: yet can by no
means allow that to be a fault. Mr. Dryden has said too much in the defence of such an innocent piece of theft, and extremely well justified the thing, both by his Arguments, and Practice. All I desire of that Lady, by way of amends, is, that if ever these Papers have the happiness to reach her hands, she would be pleased to renew her acquaintance with the story of Alcinoe in that Romance, and compare it with this Play: And then I dare be bold to affirm, she will not think me over-much beholding to it: But may perhaps be so charitable, as to entertain a more favourable opinion both of the Play, and of the Poet. I have but one word more to the Reader, and then I shall leave him to the Play, either to read it, or let it alone, which he pleases: And that is, that he would not charge me with any Errors of the Press. The Bookseller in my absence, has undertaken the care of inspecting it, and therefore he only ought to be accountable for all such faults. EDW. FILMER.
PROLOGUE. BLess'd were these happy daies, if ever any, When Poets flow'd with Wit, and you with Money. But now, both Wit and Money run so low, They're at the poorest Ebb they e're can know, This Clipt, that dwindled into Farce and Show. As for our Coin, the Wisdom of the State, May stop our ruine and prevent our Fate; What will nt pass by Tale, may pass, by Weight. But who can our corrupted Wit restore, And make that Currant as it was before? O! could we but with equal Balance sit, And by the nicest sruples weigh out Wit, How many pieces good, and fair to sight, Would yet be found by many Grains too light? In this great dearth of Wit, our Poet here Presumes to treat you with his Country fare, Not that he thinks it better than your own, Or what you daily meet with in this Town: No, tho a Poet, he is not so vain; You are to judge, he but to entertain. Freedom of Censure he to all allows, And with submission to your Judgment bows. He only hopes you will be pleas'd t' excuse, Small faults in a raw unexperienc'd Muse, Which trembling comes, full of sad frights and fears, And almost naked on the Stage appears, No Paint, no Patches, to adorn her brow, That is No thundering Consort, nor no glareing show; Those pretty knacks, so much of late in use, To varnish, and set off a homely Muse. Good, easie sense, our Poet bad me say, Is all that he has aim'd at in this Play; Well too, he thinks, if he that mark has hit, Since the best Sense, is ever the best Wit.
EPILOGUE. THE Poet, with the Soldier shares this fate, Courting your favour, he incurrs your hate. Tho one does for your daily pleasure write, The other, for your darling int'rest fight, Yet equally unkind, you both do slight The Man of War forsooth's too rough, unfit For civil Company; The Man of Wit, A meer pretending Fop, a scribling Tool, Made up of Madman half, and half, of Fool. What is it then, that thus in ev'ry age, Draws one toth field, the other to the Stage? No hope of Fame or Profit sure, for they In this too like, their harder Stars obey, Both drudge for little Honour, and less Pay. What e're it is provokes 'em, yet we see, Each fondly courts his unkind destiny; For as the gen'rous Warriour, void of fear, Presses on danger still as it draws near, And tho he sees thousands before him fall, Yet briskly ventures on, and flings at all: The Poet so, tho daily on the Stage, He sees the dire effects o'th' Criticks rage, Yet fearless dares those doughty foes engage. And one's no sooner fairly down, but strait Ʋp perks another, careless of his fate. As for the Poet of this present night, Who spite of all discouragement dares write, He neither fears nor does the danger slight. If you resolve to kill, he says you may, He only begs a very short delay, Come all again, and maul him,—the third day:
The Persons represented, MEN. Beaufort Governour of Lyons. Grammount Nephew to the Governour. Dampierre Brother to Grammount. Montigny Friend to Grammount. WOMEN. Elvira Wife to Grammount. Leonora Sister to Grammount. Lysette Woman to Elivira. A Page and other Attendants. The Scene is a Castle about a League di∣stance from Lyons in France.
ACT I. SCENE I. Enter Beaufort and Dampierre. Beau. NO more: thou hast wrought a secret from my Breast▪ Which may in time prove fatal to us both. For now methinks I do begin to hate Thee, Dampierre, as the only Man on Earth Who has it in his power to check, and blast Those Glories, now in my declining years, Which I so justly purchast in my Youth! Damp. The languishing sick Man, without reserve, Freely lays open his Infirmities, To his Physicians kill in hopes of Cure: The hearty Penitent, then only meets With true and real comfort, when he dares Unload his o'ercharged Conscience, and expose His nicest Scruples to the pious re Of some grave Ghostly Father. Beauf. Ah Dampierre! Could I with the good Penitent Confess, And at the same time quit the darling Sin; Or with the afflicted Patient hope for ease Of all my pains, by telling my Disease, I then were truly happy▪ But alass! Elvira's not so fair, as she is good: The shining lustre: of her veruous mind, By far surpasses that of her bright Eyes. Those Eyes, which yet dart beams resistless As the Sun in his full Noon tide Glory, Beams, which strike me blind to vertue▪ honour, And indeed to all things else but love. Oh— Damp. Reflect not so severely on your faults, I do beseech you, Sir, but as a man, Allow some grains for humane frailty.
Beauf. Have I, in my great Masters service spent Full Forty years, and won renown enough To glut the most ambitious Hero's hopes? Have I pass'd o'er the boyling heats of youth With an untainted reputation? And shall I now, now in my riper years, Stain all the glories of my former life? No, Dampierre, no, it cannot, must not be. Damp. Do you in earnest love Elvira, Sir? Beauf. Love her! does the devout Recluse that has Renounced this world aspire to Heaven? Does the Ambitious Hero covet Fame? Or the old Miser doat on hoarded Gold? Love her! By Heaven, I ne'r lov'd glory Half so well, nor so much dreaded the success Of doubtful War, as now I do of Love. Fearless, I have a thousand times outbrav'd The greatest dangers, and outfac'd grim Death In the most ugly shape that War could shew it; Yet now want courage to encounter Her fair Eyes, and like an arrant Coward, Tremble and quake at her approach for fear. Damp. For fear of what, Sir, of a Woman? Elvira is no more, no more than a Meer Woman; an imperfect piece of Man, Made only for his Pleasure. Beauf. Hah! by Heaven She's Natures Master piece, she's all Divine, Fair as an Angel, Virtuous as a Saint. But why, alas! do I so much as name Her hated Vertue: Would she were a VVhore, A Common Prostitute, since she is Married: Or rather since she is Married to Grammount, O! let me wish her Dead, laid in the Grave, And hoarded up lke some old misers VVealth, In the dark intralls of the happy Earth, VVhere none the mighty Treasure could enjoy, Since I cannot. Damp. Nay, now, Sir, I could chide. VVish not Elvira Dead, but think her still
Amongst the living wonders of the Age, The fairest much of her bewitching Sex. VVho, tho she may have charms enough to kill, Yet may too entertain some soft desires, To cure the wounds her fatal Beauty gives: And therefore, Sir, you ought at least to hope. Beauf. It is to innocent desires alone, That hope dares shew a comfortable end; But mine are guilty all: How then can hope Pretend to flatter him, who were he blest In all the joys successful Love can give Must yet be wretched, miserable still, Torn with the pains of a too late remorse, Sharper than those of disappointed love. Damp. These, Sir, are odd phantastick notions Of a working brain, fitter for Schools Than for a Lovers care, whose Mistriss is his all. He who dares rifle the industrious Bee, Snatches the Honey careless of the Sting: And he who briskly plucks the blushing Rose, Laughs at those Thorns that would revenge the Rape. Beauf. How powerful do thy arguments appear, To a mind wholly prepossessed with love! Thou art a Master, sure, in that soft art, And may'st assist me: I alas! am rough, Grown old in Camps, my Tongue unapt for talk; And unaccustom'd to those softer terms, Which Charm that fair, that dear believing Sex. Damp. Let me but know what you would have me do, And think it done: think your self happy, Sir, If in my power it be to make you so. Beauf. Thou then shalt break the Ice, prepare the way. Thou hast a tongue, nimble and fluent As the well feed Lawyers, soft and smooth As the old crafty Courtiers, who denies Your sute, yet would perswade you he is still Your friend. Speak, wilt thou do it? Damp. Sir, I will. Beauf. But art thou sure thou wilt? Damp. Most certain, Sir.
Beauf. Hast thou consider'd well? Damp. Yes, I have. Beauf. Perhaps already thou forget'st Who 'tis I love. Damp. No, it is Elvira, is it not? Beauf. It is indeed Elvira, but then sure There should be more of that Dear Name than one▪ Hah! What sayst thou? Damp. Not that I know of, Sir, 'Tis Grammount's Wif I mean. Beauf. Thou should'st have said Thy Brothers, thy Brothers▪ Wife, on whom Thy Uncle, the unhappy Beanfort doats. Damp. I should indeed, nor did I wave that word, For any such great kindness it imports, As might o'erthrow the resolution I have made to serve you, Sir: no, were she mine, This fair Elvira mine, as she is now Grammont's; I'd not retract one syllable▪ Of what I have said, but freely sacrifice▪ My Life, my Honour, all in short, that's dear To your repose. Beauf. Come, come to my Arms then, Let me embrace and hug thee, Dampierre. By Heaven thou art—a most illustrious Villain, a rank Pander. Oh Grammount How deply would thy Brothers baseness wound Thy generous Soul, could'st thou but guess His foul intent. But thou art good, so true To Virtue and to Honour, thou can'st ne'er Think on a crime so Black, as this base wretch Dares act; this miserable wretch, who at One fatal blow, would strike a Dagger To his Brothers Heart, damn both himself and me▪ And plunge us all into a horrid gulf Of everlasting misery. Damp. If my too forward zeal be an offence, Punish my giddy rashness as you please: Yet do it, Sir, something a gentler way. Charge me not with such black and horrid crimes, As Heaven knows my very Soul detests. Or rathertake my hated Life, see here,
My naked breast ready to meet the blow, My Tongue prepar'd to bless the hand that strikes. Beauf. I scorn to stain my Sword with such base blood, Live, and repent thy rashness if thou can'st, If not, resolve never to see my face agen. Ex. Beauf. Damp. Not see your face agen, but on the terms Of penitence, my noble Uncle. Yes, Yes, but I shall, or I am much deceived. This qualm of Conscience, is in him no more, Than a meer aguish fit; the cold one gone, A hot one then will certainly succeed. O all you black and dismal fiends of Hell, Who take delight in mischiefs baneful sport, Feed still, and blow up his incestuous flame To a resistless highth; then from his passion, Ill conceal'd, as from a flowing spring Let daily doubts, fears, jealousies, heart burnings And eternal jarrs, arise within these walls: Let Beaufort hate Grammount, Grammount Elvira, And Elvira both, whilst Dampierre hates 'em all, And justly too. I was the first▪ pretender to Elvira, But by the faithless Grammount under-min'd, All my best hopes soon vanisht into air, And I beheld her circled in his Arms. Nor durst I then think of revenge on him That did the wrong, he was but too secure, Supported by a partial Uncle's power, And by Elvira's Friends. But now I know That Beaufort doats on her, from this dear day I date my hopes of a severe revenge. But see, Grammount appears in close discourse With his inseparable friend Montigny: My mind at present's strangely ruffled, Therefore I'll withdraw, ere they perceive me. Ex. Damp. Enter Grammount and Montigny. Gram. Blest in the softest Passion of my Soul, Possessing, in my dear Elvira, all The world calls Vertuous, or my eyes think fair; How can I, friend, without a blush complain, Or murmur midst such vast, such charming joys,
As tasted once, would make an Anchoret Forget his way to Heaven, and think to find It here below. Mont. Forbear, my dearest friend, Take heed, should'st thou be rash enough to pine, Whilest with a liberal hand, kind Heaven Pours all it's choicest blessings on thy Head, Such black ingratitude, no doubt, would be Severely punisht by some signal judgment From above. Gram. Unkind, cruel Montigny, Thou know'st, at each sad thought of losing thee, Tho circled in my dear Elvira's Arms, I feel such strange distructing pangs of grief, As nought but the most perfect friendship Can excuse; so vast, so sensible a pain, As wounds my very Soul, and damps and soures The sweetest joys of a possessing Lover. Mont. Thou best of Men, and dearest too of Friends, Let me embrace, and hug, and press thee thus, Near to that heart which owns no other bands, But those of everlasting friendship for The generous Grammount: Heaven knows with what Regret I leave thee, Friend; yet must we part. Gram. O say not so, each word's a mortal wound, Each syllable a Dagger to my heart. Rather recall the hasty sentence, and Repenting thy unkindness, give me Life, And what I value more, my Friend. Mont. O my Grammount, forbear; thy kindness else Will be the ruin of thy friend; do not, Oh do not force me to repeat, What equally afflicts my Soul as thine, It must be so. Gram. It must not, by all that's good, Thou art no more tha Friend I took thee for, If thou canst thus forsake me, leave me thus, And not give one poor shadow of a reason For so severe a separation. Mont. Honor, my Friend, 'tis honour calls me hence: Honour, that Idol to which all must bow.
Gram. Honour! whither can Honour call thee friend, That Grammount would not go to share the Prize? Mont. Whilest I lie here, supinely surfeiting On all the joys of soft bewitching ease; My aged Sire, laden with years and fame, Plays the young man, and makes the Spaniards feel The smart of Wounds, I only should have given. Thither I go, thither I fly, my Friend, To court fair Honour in the midst of Blood, Horror and dire Confusion. Gram. Those Frontier bickerings call not for thee, Montigny, there's little honor to be gain'd: But if thou art resolv'd to go, refuse not Th' assistance of my Sword, oh let me share The Toyl, and Glory, with my dearest Friend. Mont. Thou must no more think on the Wars, Grammount, But from the Genial bed, reaping the sweet Reward of all thy glorious labours past, Raise up a race of Hero's, whose bright fame, For early vertues, may soon equal thine. Gram. Since honours strictest Laws must yield to Love, Let Beauty then prevail, tho friendship cannot. I have a Sister, by the world thought fair, Virtuous and young she is: her Fortune's such As may at least equal the largest hopes Of the most Noble Youths our Age can shew: If thou canst learn to Love my Friend, she's thine Mont. How Prodigal! how Lavish my Gram. Thy Friendship makes thee, with a careless hand Thou scatter'st Treasures shou'd be the Reward Of a vast merit only: or the price Of many great and glorious Services. Gram. Nay now thou triflest— Mont. By Heaven I do not: Tho yet my heart a stranger be to Love, Yet 'tis with admiration I behold The rare perfections of that beauteous Maid, But I must study to deserve her, friend. Happy, if after all the noblest toiles I may aspire to such a recompenc, And with thy leave, my generous Grammount,
Lay all the Trophies of successfull War At the fair Charming Leonora's Feet. Gram. Away preach to rough Seamen in a Storm, Or whisper to the boisterous Winds when in Their lowdest fury, and they shall sooner Hearken to thy tale than I: But see, My dear Elvira coming to my aid, And Leonora too; thou canst not sure Hope to maintain thy ground against us all. Enter Elvira and Leonora. Elv. From those dark Clouds which in thy Face appear, My boading heart foretells a rising Storm Of grief within thy Breast, speak, my Grammount, what ruder cares, to thy Elvira yet Unknown, sit heavy on thy drooping Soul? Gram. Thou best of Women, pard'n the guilty cause Of this disorder in my troubled mind. Elv. Oh name not pardon, but quickly let me share, And bear an equal part of all thy care. Gram. Hast thou not seen some men, extremely Rich, Tell me Elvira, 'mongst their dearest store Of Gold, and Silver, Jewels, and other things Of highest value, lock securely up Some pretty, favourite toy: Who when returning to review their wealth, And missing only that, yet could not bear The petty loss, tho all the rest were safe? The case, my dear Elvira, is my own, Thou art the dearest treasure of my Soul, Thou art— Elv. Forbear, Grammount, I guess the rest, Tho not so much from what thou now hast said, As from Montigny's silence, and thy grief. Each seems a like concern'd, each dreads the loss Of a dear friend; yet, you Montigny, will, Nay must be gone. Gram. Must, oh no, alass! He will be gone, uncall'd, unask'd, unsent for, He will forsake his friend. Oh Elvira, Oh Leonora, yet try all you can,
Your softest Arts, to move this cruel Man. Elv. What may be done let us resolve to do, I for a Husband plead, a Brother you. Leon. Sure friendships cause, argued before a friend, Cannot but meet with a successfull end. Mont. Such powerful advocates who can withstand? Honour! thou strange fantastick airy thing, Thou losing bargain to the bravest Souls, Thou easie purchase, costly to maintain, Thou cloke to bold ambition's restless hopes; No more, to thy capricious humours will I blindly bow, nor court thee as a slave. The present time to friendship I will give, And what that spares, shall be intirely thine; Still all that man in reason ought, I'll do To satisfie my Friend and Honour too. Elv. See my Grammount, the cruel man repents, Friendship has wrought its much desir'd effect, And fixt the Rover here. Leon. What would you more? He yields and gives you the glory of the day; Mont. Half vanquisht by my friend, I durst notst and The shock of so much Beauty as you brought To Storm the Fort: Honour it self durst not Pretend to hold it out against such odds. Can you, my Friend, pardon a proud Rebell Now imploring Grace? Gram. Talk not of Pardon, my Friend, Give me thy Hand, Elvira, Montigny thine. Thus guarded, I dare challenge all the World, To show but one Man more, as happy, as My self. Methinks mankind should envy me, Thus blest in a lasting full fruition Of all those glorious Charms, the sweetest love, Or truest, dearest friendship can afford. Henceforth, be every day, within these Walls, By all, kept as a solemn Festival, Sacred to Love and Friendship: and to me, May both, as now, ever propitious be. The End of the First ACT.
ACT II. SCENE I. Enter Dampierre pulling in Lysette. Damp NAy prethee why so refractory? Lyset. I am in haste, or if I were not, What business pray can you have with me? You, who have scarce vouchsafed One look this way, this long, long Day or two. Damp. Business of importance Child, And such as in the end might prove To thy advantage if discreetly manag'd. But— Lyset. But what, nay pray out with it. Damp. Why, thou art a very foolish ignorant Young Wench, that ever stand'st in thy Own light. Lyset. Your wisdom's much mistaken in my Character, I dare aslure you Sir, For I am nither so silly, nor so igonrant, I thank my kinder Stars, but that I very Well understand the post I am in, with all The by-advantages, that may be made by One of my profession that has wit. Damp. Wit! prethee of what use is Wit in your Commonwealth, hah! Lyset Oh, Sir, believe me, that Waiting-woman That wants it, is the greatest slave in Nature. Whereas we that have it, rather Command than serve, and in a very little Time bcome real Mistresses, whilst They, poor Ladies, only enjoy the empty, Useless Title. Damp. Good!
Lyset. For by our witty, sly, and subtle insinuations, We at length become so absolutely necessary to 'em, That they live not but in us; They see with our Eyes, here with our ears, And judge not of any thing but by our wise Directions. Damp. Admirable! Lyset. So that if love once fires their tender Hearts, 'Tis we that either fan the growing flames, Or else suppress them quite. Wisely, we manage their inclinations To our best advantage: and suffer 'em to love, But when, and where, as little, or as much, As we think fit. Damp. Incomparable! Lyset. In short, Sir, It is by our all powerful interest, That the ugly, and the awkwerd fool, if liberal, Succeeds in his Amours: Whilst the gay, Well bred, handsom wit, too oft miscarries By his unseasonable thrift. 'Tis we indeed, do all, gain us, and they are yours; Proportion but your gifts, to your desires, And you can never fail: Since to confess The very truth, 'tis we that set to sale, Their favours, and good graces of all sorts And sizes, even from a simple, single smile, To full fruition, Sir. Damp Hold, hold, enough: the world cannot produce Thy equal, here, here's Gold for thee. Lyset. For me, Sir, and why, I pray? Damp. No matter Child, here's yet more take it, And deserve it, Girl. Lyset. Let me but know which way, And much may be done. Damp. Why, watch Elvira narrowly, let not One look, one smile escape thy diligence, Never be from her, but be a constant Spy On all her actions. Lyset. Ple do't:
And yet, I doubt, I shall but lose My labour, and you your mony, At least, if you expect any thing Extraordinary from my observations. Damp. No matter, I'le venter my money. Leyst. And I my pains: tho I am confident You will be strangely disappointed, When from an exact Diary of all her Actions, you will only find, that of Sixteen long hours, she dayly spends, At least twelve in Prayer, or fulsom Dalliance with her onw lawful Husband. And so I am your Humble Servant, Sir. Ex Lyset. Damp. Go on, and prosper Girl: For if I catch Elvira tripping, Or can but find the least appearance of a slip, I'le quickly make a Mountain of a Molehill. Then to Grammount I'le go, and tell him all, Yet seem to leave much more behind untold: So make him beg to know, what known shall pinch And gall him to the quick. They love too well For Man and Wife, and what's yet worse, So good an understanding between them, Sutes not with mine, nor with my Uncles purposes. But he retuns not, as I thought he would, And to find out the reason, much perplexes me. But see, where he comes, all melancholy, Sad and pensive, almost lost in his own Wild distracting thoughts. The Devil now works Hard, and I'le not be his hindrance: But wait, Then take my time to lend a helping hand, In this our common Business. He retires to a corner of the Stage. Enter Beaufort. Beauf. How poor, And how contemptble a thing is man, Made but more wretched, by those very same Distinctive faculties of the Soul, Which yet seem to sooth, and flatter him, With an imaginary Excellence, Above the rest of the Creation.
Damp. Good! Beauf. Reason, what art thou, but the very source, And spring, from whence flow all our miseries? Thou art that glimm'ring light, by which alone, We can discern those crimes, which otherwise, We n'er had understood; at least, as such. And so had known no guilt. Damp. Better and better! Beauf. Our phlegmatick dull Priests, have all mistook Their errand sure, and grosly hitherto Imposed upon the credulous world: Whilst with an erring Zeal, they've preach'd down Lust, Yet given a Pass, to more pernicious Love. For Lust is, at the worst, but a brisk, Generous heat, and natural ferment Of the blood, lay'd by the next dear Child Of joy, that dares contribute to the cure. But when the Devil tempts us to love one, And only one: not all the Sex beside, Can quench the hellish flame; But be she Mother, Daughter, Aunt, or Niece, How near soever tyed to us by Blood, It matters not: She, she alone can cure, That gave the fatal wound. Damp▪ He's fast enough, I am sure, now I'le bolt. If I dare venture to approach you, Sir, It is with the same awful reverence, As penitent sinners do th' offended Gods: With the same humble hopes too, that at length Your mercy, o'r your justice, may prevail; Pard'ning those crimes I have with tears bewayl'd, And would have expiated with my blood, Would you have suffer'd it. Beauf. Ha! Dampierre, And in this humble posture too, nay then, No change, to me, can ever appear strange: Since in so very, very, small a time, Thou art turn'd Saint, and I a Devil. Damp. Far be it, Sir, from me to assume The Glorious title of a Saint, and yet,
A very little time, may usher in Strange alterations. Believe mine real then, And make your vertue, as remarkable In pard'ning, as in censuring, a crime Committed but in thought, and hatched there Only by too warm a zeal, for the great Beauforts Service. Beauf. Curse on thy ill tim'd change, Which only comes, unseasonably now, To upbraid my weakness. Pard'n thee! Yes, withall my heart I pard'n thee, But on this one condition let it be, That thou n'er talk to m of vertue more. Damp. Alas, what mean you, Sir? Beauf. Be wicked still; Be vitious, as thou ever wert, Go boldly on, and stop at nothing. Thy wanton fancy, represents as pleasing To thy senses, but gratifie'em all, Even to a loath'd satiety. Then come, and waving all uneasie qualms, Teach by experience the vast pleasure Of unbounded vice: gladly I'le hear thee, And become thy wanton Proselyte, my great, My glorious Master. Damp. Heaven protect you, Sir, Now you talk strangely; perhaps you doubt me, And this way only hope to learn the truth: For you, I know, are eminently good And vertuous. Beauf. Hah! that lie will damm thee Past all hopes of mercy: I am nor good, Nor vertuous, but, by much, more wicked, Than an honest heart dares think. I rage, I burn in an Unlawful, and Incestuous flame: Alas! there's a perpetual tumult In my distracted mind, nor can I fix One wandering thought, but what still leads me To the very brink of Hell. Oh Elvira—
Damp. Forget her, Sir, I once dearly lov'd her, Yet when I found she could prefer, My Brother's tardy passion before mine, I quickly shook the lazy off, and With an indiffernt eye, could safely gaze On all those Beauties I before adored. Beauf. Forget her! no, too easily alas! I can forget that she is Grammount's Wife, Or Beaufort's Niece, but that she is fair, That she is charming, above all others Of her Beauteous Sex, that, that, I never Can forget. Damp. If you must think on her, Think then, at the same time, on her too rigid Vertue, that eternal bar to all your Guilty hopes. Beauf. There is no bar to impetuous Love, At least, Vertue I'am sure is but a weak one. But why do I vainly talk of Vertue? I am convinced, there's no such thing on Earth. No, all's but pretence, all's meer Hypocrisie. Look Dampierre, round this vast Machine the World, 'Tis but a larger Theater, on which Each skilful Actor, plays that part alone, Which, for his profit, he can manage best. Come then unmask: thou seest my naked heart, To all the world beside, be the reformed, The good, the pious Dampierre, but to me, Be what thou ever wert. Damp. Hah! what's that, Sir? Beauf. Nay perhaps I may not find a name for't, That may please you: But to be plain, and short, Help me to the enjoyment of Elvira, And I'll disclaim Grammount, I'll cut off all His fairer hopes, to make a way for thee, My darling, to the possession of my Envied Wealth.
Damp. Misled, by a too hasty Zeal, I made an offer once, not all your wealth, Nor even that of the whole world, Can e're prevail with me to make again That kindness then was slighted, scorn'd, repai'd With cruel injuries, and a boisterous Storm of black reproaches. Beauf. Upbraid me not With what is past. Damp. By what is past, I but Too plainly see, the kind return my best Endeavours, for your service, in that kind, Are sure to meet with. Beauf. By various and insulting Passions agitated, I felt unheard of torments in my mind, My very Soul was, as it were, stretched on The Rack, and all that storm, was nought but the Strong Convulsions of a dying Vertue. Damp. Heaven forbid, the generous Beaufort So much renowned for solid Vertue, should In a Storm of Passion, yet make shipwreck Of it all: No, to the Wars, Sir, there— Beauf. Talk not to me of War, too long already I have toyl'd i'th' barren Fields of Mars, Wasted my Youth and Vigor in rough Camps, And bloody broils: Deaf to the Virgins Plaints, The Widows Curses, or the Orphans Cries, For Lovers, Husbands, Parents, Butcher'd all In hateful War. In short, I loath that Trade Of cutting throats, and am resolv'd henceforth To Love, and that Elvira too. Damp. Oh, Sir, think what the censorious world will say. Beauf. E'en let the world say what it will: I care not, she, I'm sure, is a meer Stranger to my blood. Come then, be once more Kind, I know thou lov'st me, Dampierre, I know thou do'st. Dam. You may be well assured I do.
Beauf. O let me embrace, and hold thee in these Arms, Till thou hast granted all I can desire. Damp. Had you before been half thus kind? Beauf. It is not now too late. Damp. Fool that I am, to stand here, only to Be tempted to my Ruin. Oh! why Do I not rather fly, not from you only, But, for your sake, from all Mankind? Beauf. Nay, now thou art too cruel: Come, thou must, Thou shalt, thou wilt. Damp. Alas! What would you have me do? Beauf. Go to Elvira. Damp. Well, for once I will. Beauf. Tell her—by Heav'n I know not what—tell her— Yes—if she delights in martial Stories, Tell her the many glorious Deeds I've done In War, the bloody Battles I have won, The Towns I have taken: Tell her, in short, All that may make her hearken to the Name Of Beaufort with Delight. Then, in a gentle Sigh, tell her I die For Love, and if, after all that, thou darest Proceed yet further, tell her at last It is for her I die. Damp. Something like this, I am resolved to do, But cannot yet tell what. I▪ll instantly Go to her, and with my utmost Cunning Try to dive to the very bottom Of her Heart: Where if I find yet any Room for a new Passion, you may be well Assured, that to your best Advantage, I will turn the Weakness of her yielding Mind. Beauf. Go, fly: Oh may we both successful prove, Thou in thy subtle Arts, and I in love. The End of the Second Act. ACT III. SCENE I. A Forest. Leonora alone. Leon. WHilst all rejoyce, Montigny, at thy stay, only waste in Tears the time away: Uncertain, what to hope, or what to fear, I wish thee gone, yet fain would keep thee here.
All ays I try, to chase thee from my mind, All Arts I use, yet can no Comfort find: For if, t'elude the Torments I endure, My Hopes from Absence seem t expect a Cure; Even those Hopes ridiculous appear, Since how can he be absent who's lodg'd here? Laying her Hand on her Heart. A welcom, yet a fatal Guest to me, Whilst I the Prisoner am, and he is free. What then, poor Leonora, wilt thou do, Thou lovest alas! but art forbid to woo, That is Man's dear prerogative alone, Thou must in secret sigh, in secret moan: And taught by stricter Rules of Modesty, What most thou lov'st thou must pretend to flie. Thus strangely wretched, surely there can be, For all thy Woes, but one sad Remedy: Die then, yet in thy Death, so lucky prove, That all the World may know, thou diedst for love. Each Poet then, thy Passion will rehearse, Sing thy sad Fate in everlasting Verse, And every Lover strew thy passing Herse. Enter Elvira and Lysette. Lyf. See Madam, where she is. Elv. Retire a little. Ex. Lysette Leon. Oh Heavens! I am surpriz'd. Elv. What? in this dismal solitary Place Alone, and all in Tears, my Dear? Leon. Those treacherous Teras will be my Ruine. Aside. Elv. Nay, seek not to hide 'em from your dearest Friend, that would be too unkind: Oh! rather, Let me know the unhappy Cause of this Disorder. Leon. I will, but you shall pass your Word then, Not to laugh at me. Elv. My dearest Child, I do, Leon. Nay, but I am confident you will laugh, Since I my self indeed, can scarce forbear, When I reflect on it. Elv. I will not, Nay, I cannot laugh at what moves thee to weep. Thy Tears, my Dear, would extort Pity From an Enemy, much more from one that loves thee. Leon. This your unmerited Kindness, Madam, makes me yet more ashamed than ever, To betray my Folly▪ For it was nothing more,
Believe me, than a meer childish Passion. Elv. Whate'er it was, imparting it to me, You will oblige me much. Leon. Were it a Secret, Or of the least Importance, I would ne'er Try to conceal it from you: Be so kind, Dear Madam, as to impute my Folly To my tender Years. Elv. Ah Leonora! 'Tis not your Folly, but your Cunning now, That I have reason to complain of. Leon. Were I as capable of Cunning, Madam, As you believe I am, yet certainly I would not use it to impose on you, To whom I stand so many ways engag'd. Elv. I know you ought not, yet I'm sure you do. Leon. Suspect it not, indeed you wrong me much. Elv. No, 'tis you that wrong your self, wrong me, And all our mutual Vows of Friendship too. For know, that with no small concern of late, I have observ▪d your gayer Humour fade, And change into a sad, dull and deadly Melancholy: With Grief I have beheld You fly all sorts of pleasing Company, Only to court Retirement in some Grove. This made me set Lysette to watch your Steps, By whom, just now inform'd, That you were gone This way alone, I quickly follow'd you, Tho' not without some Apprehensions, From the dismal Wildness of this uncouth place, Altho' I knew Montigny and Grammount, Were here before, seeking Diversion▪ In these o'ergrown Woods. Come then confess, What brought you to this unfrequented place? Leon. Ah, what would you have me do? Elv. Tell me the Truth, For should you still endeavour to conceal it, The swelling Secret would, in time, Grow too unruly for your tender Breast, And force its way, at last, with much more Noise, And eager Violence, than would be fit For so much Innocence to own. Leon. I yield: Your kind and tender importunity, At length has conuer'd all my Fears.
Share then that fatal secret which, of late, Has robbed me of my Rest, of all my Peace. Yet spare, oh spare my Tongue, th'ungrateful Task, Of naming what I still must blush to own: But let these Tears convey it to your Breast, Whilst on my tender Knees I thus implore Your Pity, and your Pardon. Elv. Rise, rise, my Dear, Take this Kiss, and with it too my pardon, My Pity, and my faithful promise, To assist thee in thy Love: For Love it is, If I must guess, that has possest thy Soul. If so, my Dear, you must be plainer yet, And name the happy object of your Vows Leon. Ah Madam, I doubt I have already Said too much, for see, my Brother coming, Oh give me Leave to hide my Grief from him, And all the World but you. Enter Dampierre. Leonora runs out, and Elvira offering to follow her, is staid by Dampierre. Damp. Nay, Madam, You must excuse my Rudeness, I but seize The next at Hand, to know by what strange fate Dampierre of late is grown so terrible, As to oblige you with such eager haste, To fly him. Elv. You cannot think your Sister should avoid you, Nor ought you to believe I would. Damp. But, Madam, may I not believe my Eyes? Elv. You may, for they can only tell you, That Leonora fled, and that I followed, And all perhaps without one Thought of you. But you of late are strangely alter'd sure, You would not else so easily suspect Your Friends of so much incivility; Believe me 'tis a Fault scarce pard'nable. Damp. Since my too light Suspicion seems a Crime, With all Submission I intreat your Pardon: Alas! I am no more the Man I was— Elv. Why, what strange Misfortune has befallen you? Damp. So great a one i'th' person of my Friend, As Heaven, in all its Anger, scarcely could. Have sent a greater. Ah! had those fair Eyes, Madam, beheld what these have lately seen,
How much would they have lost, by this time Of their wonted lustre: at least, if sorrow, Sighs, or frequent tears, could have diminisht it. Elv. You think me very tender hearted sure, Or else have some strange story to relate, Extremely moving. Damp. Believe me, Madam, It is a tale would move the hardest heart To some compassion: Think then, you see A man, compleatly blest above all others, In the richest gifts of Nature, and of Fortune; a Man, renown'd abroad for Arms, And no less famed at home for goodness, And for Virtue. Elv. You have said enough, To let me know he is your Friend, who e're he be: But sure a Man of his high Character, Can never prove unfortunate enough To want our Pity. Damp. Yet, Heaven knows, much more Unfortunate he is, than either good, Or great: In short, he Loves, Loves where he scarce Dares ever hope to be belov'd again; So, sadly lingers out a hated Life, In all the torments of a deep despair. Elv. Believe me, 'tis pity he should so misplace, His love on one, who sure deserves it not. Damp. I'll not pretend to rate her mighty worth, But only tell you she is wondrous fair, Fair as the fairest of her charming Sex; Fair as Elvira, as hard hearted too; And what's yet worst of all, like her, she is Married to another. Elv. How! his passion Then is criminal, and should be hopeless. Damp. 'Tis criminal indeed, and yet the crime, Renders it but the more conspicuous; Or if you will give me leave to say so, Meritorious; dear Devil tempt me not. Aside. Elv. I understand you not, or if I did, I am not now at leisure to dispute The merits of a guilty passion: But come, let us move homewards pray, And leave the rest to a more fitting time. Damp. No time more fitting; nor no place more free Than this.
Elv. But I am weary, and want rest. Damp Here you may have it, if you please, I beg you would hear me. Elv. I cannot now. Damp. Say rather that you will not. Elv. That would be rude. Damp. And therefore only will not hear, because It is th' unlucky Dampierre that entreats. Just Gods! must I be still neglected, Still despised, and whether for my self I plead, Or for another, still cut short? no, stay, And tho you'll hear no more of his sad tale, Be pleas'd at least to lend an ear to mine. Elv. What mean you, Dampierre? Damp. Since my friends passion is condemn'd, oh! give Me Leave to entertain you with another; Which tho not wholly innocent, perhaps, Yet owing all it has of guilt in it, To you alone, by you at least, should be Esteem'd as so. Elv. You grow mysterious now, Your looks are wild, and you much discompos'd. Damp. Behold me well: And in these troubled looks Read the disorder of my Soul; springing From Love, opposed by hatred and more sweet Revenge. Do you not tremble, Madam? Elv. Why should I tremble? If Heaven, as I believe, protects The Innocent, I am secure enough. Damp. You are indeed, for love at length has got The day; that little God, tho dispossest Some time by my too just resentment, Is now return'd Victorious to his Throne, And firmly reinstated in the Empire Of my heart. Elv. I do begin to understand you now: But Dampierre, have a care, desist in time, All yet is well: but if you dare proceed, Grammount shall surely know your good design. Damp. Tush: Meer bugbear words to scare young sinners with; You would fain make me angry, But I at present want the leisure: A sofer, nobler passion rules my Soul. I am all Love, all Fire, my wanton blood
Runs high, ready to force a passage Through my distended veins. This gloomy place, invites us too to Love, Whose kinder shades, not only will conceal Our amorous Thefts, but even forbidding Entrance to the Sun, Will shroud us in an artificial night: That all things may be done with greater decency. Come then, Offers to kiss her hand. Take this warm earnest of a greater Bliss, And think, with how much pleasure to your self, You may in one poor fleeting minutes time, Even o'erpay me for an age of sufferings. Elv. Monster of a Man, Villain unhand me, Let me quickly go, or I will fill these Woods With cries, such moving cries, as shall awake, And from their dismal hollow caverns draw, Each nobler Beast of prey to be a Guard To me, to thee base wretch, a shame and terrour. Damp. Come, come you need not use these common arts, These faint denials, little strugling fits May serve indeed as whets, to a weak And puleing appetite: But mine is sharp, wound To the utmost pitch, keen as the greedy Hawks, That's ready just to seize his long'd for prey. Elv. Lysette, Lysette: Rash, heedless Girl, oh whither art thou fled? And thou, my dear Grammount, where art thou Now? the distress'd Elvira wants thy help. Damp. Call louder yet, he answers not, perhaps He may not now so much as think of you: At least you see he is not here to help you, Therefore be wise, and what you cannot Hope to avoid, submit to patiently. Elv. Villain thou liest, he's in these very Woods. Tremble, base wretch, at the bare thoughts Of his approach; for tho he be not yet Within the reach of my too feeble voice, I doubt not but just Heaven will send him, Either to rescue, or revenge his dear Elvira: And either way, to thy Confusion Monster. Damp. Hah! say you so, what must be done then, Must be quickly done: and when 'tis done, I'll trust thee for betraying thy own shame Scarce forty paces hence, there is a gloomy
Place so private, as if kind nature had Contrived it only for our use: There at Thy beauteous shrine, I ll offer up my best Devotions; and fill thee with such melting Joys, as first shall tempt thee to forgive, Then make thee beg me to renew the Offence. Nay hang not back, for if you do, by Heaven I'll drag you thither. Offers to force her. Elv. Oh all you juster Powers above, send some relief: or give me Strength enough to punish the base Villain. Help, help, for Heaven's sake help. Damp. Hah! what envious Devil has sent him? Oh, Madam, dry up those precious Tears, Forbear those Cries, whilst Dampierre lives You're safe enough. He discoers Montigny at a distance. Enter Montigny. Mont. Whence came those dismal Cries? Hah; was it you, Madam, that so loudly Call'd for help, speak, Madam, speak I beg you, What means this strange disorder in your looks, Or do thou Dampierre, I conjure thee, tell me What was the matter? Damp. I know not I, She surely best can tell what caus'd her fear: Fortune, and her loud cries, directed me, Montigny, as they have brought you hither. Elv. Generous Montigny, waste not the time In fruitless questions, but rather If you have any friendship for Grammount, Help, O quickly help me hence, Whilst I have yet some little strength Remaining. Damp. If Dampierre, Madam, May in any thing be serviceable, Pray be so free as to command him too. Elv. Monster, avoid my sight. Damp. Hear you that, Montigny, Look to her well, for much I fear she's craz'd. Elv. Oh horrid impudence! but come, let us, Montigny, fly this fatal place: And yet my trembling joynts answer my haste But ill. Mont. Fear nothing, Madam, but accept this hard For your support. Ex. Mont. and Elv.
Damp. Impudence assist me now, Or else this one reverse of Fortune Ruins all, renders abortive all the Hopeful projects of my labouring brain, And leaves me naked to the mercy Of offended justice. Curse on my rebellious Blood, Curse on that flatt'ring opportunity, Which smiled on, yet betray'd, my dearest hopes. Enter Grammount. Gram. Well met Brother, saw you Montigny? I lost him strangely. Dam. Yes, just now I saw him. Gram. Where, which way is he gone? Dam. Homewards I think, But make not too much haste to overtake Him, least you should chance to come Before you are welcome. Gram. What mean you, Dampierre? Damp. I mean, that he's already in good Company, And would not willingly admit of more. Gram. I fear it not, my friend to me is ever Welcome, and by my self I judge of him. Damp. You may, and yet may be mistaken too: There are some certain times and seasons, When even the very best of friends Are but importunate. Gram. That very minute, My friend should think me so, I should think him No more my friend. Damp. Be not too positive: Suppose an assignation made by thee Grammount, to meet some kind, some yielding fair, Here in this very favourable place; And when that you were ready just to reap, The dearest fruits of many waking nights, And painfull days, your friend should then, just then Rudely rush in to interrupt your joys. Gram. You are wanton, Dampierre, but at present That's not Montigny's case I'm sure. Damp. I hope it is not, yet I'll not swear For any one. Gram. Why, hope it is not? Pray tell me, what from Montigny's Conduct, Can you, Dampierre, have, either to hope, Or fear?
Damp. Oh much, too much indeed, Or else these eyes are shamefully mistaken. Gram. This is all riddle, prithee be plainer. Damp. You will allow, Grammount, That when two equal Gamesters meet to play Upon the square, each with a high opinion Of the others honour, if in that case, The one play foul, the other is thereby Exposed to a more certain loss, Than if he playd with one he knew to be The most notorious Cheat alive? Gram. No doubt o'nt, his confidence in th' others Honour, makes him careless, blind to all Those little tricks, which in another, He would soon discover. Damp. Well then, there's none so likely to discern the fraud; As some good skillful honest stander by▪ Gram. 'Tis granted. Damp. I am that honest stander by, Who in a strange unequal game, see thee, Grammount, most miserably cheated: Y mre, I am your Brother, which ought At least to add some weight to what I say. Take my advice then, e're it be too late, And of al men beware Montigny, By whom you are betray'd, wrong'd, and abus'd, Beyond all patience. In short, all in this world you hold most dear, Eyes now at stake, whilst he, that treacherous friend, Plays foul, shamefully foul, thinking at one Well managed throw, to rob you of your rest, Your honour, fixing an everlasting stain On you, and all your injur'd family; Gram. My honour, Dampierre? Montigny seek to Rob me of my Honour? Have a care, And it thou lov▪st thy self-proceed no farther. By heaven, thou art not safe, unless thou canst So plainly prove each guilty circumstance Against him, as can leave no room for doubt. Damp. Having discharg'd my duty I have done▪ If you are careless, well may I be so: For tho I firmly do believe you wrong▪d, Yet is it not impossible for me To be mistaken, since chance perhaps, Not assignation, may have brought them hither.
Gram. Curse on thy double Tongue, hold me not thus In doubt: but tell me quickly, what chance, What assignation do'st thou dream of, Hah! Tell me, who were they thou saw'st here? Speak, wretch, speak, or by all that's sacred I shall forget thou art my Brother. Damp. You are strangely passionate, tho all at last May come to nothing: I only say I saw 'em here, I mean Montigny and Elvira, Here in this dismal solitary place, Alone too, but what of that, all places Are alike, company, or no company, 'Tis all one, you now, to persons that Are vertuously inclined. And if you can Believe them such, why, there's an end of all. Gram. Just Gods! that I should ever live to hear, The softest, tenderest Wife, and truest friend Thus to my face abused, yet must not punish The offender. Damp. You wrong your self, Grammount, In rashly blaming me, who jealous of Your Honour, do in pure kindness only, Speak my reasonable fears. Gram. True: I wrong my self, my Wife, my Friend, and thee, In blaming thee good, honest Dampierre: Indeed I am ashamed, that by too prompt A passion, I should seem to give thee so Much credit, as should make me entertain The least suspicion, either of Elvira Or Montigny. Farewell unworthy man, Be not hereafter so extremely jealous Of my honour, but consult your own. And know, I wear a Sword, will do me right Against all the world except a Brother. Ex. Gram. Damp. So, now 'tis all against Dampierre, Dampierre against all: no matter, Thanks be to Fortune, and my lucky brain, All things do yet go reasonably well. I have, by way of accusation, Got the start both of Montigny and Elvira, And that's no small advantage, in my case. For now whether Grammount begins with them, Or they to him complain; in all appearance, I am equally secure, since either way,
Whate're is said of me, will seem contriv'd Only to blast my reputation, And so be all suspected: Wondrous good▪ Go bravely on then, Dampierre, push at all, Honour attends th' attempt, tho thou shouldst fall. The end of the Third ACT. ACT IV. SCENE I. Enter Elvira and Leonora. E 'TIs true, my Dear, your inconsiderate And hasty flight, was tho the innocent, the only cause of that adventue. Alas! I tremble when I reflect th great danger you were in, and blush I consider I must call him Brother, Who could be guilty of so barbarous An attempt. Elv. No more of that, for if you Call him Brother, so does my dear Grammount, From whom with care this secret must be kept, Least a too just resentment should transport, And hurry him beyond the limits of His usual moderation, so engage The family in sad and endless broils. Leon. Your goodness, Madam, is beyond example, But may there not be danger in it? Some men are of so base a temper, That a pard'n, proves but a new inducement To 'em, to offend again. Elv. 'Tis in my power To hinder his offending in that kind. Leon. 'Tis true, and yet I cannot choose but fear, Tho what, or why, I must confess I know not. Elv Prethee no more of thy kind fears, I apprehend not any thing, my dear, Nor can I at the present think of ought But of thy Passion, Child, 'tis a noble one, Discreetly placed grounded on rational hopes.
Leon. For Heavens sake, Madam— Elv. Nay, do not blush: Montigny's one of such undoubted worth, As justly may—but see where he comes, Where is Grammount? Enter Montigny. Mont. Gone, Madam, to the Governours Apartment, Where he continues very busie in Dispatching some affairs of great Concern. Elv. It has been still his chiefest care to ease The Governour in all he could, and I Am glad he studies to oblige so good And generous a Kinsman. Mont. His merit justly, Madam, claims that service. Elv. And my Grammount pays it most willingly. Would he were here. Mont. I, Madam, wish it too, Yet something within me, what I know not, Checks the fond wish, and makes me almost dread Th' encounter of my dearest friend. Alas! How can I ever look him in the Face Again, or hear him call me by the name Of friend, whilst Dampierre lives. Elv. Can you believe you should oblige Grammount, In spilling of his only Brothers Blood. Mont. In punishing so exquisite a Villain, I do most certainly believe I should. Leon. Yet that Villain still, is Grammount's Brother; Mont. Brother, alas! what signifies the name Or empty title of a Brother? He who by vertue, or by kindness merits The name of friend, is not a friend alone, But even a Brother too, and much more so, Than is the wretch that only claims by blood. Elv. Too low methinks, Montigny, you depress Those sacred ties of blood, on which the world Seems to rely so much. Leon. Brother's a name So dear, that the meer title only seems Enough to justifie our kindness For the very worst of men. Mont. 'Tis true, Much is by custom given to the name Of Brother, and therefore only, 'tis,
Since decency disarms my Friend And will not suffer him to use his Sword, That I believe my self engaged in honour To draw mine. Elv. Equally impious In Grammount 'twould be to wish revenge, As act it. Leon. And what he cannot wish without A crime, you cannot do without a greater. Elv. No more of this, I know Montigny You are my Grammount's dearest Friend, Consult not then his Honour only, But his repose, and that of all his Family. Mont. Believe me, Madam, that's my only aim. Elv. I do; and therefore beg you to conceal This shameful story. Oh bury it In eternal silence, let not Beaufort, Let not Grammount, suspect the least of Dampierre's Villany: but above all, beware of Making it more publick by a quarrel. Mont. Ah, Madam— Elv. I must not be denied, unless you have A mind to ruin him you call your friend, And ever robb him of his sweetest rest. I do conjure you then by all your Vows Of friendship to my dear Grammount, By all that's dearest to you in this World— Elv. Press it no further, Madam I Obey, Tho Heaven knows I do it with regret. Elv. We'll leave you to your cooler thoughts, Montigny, Commending moderation still, as best, In this and all other cases between friends. Come Leonora. Ex. Elv. Leon. Mont. Just Heaven! how much Beauty, how much goodness have you bestow'd On this one Woman. Ex. Montigny. Enter Lysette follow'd by Dampierre. Dam. What! threaten to turn thee out of Doors, Basely expose thee to the scorn Of all thy laughing tribe, rail at, And revile thee for a matter of just nothing? Lyset. Nay, 'tis a fault not to be pardon'd, And therefore I'm resolved to be revenged. Damp. Fault! that's a name too soft, too mild,
For such a crime: Why, 'tis Treason, Downright Treason, a flat Conspiracy Against thy Empire Child. Lyset. Right, therefore once more I do pronounce She sinks under the mighty weight Of my displeasure. Damp. Thou hast it in thy power, my Girl, To crush her into nothing. Lyset. I have indeed, thanks to the dear delight You take in mischief, Sir. But hark ye now, in cooler blood, Pray tell me what mad pranks You play'd i th' Forest, to put My Saint-like Lady into such Devilish Passion. For when all▪s done, my being out Of the way so small a time, was but an Inconsiderable fault, too slight To draw on so much anger. Damp. No Pranks at all my Child, Only an Argument arose by chance, And I unluckily▪ maintained my part With something too much heat, Which put her Ladyship into a horrid pelt, And made her rail at me, at thee, And every body else I think. Lyset. Yet, out of her abundant kindness, She has forgiven me forsooth, And once again received me into favour. But that's no matter, I have not yet Forgiven her: Nor will I, till to her cost▪ I have made her know me better. What! Pretend to turn me out of Doors, No, my blood rises at the very thoughts on't, Say when shall I be Revenged? Damp. This night, this very hopeful night, Nay if you let slip this night, You may perhaps look long enuff For such another opportunity. Lyset. With all my heart then, let it be this night: For now, methinks, I am prepared for any thing That looks like mischief. Damp. Bravely resolved. Know then, Grammount at present Is at the Governours appartment, Where multiplicity of business,
Committed to his care alone, By the uneasy Beaufort, will certainly Detain him longer than ordinary: So that the Night, which now draws on a pace, Will in all probability be far spent, E're he returns to his own Lodgings; And then, then my Girl. Lyset. Ay, then will be the time, when I Poor inconsiderable fool, will with Such cunning play my Treacherous part, As shall with ease impose upon the good Grammount, Pluck from his faithfull breast Deep-rooted Love, and in its room Plant the rank weed of Jealousie, Turn dearest Friendship into mortal Hate, And so give birth to general Confusion. Dam. Revenge, how sweet thou art! Revenge now makes Thee undertake a part, the Devil himself Would bogle at: No Woman sure e're suckled thee, Or something more than man club'd to thy getting. But see, the Governour appears, Away, and fail not when it comes to th' push Be sure. Lyset. Fear me not. Exit Lyset. Enter Beaufort. Damp. This Wench is ripe for Hell. Beauf. Well, what News Dampierre from Elvira? Knows she my Love, does she speak Life or Death? Damp. Hear the story, then be your self the Judge. Beauf. Proceed. Damp. Know then, that leaving you I went directly to Elvira's Lodgings, But missing of her there, and being told, That she was gone, attended by Lysette, To take a turn i'th Neighbouring Forest, Thither I follow'd her, where I first met Lysette, and quickly managed her so well, As not to stand in awe of her too near Attendance: The Woman so secured, I boldly ventured to attack the Lady, Whom, as I could have wisht, I found alone. Our first discourse was of indifferent things, Which yet I managed with such curious Art, As drew her on at length to that of Love.
Beauf. Thy boldness makes me tremble, Dampierre. Damp. From Love in general, we quickly came Down to particulars, and then you may Believe I fail'd not to describe your flame As you your self could wish. Beauf. nam'd you my name? Damp. Not yet, nor did I at first let her know She was the person Lov'd: But still mad Of borrow'd names, till finding that my art Prevail'd, and that the soft and moving Terms, In which I told the story of your Love, Had toucht her tender heart with pity of Your case, then I reveal'd the secret, told her all. Beauf. And how did she receive it ha! Damp. Why Sir, with all the haughty marks of Pride, And Scorn, she could put on; tis true, she said Not much, and fain would have been gone, but I Made bold by the advantage of the place, Stopt her, and would have made her hear me out, When on the sudden in stept— Beauf. Lysette. Damp. No, Sir, Montigny. Beauf. Montigny say'st thou! Hell and Confusion! but say what follow'd. Damp. Only this, as soon as he appear'd, With eager haste she flew into his arms, Then with a scornful smile, and slighting toss O'th' head, she took her leave of me, and so Triumphantly went off with her Gallant. Beauf. Just Gods! How can you wink at so much base And rank Hypocrisie: If such crimes as these Meet with impunity, the world will grow too wicked by the bad example. Rather assert, assert your Sovereign Power, And darting Thunder at her devoted head, Let her, oh let her unpitied fall A wretched instance of offended Justice. But, tell me, do'st thou believe Montigny Over heard thee? Damp. Most certainly he did. Beauf. What then in this unlucky case is to be done. For sure if once Montigny knows I love, 'Twill not be long a secret to Grammount. Advise me Dampierre.
Damp. Excuse me, Sir, I know no way but one That can effectually secure Mens Tongues. Beauf. And what way's that? Damp. Faith, Sir, an easy one. Cut but the Throat, the Tongue will tell no tales. Beauf. No, that's a way too rough, I like it not. Damp. Why now I think on't better there may be Yet one way more, not quite so safe perhaps As t'other, but— Beauf. Name it and I am thine For ever, but no blood I charge you. Damp. No, this is a Gentler way, it is but Subtly loosening that firm tie of Friendship, Which seems so well and firmly knit, between Montigny and Grammount, and you have done Your business: For if they are not Friends, Most certain 'tis they will be Enemies, There is no mean, and then you need not fear Beauf. Most true: but then the difficulty is, How to divide two souls so strictly, and So long united, in the dearest bands Of Friendship's sacred, and severest Laws. Damp. Let me alone to manage that affair, If Grammount Loves Elvira, before To morrows Sun he shall as surely hate Montigny to the death: Distrust me not, But if you like the project— Beauf. Like it, yes, I guess at thy design, and like it well: Grammount I pity thee, tho' it is but just To let thee see thy danger, e're thou art Too far impos'd on by a Treacherous friend, And wanton Wife. But it grows late, And I am strangely discomposed. Farewel. Exit Beauf. Damp. Go, go to bed old man, sleep if thou can'st, And dream of happy hours thou ne'er shalt see. So, he's well prepar'd I think, and I have Gain'd a mighty Patron to protect me Whatever mischief happens; the more the better now, since he is like to Answer all. Poor I am but his humble Instrument, Ha! Ha! Ha! I could e'en kill my self with Laughing now, To see how strangely all things have conspir'd, To Crown my Roguery with Success, And me with Safety. Exit Damp.
Enter Grammount and a Page before him with a Flambeau. Gram. Business, unlucky business long has kept Me from Elvira: Tho' all late as 'tis, Methinks some dark, ill-boding fancy seems to tell me, 'tis too early yet, to seek Those Joys I ever found in her dear Arms. A strange unusual damp has seized my soul, And I who use, with eager Joy to fly To my Elvira, have now scarce the strength, Or Will indeed, to move one step that way. Oh Dampierre, Dampierre, what was thy design? Since I left thee, my working thoughts have been In a perpetual hurrey; thou, alas! Hast poyson'd all my dearest Joys, and in My troubled mind, laid the foundation Of Eternal Doubts, Perplexing, Gnawing, Killing Doubts. And yet I know thee, Dampierre, Base, of a Poor, Mean, Low spirit too, And so, capable of any mischief. Why then should'st thou gain credit with Grammount, Who knows thou hat'st both him and his Elvira. No, from my memory henceforth I chase Thee, and each thought of thy base Treachery. Grammount's too happy in a vertuous Wife, And Generous Friend; tho' curst indeed, in thee, Thou Cruel, and Unatural Brother. But hark, what noise is that? A noise of opening a door and Lysette Enters who seeing Grammount pre∣tends to avoid him. He stops her and turn∣ing up her hood sees her tearing a Letter with her Teeth. O, 'tis the door opens. Hah! Who art thou that stealest Away so guiltily? Nay, I must see, Lysette! Whither away at this Unseasonable time of night, And what paper's that thou Mumblest so? Lyset. Alas! I am undone, Pardon me; sir, Oh Pardon me I beseech you. Gram. Would'st have me pard'n thee e're I know thy fault, Confess, and then perhaps thou may'st deserve it. Lyset. Oh never, never, all that I desire, Is that you would be so just, as to believe Me only guilty, for on my life My Lady's innocent.
Gram. Hah! thy Lady, speak, what of her? Lyset. Why, she I do declare to all the world Is innocent, by all that's good she is, Nay were I to die next minute, My Tongue should end my story with that truth. Gram. I ask not of her innocence, but tell me, And tell me truely, as thou hop'st for any Mercy from me, whither wert thou Stealing with that Letter, and what Were the contents of it? Lyset. For Heaven sake, and for your own, Sir, Press me no further, here on my knees I beg you would not. Gram. Ha! do'st thou dally with me? Come, speak quickly, or by heaven thou diest. Lyset. Do with me what you please, But force me not, I do beseech you, To a Confession that— Gram. What! Speak I say, tell me, What was that Paper, to whom directed, And from whom? Lyset. Alas I die for fear— Gram. If thou continuest obstinate, Not all the world shall save thee from my Fury. Lyset. It was— Gram. What was it, speak I say? Lyset. It was a Letter— Gram. From whom? Lyset. It was a Letter from my Lady— Gram. Well said, to whom? Lyset. To—Yet, Sir, excuse me I conjure you. Gram. Hah more trifling, out with it boldy, or— Lyset. 'Twas to Montigny, Sir, Your best, and dearest friend, Montigny. Gram. To Montigny! Was it to Montigny, that Elvira sent thee With that Letter at this unseasonable hour? Lyset It was: But why should that so much disturb you? A petty quarrel parted 'em in the evening, When tho' Montigny humbly sued for pardon, She would not grant it, till at the last, good Lady, Repenting her severity, she could not rest, Till she had given him an assurance, under Her hand, that what he then so earnestly Desired, was now as freely granted, and—
Gram. Peace Screech-Owl, Peace, thou rank messenger of lust: By heaven, I know not why I do not kill thee, Hence from my sight I say, away. Exit Lysette. But which way now, wretched Grammount, wilt thou Direct thy wandring steps, where e're thou goest, Destruction, Horror, and Amazament will attend thee. Thy faithful cares, deaf to all other tales, Will turn each sound into this one sad story, Elvira's false, Montigny's false, and now Grammount's become, the scorn of all the world, Oh 'tis too much for mortal man to bear, By heaven, i'll make my sad, and just Revenge As signally notorious as my wrongs. But hush, be still y' unruly passions of My mind, and think Grammount, that to revenge is but the way to publish thy disgrace. Patience then, oh patience, grant me just heav'n More patience, or take from me that little I am yet master of, and in return Bless me with madness, eternal madness, Madness without one minutes interval of sense. Grief, Rage, Despair possess my totur'd mind, Make me but mad, ye Gods, and you'll be kind. The end of the fourth Act.
ACT V. SCENE I. Enter Elvira and Leonora. Elv. NO more, no more; my Grammount is unkind, Fickle, inconstant, wavering, and false; Some fatal Beauty has surpriz'd his Heart, And chased th' unfortunate Elvira thence For ever, as a stranger to his Love. Leon. Judge not so hardly, Madam, of a Flame So pure, so exemplary, and so chaste As his. Elv. What other Judgment can I make? In vain I have wept, in vain I have pray'd, In vain all night pursued his flying steps From place to place, yet cannot get one Look That may seem kind, nor one poor Word By which I might but guess at the sad Cause Of his pretended Grief. Leon. This his proceeding Seems to me most strange, I must confess, But yet— Elv. Seek not, dear Leonora, To excuse him, but rather pity me. Ah! hadst thou been a Witness of my grief, And of those rough returns he last night made To all the softest and engaging Arts My Love could then invent, or his desire, Thou wouldst with Tears lament, not doubt his change. Leon. What strange Unkindness was he guilty of! Elv. Long had I wisht my dear Grammount's return, With all th' impatience of a loving Wife, Ready to share and sooth his nearest Cares, And lull his wearied Body in these Arms To gentle Rest. The Night far spent, at length He came; but when with open Arms I ran To meet him, alas! how was I surpriz'd, When I read nought but Fury in his Face! Doubting his Health, and vent'ring yet nearer To him, he frown'd, and rudely flung me off: Yet by degrees his Rage began to waste; And giving place to some more gentle Thoughts, A fullen deadly Grief seem'd to succeed it:
When I, once more, attempting to draw near, He gently only put me by, then with A deep and dismal sigh turn'd short away, Leaving me all in tears, and almost dead With grief. Yet I resolv'd to follow him; And so indeed we pass'd the tedious Night, He flying still, I still pursuing, tho' in vain. Leon. With all my Heart I pity you, and wish Twere in my power to serve you, Madam. Elv. Ah, my dear Child, what can thy Kindness do For miserable me, unless perhaps It teach thee now to bear me company In tears, to echo forth my sighs from thy Compassionate Breast, and kindly share The sharpest Pangs of a too just Despair? All this, my Dear, I dare expect from thee, And from thy Love; and yet even all this Would but augment, not ease my Misery. Leon. Yet something more I'll do, I'll to Grammount, And force that fatal Secret from his Breast, Which he yet keeps so close. Elv. But can you think. That he will hear a Sister, who is deaf To all the sighs of a once dear-lov'd Wife? No, no; too much you wrong my dear Grammount▪ Were he the Man he was, with Joy he'd hear His dear Elvira; but not being so, Be yet so just as to believe him deaf To all the World beside, as well as her. Leon. Whither will your distemper'd Fancy lead You, Madam? Oh, think— Elv. Alas, I know not. Ah my Grammount! couldst thou but guess to what A wretched state thy cruel usage has Reduc'd the poor unfortunate Elvira, 'Twould make thee soon repent, and give new life To thy expiring Love. Leon. Madam, once more I do beseech you give me leave to try My Fortune with Grammount; I may prevail. Elv. Never: alas, he will despise thy Sex, And slight thy tender age. No, were he to be Prevail'd on by Entreaties, Montigny Best of all the World might hope to do it. But—
Leon. Despair not, Madam, Friendship, perhaps, May do what Love at present cannot. Elv. Ah, tempt me not to entertain a Hope Which, once deceiv'd, will but encrease my Pain. Yet for thy sake, my Dear, I do submit. Go to Montigny then, and faithfully Relate my Story; but leave the rest to him, Whose Generosity will better teach Him how to act, than all that we can say. Leon. Madam, I fly. Exit Leon. Elv. And I in the mean time will once more seek My Dear, my false, ungrateful Fugitive Grammount. Exit Elvira. Enter Dampierre and Lysette. Damp. Well met; what News, my little Fury, From thy Quarters? Lys. News, my great Lord of Mischief, worthy of Thy Ear. In short, I've play'd my part Most rarely well, and now the Devil, I think, Is playing his. Damp. As how, I pray? What, is the wise virtuous Grammount caught at last? Does he begin to powt? Lys. Oh, extreamly. Damp. And Elvira, what does she? ha! Lys. Why, she e'en whines, and pines, and blubbers, Like any o'ergrown Girl that had been Newly whipt. Damp. Good, wondrous good. Lys. Yes, yes; all yet goes wondrous well indeed; But what the end will be, for my part, I cannot guess. Damp. No matter, let there be no end at all, But that which puts an end to all things, Death. Oh, may Confusion, Rage, Despair, and Everlasting Jealousie attend 'em to their Graves. Lys. Amen, say I: but yet suppose they should At last come to a right Understanding, What would become of me, I pray? Were it not better, think you, to decamp In time, and leave them to themselves? Damp. By no means; that would make 'em presently Smell out thy Roguery and their own Error: Rather be more diligent, and more assiduous In your attendance now than ever: Consult their Looks, for till you find the weather
Clearing there, you need not fear a Storm; And then at last it will be time enough to fly. In the mean time, here; thou hast been Offers a pair of Gloves. Industrious, and dost deserve Encouragement. Lys. A nasty dirty pair of Gloves, I warrant you; Foh! I'll have none of 'em. Damp. Away, thou'rt a Fool, and knowst not what Thou hast refus'd: they are, I tell thee, Gloves of the richest scent; besides, each Finger's Lin'd with Gold; here, wear 'em for my sake. Lys. Well, for once I care not if I do, the cordial Gold Perhaps may keep my Spirits up, and give me Strength to bear the brunt of all. Adieu, Sir. Exit Lys. Damp. Go thy ways, thou art a dainty Girl, and dost love Mischief well, for which I love thee, tho' I dare not Trust thee. Thou art indeed a thought too mercenary, And may'st at last, for Gold, sell me, as thou already hast Thy Mistress; therefore I can but pity thee. Those Gloves, How rich soe▪er and sweet their scent may seem, Yet once well heated on the Hand, will cast a strong And deadly smell, most fatal to the Brain, a Poyson Not only certain, but strangely sudden in its operation, As I was told, at least, by an Italian famous in that hellish Art, from whom I had 'em. If it be so, my business is Compleatly done, and thou, poor fool, Lysette, hast The Reward of all thy Services. Exit Damp. Enter Grammount. Gram. What is that thing call'd Happiness, which Men With so much noise and eager zeal pursue So many several ways, each hoping to Attain it in the possession of some Distant long'd-for Blessing, tho' all alike In vain? For even that darling Blessing Plac'd in a nearer light, and once enjoy'd, Loses but too much of its wonted lustre; Or else, encounter'd with rude Crosses from Abroad, is lost and buried in a thick And dismal Cloud of rank uneasie Cares. There's no such thing then as a happy man On this side of the Grave. Look on me, all You vain Pretenders, look on me, and own At last this Truth; for all the dearest Joys Of Life did seem to court and flatter me: Yet all those Joys are in one moment dampt, All vanisht, all lost to me for ever.
Friendship and Love, which once made up The sweetest part of 'em, do now conspire My ruin. Oh Elvira! Enter Elvira. Elv. Oh Grammount! He turns from her. Nay, turn not, turn not, cruel man, away, But look upon thy poor disconsolate Elvira, almost drown▪d in tears: speak, Oh speak at last, and let her know wherein She has been faulty or unfortunate Enough to merit this hard usage from Her much-lov'd Grammount. Gram. Art thou Elvira? Elv. Why dost thou ask that unkind Question? Gram. Because Elvira ever loved Grammount, And so could never be a trouble to him. But thou, alas! art most importunate; Prithee be gone, thou art not Elvira, Not the same Elvira, that I'm sure of. Elv. Yes, I am the very same I ever was, The very same Elvira still, on whom With dearest Transports thou didst once bestow Ten thousand Vows of everlasting Love: The same unfortunate Elvira▪ Who, charm'd by thy sweet, soft, bewitching Arts, Heard with delight those many treacherous Vows By thee intended for her ruine. In short, I am the same Elvira that At last crown'd all thy hopes▪ paying down Love For Love, as I then thought, tho' since I find, With purest Gold I only purchas▪d Dross. Gram. Forbear, forbear Elvira, and recall Not to my Memory those happy days In which I dearly lov'd, and thou wert kind; Too much, alas! 'twill aggravate my Grief, Since I within this Breast already feel Torments, to which nothing, I'm sure, can add New Pains, but a reflection on that Heaven I once enoyed in thee and thy dear Love. . If in Elvira's Love thou once wert blest, Why art thou not so still▪ Gram. Oh Elvira! All things e strangely alter'd since that time; Love once was pure, and Friendship sacred held, Yet now the one is little else but Lust,
The other all design. Vertue is fled, And Vice Reigns now Triumphant in each sex, We are all wond'rous weak alas, and frail. Oh— Elv. 'Tis true, most true my dear Grammount, and yet What weakness canst thou justly tax me with; Unless perhaps my loving thee too well, Be an infirmity unpardonable In the unfortunate Elvira. Gram. Oh— Elv. Alas! what means that sad and dismal groan, By grief extorted from thy manly breast: Thou canst not sure be so unjust, as to Suspect my Love. Yet if thou art, speak I conjure thee, but speak plainly then, And not in un-intelligible groans. Speak, cruel man, oh speak, do I not love thee? Am I false? oh may Elvira live no longer, Than with a passion Innocent and Pure She loves her dear Grammount. Gram. What pity 'tis our hearts are not expos'd To open view, as are our faces, that So, even our most private thoughts might all Appear, naked and bear as at their first Conception, e're drest up in ornamental Words, of a much different import. Elv. Ah, could'st thou but see into my heart, Thou there would'st soon perceive thy error And my innocence. But since, my dear Grammount, That cannot be, believe my words, believe These tears, believe my Actions, oh see, I am here ready to receive thee still, Rude and Unkind, Ungrateful and Inhumane As thou art. Come then, come to these arms, Ne're yet stretcht out to thee in vain. Wilt thou not come, not yet? thou canst not sure Deny me now, when all I beg of thee, Is, that once more thou would'st be happy. Gram. Why should'st thou desire impossibilities? Alas! I never can be happy more. Elv. If thou Grammount can'st ne're be happy more, Then must I be for ever miserable. Cruel man, shew yet some small remainder Of humanity; be not so rash, Either accuse, or else acquit me, But pass not sentence on me e're I'm heard,
Gram. No, fear not too hasty, or too hard A sentence from my mouth. False as thou art, I cannot hate, where once I loved so well. Live then Elvira, live long, but live a Stranger to Grammount. And that thou may'st live Happily, wipe from thy memory the Dearest passages of some few past years, And see thou quite forget, there e're was such A wretch i'th' world as I am. Elv. Hold, oh hold! It is too much, alas! insult not poorly O're my weakness, nor play the wanton With my grief: Why do'st thou bid me live, I fit must be without Grammount? Why do'st thou wish me happy? when all my happiness, Thou know'st depends upon thy love, Yet that thou say'st is forfeited, is lost To me for ever, oh my Grammount. It is emiff thou art unkind, Be not unjust to thy Elvira. For pities sake grant something to the dear Memory of our mutual Love, And if thou know'st me false, tell me wherein, When, or with whom I have offended. Gram. What satisfaction would it be to thee Elvira, should I tell thee all: since all Alas! can be no more, than what thou know'st, As well at least, if not much better than My self. In short, I am convinced thou can'st not Clear thy self; and if so, consider that A weak defence is worse than none at all. Tempt me not then to speak, since 'twill but add To thy Confusion, and my Shame: But I would willingly spare both, as much As may be with my honour. Elv. Confusion, Sme, Contempt, and everlasting Infamy, For ever be my Lot, if e're I wronged Thy Love so much as in one guilty thought. Oh my Grammount my dear, my Lov'd Grammount, See thy Elvira o her tender knees, From whence she ne're will rise, till she has learnt The strange and fatal cause of her disgrace. Gram. Away, this thy affected obstinacy, Would make me hate thee, were it possible.
Elvira, is it not enough that thou hast Wrong'd my Honour? but that I my self Must here repeat the shameful Tale Only to gratifie thy wanton curiosity. Perhaps indeed, I know not half thy brave Exploits, so my imperfect tale may yeild. Thee some diversion: But have a care, The Cuckold yet bears his misfortune Patiently enough, make him not then thy sport, For if thou do'st, by Heaven away, away Elvira, I would not be provokt, away I say, Whilst yet I'm Master of my growing Passion. Elv. Do what thou wilt, be rude, be cruel, Be inhuman as thou hast been, to the Poor Elvira, yet whilst she has any strength, She never will let go this hold, unless Thou first communicate the fatal secret. Gram. Away, thou'lt force me to be rude. Be not so strangely obstinate, alas! I would be civil, tho I can't be kind. Elv. Barbarous man! yet speak, what have I done? Gram. Will nothing else content thee? then thus I throw thee off, and force my way. Strives to get from her, and drags her about the Stage. Elv. And thus I cling to thee, close as the tender Ivie To the sturdy Elm. Do, do merciless Grammount, do, pull, hale, tear, drag, nay kill me, Yet I'll not willingly let go: But oh! His cruel strength prevails. He breaks from her. Gram. Farewell thou most importunate of Women. Elv. Stay, stay my Grammount, give me but one poor Minute more, and all is done: Fear not, I will no longer urge my innocence, It is enough that thou believest me false: Oh, for thy own repose, may'st thou for ever Think me so. Farewell, methinks I feel, My lab'ring soul striving, and strug'ling, With its utmost force, to break it's wretched Prison, yet something, I know not what, still Makes resistance and obstructs its passage. I see Grammount, thou likest not the delay, I will dispatch then, and for thy sake, Hasten the slow approaches of my fate. Art thou then fled, art thou then gone for ever?
Farewel my dear, unkind, Grammount, farewell And when I'm dead, think what the poor Elvira Would have done to have kept thy love, who on Her own tender breast dares thus revenge The fatal loss. She pulls out a Dagger and stabs her self. Gram. Hold, hold, Elvira hold! By Heaven 'twas boldly done, and nothing could Have given so sure a blow but Innocence It self. Yes my Elvira, every drop Of that dear blood, loudly procliams to all The world, thy innocence and my sad guilt. Oh ye just powers above! to what strange fate Am I at length reserved! see, at thy feet My dear Elvira, the wretched'st thing alive, A thing, unworthy of the name of Man, A Penitent, who dares not hope for pardon Either from Heaven or thee, tho both alas! Are infinitly good, and merciful. Enter Montigny. Mont. Where is Grammount, where is my dearest Friend? Gram. Who is it names Grammount, hah! Starting up. Mont. Elvira all in blood! Oh Heavens! I hardly dare believe my Eyes, what wretch Could have the heart to do so Villanous A deed? Gram. See here that miserable wretch, That bloody Villain thou wast speaking of. He was thy friend, oh, if thou still art his, Do him one friendly office, draw, and sheath Thy Sword in this disloyal Breast; strike home Be sure, and with one kind obliging blow At once deliver me, from the too just Reproaches of the world, from this dear, yet Killing spectacle, and from my hated self. Elv. This wound, believe me, came not from his hand, Elvira's arm, assisted by dispair, Had strength enough to give the fatal blow. Mont. Oh my Grammount, oh my dear friend, What a vast Treasure hast thou lost. Alas! what can I do but pity thee, Thy crime carries its own punishment Along with it, a punishment beyond What the severest justice can inflict.
Enter Beaufort Beauf. Tell me what means this general mourning, A sad confusion seems to reign within These walls, where e're I go I meet with deep Despair, and if I chance to ask the cause, I'm answered only with a sigh, some tears, And a distracted ghastly look, and that Is all th' intelligence I can get. Gram. Here be informed then, oh see here a Sight, Will shake thy generous soul with horror: A Sight, will make even thee look pale, And tremble, tho' long ennured to slaughter, And brought up in blood. Nay, start not Sir, It is Elvira welt'ring in her gore, Elvira fal'n by her own hand, But murdered by Grammount. Enter Leonora. Leon. Never did so much joy, as here I bring Spring from so sad a cause. Beauf. Hah! who's that unseasonably mentions joy Here in this place of everlasting Woe. Leon. Oh heavens! are all my dearest hopes thus dasht? Oh Madam, who has done this bloody deed? Elv. 'Twas I, 'twas I my self▪ my dear, weep not For me, but rather go, and comfort If thou canst the poor Grammount. Leon. Oh Grammount! Unfortunate Grammount, most grosly hast Thou been imposed on, strangely abused By that prodigious Monster Dampierre. Know then, that Letter, thought directed By Elvira to Montigny, And sent, at that dead guilty time of night, Was but a trick, a meer device, the whole, Only a scene contrived by Dampierre, Acted by Lysette. This truth, from her own mouth I just now learnt, And she confirmed it with her latest breath. For she is dead, poysoned by Dampierre. This confession was to me, I must confess, Most welcome, and welcome sure it would have been
To all, had it been made but some few minutes Sooner. Gram. Gods! what has this miserable Caitif done. To draw down all your anger on his head? What horrid crimes before had stained his Soul That you should thus, all at one fatal blow, Oppress the wretch with your severest Judgments? Oh, that some Mountain now would fall on me, And in its dreadful ruines hide my head. But hark methinks the Gods grow loud; hark, how Their awful thunder grumbles in the Sky, See how the fiery balls fly whizzing by! Dealing amazement, and destruction all a round. Ha, ha, ha, ha. See you old miser, laden with swelling bags Of ill-got Gold, with how much awkar'd haste, He limps away to shelter: see how he ducks, And dives, and dodges with the Gods, and all Only in hope t' avoid, for some few daies Perhaps, the just reward of his accursed extortion. The hot Adulterer now, all chill and impotent With fear, leaps from the polluted bed, And crams himself into a cranny, Those mighty men of blood, who make a Trade Of murder, forget their wonted fierceness: Outnois'd they shrink aside, and shake for fear O'th' louder threatnings of the angry Gods. Whilst I, I only, tho' the wickedest wrech of all, with an erected countenance stand to't, Courting those dangers others seek to avoid. And yet there's not one dart one ball for me, Tho I, Heaven knows, deserve 'em all. Oh He throws himself on the ground. Elv. Let not the knowledge of my innocence, My dear Grammount, add to thy grief, Rather believe me guilty still, alas! Thy generous easy nature was abused, Imposed on by a Brothers wicked arts. Thou still art innocent, and so am I, Who freely can forgive thy greatest faults. Come then Grammount, come to thy Elvira, And with a kiss, a cold and dying kiss, I'll seal thy pardon. Gram. My dear Elvira, this thy prodigious Goodness, does but encrease my misery. Yet I will come, yes my Elvira,
With a down dejected countenance, Not daring to look up, but creeping thus, And crawling on the earth, I do approach Thy feet, here, spurn the vile thing, tread, trample The miserable insect into nothing. Elv. Oh my Grammount, yield not too much to grief. It is a fatal, tho a slow disease. Gram. I thank thee, dear Elvira, for that hint. Now thou art kind, and giv'st me good advice. Whoever would endure an age of pain, When one such blow as this, might give him present ease? Stabbs himself. Beauf. Hold, oh hold Grammount. Leon. Oh heavens what has he done? Mont. Too much alas! altho' no more than what I apprehended from his just despair. Gram. Help me, my friend, and place me near that Saint. So, now 'tis pretty well, pardon me my dear Elvira, that so long I have defer'd This piece of Justice, or rather pardon me, That at last I durst presume to mingle. My polluted blood, with those pure streams of thine. Elv. Oh my Grammount! My Love can pardon thee any thing, Yet 'twas unkind, to give me thus A second wound, a wound more grievous To the poor Elvira, than the first Which gave her death. Elv. Where, where art thou my Grammount A rising mist has on a sudden snatched Thee from my sight, alas! I faint, I dye, Death seizes now on every part, and my Affrighted Soul sits hovering on my pale And trembling lips, just ready to begin Its flight. Gram. Oh stay, Elvira, for thy dear Grammount, Stay yet, but one poor minute, then, As we have long liv'd and lov'd, So let us still Love, and lanch together Into a vast eternity, where we may Love For ever. Elv. Oh no, imperious death commands And I must needs obey. But do thou live, Live yet, if it be possible, and Love The memory of the poor Elvira, Farewel—Farewel—my dear Grammount—For ever She dies.
Gram. She's gone, and all my comfort is, that I Shall quickly follow her. Yes, this sight wounds Deeper than the sharpest dagger. And yet How many Charms remain Unconquer'd still, As Beauty lies Triumphant over Fate, And seems to flourish in the arms of death. Oh let me steal one parting kiss, at least, From those cold lips. But e're I go, my Friend On thee I here bestow all I have left Of value in the world, this weeping Maid. Mont. If the fair Leonora will confirm The gift, I shall be but too happy. Oh, my Grammount I beg thee to believe Since Fate deprives me of my dearest Friend, Nought but so rich a present from his hand Could bribe me to survive so sensible a loss, Gram. Here take her then. Beauf. And with her all my wealth, Gram. The poor Grammount can only thank you Sir. Come Leonora— Leon. For Heavens sake— Gram. This modesty's unseasonable now. Deny me not the satisfaction To see thee e're I die so well bestowed, Give me thy hand. Take her Montigny. And may this saithful Wise abundantly Supply the want of an Unfortunate But real Friend— Farewel! a long farewel to all. Hark, hark Methinks I hear Elvira call. I come, I come Elvira, my aspiring Soul Begins to mount, not to o'retake, but at An awful distance to attend and wait On thine above, in those blest Regions Of eternal peace. He dies Beauf. Fate now has done its worst, and from me torn All the delight and comfort of my age. Who waits there? hah! Enter Servants at one door, Damp, at the other. But see, just Heaven has sent him to receive The due reward of all his crimes. Seize, Seize on that Villain Dampierre instantly. they seize him. Damp. What means this rudeness, hah! Beauf. Look there, Grammount is dead, Elvira's dead,
And all this mischief is but the effect Of thy black hellish arts. Damp. Why, if they are dead, Let 'em be buried: What is't to me? They might have longer lived, or sooner died For ought I know, who is it dares blame me? Leon. I, tho thy Sister, must accuse thee wretch Think, think on Lysette, poysoned by thee, She with her latest breath discovered all Thy arts. Damp. Then my Italian was a Rascal, Away, thou art a Girl, and should'st be whipt For prating. Leon. Ah! was't not enough, that in the Forest Thou on Elvira's honour madest a base Attempt, but to reward her goodness In concealing thy black crime, Thou must Conspire her death too? Beauf. Hah! how's that, can that be true? Mont. Mo true, believe me Sir, and had not I, Directed by her cries, come in by chance, The Villain had accomplisht his design. Beauf. Heavens I is it possible? Damp. Yes, employ'd by thee, I would have been thy taster Beaufort. I would have wanton'd with her, stroked, and tamed The vertuous fool, then brought her gentle, To thy longing arms. Do'st thou not Love me for't? yes in thy heart I know thou do'st, for who but I, would e're Have taken so much pains to serve thy Lust? Beauf. Justly thou do'st reproach me Dampierre We are both Villains, and on both I will My self see speedy Justice done. Thou who In spite of all my caution, hast yet dipt Thy hands in blood, shalt suffer death with the Most cruel tortures our severest Laws Inflict on murderers. As for my self, Here I renounce the world, and all its joys, Resolved henceforth in some Remote And Unfrequented Hermitage to spend The small remainder of my wretched days At Nature's charge: Where the cold clammy earth Shall be my bed: homely, but wholesome roots My daily food, and water from the
Nearest Spring my only drink. There on my Bended knees I'll try to appease the anger Of offended Heaven, and with repeated Earnest vows solicit pardon for all my faults. Damp Ha ha ha! Beauf. Canst thou laugh wretch? Damp. Yes heartily, at thee and thy pretended penance. Beauf. Away with him, and load him well with Irons. Damp. Do thy worst old man, I fear not thee, nor death. Damp. is led out Beauf. Now there is little left for me to do, But to discharge my duty to the dead. In sad and solemn pomp I will attend Them to the earth, and give them both one grave. There, when in peace their dear lov▪d Ashes lie, From Treacherous ease, from all vain joys i'll fly, And tho I live, yet to the world i'll dye. FINIS THe Inhuman Cardinal, or Innocence Betrayed. A Novel by Mrs. Mary Pix: Now in the Press and will suddenly be published, the second part of the proposal to the Ladies, wherein a Method is offered for the im∣provement of their minds. By the Author of the first part, 12o. Printed for R. Wilkin. OVid Travestie, or a Burlesque on Ovid's Epistles; by Captain Ale∣xander Radcliff, of Grayes-Inn. The Old Batchelor: A Comedy, by Mr. Congreve. The Family Physician, being a Choice Collection of the best Remedies for the Cure of all Diseases incident to humane Bodies; very useful in Families, and serviceable to Country People. To which is added the true English Wine-Cellar, being the best method to make all English Wines, and Metheg∣lin; with a Collection of the Choicest Cosmetick Remedies to preserve the Complexion of Ladies▪ Published by George Hartman Phylo-Chymist, and Servant to Sir Kenelm Digby till he Dyed. Price 2 s. 6 d. Printed for Richard Wellington, at the Lute in St. Paul's Church-Yard.
