L3206 c.121.g.9[32] R229183 99888218 201001
LOVE in a BARN. Or, Right Country Courtship. woman milking a cow COME all ye brisk country girls, And London lasses too; A merry ditty I have to tell, Which certainly is true. In Reygate liv'd a buxome las, Both beautiful and fair, Her beauty was her portion, As hereafter you shall here. Her father was a farmer, Who did at Ryegate dwell, Just by liv'd a noble Lord, Whose name I must not tell: Whose country house at Ryegate was, In the sweet pleasant air, And this Lord he fell in love With the farmer's daughter fair. He ofentimes beheld her A- milking in the moon, And he must go to drink the mk From the cow while it was warm. The draught of love he drank so sweet By gazing on her charms, That the sweet creature he would oft W sh for in his arms, He said, I've slighted ladies, Of honour, birth, and fame: Now Cupid has betray'd me To an innocent country dame. I must reveal my passion. Or for her lose my life; If money her virtue will overcome. I soon will end the strise. Next morning he goes to her, As she a-milking were, And he began the story To the farmer's daughter fair. Thou fairest of all creatures, My heart is in love with thee; If thou can'st love a London Lord, A Lady thou shalt be. Sir, said she, What do you mean, More fit I am, I vow, To mind my father's dairy, And feed the pigs and sow. I cannot dress up in the mode, As London lasses wear. Said he, but I will keep a maid, To wait on thee, my dear. A maid! said the country lass, I can but laugh at that: Must I ride to the church in my short cloak, With a feather in my cap? No, no, my dear, that is the dress My jewel thou shalt were, When thou along with me dost go To take the rural air. Then, Gaffer, said the country girl, Yet something I've to say, Among the ladies I cannot dance, Except it be the ha. But thou can'st dance in bed, my dear, And that's the prettiest sport. Ay, never fear, I'll warrent thee, As well as the best at court. This was Right COUNTRY COURTSHIP, And made the Lord to smile, But his whole intention was This maiden to beguile. But the country girls are not such fools, For to be taken in, So now come here the country bite, Which she did put on him. He made her many presents Of watches, jewels, rings, The girl she was well pleas'd At sight of such fine things. The cow-house was the chamber In which they us'd to court: At length be must bef ooling
Under her petticoats. She said, is this the way That courtiers come to wooe? There's no harm, says he, my dear. We serve the ladies so. I do not like the fashion, The country girl reply'd. I will not be a lady Until I am a bride. She finding he had store of gold, Says she, I plainly see, That he has no intention That I his bride shall be; He shall not have my maidenhead, I solemnly do swea, But I'll bite him of a portion, Then wed with Ralph my dear. Next morning came the Lord, As he was us'd to do, With a pretence to drink the milk Warm sir from the cow. Then with the charming milk-maid Still fooling he would be, Says he, five hundred pounds I'll give One night to lie with thee; Then afterwards I will thee wed, So no barm can there be. Well, If I lose my maidenhead, It shall be in my father's barn: So now the money put me down, And treat me well with wine, Then to-night at twelve o'clock, It is the only time. He was delighted for to catch The maiden in the mind, Then unto the barn he took A bottle of rhenish wine. A gang of Gypsies us'd to lie, Sir in the barn all night, Then here this damsel soon she play'd A country crafty bite. She told unto the Gypsies How she the scheme had laid, So bid them to conceal themselves Among the corn and hay. She said, I'll give you notice In every degree; And if you bite this am'rous blade. Rewarded you shall b. 'Bout twelve o'clock to her he came Just as the apointment were, When no light but what the moon Granted unto them there. Thus they sit down among the straw His arms round her he twines; Full merrily they toss about The bottle of rhenish wine. The girl oft kiss'd the bottle, But never touch'd the wine, Until his Lordship's eyes began To twinkle very fine. He laid him down amidst the straw, And fast asleep he falls; The fa mer's daughter then arose, And the Gypsies soon did call: Says she, Go strip you all buff, Then down by him golie, And the little gypsy at his back, I beg that you would tie. Both his hands I have made fast Not easy to be undone, Then as he rises in a fright, Like a devil he will run. Five pound she to the gypsies gave, Then home she strait did steer. The Lord began to awake, sir, In the morning fair and clear. He took a roll upon his back, The gypsy began to squeak, His hands being ty'd he then began To scramble on his feet. The gypsies all were standing up, Their coal-black hair hung down, He took them all for devils in bust, And run into the town, With the bastard sq uag at his back. His wig was tag'd with straw, Sure such a sight as this No mortal ever saw. The servants were amazed When they did let him in, They took the gppsy from his back, And soon relieved him. So the child he is like to keep, For the gypsies they are gone▪; Thus now he is the talk of all The women in the town But yet he is wll pleased With the pranks that she has play'd, He said, I am resolv'd to wed This virtuous country maid. For virtue is her portion, Of that she has her share▪ O now this Lord has married This furmer's daughte f.
