S349 816.m.22[37] R222961 99885378 201311
St. PAULS LIFE and TRAVELS From His Conversion. And also his several Sufferings, unto His Martyrdom at Rome. Collected from Sacred SCRIPTURE and Serious HISTORIANS. The Life and Travels of St. Paul from his Conversion to his Martyrdom. AMongst the Jewish Ntion, a certain Benjamite inhabited in the City of Tarsus, from whence descended that bles∣sed Apostle St. Paul, who was by his father called Saul, in evedence that he was an Hebrew of the Hebrews. He was sent from Tarsus unto Jerusalem to be in∣structed in sacred knowledge, and at the feet of Gamaliel a Doctor of the Law, he was set to study the Holy Scriptures, in which he pro∣fited beyond all his Felow-studients. Here eager of his Learning and Religion, he drew in the Do∣ctrine of the Pharisees. About which time the promised Mesiah appeared, Saul at Jerusalem, was so intent that this news of the Mesiah found no entertainment from him. Christ being crucified at the great Pascha Feast, and at Pentecost; the Holy Ghost coming upon the Apostles, enabling them to speak Languages, and work Miracles, many became their converts, so that by the feast of Tabernacles, there was a necessity to ordain Deacons, and of these seven were appointed, whereof Stephen was one; they were not more zealous in spreading the Gospel, than the Jews were enviously opposite; amongst which Saul of Tarsus was not the least. The first qarrel was the Synagogue of the Libertines against Stephen, supposed to have been at the next Feast, following the Feast of Tabernacles, at which time Stephen received Ordination; at which time Stephen was apprehended by those Libertines, and before the Councel tumultuously condemned and stoned to death. But devout men exposed themseves to the Jews displeasure by sollemn lamenta∣tion and convenient burial. These persecutors much enraged made great havock; and under this Councel that condemned Stephen, Sau was then an ement Offi∣cer and gave his vote to his death, and was in special imploy to see the Execution done, and was zealously mad and furious to destroy and imprison all that fell in his way, and to accomplish his design, he got Letters from the High-Priest, directed to the Synagogues in Damascus, to bind and bring away all that should own the name of Christ. But in this his hast going to Damascus, a bright light appeared round him, and he was cast upon the ground, greatly astonished, and a voice speaking unto him saying, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? This miraculous voice and stroke cooled Paul's courage, and he lay mbling, his heart turned, and his note was changed, he immediate∣ly became obedient to the Heavenly voice. Bing led into he City, for he was stuck blind with the light; three days after Ananias by Divine appointment baptized him, and constitted him a Gospel preacher, and Saul immediately began to preach up that Doctrine in the Jewish Synagogues, and confounded his Jewish adversaries by Scripture arguments out of the Law and Prophets, proving that that Jesus that they had so lately crucified was the very Christ. For which the Jews instead of being convinced, go about to kill him, but few days after he left Damascus, and went into Arabia, and there he continued the space of three years. Saul returning back to Damascus about the 23 of Tiberius, but here again he finds the same malicious spirit remaining in the Jews, and to escape wih his life, was fain to be let down in a Basket over the Town Wall, and fom thence he went to Jerusalem abou the Feast of Tabernacles. All this time had he seen none of the Apostles, but now coming to Jerusaem he met with St. Peter, who at first with others shunned Paul But Barnabas wrought his Introduction amng them. Paul af∣ter fifteen days labour and pains bestowed to little purpose, left e∣rusalem, and went down to Cesaria, and from thence through Phoe∣nicia, Syria, and Cylicia, and so to Tarsus. Saul goes with Barnabas to Antioch, where he continued one whole year, and after a lag col∣lecton, made for the poor Saints at Jerusalem, it was carried by the hands of Barnabas and Paul, where they both continued. Paul being in an extasie as he was praying in the Temple, was caught up into the third Heaven, where he heard words unspeakable, and was commanded quickly to be gone out of Jerusalem, and to go to the Genties. Saul returns back to Antioch, where the Holy Ghost spake openly by vision, saying, Seperate me Barnabas and Paul, for the work of the Ministry: and from henceforward he was called Paul. Paul and Barnabas leave Antioch, and at first come to Selucia neer the Sea, and from thence sailed unto Salamis in the Isle of Cyprus, and after some stay journeyed over the Island unto Paphos, where Sergius Paulus the Governour held his seat, and was by them conver∣ted to the faith by miracle, having first smote Barjesus a Sorcerer with blindness, who opposed them. In the Spring they crost the Sea to Perga in Pamphilia, from hence John Mark returns to Jerusalem, and Paul goes as far as An∣tioch in Psidia, where Preaching in vain to the Jews, he returns to the Gentiles, where crowds of converts come in. From hence they travail to Iconia, the principal City of Lycaonia. This year happened the Famine spoken of by Agabus. Paul and Barnabas continue Preaching at Iconia, but were quickly driven away by the Tumultuous Envious Iews, and went on Preach∣ing at Lystra, where they cure a lame man miracuously, but they were pursued with Malice, and here they stoned Paul, who was by Miracle restored to lfe again, and went with Barnabas for Derbe, where having setled the Church, they return to Lystra. Where having Ordained Elders, they return to Iconium, and from thence they came to ntioch in Psidia, from thence they came back to Perga, and from thence to Attalia, thence they return th ough Cilicia, and Syria, unto Antioch in Syria, and whilst they continued at Antioch, certain Iews disturb the Church, whence arose great di∣sputes, Barnabas and Paul thereupon are sent to Ierusalem, to deter∣mine those controversies, where it was ordaind and decreed, and they both return to Antioch, to the full satisfaction of the Churches. Paul after some faling out, parts with Barnabas, and Iohn, Mark, and Paul, and Silas, depart into Asia. Paul travails through Syria, and Cilicia, unto Derbe, unto Lyconia, and so through Phrygia and Gala∣tia, and ithinia, and so to Troas, in Myssia: from hence shipt to the Isle of Samothraet, and thence to Neopolis, and so to Phi∣lippine in Macedonia, Lydia converted, and others, also the Jaylor, on the morrow being dismist they went to Amphipolis, and so to Appo∣lonia, and thence towards Thessalonica, but being persecuted at Per∣sia, Paul sailed away by Sea to Athens, where Paul had many dis∣putations, and converted Dionysius, and one Damaris, and others; from hence Paul wrote the First and Second Epistle to the Thessa∣lonians, and from Athens he went to Corinth, at Corinth Paul had a Vision, to encourage his Preaching. Here he made Tents with Aquilla and Priscilla preaching in the house of Justus. Paul leaves Silas to govern the Church of Corinth, and sails to Ephesus, in Asia, leaving Timothy to govern, he sailed to the Isle of Creta, where having setled a Church he left the care to Titus, and so sailed to Cesaria in Canaan, and so went up to Jerusa em, and thence to Antioch, and so began a third voyage, through Gaatia, & Phrygia, and so to Ephesus, where he preached two whole years in the School of Tyrannus, where he did many miracles, and foiled seven sons of Scva, a Jew attempting to cast out Devils. St. Phillip being dead, St. Pau was called to be an ∣postle, and was reckoned amongst the Twelve, and ever after writ himself an postle, many burnt their books, but Demetrius the Silver∣smith raiseth a tumult. Hence Paul wrote the first Epistle to the Corin∣thians, and sent it by Timothy, Paul left Timothy at Ephesus, and went into Macedonia, passing by Troas, whence he wrote the second Epistle to the Corinthians, thence he wrote to Titus in Crete, from Nicapolis, Paul come to Corinth, whence he wrote the Epistle to the Romans. Hence he went to Philipi, from whence he went by Sea  Toas in Asia, where he restored Eutechus to life, thence went he to Affos, and so to Mytelene, to the isle of Chios, to Samos, to Trogilium, to Micales, to Miletus. Hence sailed he away to Chaos, and so to Rhoodes, hence to Cyprus, unto Tire. Hence saied he again to Ptolamais; and thence to Cesaria, here he was told of the ill usage he should meet with at Jerusalem, yet went he on thither, and being found in the Temple, he was apprehended and buffeted, but was rescued by Lysias the chief Captain, and found to be a Roman, and was sent to Cesaria before Felix, who condis∣cended to hear Paul preach, and after two years left Paul in prison, Festus prefect of Judea, Paul is accused a fresh, but appeals to Cesar, King Agripa hears Paul, Paul is shipt for Rome, sails by Zidon, to Cyprus, Mira, in Pamphilia, where he is shipt of Alexandria, and came to Guida, thence by Salmona, and so West-wards to the Haven in Creta, called fair-Heavens, neer the City of Lasea, not wintering here, they sailed on to Winter in Phenix, where for fourteen days they had a soitary journey, all hope of life was passed, and the Ship perished, but all the persons escaped safe, and landed at the Island of Melita, where the Governour Publius was converted, thence they sailed to Syracuse, thence to Rhegium, thence to Puedi; thence tra∣velled to Apiforum, thence to the three Taverns, and so to Rome, here Paul first preached to the Jews, but they being hardned, he prea∣ched two full years to the Gentiles, in his own hired house, the soul∣diers being his guard, he continues prisoner at Rome, whence he wrote the Epistle to the Galatians, and likewise that to the Ephesi∣ans. Epaphroditius brings him relief from the Philipians, being prison∣er, by whom he returned his Epistle to them: Timothy also delivers him he alms of Ephesus, and after came Onesimus from his Ma∣ster, by whom St. Paul returns his Epistle to Philemon. Then came Epaphras also to Rome, and after two years imprisonment, he was heard before Nero. Being set at liberty, he goes into Spain, Paul in Gallia ordained Cresceus, from whence he sailed into Greece. St. Paul visits the Churcheism Macedonia, and lands at Troas, in Asia, where Carpus was Bishop, where he left his cloak and parch∣ments, and went up into Phrygia, unto Laodecea, and from thence wrote his Epistle to Timothy at Ephesus, and from thence went to Miletum; hence sailed to Corinth, and hence he sailed to Rome, hence he wrote his second Epistle to Timothy. Paul is imprisoned, being betrayed by Alexander the Copper-smith of Ephesus: Paul was beheaded at Rome, and with him suffered his companions, A∣riffarchus, Trophimus, and udeus. He spent 32 years in preaching the Gospel before he suffered Martyrdom for the Testimony of Jesus. FINIS. Printed for Phillip Brooksby in West-smithfield.
