V367a [ocm]09086322 204369
A view of the PROPOSITIONS Presented to His MAJESTY BY The Parliaments of both Kingdoms. royal blazon or coat of arms C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE Printed in the Yeer 1647.
A view of the PROPOSITIONS Presented to His Majesty by the Parliaments of both KINGDOMES. FOR Introduction, know; That a factious party in the Parliament of England brought in 2. Bils,The Intro∣duction. to take away Bishops, and to take the Mi∣litia from the King, which being rejected in a full and free Conven∣tion of Parliament; were afterward revived, and promoted by Tumultuous people, in, and about London, who drove away the dissenting Members of Parliament, and so the Bills passed both Houses, to which, they desire the Royall Assent; and, His
Majesty refusing, they took up Armes, to force him, as before, they had the Houses: and, when they were likely to be overcome, they call in the Scots to their assistance, and joyne in League and Covenant with them: and, when they had van∣quished the King, and His Party, the Parliaments of both Kingdomes presented these to His Majesty: Whereof, The Propo∣sitions of three sorts.1 Some Propositions are Antecedent to the Warre, and contain the first cause, and grounds of it, and set forth the designe of the Proposers agi∣tated before, and prosecuted by the War. As the (3) for takng away Bishops in England, and Ireland; the (13) for setting the Militia of England and Ireland in the two Houses of Parliament: That part of the (17) That the Houses shall nominate the great Officers in the Kingdomes of England, and Ireland. And the (14) That no Peers made since the Lord Littleton carried a∣way the Great Seale (which was May 20. 1642.) or to be made hereafter, shall sit, and vote in Parliament without the consent of both Houses of Parliament. The (7, 8, 9, and 10.) concerning Papists, and the (12) for suppressing Innovations, &c. I insist not on, because His Majesty assented to them before Armes taken up, and so they can be no cause of the War. 2 Some Propositions are concurrent with, and emergent upon the War, and set forth the meanes used by the Proposers to promote their designe, and War: As the (4) for confirming the Ordinances for calling the Assembly of Divines: The (2) for taking the Covenant. The (5, 6, and part of the 17.) for
Reformation, and Uniformity in Religion in the King∣domes of England, and Ireland, according to the Cove∣nant. The (15) for confirming the Treaties between the two Kingdoms. The (17) That the power and Govern-of the Militia, and Tower of London, shall be setled in the Lord Major, &c. 3 Some Propositions are subsequent to the War, and serve to secure the Proposers (both now, and hereafter) and their party, and their designe, not on∣ly by Act of Parliament, but by Military force and power also: As the (1) That the King declare Null all His Declarations, and Proclamations, and all Judi∣ciary proceedings against them, had, and made, or to be had, and made. And the (19) for confirming all that hath passed under their Great Seale, and for Nulling whatsoever hath passed under the other Seale since May 20. 1642. and under the Great Seale of Ireland, since September 15. 1643. And the (16) concerning their proceedings with Delinquents (as they call them.) And that part of the (12. and 13.) for the two Houses of Par∣liament to raise monies as they please in future, for the payment of Souldiers, and of the publick debts, and da∣mages of the Kingdoms. And to all, and every of these Propositions, the Parliaments of both Kingdoms desire His Majesties Assent: And that they, and all such Bills as shall be tendered to Him in pursuance of them, or any of them, may be established by Act of Parliament. And so what the Parliament of England (as they will be called) could not do singly,The Scots joyn to press these Pro∣positions up¦on the King & the peo∣ple. the Parliaments of both Kingdomes undertake joyntly, (ViZ.) To overthrow the Ancient Constitution of the King∣dome, both in respect of the Church, and of the
State: And to take away the power, and Govern∣ment from the King, and to settle it in the two Houses of Parliament, and to establish it by Act of Parliament: Also they desire several other Acts to passe for making good their former proceedings in the prosecution of that establishment, and to make good the establishment it self, in case of opposition, or disturbance hereafter. And this is the safe, and well grounded Peace, they speak of, & have sought for. Why the King cannot assent to the Propositi∣ons.But how can they expect, that the King should give His Assent to these their Propositions, and that He should passe and Enact them? That He should give up His Power, and Protection, and Go∣vernment of the People, wherewith God hath in∣trusted Him. That he should destroy Bishops, be∣ing bound by his Coronation Oath to defend them. That he should renounce His righteous Cause in rescuing His Kingly Power, and vindicating the freedome of the Parliament, and Subject, and up∣holding the Constitution and Government of the Kingdome? That He should ruine that Loyal par∣ty of the Nobility, and Gentry, and those faithfull Patriots that adhered to Him in the late War, on behalf of the Crown, the Parliament, the Subject, & the Kingdom? That he should justifie, and make a president of their most unwarrantable Armes, and proceedings against Him? That He should debase His Royll Government, and Succession, and en∣slave His good Subjects irrecoverably to all poste∣rity? Againe, how can they expect that the people
should approve of these their Propositions,Why the people will not admit of these Propositi∣ons. tending onely to the advancing of the power of two Hou∣ses of Parliament, without any regard to the Sub∣ject, or the Lawes, or the Liberties of the King∣dome? I say, how can they expect, that the peo∣ple should approve or admit of them, and forgoe our ancient, known, regall Government by Lawes and Justice, and to submit to a Parliamentary mili∣tarie arbitrarie Government, by will and power? and withall, to expose themselves to the violent in∣sults of parties and factions, and to the pride and insolence of particular persons? For such hath been the Government, and such our condition for these foure or five yeares last past, and likely to be (for ought I see) for many Generations to come. And should his Majesty passe the Propositions, as is desired, Tyranny would be incorporated into our very Constitutions and Government, and our slave∣ry would be both grievous (lying under the power of a Legion of Tyrants) and remedilesse, being tied to it by Act of Parliament. Who they are that hin∣der the peace of the Kingdome.And now let the world judge, who they are that hinder the peace of this miserably distracted King∣dome, (which cannot be setled but by a peaceable agreement between the King, the Parliament and the people) whether his Majesty who refuseth these Propositions, (so destructive to his owne and the peoples interests) or they who in prosecution of their English Scottish designes, will have no peace, unlesse his Majesty admit them, and resign up all to them. And the truth is, the Parliament-men generally
having made such advantages upon the King and upon the people by their late Government, are not willing to forgoe it, but resolve almost unanimous∣ly to continue it, either by Law, (if his Majesty passe those) or by force, (if he refuse them:) and Sub∣jects againe they would not be, least they become liable to questioning, accompting, &c. And should his Majesty condescend to their de∣sires, and put all into their hands, would they not quarrell about the sharing of it, as they have hi∣therto contended with his Majesty for the power and Government? So from henceforth, would not the factions contend amongst themselves for the Administration of that power, and thereby also disturb the peace of the Kingdome as at this day? Justice the only means of peace, Es. 32.17.The onely meanes of peace indeed, is justice, to give to every one his owne; to the King his owne, to the Parliament their owne, to the people their owne: and I shall believe they intend the peace of the Kingdome indeed, when they go the way of peace, and offer or accept just and righteous Pro∣posalls. But they cannot be safe, unlesse these their desires be granted. Yes, they may: an Act of Oblivion and a gene∣rall Pardon, would save them for what is past; and the Apostles admonition observed for the time to come, Wilt thou not be affraid of the Powers? do that which is good and thou shalt have praise of the same, Rom. 13.3. By a Lover of his Countrey, and a Well-willer to the peace of the Kingdome.
