2578 [ocm]61740325 194873
Note, that whereas in the returne Quind. Pasce, the number 21 is twice set downe, it is not ment, that there are two one and twentie daies, but that that 21 day, ser∣veth for two seuerall purposes, viz. for the day of Excep∣ions, and the Returna breuium also, and so of such others. Note also, that a writ being returnable (in the common pleas) vppon any of the Returne or Essoyne daies aboue mentioned, that the partiè ought not to be arested, vppon the same Essoyne day, the day of Exception, the Returna breuium, or the Apparance day of that returne. ¶ To the curteous Reader. All dayes in banke, in euery Terme, as they fall out, this yeere, (As plainly as I could contriue) I offer to thee heere. Which if to thee in any sort, may pleasurable bee, I haue my wish, my purpose was, onely, to pleasure thee. Nudae gratiae. George Alleyn. ¶ To the curteous & studious Reader. Acceptance of a simple gift, in kind and friendly wise, Is matchfull, with the giuing of a gift, of greater prise. Each gift, that euery man shall giue, such price and value takes, As he that shall receaue the same, acceptance thereof makes. For kind accept makes smalest gifts, to seeme greatest of all:
And hard accept, makes greatest gifts to seeme but very small. But good accept, the widdowes mites, (a thing of small account) All offrings that the rich men gaue, in value, did surmount. Heereby, the poore mans sacrifice, that was a parched cake, As pleasing was, as all the steemes that sweet incense could make. Heereby, two handfulls of water, to Artaxerxes brought, As welcome was, as iewels rich, that were most finely wrought. Heereby, poore Conons nauew rootes, became a greater gift, Then was a stately Stallion giuen, vpon a gainefull drift. In hope hereof, I boldned was, to string my bow anew. And subiect this my second worke vnto thy friendly view. The good accept whereof shall be, the spring-time of my paine: The sommer of my recompence, and haruest of my gaine. Pre captu lectoris habent sua fata libelli, Proque animo capientis habent sua praemia don. H. A.
