11187 S102530 99838307 2681
THE MARROVV AND IVICE OF TWO HVNDRED AND SIXTIE SCRIPTVRES. OR MONAS TESSARAGRAPHICA, That is: THE FOVRE HOLY SCRIPTVRES of the Old and New Testament, appointed euery Son∣day to be read in our Church of England, combined and brought vnto one chiefe head and point of doctrine: Together with the rest of the holy Scriptures, set out also for the principall solemne Feasts of the Natiuitie, Circumcision, and Epiphany of our Lord and Sauiour Christ Iesus, of his Resurrection, Ascension, and sending downe the holy Ghost vpon his Apostles, and the rest of the Church assembled (in vniformity) in Ierusalem, at the Feast of Pentecost. WITH 1 A generall Harmony and connexion of all these together: AND 2 A particular analyse of euery one of them: SO THAT 1 Not the Ministers alone: BVT 2 Euery godly housholder, and studious Christian may not onely 1 Confirme their consciences in the sound truth of the Religion of Adam, Seth, Enos, Christ and his Apostles: But also 2 Confute all aduersaries, of what ranke soeuer, with these com∣bined and selected euidences of Gods truth. Extracted by Iames Forrester▪ Minister of Gods word at Enderby neere Bul∣lingbrooke in Lincolnshire, Chapleine to the Queenes most excellent Maiestie. Printed at London for Simon Waterson dwelling at the signe of the Crowne in Paules Church-yard. 1611.
TO THE MOST CHRISTIAN, HIGH AND MIGHTIE PRINCE, OVR SO∣VERAIGNE LORD, IAMES, BY THE Grace of God, King of great Brittaine, France and Ireland, Defender of the true, ancient, and Catholicke Faith. MOST Mightie Monarch, and our renowmed Soueraigne. It was the speech and position of Plato,Platoes com∣mon-wealth. delighting in his owne e∣lement of Philosophy, and farre exceeding others therein, That those States and Kingdomes were happie, wherein either Philosophers held the Helme, or Kings and Potentates were able to dis∣course philosophically. More blessed and happy had these bene, in his eyes & estimation, if he had knowne diuine Philosophy, that sacred Theology, & had begun to taste that life eternall, by acknowledging of God in Christ Iesus.Ciceroes com∣mon-wealth. It was the poeme of that most eloquent Orator, though a very proud man (like the lad Narcis∣sus delighting in his owne shadow) O fortunatam, na∣tam,
me consule, Romam: He would also haue beene of another opinion, if he could haue spoken the tongue of Canaan, so well as the Latine and Roman language. For how had holy Religion (so called a religando) re∣straining men so effectually, as with a bridle, from that capitall sinne of pride and arrogancie, held him in, as with a curbe, and not suffered him to beare his head so loftily. Romish syna∣gogue and false Church.But to speake no more of Heathen Philosophers & Orators, men without God in this world, weakened or rather wasted with that incureable disease of pride and selfe-loue. This iron age of ours, I may call it earthly, this old and last age, this crooked and decrepite time, this melancolike Saurne, or rather Sathan, hath ingen∣dred a brood and issue of children, exceeding both Plato and Cicero in haughtinesse, and exalting them∣selues. Pontifex Roma∣nus hermaphro∣dita.That Bishop of Rome, that monster of and among men, that Hermaphrodite, though calling himselfe by a most humble title and name, the seruant of seruants of the most high God, is neuerthelesse more proud then Pharaoh, more blasphemous then Sennacherib, of an haughtier spirit then Nebuchadnezzar and Herod; exalts the happinesse of the Romish Church aboue all other: enuies our felicitie (which he cals misery) and would haue vs happie, after the new Romish fashion. He dis∣claimes vs altogether, proclaimes vs heretikes and apo∣stataes, for that we are departed (aut mentiuntur philo∣sophi) from the true mother and the most ancient Ca∣tholike Church of Rome. They say, that all those are happy, and none other are blessed, but such as are blessed of that Romish Father, Christs Vicar, with his
leaden paper, or parchment Bull-blessings: if a despa∣rate stabber or ruffian like swash-buckler, and the di∣uels hangman (more bloudy then any butcher) may haue his bare word go for payment. Whether he be Emperor, King, Priest, or Subiect, he must be Anathema Maranatha, cursed with a greater curse then with Booke, Bell and Candle, that will not subiugate him∣selfe to that Romish Money-monger, S. Peters Cacozelist, and bastard successor: that will not giue him honour and worship, of Douleia and Latreia, as to the Lord God Almightie. Whereupon those cursed impes of his,  vagi & errones, his vagabond false Prophets, those re∣gular and secular Priests, those Man-slayers, King-killers, and traytors of that last, but most damnable and wicked order the Iebusites (I would say the Iesuites) those hellish Alchimists, calciners of Kings, Queenes, Princes, Nobles, Gentles and Parliament houses, such matters as neuer any but the diuels Pyrophilactikes wrought vpon. These, these I say, are still in hand with their Romish caco-lukes, to depart from the English Church, which hath so long stood excommunicate, to abhorre and detest our Temples and holy assem∣blies: to ioyne themselues to their catholicke, and (if you will beleeue the lyars) the most ancient Religion, to be reconciled to the Romish power, and not to take the oath of Allegiance, or of Supremacie, at the in∣stance of any Magistrates, in the kingdome of England. Amongst our selues there is yet another ranke of men,The seditious and factious conuenticles. who haue seuered and torne themselues from the true Church of Christ, dispersed abroad, or gathe∣red, either in great Britaine, Germany, France, or other
places. These people are very like bad Phisitions, who professe great cunning in healing other mens mala∣dies, but are farre vnable to cure themselues. They would heale vs (whom they call Babylon) themselues being blind and vnskilfull in their owne grieuous dis∣eases of pride and confusion. Oh (say they) happie were the inhabitants of this land, and more happie were the Rulers and Teachers, if they were members of the true, that is (as they call it) of their separated congregation. Twice happie should the people of England, and other countries be, if once they would worship God, according to his word with vs that are separate, abdicate and abiured. Thrice happy should they be, if they would throw away their Leitourgie, that is, their booke of Common Prayer, and would not pray to God, in any prescript forme of prayer, or pre∣meditate: If they would not celebrate the feast dayes of Christ and his Saints: If they would not appoint the Scriptures, and stint them to be read vpon certaine daies and times: if they would separate the good from the bad, the cleane from the vncleane: if they would do all things after the discipline, forme and admini∣stration vsed in the primitiue Church. Wherfore they cry out against our Church, holding it to be false and adulterate, Antichristian, Babylonish, and Romes sister. For (say they) you worship God in vaine, teaching for doctrines mens commandements: therefore it is no ioyning with you in any spirituall societie. For which cause, that with more craft and speed, they may inueigle the vnletterd, ignorant, yong∣lings and weake ones with their Syrene songs, & sweete baites, vnto their faction, they abuse our Lords words
pronounced by Esay, Ieremy, and his holy Apostles,Esay 52.11. Ieremy 51 6. 2. Cor. 6.17.18. Reuel. 18.6. S. Paul & S. Iohn, Depart ye, depart ye, get ye hence, come out from among them, purge your selues, ye that carry the ves∣sels of the Lord, and then will I receiue you. With these and the like inchantments (as did Simon Magus) they do bewitch the people and yong lambes, of that great Shepheard, and Lord of the flocke, that Archbishop of our soules Christ Iesus. All these, the eyes of your Maiestie do behold, and your eye-lids do consider, that they are in the gall of bitternesse, and wrapped in iniquity: all these Phari∣sies (I meane) who iustifie their owne assemblies, dis∣allowing, scoffing, and deriding ours, as meerly false, meretricious, Babylonish and Antichristian. These mockers do call (the booke of Common prayer) a peece of swines flesh, spitting at it and despising it as a thing most vncleane and abhominable. The bookes of the holy Bible, of the old and new Testament, which are yearly or oftner read through in our congregations (because they are set forth some for one time, & some for another, to be read in order and course) they say they are read by patches and peeces, they are cut, rent, and violently torne, and applied superstitiously to dayes, feasts and times. For these causes (most religious King) I that am the least and most vnworthy of all your seruants,English church a member of the true catho∣licke Church. neither allowing of Platoes or Ciceroes Common-wealth, nor of the Romish or factious synagogues; but professing my selfe a member and Minister of the true, Catho∣licke and most ancient Church of Christ; haue dedi∣cated and consecrated this my Monas tessaragraphicke vnto your Soueraigne Maiestie (being the true Mo∣narch
of foure kingdomes) for that of right such a Treatise belongs vnto your Excellency.Subiect of this Booke and Treatise. Wherein those foure Scriptures which are for euery Sonneday throughout the yeare, appointed to be read and ex∣pounded in our Churches, are reduced vnto one chiefe head of holy and Christian Religion. Where∣in those principall and fundamentall heauenly do∣ctrines may easily be seene and perceiued. Wherein not the dead Sceleton, but the liuing Anatomy of the body and soule of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, God and Man is described. Of that Sonne of man, I say, which for vs was borne, circumcised for vs, appeared to the Gentiles, was baptised for vs, fasted and prayed for vs, was tempted of Sathan, preached to vs, and for vs: Suf∣fered vnder Pontius Pilate, & died for vs, rose againe & ascended into heauen to prepare a place for vs, sits at the right hand of God in glory. Sēt his holy spirit that comforter vnto his Church, which with one accord (not contentiously) were assembled together. Which holy spirit, with all the gracious and necessary gifts thereof, he promised to continue with this his true Church, vnto the end of the world. This is that holy coniunction of the chiefe and prin∣cipall heads of Christian Religion, handled, confir∣med and applied in our english Leitourgie.A true coniun∣ction and co∣pulation of the chiefe points of Christian faith in our English Lei∣tourgie. This (most renowmed King) is that holy knot of mariage, and vndefiled wedlocke: which no mortall man ought to breake or loose, vnlesse he will be guiltie of heynous and mischieuous sacrilege. This is the order and method, the end and scope of those holy theopneustall bookes, conteined in the old and new Testament. That vnitie of all vnities in the Monarchie and myste∣rie
of that indiuisible Trinitie, who hath appeared to vs in, by and through Iesus Christ, who is yesterday, and to day, and the same for euer. That King of Kings, and Monarch of Monarchs, blesse your Monarchie for euer. That inuincible, vi∣ctorious Lyon of the tribe of Iuda, preserue in soule and body your excellent Maiestie, your most louing, loued, and beloued Queene, my gracious Lady and Mistresse, with all that holy of-spring, those flouri∣shing Palmes and blessed Bay trees, from all treache∣rous and trayterous machinations of all Romish Mal∣shrags, and other mischieuous persons. That holy spi∣rit, proceeding from the Father and the Sonne, fill you all full of graces, gifts and blessigs in this your troublesome pilgrimge: and giue you the expecta∣tion o the blessed hope, euen the appearing of that great God our Sauiour Iesus Christ Amen. Which that he my d, I will and must incessantly pray, as being your most dutifull seruant in all sub∣mission, The most vnworthy of all your Chapleines, IAMES FORRESTER.
To the godly and peaceable Readers herof, grace and peace be multiplyed abundantly in CHRIST IESVS. THE blessed, and most sacred Scriptures of God, penned by those holy Theopneusts, may well be resembled to the water os the sea, which is farre sweeter in the bottome then in the vpper part, and superficies. Whosoeuer meanes to partake the sweete relishing water of this euerliuing and euerlasting fountaine, must haue a bucket to draw with, for the well is deepe. The more linckes of graces, vertues, and godly diligence, that the chaine of this bucket containeth, and the more capacious that the bucket of his lowly heart is, in humility to come to the owneand founder of this well, the better hee shall speed at this inexhau∣stible Ocean. If thou compare Scriptures with Scriptures, pondering all things, weighing and considering them well in thine heart, as the holy virgin Mary did: then shalt thou proue by the Scriptures, that Iesus is the Christ, that hee is waters, in the plurall num∣ber, to quench the heate of thy thirsty soule. There shalt thou finde that hee is  of the masculine gen∣der, the best wine of all, to comfort and exhilarate thy wearyed and sorrowfull heart. Then shall thou know that his word and Scrip∣tures is that sincere, pure, vncorrupt, and vncurdled milke, wherewith, by his grace, thou shalt grow and increase from grace to grace, and vertue to vertue, till thou become an absolute man in Christ Iesu, ready for euery good worke. Then shalt thou be able to reproue the gaine-sayers, to conuince the contradictors and lyers against the truth.
That this holy water drawne out after this manner, is of these most rare and inexplicable vertues, nothing can better teach thee then true experience in the Patriarches, Abraham and Dauid, in Moses and Ioshua his successor, in Iosiah and Hezekiah, in zealous Eliah and Micaiah. In the cheerfull and vndaunted spirits and administrations of all Gods Prophets before Iohn Baptist, and of the Baptist him∣selfe, as also in the effects of the Apostles labours: In the peoples reuerent hearing, and diligent practising of Gods truth, in sear∣ching the Scriptures for their further confirmation. In their vn∣wearied labouring, toyling and paines taking, to grow and increase in their cōmenced knowledge. In louing and embracing the word of the kingdom aboue all other things. In their entertaining the Mi∣nisters as the Embassadors of Christ, as Christs faithfull stewards and vicegerents, as men vnreproueable, yea as the Angels of God. Oh that there were such an heart in the people of our lands, in the members of Christs Church in Great Brittaine, in the most strict and curious professors of Christs blessed Gospell. Then should the sonnes and children of the Church be as the flourishing plants growing and fructifying in grace and knowledge. Then should the daughters of Sion which attend vpon their Queene-mother the Church, be as the pollished corners of Salomons pallace,Psal. 144.12.13, &c. and of the Temple Ierusalem. Then should Gods graniers be full and a∣bounding with all manner of good corne, the fruits of an holy profes∣sion. Then should the sheepe of Christ bring forth thousands and ten thousands of holy workes and good fruits, both in publicke and in priuate in the sight of God and men. Then should Christs Mini∣sters, the true labouring oxen which tread out the corne, be encou∣raged to take paines and strong vnto labour. Then should we haue no such rents, schismaticall factions, or diuisions, which cause ma∣ny leadings into captiuity, and much complaining in our streets. But alas, I may cry out with Ieremy, My belly, my belly, I am pained at the very heart,Ieremy 4.19. mine heart is troubled within me, I cannot be still, for my soule hath heard the sound of the trumpet, and the alarme of the battell. For amongst vs here in England and Scotland, in stead of solacing our soules among the
sweet trees of Mirtles and Cinamon, the most odoriferous sents of the flowers of holy Scriptures, gathered out of the garden of Gods Booke: We haue our delights in the loathsome stinking Henbane (I must not say Tabacco) of smoking and fretting diuision. Soun∣ding out the Trompets, and striking vp the Alarme of carnall con∣tention amongst our selues: Scorning our publicke seruice of God; because it is not after their owne humors: Scorning the Ministers of Gods Word and Sacraments, which are conformable to this Administration. Yea, and, which is most fearefull of all, scorning and loathing that sweete Dew and Manna which comes downe from heauen to vs by their ministery. For as there is one sort of Recusants among vs, which will nei∣ther come to our publicke Assemblies, nor vnto the priuate con∣uenticles of the factious:H Barrow in his Discouery of the false Church. So haue we another sort, who are Mal∣content, and will neither come to Seruice nor Sermons; because (say they) both Seruice, Sermons, Ministers, Administrations, Sacra∣ments, Gospel, yea Christ himselfe are adulterate, Popish & Anti∣christian. Lamen. 2.10.11.12, &c.Godly gracious Ieremy was full of passions in beholding the de∣solations of the city Ierusalem, and the miseries of the inhabitants thereof, for that the children and sucklings were ready to die for bread in the streets of the city. His eies failed with teares, his bowels sweld, his liuer was powred vpon the earth. In his passionate maner he crieth out, Mine eye casteth out riuers of waters for the destru∣ction of the daughter of my people,Lam. 3.48.49.50, &c. Mine eye (saith he) droppeth without stay, and ceasseth not till the Lord looke downe and behold from heauen. I, that am the meanest among thousands of my coate, do wish with Ieremy that mine head were of water,Ierem. 9.1. and mine eies a fountaine of teares, that I might weep day and night, because of our yong & old Ministers, and because of others that are not Ministers, both yong people and old of both sexes. For they with the desolate and wofull people of Ierusalem,Lam. 2.12, do cry out for bread and drinke spirituall, as they did for corporall food, to feed their swoning carcases. Those hunger-starued soules & pining creatures had cause to cry for bread, being ready to giue vp the ghost in their mothers bosome.
The silenced Ministers, and the vndiscreet children and people of our Church, if they (with the orthodoxe Ministers and people of other reformed Churches) will enter into a true and due conside∣ration of all circumstances; hauc little or no cause to cry out for the bread and drinke of their soules; sith God did neuer more bounti∣fully yeeld and bestow it then he hath in these our dayes. But bread from heauen will not serue the Israelites turne,Numb 11.4.5.6. their soules loathed Manna, they longed for Quailes, though they payd deere for their Lust and for their Quailes. The godly zealous and effectuall prayers in our booke of Common Prayer, conceiued and penned vpon sundry occasions, they be too grosse for our nice and daintie stomackes, which can away with no∣thing but their owne conceited (I should say) conceiued prayers, to be spoken and pronounced vpon the sodaine and ex-tempore. As though stinted and set formes of prayers, both in the time of the Law and Gospell, had not bene commanded by God the Father to the Priests then liuing, by Christ his sonne, to his Disciples, or that our Lord Iesus himselfe had not prayed and vsed the same prayer three seuerall times in the same words.Math. 26.44. Marke 14.39. Those holy and Canonicall Scriptures set out for most speciall vses to confirme the maine fundamentall points of Christian Reli∣gion (as our Censorians say) are wronged and wrung,H. Barrow in the Discouery. &c. and the most of our factious heads. mangled and diuided to serue our superstitious vses of Dayes, Fasts, and Feasts. But beside the answers that I haue yeelded to this, and the like cauilling obiections and slanders, in my Proeme vnto this Booke, and those answers which Maister Hooker maketh in his booke called Ecclesiasticall Policie, I shall (if God giue life and meanes) in the Sermons which I intend to publish first, vpon the parcels of holy Scriptures appointed for the Gospels for euery Sonday, and all the great Feasts in the yeare, deliuer my mind at large to the sa∣tisfaction of euery one, except he be of his mind that sayd, Etiamsi suadeas, non persuade bis tamen. Meane while, I beseech you to reade that briefe generall Con∣nexion (in the end of the booke) of all the holy Scriptures, com∣maunded to be read in our parish Churches and Congregations
for all the Sonnedayes and Feasts aforesayd: As also I pray you be pleased to view the Index or Table of all the two hundred and sixty Scriptures. Where it shall appeare vnto you, that the most of the Bookes, and the chiefe of the Chapters of the old Testament induced for the sound confirmation of Christians in the holy myste∣ry of godlinesse, are by a speciall direction of Gods spirit in those that culled them out, annexed vnto the Bookes, Chapters, Do∣ctrines and Applications of Scriptures in the new Testament. All which do so consequently and concordantly, and in so sweete an Harmony sound and agree together: as vnto euery plaine ho∣nest Christians view it shall appeare, That as Moses and the Pro∣phets spake of these things darkly and somewhat a farre off (as may beseene in the two first Lessons:) So our Lord Iesus Christ, per∣formed all things in Action by his Preaching, Miracles, Death, Resurrection, &c. which were fore prophecied of him, as is shewed in the Gospel. In like manner the Apostles and Euangelists ex∣horts vs vnto the vs and practise of all holy documents and instru∣ctions, as may be perceiued in the Epistles. Now that with one accord, in peace and vnitie, we may make vse of the diuine Scriptures sweete and most comfortable Harmo∣nie, let vs intreate the God of peace to knit our hearts together, that with one minde and mouth we may pray to God, and praise him in thought, word and deed. In this commendable Harmonie of soule, heart and voyce, let vs be glad and reioyce, and giue glo∣ry to the Lord God Almightie, who hath raigned. Let vs with our spirituall musicke giue glory to him: because the mariage of the Lambe is come, and his wife hath made her selfe ready. And to her was granted that she should be arraied with pure fine linnen and shining: for the fine linnen is the righteousnesse of Saints. Euen so let vs all say (which loue that his appearing) Come Lord Iesus, come quickly. The grace of our Lord Iesus Christ be with our spirits, Amen. Farewell, From mine house this 8 of Ianuary 1611. Your friend to vse, IAMES FORRESTER.
THE PROEME, CONTAINING THE OCCASIONS AND MOTIVES, THE SVBIECT MATTER, THE Methode and vse of this Harmonie and Combination following. FOR as much as the godly reuerend and learned Fathers, together with the holy Martyrs of the Church of England, and of other reformed Churches; haue by the guidance and direction of Gods spirit, not onely for the vniforme and vniuersall good of Christs Catholicke Church: but also for the particular instruction, edification, exhortation and comfort of euery true and faithfull member thereof. Because (I say) hey haue, with that great care and singular wisedome, made a most fit, and worthy choice, of such holy Scriptures, for the publicke seruice in the Church, to be read and taught among vs: as well vpon the great and solemne Feast-dayes, as vpon all the Lords dayes, or Son-dayes throughout the yeare, and namely for these called the Son-dayes of Aduent. I haue therefore thought it good to vndertake this poore paines and labour, both of combining and chaining toge∣ther, the texts culled out to these ends: as also to reduce
them, vnto one chiefe and maine head of doctrine. Setting downe the reasons and occasions, why they are chosen: the generall and speciall connexion of them, the scope and drift of euery one of them, with the generall and particular ana∣lise, resolution, vse and method of euery and each of them. Which being by our Ministers well thought vpon, well compared together, and with diligence deliuered; and by our people as well and as throughly vnderstood: will not onely be sufficient confirmations, and grounds, to establish our faith, in the truth of such doctrines, as they import: but they will serue also, as confutations and swords, wherewith to refute and wound, at the very heart, both Iewes, Arrians, and Anabaptists, or any other like heretickes. For so many, as are not like the deafe Adder in hearing, or the blind Beetles in seeing, though they were captious, a∣gainst the authenticke proceedings in the Booke of Common Prayer; yet may they lend their hearing eares, in this respect, to Esay that Euangelicall Prophet, and to Malachy, which prophecied concerning the comming of Christs Prodromos, Iohn the Baptist, and of Christs owne coming and Aduent. For Esay in his fortieth, and Malachy in the third Chap∣ter, do plainly speake and foretell; first as touching the time, that our Lord will come shortly (as he did indeed:) second∣ly, of the very place, whereunto he will come: thirdly, of the manner how: and fourthly, of the end why and where∣fore he will come. Do they not shew and foreshew, that he will come speedily, coming, he will come, and that he will come to Ierusalem. That he will come into his temple (as Malachy 3.1.) that he will come to reforne the deformities therof. Do they not prophecy, that he will come to turne the hearts of the Sectaries, of the factious and seditious in the Temple, to turne the hearts of the theeues in the temple, or to turne and whip them out of the temple. Hearken then, and heare I pray you my brethren (albeit you thinke not the same thing with vs) giue eare to S. Ber∣nard, that most religious Doctor, so rauished with zeale, and
altogether giuen to his heauenly meditations. Heare him, I beseech you, how he preaches to you touching this matter, in a Sermon concerning our Lords Aduent. Tis fit my bre∣thren (saith he) that with all deuotion, we celebrate the Lords Aduent and Comming, being delighted with so great consolation, being astonished with Gods so great fatherly kindnesse, being inflamed with Gods so infinite loue. Let vr not so much thinke of his comming, which is alreadie come, and why he came, to saue that which was lost: but here∣upon also let vs meditate, from whence he will come, and that he will assume, and take vs vnto himselfe, when he shall come. That we should continually meditate, vpon these his two Aduents and commings, ruminating and weighing in our hearts, how much he hath performed by his former, and how much he hath promised to do for vs at the latter. But you will say to me, that Bernard saw not all things: Wherefore I pray you hearken diligently, vnto that Mo∣narch of the Fathers S. Augustine. There was no cause (saith he) of the Aduent of our Lord Iesus Christ, but to saue poore sinners. Where no diseases are, no wounds or sores: there is no vse or occasion of any Phisicke. Wherefore that great Phisition, came from heauen: because the whole world lay full of sicke folkes. Because all mankind was lost after one had transgressed, in whom all mankind was compre∣hended and tooke their originall. Therfore came one with∣out sinne, who saued all beleeuers, by his righteousnesse, which was without staine of sinne. For twas not our righ∣teousnesse or merites, but our sinnes & wretchednesse, that drew downe this Physition, and caused him to come from heauen to the earth. Howbeit some contradicting spirit, will yet obiect and say: I yeeld to all this, what then? Can it thereupon be gathe∣red, and concluded, that other Sondayes and Holidaies must also be obserued, as you do keepe them? I pray thee looke vpon Caluine a late and new writer, who to a like purpose alledgeth the words of Cassiodorus. Marke what that godly
and learned man writeth, in his Commentary vpon the 118. Psalme, concerning the celebration & memoria l of that day, when Dauid made his first entrance into his kingdome. The words whereupon he writes are these. (This is the day, which the Lord hath made, let vs reioyce and be glad in it.) That which he writeth hereupon is this. Albeit (saith he) tis true, that all dayes were alike created of God; yet Dauid by a certaine eminencie, and excellency, cals it a diuine day, or a day which the diuine Creator hath made, and set apart, which after a long time of darknesse, shone and gaue light for the Churches good; because that day was principally noted and obserued, and vnto posterity a day most memorable. Was this lawfull and expedient in the time of the Law? It well beseemed, and befitted king Dauid, the type and sha∣dow, who figured our Christ. Why then should not Christ haue a day, kept and celebrated for himselfe, who is Dauids king, the lawes complement, the substance and subiect mat∣ter of the Gospell. The holy Angel of the Lord, vpon the very day of Christs birth, tooke a text concerning Christs birth, and preached thereupon vnto the Shepheards. Why should not all good Bishops, Pastors, Teachers, and all other Ministers and mēbers of Christs holy Church, yeeld & performe the same? Furthermore, And forthwith, there was with the Angell (saith S. Luke) a multitude of heauenly souldiers, praysing God, and saying: Glory to God in the highest, peace in the earth, good∣will towards men. The quiers of the holy Angels did keepe and celebrate this blessed day, of that new borne Babe: they talke of the deeds and effects thereof, in their Sermon and in their song. The shepheards they publish it: Christs mother ponders it. Why should not other holy men and women do also the same? vnlesse they will staine themselues with the tincture and pollution of most lothsome ingratitude, and proofe of all Gods creatures, and of all that professe religion, the most vnthankfull.
Lastly, the reformed Churches (to speake but one word more) who vnto them and vs may in this case be an exam∣ple, neither do now, or euer did deny, the keeping of these and other dayes and feasts. The which may appeare, both by the Sermons, workes, words and practise, of the most orthodoxe Ministers, and may be seene also, by the decrees & constitutions, of national and prouincial synodes; as also, out of that Harmony of Confessions of the reformed Churches, the 16. Section. Methinkes then, that men should not carry themselues, so rudely and vncharitably, or to open their mouths, so wide and vnreuerently, against their mother the Church of Eng∣land (and all other godly reformed Churches in Christen∣dome) as do the factious sectaries, or Anabaptisticall Recu∣sants, who giue out in their libels and contentious pamph∣lets, that the celebration of Aduent, the feast of the Natiuitie of Christ, of Easter, of Christs Ascension, and the feast of Pentecost, is either Iewish, or Antichristian and Popish. For if they, or any other such greene heads were not, some of them selfe-conceited, some hood-winked, others wilfully blind and deafe, they might easily heare, and most cleerly see by com∣paring and combining the sacred Scriptures of the Old and New Testament together, culled out by the Church for these purposes, as also by that generall connexion and mu∣tuall coincidence, and consequence one vpon another, that their opinion, as it is very erroneous: so is it vnto o∣thers, and themselues very dangerous. But to leaue them, and to come to our selues (which are of another mind) that we may proceed in our intended pur∣pose: Let vs behold and consider, the choice that is made, for this first Sonday in Aduent, which is very singular, most effectuall, and to very good purpose, as seruing to front all the Aduent Sondaies, yea and all the rest of the Sondaies, in the yeare.
The first Sonday in Aduent.Christs first coming. FOR the two first Scriptures taken out of the old Testament, aportioned for the two first Lessons, for morning and euening prayer this day, taken out of the prophesie of Esay, do giue a true and certaine knowledge of our Lords coming indeed. First, like a iust Iudge, to rate, reproue and punish the grieuous sinnes of the Iewes. Secondly, like a mercifull God, to forgiue the sinnes of the penitent. Thirdly, and like a general God, that is both of Iewes and Gentiles, to gather a generall and vniuersall Church of them both, to glorifie his name here, and to be partakers of hea∣uens glory for euer hereafter. The third Scripture, chosen for the Epistle, doth by the spirit of God, in that Choice-teacher for the Gentiles, make vse of Christs Aduent, and the former doctrines: by exhor∣ting Gods people to awake out of sleepe; seeing he is come that hath saluation vnder his wings: Sith the night of the Law and Ignorance is past, and the day of cleere Knowledge, the Day-light of the Gospell is at hand, the day-spring from on high hath visited vs. The generall drift and pur∣pose of the gos∣pell.The fourth and last Scripture, taken out of Christs holy Gospell (and thereupon, fitly taketh the name of The Gos∣pell for the day) confirmeth by effect, and by the deeds of Christ, the truth of his comming: by a true relation of time, place, manner, end, and other testimonies of his Aduent. 1 That the Iewes might be confirmed. 2 And the Gentiles comforted in their Sauiour and sal∣uation. Thus much haue I, by the assistance of Gods spirit, thought good to declare, as touching the reason and occasion, of the choice of these foure holy Scriptures for this day: as tou∣ching
their generall drift, scope, and vse, and as touching the harmony, and sweet musicke of them all, concording and agreeing in one. Now of the particular methode, resolution, and distribution, of such chiefe doctrines, as do arise natu∣rally out of the text of each and euery of them. The first of the foure,1 Lesson for morning praier Isay 1. is the first chapter of the holy booke of that Euangelicall Prophet Isay, appointed for the first Les∣son, or chapter of instructions, for the Morning prayer, and seruice of God in our congregations. Wherein Iehouah the Father, by the mouth of his Prophet Isay, First, crieth out aloud, against his people the Iewes,The parts and chiefe doctrines of the chapter, 1 An earnest reproofe of the Iewes: and why. be∣cause in their spirituall hearing, vnderstanding and percei∣uing, they were worse then the heauens, and the earth, the Oxe, and the Asse, whom God appealeth vnto: and there∣fore soundly reproueth both Princes and people. 1 For theit want of the sense and feeling of Gods iudge∣ments. 2 And for their hypocriticall seruing of him with their outward and ceremoniall obseruances alone, without in∣ward truth and sinceritie, from the 1 verse of the chapter to the end of the 15 verse. 2 The Lord calleth his people to repentance, to faith,2 A calling them to repen∣tance. and to obedience, verse 16, to the end of the 19 verse. In the third place, Iehouah menaceth the disobedient and rebellious, with grieuous punishments,3 A threatning of them. to light vpon them for the sinnes of the Princes and people. verse 20. to the end of the 24. In the fourth part of the chapter,4 An offer of mercy, & a de∣nouncing of iudgement. the Lord offereth mer∣cy and redemption, vnto the remnant which are penitent: and denounceth iudgements against the obstinate and idola∣ters, verse 25, to the end of the 31 verse, the last verse of the chapter. The second of our selected Scriptures,1 Lesson for euening praier. Isay 2. is the second chapter of Isaies prophecie, and is set apart for the first Les∣son or chapter of instructions for the euening seruice of this day: whose order and analyse is this.
1 A promise of saluation to Iewes & Gen∣tiles in the last dayes.First, there is a gracious prophecie of Gods fauour in Christ Iesus, vnto his people the Iewes, and a promise of their saluation in the last dayes and times of the world, and that all the nations of the world (as well as the people of the Iewes) shall be partakers of this Aduent, light and saluation purchased by Christ Iesus, who is described also. Yea, the manner of his kingdome, and vsage of his people, is liuely set forth by the Prophet, verse 1. to the end of the 5 verse. 2 An acknow∣ledgement of their vnwor∣thinesse.In the second part of the chapter, the Prophet taking v∣pon him the person and partie of the people of the Iewes, doth acknowledge their vnworthinesse of this fauor of God, to be restored to their former estate, to be pitied or redee∣med by Christ, and sheweth that they are rather worthy of punishments, and to be forsaken by reason of their idola∣try. Verse 6, to the end of the 9 verse. 3 Exhortation to preuent the iudgements of God.In the third place, the people are exhorted by the Pro∣phet to repentance, to preuent these iudgements of God, whereof he doth seuerally make mention. Verse 10, to the end of the 18 verse. 4 A prophesie of some mens vaine and idle repentance.In the fourth and last part, the Prophet foretelleth, how some shall returne and repent for their idolatry after a sort, not with a repentance and godly sorrow: but rather in the iust iudgement of God, they shall shew the vanity, and a kind of detestation of their idols (whether they will or no) though not with a full purpose to forsake them. Verse 19, to the end of the 22, which is the end of the chapter. Epistle.Our third text of holy Scripture, is a portion of the 13 chapter of S. Pauls epistle to the Romanes verse 8, to the end of the 14 verse, which is the end of the chapter.Rom. 13. v. 8. to the end of the chapter. Wherein the spirit of God by the pen of the holy Apostle shewes to Gods Church, what vse they are to make of the doctrines concerning the Aduent and comming of Christ. And here by the way we may obserue, the wise and no∣table choice of the Scriptures for our English Leitourgie. That as they begin with Scriptures conteining forcible ex∣hortations vnto the performance of loue, in doing the du∣ties
of the second Table. So do they proceed in this course, in many of their elections, and they knit vp the most of their choises of texts for the Sondayes after Trinitie, with such kind of Scriptures. For here in the Epistle for this first Sonday in Auent we haue first an exhortation to brotherly and neighbourly loue. verse 7, to the end of the 10. Secondly, the doctrine of Christs Aduent, whereupon this exhortation is grunded. verse 11. And thirdly, the vse of this dctrine, verse 12. Fourthly, the triall and exmination of our obedience to these exhortations, by the effects vers. 13.14. Fist, the exhortation conteineth a peremptorie comman∣dement, to owe the debt of loue to all men, whereto are an∣nexed three strong reasons, the first in the 8: a second in the 9; and a third in the 10. verse. Secondly the doctrine,2 Part of the Epistle, is do∣ctrine. which toucheth the comming of Christ, and light of the Gospell is propounded in two phra∣ses. The first is, And that considering the season. vers. 11. The second phrase is, the night is past and the day is at hand. vers. 12. The third part of the text, is the vse of this doctrine,3 The vse of this doctrine is exhortation. by exhortation to three duties. First, to arise from sleepe, the reason whereof is, For now our saluation is neerer, then when we beleeued. ver. 11. Secondly, to cast away the workes of darknesse. Thirdly, to put on the armour of light. vers. 12. The fourth part of the text is,4 Triall of our obedience to the exhortati∣on, which will appeare by the effects. concerning the triall and examination of our obedience, and right hearkning to these exhortations, which will appeare by generall and speciall effects: generall by our walking honestly, as in the day. ve. 13. Speciall effects are twofold, consisting first in leauing off, and ceasing from euill, secondly, in cleauing to, and em∣bracing the good. The euill is particularized by the speci∣als, some euils being reckoned vp for all the rest, as first gluttony, secondly drunkennesse, thirdly chambering, fourth∣ly wantonnesse, fifthly strife, sixthly enuying: wherein Gods people may not walke, that is delight, verse 13. The good is propounded two wayes. First, in being cloathed with
Christ, Put ye on the Lord Iesus Christ. Secondly, in being vnclothed with the flesh (he meanes with the worst part of the flesh) that is, the lusts of the flesh, and take no thought for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof, vers. 14. Gospel.Our fourth portion of Scripture is Math. 21. ver. 1, to the end of the 13 v.Math. 21. v. 1 to the ende of the 13. whereof there be these three parts. First, the commandement of our Lord Iesus Christ, to the two disciples,1 Part of the Gos. is Christs cōmandement. to fetch the asse and the colt, from the 1. v. to the end of the 5. v. Secondly, the obedience and ioyfull seruiceablenesse of the disciples.2 Obedience to this commen∣dement. v. 6. & 7. Thirdly, the effects of Christs iourney, and riding to Hie∣rusalem,3 The effects of Christs riding and comming to Hierusalem. in the rest of the verses. The first effect that it tooke, was in the great multitude, whereof first, some spread their garments in the way: secondly, other some cut downe branches from the trees, and strewed them in the way.1 Effect in the great multi∣tude. v. 8. The second effect was in the people that went before, and which followed after,2 Effect, in the people which praied to God, & praised God. to wit, first, their praying to God with Hosannah: secondly, their praising of God with Halleluiah for that sight and benefit. v. 9. 3 Effect, the common mul∣titude were troubled.The third effect which Christs iourney wrought, was in the common sanctorum, viz. all the city, who were troubled and much moued; and therefore moued a question, saying, Who is this. vers. 10. The resolution and answer whereof is made by the people, the concomitants, precedents and sub∣sequents of Iesus, who because their hearts beleeued, their mouths confessed, saying, This is Iesus the Prophet of Na∣zareth in Galile. v. 11. 4 Part of this Gospell is con∣cerning the end why Christ came to Hieru∣salem.The fourth part of this text containes the purpose and end of Christs comming to Hierusalem: namely, to visit his Tem∣ple, to go into his Temple, and that is for these two ends. First, to preach to them, and that vpon this text, Mine house shall be called the house of Prayer. vers. 13. The second end was to practise his preaching, which (as it was with authoritie, and not as the Scribes▪) so he practised
as effectually,Christs second coming. & as perfectly in casting out all them that sold and bought in the Temple, in ouerthrowing and rooting vp what soeuer his heauenly Father had not planted. verse 12. The second Sonday in Aduent. AS the foure holy Scriptures for the former Sunday made mention of Christs Aduent and coming to his old people, and to the Temple of the Iewes:Coherence of these 4 with the other 4 scri∣ptures going before. so these foure for this day do declare and shew the further spreading of the wings of Gods fauour in Iesus Christ towards the Gentiles. For the Gospel-like Prophet Esay in the two first Lessons,Generall sūme of the two first Lessons. chosen out for this dayes seruice, speakes most euidently and certainely of Christs Aduent to the Gentiles, of his gra∣cious calling of the nations vnto the light of the Gospell, of his coming to vs with such glory and brightnesse, that the Moone shall be abashed, and the Sunne ashamed of their light, when the Lord of hosts shall raigne in mount Sion and Hierusalem. S. Paul the teacher of the Gentiles,Generall sūme of the epistle and gospell. in a portion of his Epi∣stle to the Romanes (which were Gentiles) chosen out for the Epistle in his doctrine exhortatiue, confirmeth the calling of the Gentiles. And our Lord Iesus Christ, S. Pauls maister and ours, preacheth a Sermon (which S. Luke recordeth) concerning Christs second Aduent, his comming to iudge∣ment at the end of the world, wherein Iewes and Gentiles shall be finally called to their last account. The first Lesson for morning prayer this day is,Mor. Prayer. 1 Lesson Isay 5. the first chapter of Isaies prophecie, containing these principall heads of doctrine. First,The parts. the Lord by way of exprobation recapitulates ma∣ny great fauours and mercies vouchsafed to his people and Church of the Iewes. v. 1, to a part of the 4.1 A rehearsall of many great fa∣uours shewed. Secondly, the Lord in the exposition of the song and parable of the vineyard,2 How the Iews abused these mercies of god. declareth what vse (or rather what abuse) the Iewes made of all Gods mercies shewed toward
them from thence to the end of the 7 verse. 3 A grieuous denunciation for their grie∣uous iniquities, to wit, against the Ingrossers of lands and hou∣ses, Ingrossers of drinke & plea∣sures, Obstinate and violent in sin, Proud Philau∣tist, Mightie drin∣kers, and swi∣nish beasts.Thirdly, the Prophet of God (beholding their vnthank∣fulnesse and wickednesse) falleth to his obiurgation and grieuous denouncing of woes and curses against these trees that brought forth such fruit. First, against the couetous tree bringing forth the corrupt fruits of ingrossing of commodi∣ties, as houses and lands, of oppressing and grinding the poores faces. verse 8.9. and 10. Secondly, against the in∣grossers of drinke and pleasures, against greedy drunkards and epicures, making a god of their pleasure. verse 11. to the end of the 17. Thirdly, against the stiffe Okes and hard beames, to wit, first, such wicked ones as draw iniquity with cords of vanitie. v. 18.19. Secondly, such as speake euill of good, &c. vers. 20. Thirdly, against the stiffe in their owne con∣ceit, the selfe-conceited, the Philautist. ver. 21. Fourthly, a∣gainst the mightie guzzelers and stiffe or hard drinkers, which bring out of that swinish and beastly tree, most filthy and loathsome fruit, and shall haue a plague and iudgement proportionable to their contagious and infectiue iniquity. verse 22. to the end of the 25 verse. 4 A prophecie of the Gentiles calling.In the fourth part of the chapter there is a prophecie con∣cerning Christs coming to call the Gentiles, to plant a Church of them, that the Lord may see whether they will bring forth any better fruits then the Iewes did. verse 26, to the end of the 30, which is the end of the chapter. Euen. Prayer. 1 Less. Isay 24.The first Lesson for Euening prayer, is the 24 of Isay, which may be distributed into these chiefe heads, 1 Curses are denounced a∣gainst the Iews, and why.First, the Prophet pronounceth and denounceth, vnto, and against the defectiue Iewes, Gods curses and plagues v∣pon the earth and inhabitants thereof; vpon the soules of the people, and of the Priest and Ruler of the people, as also vpon others of the body oeconomicke, and the body poli∣ticke. And in like manner he pronounceth the curses that are to come vpon the fruits of the earth, vpon the chiefe trees, as the vine which should yeeld the most cordiall liquor. And all this the Lord doth for their wickednesse,
and departing from him; therfore all ioy is darkened, and the mirth of the world is gone wy ver, 1. to the end of the 12. In the second place the Prophet makes mention of the calling of the Gentiles to magnifie the Lord,2 The Gentils are called to magnifie Gods name. with that rem∣nant of Iewes which shall be reserued for saluation, Who shal praise the Lord in the valleys, in the Iles of the sea: yea, the Kings of the world that are vpon the earth, shall be gathered together, an shall showte, for the magnificence of the Lord. They shall be gathered together, as the prisoners in the pit, and they shall be shut vp in the prison, and after many daies shall they be visited. Then the Moone shall be abashed. &c. and glory shall be before his ancient men. Ver. 13. to the end of the 23. the end of the chapter. The third part of holy Scripture for this day is,Epistle. Rom. 15. v. 4.14. a part of the 15. chap. to the Romans. ver. 4. to the end of the 14. ver. containing these principall points. The first is, Saint Paules illatiue doctrine,1 Doctrine il∣laiue. or proposition inferred vpon the premisses. For whatsoeuer things are written, they are written for our learning, &c. Ver. 4. The second is the Apostles prayer to God for the Ro∣mans, Now the God of patience and consolation &c. Ver. 5. & 6.2 Prayer. The third is his exhortation.3 Exhortation. Wherefore receiue ye one ano∣ther, as Christ also receiued vs to the glory of God. Ver. 7. The fourth is,4 Confirmati∣on of the ex∣hortation. the confirmation and ground of this ex∣hortation. First by the Apostles peremptory proposition, drawne from the office of Christ, and the end of that office. Now I say that Iesus Christ was a minister of the circumcision for the truth of God, to confirme the promises made vnto the Fathers, Ver. 8. The second kind of proofe and confirmation is by foure quotations of holy scripture, three out of the Psalmes, and one out Esaies prophecy cited in the 9▪ 10.11. & 12. Verses.5 Another prayer concei∣ued vpon the former occa∣sions. The fift point of this portion of Scripture is another prayer, which the Apostle conceiueth vpon the former occa∣sions of doctrine. Now the God of hope fill you with all ioy and
peace in beleeuing, that he may abound in hope through the power of the holy Ghost. Ver. 13. The sixt and last, is the good conceit and opinion that Saint Paul had conceiued of the Romaines,6 S. Pauls good opinion of the Romanes. causing him thus to write vnto them, and in this manner to speake and pray for them. And I my selfe also am perswaded of you my bretheren, that ye are full of goodnesse, filled with all knowledge, and are able to admonish one another, verse 14. Gospell. Luke 21.25.33. The agreemēt betweene this & the former.The fourth portion of holy Scripture, the Gospell for this day is the 21. of Luke, verse, 25. to the end of the 33. Which being compared with the three formerly chosen, it will euidently appeare, what a sweete agreement and con∣nexion there is among them, to confirme this Aduent of Christ, and calling of the Gentils: and to maintaine the in∣fallible certainty and assurance of the full redemption and saluation both of Iewes and Gentiles. Christ Iesus hauing occasion offered him to prophecy and foretell the signes of Hierusalems destruction, ariseth much higher, & preacheth of the signes preceeding the end of the world.Christs princi∣pall purpose in this Gospell: a reason of the choife hereof. He discourseth (I say) of his second coming to iudgement, bringing a more generall and more grieuous desolation, then euer was heretofore from the beginning of the world. And here withall in this second Aduent of his (appointed by the Church to be taught for this second Sonday in Aduent) he principally makes mentiō of the end and purpose of this his Aduent: to wit, the perfect redemp∣tion of their soules and bodies, as he saith: When these things begin to comt to passe, then looke vp and lift vp your heads, for your redemption draweth neere.Analise of the Gospell in ge∣nerall. Our Lord in this Gospell, by the pen of Saint Luke (that happy Physition for the soule and the body) doth first acquaint vs with the signes immediat∣ly foresheweing Christs coming, with a description of the Aduent, or coming it selfe. ver. 25.26.27. The second is a most comfortable vse, that both they and we, Iewes, and Gentiles, are to make of this our Lords com∣ing and second Aduent, ver. 28 to the end of the 33. This is
the generall suruey of the text. In more parts to diuide it (that we may see each and euery parcell thereof,Parts of the Gospell special. when it is laid open and dissected) let vs giue good eare vnto our Preacher the great Rabbi and do∣ctor, who by a Synecdoche, taking some parts principall for the whole, and euery singular, tels vs: first, that there shall be signes of this his Aduent: first, in the superiour, coelesti∣all, and irrationall bodies: to wit, the Sunne, the Moone,1 Signes in di∣uerse sorts of creatures. the Starres, in the inferiour, and sublunary, the earth, the sea, the waters. Secondly, in the rationals and animals, as first trouble among the nations, with perplexity, ver. 25. Secondly, he sheweth the effect of this trouble, which shall be this. Mens hearts shall faile them for feare, and for loo∣king after those things, &c. Ver. 26. Secondly, he shewes vs,2 Subsequent or sequele of these signes. what shall be the subsequent or consequent of these signes: to wit, Men seeing the Son of man coming in a cloud with power and great glory, Ver. 27. Concer∣ning the vse of these signes and Christs coming, it is deliue∣red: First, with a couragious Attendite and most comfor∣table exhortation, to be encouraged,How Christ deliuers the vse of these signes. not discouraged at the signes, but rather 1. to looke vp, 2. and to lift vp their heads, our Sauiour inducing one gook reason for both: which is this, For the redemption draweth neere, ver. 28. Secondly, he beats the vse of these signes into men heads with a sound mallet, and beetles of a figge-tree, and all other trees. the Protasis whereof is in the 29. and 30. ver. the: Apo∣dosis ver. 31. so likewise ye when yee see these things, &c. Thirdly,3 His strong proofe to con∣firme all. that the elect and people of God might here∣in be so confirmed, as nothing in heauen nor in earth should cause them to quaile. He prooues all that he hath spoken with his most vsuall and vehement asseueration of the truth of two signes. Verily I say vnto you, that this age shall not passe (1. some of the Iewes shall remaine when the last signe shall be seene) till all these things be fulfilled. Ver. 32. The second of these two, and the last signe that shall be after all eternities, is the perpetuity and eternity of Gods truth: to wit, though
heauen and earth shall passe (which is the last signe of all) yet Gods word shall not passe away; that is to say,Certainty of Christs coming. either in this do∣ctrine now deliuered, or any other clause or title of Gods word whatsoeuer, ver. 33. The third Sonday in Aduent. Connexin of these with the ormer.THe Scrptures of God, chosen out for this third, and for the fourth Sonday in Aduent, must needs in the generall scope agree with the rest before going: sith the occasion of the choice is generally all one, which is, to confirme vnto the Church of God the truth of the first, and the certainty of the second coming of their Sauiour Christ. Generall sūme of the first two.The two Scriptures of the old Testament, taken out of Isaies Prophecie, seected for the two first Lessons this day, doe Prophetically, and yet plainely declare and proue the same. In the first whereof euery true member of the Church thanks God for that benefite and sauour of God in Christ, diuisim. And in the second, the chosen of God continue that holy song,Generall sūme of the Epistle & Gospell. for that vnspeakeble benefite, coniunctim. The first of the Scriptures of the new Testament, doth for this cause, bid men to liue in hope, and patiently to expect, in forbid∣ding men to iudge any thing before the time, vntill the Lord come who will lighten things that are hid in drkenesse. &c. In the second, our greatest Lord and teacher himselfe vpon Iohn Baptists question. Art thou he that should come, &c. Remised this message, vnto his herbenger. Go and shew Iohn what things ye haue heard and seene. Mor. Prayer. 1 Lesson, Isay 25.The first Lesson for morning prayer is, Isay 25. which doth containe a speciall kind of praising God, and full of feeling: wherein euery child of God doth in particular, apply the coming of Christ and his redemption vnto him∣selfe. Parts.The chapter may be distributed into these chiefe heads.
1. containing a forme and manner of the thanksgiuing,1 A forme of gratulation. the words thereof. O Lord thou art my God, I will exalt thee, I will praise thy name. Ver. 1. And in that day shall men say: loe, this is our God we haue waited for him, and he will saue vs: this is the Lord, we haue waited for him, and we will reioyce and be ioy∣full in his saluation. Ver. 9. The second is the motiue and foundation of this gratula∣tion,2 The ground of this gratu∣lation. which is, 1. either, generall in the first verse, contai∣ning the specials. For thou hast done wonderfull things accor∣ding to the counsels of old, with a stable truth, 2. Or speciall, which is manifold, containing many reasons, yet all of them drawne from two strong places: 1. from the iustice of God, in executing of his iudgements vpon the rebellious and dis∣obedient Iewes, or any other, Ʋer. 1. to the end of the 5, or from his mercy and louing fauour, in calling, sanctifying, and offering saluation by meanes of his Son Iesus Christ, vnto his chosen people of all nations ver. 6. to the end of the 12. which is the end of the chapter. The 26. chapter of Isay is the first Lesson for euening prayer,Eue. Prayer. 1 Less. Isay 26. wherein the Prophet foretelleth what complicate & combined ioy there shall be of Gods ppl together assem∣bled, or in speaking and singing in their hearts all one song concernng Christs coming, & bringing wih him sauation, which he shall set for wals and bulwarkes. The chapter giues vs a view and sight of these principall points. First,Parts. the Prophet propounds the substance & ditty of this generall and Catholicke song.1 The ditty of this Catholick song. ver. 1. In that day shall this song be sung in the land of Iudah, we haue a strong city: saluation shal God set, for wals and bulwarkes. The second is, that vse which the Prophet makes of this song,2 The vse of the song. by his exhortation. ver. 2.3.4. The third is the ground and reasons, whereupon these exhortations are founded:3 The reasons and ground of the exhortatiō. drawne First, from the experience of Gods power, in taking a∣way the lets and hinderances vnto the saluation of his peo∣ple. 2. from the experience of his fauour vnto all the godly,
in generall to the Prophet, and each godly man in speciall, Verse. 5. to the end of the 21. verse. which is the end of the chapter. For▪ lo, the Lord cometh out of his place, to visite the iniquity of the inhabitants of the earth vpon them, and the earth shall disclose her bloud, and shall no more hide her slaine. What meane these speeches? who shall performe this & more then this? But our God in Christ, and by Christ. Christ, I say, God with vs, and man for vs and in vs: He did it at his first coming, by himselfe immediatly and in mercy, when he played the Priest and the Prophet by his mercifull and gra∣cious ministery. He shall do it at his second coming, when he shall act the part of a King, the King of Kings, and sole Iudge of Kings, to iudge Kings, and all others in the world, as he sits in his glorious throane and tribunall of Maiesty, Epistle.In the third portion of Scripture selected for this day, 1. Cor 4.1. to the end of the 5. verse,1. Cor. 4.1. to the 5. ver. we haue an Apostolicall exhortation, as before a Propheticall, touching Christs me∣diate ministery, and his coming to vs by the Ministers of his word and disposers of his secrets, That we may cary such a reuerent esteeme and opinion of them as their places deserue, and as becommeth vs. The Text broken vp hath these parts, 1 Pauls exhor∣tions.First S. Pauls exhortation, which is double, 1. concerning other mens respect and iudgement of the Ministers, ver. 1. 2. concerning the ministers carriage and respecting them∣selues, that they may be accounted indeed, and not in word, the Ministers of Christ & worthy disposers of Gods secrets, ver. 2. 2 Pauls resolu∣tiō concerning his censurers.The second part containeth the Apostles owne resolutiō, concerning other mens estimation and iudgement of him∣selfe. ver. 3.4. 3 Pauls exhor∣tation tou∣ching this point of censu∣ring.The third containeth his concluding exhortation, as tou∣ching this point of iudgement and censuring: limiting it vn∣to the time of the Lotds coming, who being the great censu∣rer of all, will then make it appeare, who hath iudged right∣ly and with commendation at Gods hand. ver. 5.
The fourth portion of Scripture for this day,Gospell. is Math 11.2, to the end of the 10 ver.Mat 11.2. to the 10. deliuering vnto vs two most wor∣thy demonstrations of the vndoubted truth & certainty of this powerful & gratious Aduent, & coming of Iesus Christ. The fist is that answere which S. Iohns Schollers carried to their Maister,1 Demonstra∣tion of Christs comig as touching the infallible certainty of Christs coming (for this was Iohns question) ve. 2. to the end of the 6. ver. The second is our Lords testimony,2 Christs own testimony to confirme Iohns mi∣nistery, and consequently the inuiolable truth of his owne coming, in the 7. 8. 9. & 10 verses. The former of these de∣monstrations containes, 1. a question moued by Iohn Baptist (though he was in prison) in the 2. & 3. verses, 2. an answere made by Christ in the 4.5. & 6. verses, The latter compre∣hends a patheticall question, thrice repeated by Christ, cō∣cerning Iohns person and ministerie, and by himselfe answe∣red, 1. negatiuey , in the 7. & 8, verses, 2. affirmatiue∣ly  in the 9. and 10. verses. The fourth Sonday in Aduent. THe neerer that we come to the parcels of Scripture which do manifest and make plaine to vs the vncon∣troueable truth of the incarnation and birth of our Lord Iesus Christ,Coherence of these with the the former Scriptures. the more euident and perspicuous are the pas∣sages of holy Scripture, which the Fathers of the Church haue chosen, to verifie the truth of his Aduent. Of his first and of his second, his generall and sufficient coming for the good of all, in offering himselfe vnto all, both bad and good Iewes and gentiles. Of his particular and effectuall coming for the saluation of all the elect onely, for each of them, and euery of them. For we may heare how God by Isay, 1. cryeth out against the rebellious house of the Iewes, & that is one kind of com∣ing to them, as bad as they were. And in the other Scripture,
for the euening,Summe of the 2 first Lessons, Summe of the Epistle & Gos. God by his Prophet most plainely dothSpeciall demonstrations of Christs coming to all people. speake of Christ his Sonne, who shall raigne in, iustice and the Princes shall rule in iudgement. What better vse and application can be made of these doctrines then that which Saint Paul deliuers in our text for the Epistle? Doth not S. Iohn the Euangelist take the same course, in prouing the coming of Christ, which Christ himselfe did, in the former Gospell. Math. 11. The first Lesson for morning prayer is, Isay 30.Mar. prayer. 1 Les. Isay 30. compre∣hending these doctrines. Parts.First the Prophet preaches wo and iudgements against the rebellious children, & people of the Iewes,1 Iudgements are denounced against the di∣strusting Iewes. for their ma∣nifold wickednesse: and namely for consulting with, and trusting in the Aegyptians, when they were in distresse & not trusting in the liuing God ver. 1. to the end of the 7. 2 Against te contemning Iewes.Secondly, the Iewes are taxed for their contempt of Gods word in the mouth of the Seers and Prophets: for the which they are sure to be plagued, as for their distrust in God and relying vpon the strength of man, ve. 8. to the end of the 17. Thirdly, the Prophet preacheth of the Lords Longani∣mity and expectation of the conuersion of these refractary Iewes,3 God expects the Iewes con∣uersion, & the Gentils calling and of the calling of the Gentiles by the preaching of Christs Gospell, by the preaching of the plentifulnes of Gods mercy in Christ (resembled vnto riuers and streames of water) the plentifulnesse of his spirit like a riuer that ouerflow∣eth to the necke, and by the preaching of his iudgements to light vpon his enimies ver. 18.33. which is the end of the chapter. Eue. Prayer. 1 Les. Isay 32.The 32. chapter of this Prophecy is the first Lesson for euening prayer, affoarding and teaching these doctrines. Parts.First, there is a Prophecy of the kingdome of Christ,1 A prophecie of Christs kingdome. shewing what manner of gouernment it shall be, and what shal be the effects thereof, as in the conuersion of the blind, the foolish and niggard &c. to see their ignorance, folly & wickednesse, ver. 1. to the end of the 8. ver.
Secondly, the Prophet foretelleth the desolations of Hie∣rusalem,2 Of Hierusalēs desolation. and forewarnes the dainty women to consider there∣of, whom it also concerned. v. 9. to the end of the 14. Thirdly,3 He tels when these things shall be effe∣cted. the Lord by his Prophet telleth the people when these things shall come to passe, and how long their miseries shall continue among them: to wit, till the Lord Ie∣sus do come, till he send the plenteousnesse of his spirit from aboue, by his Sonne Christ, by the ministery of his Apostles, and prophets in the latter daies, ver. 15. to the end of the 20. which is the end of the chapter. A part of the fourth chapter of S. Pauls pistle to the Philippians ver. 4.Epistle. Phi. 4.4. to the end of the 8. is the Epistle for this day: wherein The Apostle makes the Aduent and second coming of Christ the ground of his exhortation,The ground of the Apostles ex∣hortation. and of the Philippians reioycing. The parts of this text are, First, exhortation: secondly, dehortation: thirdly,Parts of the E∣pistle. 1 Exhortation. 2 Benefite of obedience to it. 3 Dehortation from distractiō. the good and benefite redounding to them, through their obe∣dience and hearkning to these exhortations and dehortati∣ons. The exhortations is, 1 To reioycing, v. 4. 2 To patience in distresses, and expectation of the Lords coming: vnto both which is annexed the reason and certainty of Christs com∣ing. ver. 5. He dehorts from distraction and immoderate care and trouble of minde, in these dangerous daies, exhorting them, 1. to prayer, 2 to supplication, 3 to thanksgiuing. v. 6. The benefite they shall reape by hearkning to this good exhortation and counsell of the Apostle,The benefite of obedience to the exhortaton is the custodie of their hearts in peace. is propounded to be a preseruation of their hearts and minds in Christ Iesus, by the best and safest keeper and custodie of all: which is, the peace of God, which psseth all vnderstanding. ver. 7. The fourth chosen Scripture, which is our Gospell for this day, is a part of the first chapter of Saint Iohns Gospell. verse 1.9. to the end of the 28 verse, differing from the for∣mer precedent Gospell in the speciall. For Christ, the way
and the truth,Speciall demonstration of Christs incarnation. doth in the sore-going Gospell giue testimo∣ny vnto Iohns ministery.The difference betweene this and the former Gospell. But here Iohn testifieth of him∣selfe, being thereunto vrged: as also of the vertue, power, and diuine efficacy of Christ his Lord and maisters mini∣stery. Parts A twofold re∣stfi ation by a dialogue. Speakers are twofold.This text comprehends a twofold testification of Saint Iohn the Baptist deliuered vnto vs by way of a dialogue: (for he Testifieth either of himselfe or of Christ his maister) The interocutors are, the Pharisaicall Priests and Leuites, Secondly, or Iohn the Baptist. They are the cauesling questionists, he is the defendant and answerer, cuīus partes tutiores & saniores sunt quàm op∣ponentium. These Sophisters do propound vnto S. Iohn foure sorts of questions.Sophisters pro∣pound foure questions▪ The first is, Quis es?1 Quis es? in the 19 verse, answered in the 20. verse. The second is, Quid tum? or vtrum?2 Quid tum? or virum. ver. 21. answered ne∣gatiuely, in the same verse, The third is Qualis es?3 Qualis es? vnder the word quis es? as if they had said, what kind of place hast thou? what office bearest thou? of what calling art thou? that we may giue a direct answere concerning thine office, to them that sent vs, &c. verse 22. answered in these words, I am the voyce of him that cryeth in the wildernesse. ver. 23. The fourth and last question is, Quamobrem,4 Quamobrem? Why bap∣tisest thou then? if thou bee not Christ, nor Elias, &c. verse 25. The answere to this expostulating Quare, or Quamobrem, is, I baptise with water, but there is one among you, whom you know not ver. 26. he it is that commeth after me &c. ver. 27.
The Natiuity of our Lord Iesus Christ, commonly (but truely) called Christ∣mas day. SVch is the truth and constancy of Gods promises,Connexion of this feast with the former Sondaies. which in Iesus Chrst are yea & amen; that though heauē & earth shall passe. yet on iot or title thereof shall neuer passe. For that which the Father hath in times past foretold by the mouth of his Prophets, he hath now fulfilled and performed it, in sending his Sonne, in the similitude of sinfull flesh, to be borne of a sinner (though not conceiued in sinne) to be borne for sinners of all sorts and degrees of people, which belong to saluation. As then vpon this day there is a solemne feast celebrated of the Christian reformed Churches (but not of the factious conuenticles,Vse of the doct∣rines culled out for this day, & the other three holidayes. and seditious Assemblies) so there are such fundamentall points of religion selected, and culled out to be handled, both for the day it selfe, and the concomitant holidaies: as Gods people may therein take infinite causes of inward and outward reioycing. For,Generall sūme of the Scrip∣tures for all these holidaies▪ besides the sweete and heauenly discourses falling out for the great day it selfe, (called Christmas day) concerning the eternall Diuinitie, and true humanity, the two natures, and the three offices of our Sauiour and royall Redeemer, We haue vpon the next day after, a ratifying of this truth by the death of S. Stephen: a Deacō of the Primitiue Church, and the first Christian Martyr. Vpon the third holyday (called S. Iohns day) a strong con∣firmation of these truths by S. Iohn the Euangelist, that be∣loued Disciple of Christ. And vpon the fourth day, a notable celebration and
commemoration of the truth and time of Christs birth,Christs diuine and humane generation. (that babe and young Lambe of God) by Herods bloudy massa∣cre of such a multitude of sweete babes and innocents. Chrst hims lfe aledgeth the prophcies to proue the truth of his birth.The Scriptures of the Prophets Isay and Dauid, who (as Christ himselfe saith) do spake of him▪ where he alledgeth the booke of the Psalmes (from whence the Church hath chsen sixe for this feast) doe testifie and make mention of our Lords birth humane, of his generation diuine, and of his eternall kingdome. 6 Proper Psalmes.The 19.45. and 85. Psalmes for morning prayer, as also the 89.110. & 132. proper Psalmes for the euening do shew the truth of these doctrines vnto vs. The 19.19 Psalme analised. Psalme decla∣reth these particular points. 2 The crea∣tures teach.First, how Christ the Sonne of God, the maker of the great world, teacheth all men in generall, by the creatures, to wit, 1 heauens, 2 firmament, 3 daies, 4 nights, 5 Sunne, v. 1. to the end of the 6. 2 The word doth teach.Secondly, how the Lord God by his word in the mouth of man, that little world, with the working of the fiery spi∣rit, doth, First, conuert mans soule. Secondly, giue wisedome to the simple, Thirdly, reioyce the heart. Fourthly, giue light vnto the eyes. Reade more, from the 7 ver. to the end of the 11. concer∣ning the excellent effects, and incomparable qualities of this second Schoolemaister. The 45 Psalme,45 Psalme ana∣lised. which is the second of the proper Psalmes, intreats of a good matter, for, 1. it is of the King of Kings, Christ our Bridgroome, and 2 of his spowse the Church, 3. of the beauty, loue, and glory of both. 85 Psalme ana∣lised. 1 Generall ex∣perience of Gods loue to the Church.The third is the 85 Psalme: wherein Gods Church and people do speake, 1. generally of the loue of God in Christ, which they haue found by experience, Lord thou hast bene favourable to thy land, thou hast turned the captiuity of Iacob. ver. 1.
Secondly,2 Partieular ex∣perience there∣of. the Church intreateth of this loue of God in particular, Thou hast forgiuen the iniquity of thy people, and co∣uered all their sinnes, verse 2. Thirdy, they confirme by future prophecie,3 Confirmation & assured hope of the future performance of all. that which they haue found by precedent, and shall find by future ef∣fect, in then selues and others, Mercie and truth shall meete together, righteousnesse and peace▪ &c. verse 10. In the fourth of our proper Psalmes, which is the 89,8 Psalme ana∣lysed. the sweet singer of Israel. 2. Sam. 23.1. is rauished in spirit, and therefore by the effect of the former experience, First, he protesseth and prophecieth,1 Dauids prote∣station of praise for Gods mer∣cies herein. I will sing the mr∣cies of the Lord for euer: with my mouth will I declare thy truth, from one generation to another▪ verse 1. A reason of this his pro∣testation he rendreth, For I said, mercy shall be set vp for euer. verse 2. Secondly, he grounds his protestation,2 The ground of his protesta∣tion. and his confirma∣tion vpon a most sure foundation, Gods owne oath infalli∣ble made vnto Dauid, a true type and figure of Christ. Reade the text from the 20. verse to the end of the 37, you shall find that the Prophets doctrine is most plaine, concerning the eternall generation diuine, and the infinite eternall per∣petuity of the spirituall kingdome of Christ Iesus our Lord. In the fifth of these proper Psalmes, being in number the 110.110 Psalme analysed. 1 Dauid sings of all these points toge∣ther. 2 He confirmes it by Gods oth. First, how well doth king Dauid first sing of all these points together, to wit, the diuinitie, humanitie, kingdome and priesthood eternall of his Lord and Sauiour, The Lord sayd vnto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, &c. verse 1. Se∣condly, how doth he proue it, but by repeating Gods oath irreuocable, The Lord sware and will not repent. Thou art a Priest for euer, &c. verse 4. In the sixth of these proper Psalmes the 132,132 Psalme a∣nalysed. A relation of another oath which God hath made. Parts and con∣ēts of the oath. one of the songs of degrees, our royall Prophet tels vs of an other oath which God hath sworne, confidently made, and con∣stantly to be performed, The Lord hath sworne in truth vnto Dauid, Of the fruit of thy body will I set vpon thy throne. verse 11. Here,
1 Christs king∣dome.First, God by Dauids mouth doth prophecie,Christs kingdome, priesthood & prophecie. that Christ shall be borne a King, of the royall stocke and tribe of Iudah, Dads fmily. Second y God confirmeth this point con∣cerning the perpetuitie of Christs spirituall kingdome,2 Cōfirmation of the perpetui∣ty of this king∣dome. that howsoeuer the Iewes and other enemies deale with Christ and his church; yet vpon the head of Christ, his crowne shall flourish Verse 18. In our first Lesson for Morning prayer,Mor. Prayer. 1 Lest I ay 9. being Isay the 9. chapter, these doctrines of instruction are confirmed vnto vs. PartsFirst, Isay prophecieth of the certainty of Christs birth,Parts 1 Certain of Christs birth. in the preterperfect tense. Vnto vs a child is borne, and vnto vs a Sonne is giuen. Ʋerse 6. Secondly, of his diuine and eternall generation2 Diune and eternall gene∣ration. in the present tense, The mightie God, the euerlasting Father. Verse 6. Thirdly, of his perpetuall kingdome3 Perpetuity of his kingdome. in the future tense, The Prince of peace, the increase of his gouernment shall haue none end. Vorse 7. In the first Lesson for Euening prayer, being Isay, chap∣ter 7.10,Euen. Prayer. 1 Less. Isay 7.10. to the end of the 15 verse: what words can be more plaine then these, Behold a Ʋirgin shall conceiue and beare a Sonne, and she shall call his name Immanuell. Which words of the Father tetifying of the Sonne, do most preg∣nantly proue, Parts.First, the immaculate and true conception1 The true and immaculate conception. of the Virgin with Christ, That holy thing and Son of the most high, &c. Behold a Ʋirgin shall conceiue. Secondly, the certainty of Christs birth,2 The certainty of Christs birth. and beare a sonne. Thirdly, the vniting of two natures, diuine and humane in one person,3 Vniting of the two natures. The summe o the 4 scriptures of the new Te∣stament. and thou shalt call his name Immanuel. From these 8 Scriptues of the Prophets and old Testa∣ment, if we discend to foure more of the new; we shall in the cleere noone day and bright sun-shine of the Gospell, be∣hold the acting, effecting, accomplishment and vse of the fore-prophecied fauors.
For in the second Lesson for Morning prayer, Luke 2. v. 1. to the end of the 14,Mor. Prayer. 2 Less. Luke 2.1. to the 14. the Euangelist sets downe the truth of the birth of our Sauiour. First, in naming the time when, secondly, the place where, thirdly, the manner how, fourthly, the persons celestiall and terrestriall,1 Time, 2 Place 3 Maner, 4 Per∣sons the witnes∣ses. as witnesses of the ioyfull birth of this euer-bles∣sed babe. And in the Gospell for this day Saint Iohn the Euange∣list, chapter 1. to the end of the 14 verse,Gospell. Iohn 1.1 v. 14. Summe of ali the 14 verses. speakes of Christs diuine generation before ime, and so is he , verse 1. In the 14 verse, being the second generall part of our Gospell for this great feast, the beloued disciple tels vs out of these words, And the word was made flesh, and dwelt a∣mong vs, &c. that in time, the creator of time, in the fulnesse of time had his humane generation and cohabitation in the tabernacle of our flesh, and so is he , though not : So that this very , which is, , to and with God the Father, is for our sakes become the Sonne of man, and of the same substance of his mother, a perfect man of a reasonable soule, and humane flesh subsi∣sting. Epistle. Hebrewes 1.1. to the end of the 13.The Author of the Epistle to the Hebrewes, chap. 1. v. 1, to the end of the 13, giues vs to vnderstand, that God hath fa∣uoured vs more in these latter dayes, then he did the fathers in former times, verse 1. First, in speaking to vs by his Sonne.1 God speakes to vs by his Sonne, verse 2.Generall sūme and particular analyse. Secondly, in shewing vs that he is the true Prophet.2 Christ is the true Prophet, verse 2. Thirdly, the Author of this Epistle describes, first, the person of Christ in his God-head and Man-hood vnited, verse 3. And secondly, the offices of his Kingdome, Priest∣hood and prophecie. verse 3.3 Christs person is described, Fourthly, he sets forth Christs excellency aboue Angels4 Christs excel∣lency aboue Angels, and all creatures, in these his offices of Kingdome, Priest∣hood and prophecie. verse 4.5.6.7. Fifthly, he proues the eternity of his kingdome5 The eternity of his kingdom. after all
creatures terrestriall and celestiall. verse 8. &c.Christs true and immaculate birth. Eue. Prayer. 2 Les Titus 3.4. The end and vse of all the former fauors.In the second Lesson for Euening prayer, Titus 3.4. to the end of the 8. A scripture concluding the Seruice of this high and solemne day, S. Paul shewes the vse of all these premised fauours, and the end, or rather the ends why God hath thus dealt with vs, 1 Our saluationFirst, that we might be made heires of eternall life. verse 7. 2 Our obediēceSecondly, that we beleuing in God, might be carefull to shew forth good workes, verse 8. Vse of all these 12 Scriptures, and dedicato∣graphy toge∣ther. The best Iewell we can weare at Christmas, or any other time.Thus are these eight Scriptures of the old, and foure of the new Testament (as the twelue precious stones in Aarons brooch and iewell vpon his brest) combined and set toge∣ther. That euery Christian man or woman may this Christ∣mas time weare them next their heas, as an heauenly A∣mulet and Antidote compounded by Gods true Apotheca∣ries, to preserue them from the poyson and plagues of A∣theisme, Iudaisme, Turkanisme, Papisme, Anabaptisme, pro∣fanenesse, of negligence and carelesnesse in the right man∣ner of worshipping, and in the true forme of fearing, and obeying God in Iesus Christ, by the power of the holy Ghost. Now let vs diue deeper, and search more diligently into the Gospell for this day, that we may behold that comely order which S. Iohn obserueth in it, and the heauenly lessons which we are to learne out of it. That which the holy Euangelists, Mathew, Marke and Luke had written according to the Scriptures of Moses and the Prophets, concerning Christs accomplishing of all things before spoken, by his birth, life, doctrine, passion, death,Difference be∣twixt the wri∣tings of the o∣ther Euange∣lists and Saint Iohn. resurrection, &c. S. Iohn doth in this booke after ano∣ther manner, and in another kind deliuer. For he epitomi∣zeth that, which they discoursed of at large, concerning Christs humanity, and that in these words, And the word be∣came flesh, and dwelt among vs, &c. And he maketh a most ample tractate, as touching Christs diuine nature, as tou∣ching his effects also, and the execution of them.
These 14 verses of this first chapter,Occasion of the choice of this scripture, Iohn 1.1.14. are as a specimen of the whole booke; and therefore the godly Fathers of the church haue chosen it as a most speciall Scripture to be handled vpon this day, and at this time. In the first 13 verses, he writes of Christs diuinitie.Generall ana∣lyse.Christs diuini∣tie. In the 14 verse, of Christs humanitie.Christs huma∣nity. He proues the diuinitie of the Sonne,Confirmation of the diuinity. whom he calleth the Word. First, by his eternitie,1 Eternitie, In the beginning was that word. Secondly, by his Consubstantialitie2 Consubstan∣talitie, in the Deitie, and that word was with God, that is, one of the persons of the Deitie. Thirdly, by the nature and essence thereof,3 Essence and nature, and that word was with God, verse 1. Two of these Arguments are by S. Iohn, for the more cer∣tainty of the truth repeated, The same was in the beginning with God, first, that is one of the persons of the Deitie,4 Reptition of two former ar∣gumēts for the better confir∣mation, se∣condly, coeternall, verse 2. The other arguments are taken from the workes and ef∣fects of the Sonne and word of God.5 Arguments taken from the workes of Lo∣gos. The first, is the worke of Creation, All things were made by it, and without it was nothing made which was made. Verse 3. The second, is the worke of Vinification, the worke of gi∣uing life, that is to say, reason and vnderstanding kindled in mens minds, to acknowledge him to be the Author of so great a good, In it was life, and that life was the light of men, verse 4. And that light shineth in the darknesse, &c. verse 5. The next maner of reasoning,6 S. Iohns testi∣mony to con∣firme the truth hereof, and kind of argumentation which S. Iohn vseth, is testimonium humano-diuinum, or di∣uino-humanum, the testimony of Iohn the Baptist, who being a man, yet was a Gods man, a man of God, first, sent from God: secondly, bearing this office, to this end, To testifie and beare witnesse of this light 1. the Son of God, 2. the Son of man, God and Man, 6.7. & 8. verse. In the other 5 verses following,7 Kind of rea∣sons are argu∣ments drawne from the cause and effect. our Euangelist will teach and proue by reasons and arguments, drawne from the cause and effect, that albeit there was sufficient cause and
reason why this light of Christ should haue taken better ef∣fectChrists diuinity and humanity demonstrated. in illuminating the world in generall, and the Church in speciall, taken out of the world. Yet neither did all the world, nor all th Church (whom S. Iohn cals Christs owne) receiue it. 1 From the cause,The first argument taken from the cause, is, He was that true light which lighteth euery man. Verse 9. 2 From the caue.The second, He was in the world, that is, by the creatures and light of reason, he did (as it were) in the person of his Godhead and Manhood offer himselfe to the world. Ver. 10. Effects. Christ is to some,Now for the effects of these heauenly causes, first, it fared with our Lord Iesus this true light and Soule-phisition, as it doth with a light which is extinguihed,1 Like an ex∣tinguished light, or a good medica∣ment prepared which is not of ignorant or wilfull patients receiued. The light was generall, the medicament , sufficient (though twas but one) to cure all and euery one. But,2 Like a reie∣cted medica∣ment. 1 From the ef∣fect in the world.First, the world suffred it to stand by them, for the world could not see, it was in darknesse. verse 10. Secondly, though the greatest physiion applied this me∣dicine himselfe to his owne patients,2 From the ef∣fect it tooke in the Church, th worldly lewes: yet the greatest number of them would none of it. He came vnto his owne, and hs owne receiued him not. verse 11. Herein they were worse then the world; for that they did know and ac∣knowledge Christ, but would not receiue him. 3 Effect of this cleere light was in the elect, Christs best pa∣tients.Thirdly, the third effect that this cleare light and most so∣ueraigne medicine tooke, is in the thankful receiuers therof, Christ best patients, to wit, the elect and godly. To whom, as he administred the medicine, so be vouchsafed the bles∣sing, good operaion and happy effect thereof, to beleeue in his name.Description of the elect, And these good patients are thus described: First, by the right and title of filiation,1 By their fiia∣tion, a prerogatiue to be made the sonnes of God by adoption. verse 12. Scondly, by their generation2 By their ge∣neration. and birth, or rather by their regeneration and new birth, which is to be borne of God, that is, spiritually of Gods spirit. Vnto which birth Saint Iohn
opposeth the carnall and fleshly, which is, first of blood, se∣condly, of the will of the flesh, thirdly, of the will of man. v. 13. Christs humanity is thus proued:Confirmation of Christs hu∣manitie, First, twas no other nature but the essence and essentiall nature of God , Sermo, that word which was made, that is,1 Coniunction of the essence, became flesh, which tooke not vpon him the nature of Angels, but of Man, And the word became flesh, Secondly,2 Twas in our flesh, not in the nature of An∣gels, he dwelt and made his abode for the time in the tent and tabernacle of our flesh, And dwelt among vs. Thirdly, he that is of these two natures, hath the essentiall fulnesse of two qualities, and attributes full of grace and truth.3 He hath essē∣tiall fulnesse of grace & truth, Fourthly, this glory of Christs Maiestie manifested in the flesh, was beheld of men when this Word the naturall Sonne of the Father appeared in the flesh,4 Men behold the glory there∣of. And we sawe the glorie thereof, as the glorie of the onely begotten Sonne of the Father. Verse 14. The Sonday after Christmas. SEeing that for the most part, euery yeare there falleth out one Sonday betweene Christmas day & the Circum∣cision of Christ, called New-yeares day: and namely,Why scriptures are chosen also for this day: when they fall not both vpon the Sonday, or Sonnes day; there∣fore haue the Fathers of the Church thought good to set a∣part some such holy scriptures as may serue also for this day. And because, betweene the great feast of Christmas, and the feast of Christs Circumcision, the 8 day after,The doctrine of Christs birth more necessary then any other. and his Epi∣phany, or appearing to the Gentiles celebrated twelue dayes after Christs day: there can be no Christian doctrine more fitting the Sonday after the Natiuity, then the doctrine of the Natiuity, of Christs genealogie according to the flesh, and his humane nature, For this purpose therefore,Generall sūme of the two first Lessons, haue they out of Isaies Prophecie, taken two Chapters, recording a famous historie of King Hezekiah (of whom came Iesus, which
is called Christ,Hezekiah zealous for Christ. who as he was (with Dauid and other good kings) a figure of Christ, the eternall annointed king and Christ of God: so first, in this God, through Christ he trusted and beleeued when blasphemous Senaheribs Rab∣shakeh laboured him to the contrary. For vnto this Lord and Christ, he prayed for victorie, and obtained that a∣gainst that monster, whose nose-thrils God had hooked. And secondly, vnto this Lord and Sauiour he had his re∣course in his particular and distressed estate of a desperate sicknesse, who was heard in that also, and out of the danger of death deliuered. Generall sūme of the epistle & gospell.Vnto these holy Scriptures of the old, they do adioyne two out of the new Testament, most fitly accommodated vnto this businesse. In the first whereof S. Paul shewes to all our comforts, that when God saw his time (which was the fulnesse of time) he sent his naturall and onely Sonne to be∣come the sonne of a woman, and made vnder the law, that he might redeeme them that were vnder the law, That we might receiue the adoption of sonnes. In the second, that neither few nor Gentile might herein be mistaken. S. Mathew the Euangeist, who hath the face of a man, first, lookes Iesus Chri n the face, whom he cal∣leth the sonne of Dauid, the sonne of Abraham, and so pro∣ceeds in hi petigree: secondly, he describes the true man∣ner of Christs birth, by declaring all such circumstances as in euery hystorie diuine and prophane do denominate the truth of a deed done indeed, and not fanedly. Mor. Prayer. 1 Less. Isay 37.The 37 of Isaies prophecie is the first of the chapters for Morning prayer, wherein Gods holy Prophet makes rela∣tion. Parts. 1 King Hezekiahs griefe at the hearing of the blasphemy, and his recourse to God therein.First, how the good king Hezekiah was affected with griefe, at the report and hearing of Saneheribs blasphemy, which was belched out against this true God and Sauiour of the world (the God of victorie, the God of health and life) and what course Hezekiah tooke after he heard that. Verse 1. to the end of the 20 verse.
Secondly,2 The effect of his griefe, & of his prayer to God: what effeect this wrought for the good of He∣zekiah, 1. in that his prayer was heard of God, and 2. the blasphemies iudged of the great Lord and higest Iudge, ac∣cording to his demerite, ver 21. to the end of the 29. Thirdly, God assureth Hezekiah hereof,3 Hezekiahs cō∣firmation here∣of by God. and confirmeth him herein ver. 30. to the end of the 35. Fourthly, God executeth and performeth this iudge∣ment, which he before denounced,4 Gods exeu∣ting hereof. 1. against the army of this proud Potentate, and 2. against the raging beast himselfe, that Assyrian Leuiathan, ver. 36. to the end of the 38. the end of the chapter. The thirtie eighth chapter of this Prophecie is our first Lesson for the euening, wherein the Peophet teacheth vs,Eue. Prayer. 1 Los. Isay 38, by the example of Hezekiah, in our owne and particular, and personall distresses, as well as in the general, publicke & ra∣tionall calamities of our country & people, to turne our faces vnto the Lord, to pray vnto him, & to confesse ourselues vn∣to his all-knowing Maiesty. ver, 1. to the end of the 3. In the second place the Prophets tels vs,2 God is heard of Hezekiah. how God incli∣ned his eare to Hezekiahs faithfull & feruent prayer; confir∣ming by a signe against nature, taken from the retiring shad∣dow in the diall of Ahaz, that his yeares and life, should be prolonged. ver. 4. to the end of the 8. In the third part of the chapter, the Prophet lets vs see the thankfulnesse of Hezekiah, after his recouery,3 The gratful∣nesse of Heze∣kiah. set downe by writing in a record to Gods glory, & the Kings eternall me∣mory and commendations, ver. 9. to the end of the 20. In the fourth place,Hezekiah is cu∣red by the Pro∣phet. we may see how God vsed the person of the Prophet, to be a counsellour of aduise for the Kings bodily health (as before for his soules) in prescribing a cap∣taplasme, to be applyed with good successe to the Kings a∣postume: besides the former assurance by that extraordinary signe of the dyal. ve. 21.22. being the last verses of the chap∣ter. A part of the fourth chapter of S. Pauls Epistle to the Ga∣lathians, is our Epistle for this day, whose distributiō is thus:Epistle. Gal. 4.1. to the 7. ver.
PartsFirst, his proposition deliuered in a similitude,Christs incarnation in the funes of time. whose pro∣tasis appeareth ver. 1. & 2 of an heire in his nonage differing no∣thing from a seruant,1 The protasis of the similitude. &c. but is vnder tutors and gouernors vntill the time appointed of the father. 2 The applica∣tion of the si∣militude.Seondly, the application and apodosis of the similitude ver. 3.4.5.6. which may stand in stead of the Minor and As∣sumption. 3 The cordiall conclusion and vse extracted out of both.Thirdly, the conclusion, which is most cordiall and in a diuine manner extracted out of both the former. Wherefore thou art no more a seruant, but a sonne: now if thou be a son, thou art also the heire of God through Christ. ver. 7. The first chapter of Christs Gospell written by S. Mat∣thew,Gospell. Math. 1. Parts generall is our holy God-spell for this day, wherein like a true antiquary and most faithfull Hystorian he deliuers First, the genealogie of Christ,1 Christs ge∣nealogie, ve. 1. to the end of the 17. Secondly, the truth of the birth of our Sauiour, with the incidents,2 Christs birth. occurrents, and subsequents thereof, both in the virgin Mary and in Ioseph her husband, ver. 18. to the end of the 25. the last ver. of the chapter. Particulars. 1 S. Mathewes description of Christs genea∣logie.In these obserue more particularly, 1. Mathews descripti∣on of the generation & genealogie of Christ, which is two∣fold: The first is generall, as that he is, 1. the sonne of Dauid, 2. the sonne of Abraham, ver. 2. to the end of the 16. Secondly, obserue the calculation and collection2 His calcula∣tion & collecti∣on. which S. Matthew makes of the three times 14. generations amoun∣ting vnto 42. discents (before drawne out in speciall) as first, from Abraham to Dauid: secondly, from Dauid to their captiuty into Babylon: thirdly, from their captiuity, vn∣till Christ. ver. 17. Confirmation of Christs birthThe truth of the birth S. Matthew proues, First, out of the truth of the Virgins conception1 By the Vir∣gins conceptiō. (after her betrothing to her husband, and before they came together) she was found with child of the holy Ghost. ver. 18. 2 By Iosephs in∣tention of se∣paration.Secondly, by Iosephs intention of separating her from him because she was with child. ver. 19. 3 By Gods pre∣uention of Io∣sephs purpose, whereof there be 4 reasons.Thirdly, by the diuine preuention of Iosephs politicke
(but honest) separation,Christs pedigree. wherefore the Angel alleageth these reasons, 1. that which is conceiued in her is of the holy Ghost, ver.  20, the 2. from the true effects of conception, her parturia∣tion,  she shall bring forth a Soone, the 3. from his Circumcisi∣on,  and the name that should be giuen him at his circumcisi∣on, with the etymologie and reason of his name, ve. 21. the  fourth reason is taken from the end of all: to wit, why all this was done, viz. the fulfilling of the holy Scriptures, pro∣phecying so of him, and namely the Scripture of Isay. Behold a Virgine shall be with child, &c. ver. 22.23. The fourth proofe that S. Mathew brings (to proue the birth of Christ,4 Iosephs obedi∣ence to Gods cōmandement, is Iosephs obedience vnto God in taking of his wife Mary, but not knowing her carnally, till she had brought forth her first borne Sonne: therefore tis true that she did bring him forth: vnto which fourth confirmation is repeated one of the former proofes, to wit, our Lords cir∣cumcision: which action could not haue bene done to him, if he had not bene borne, truely borne; and not fantastically as fanatikes imagine. verse 24.25, the two last verses of the chapter. The Circumcision of our Lord called also New-yeares-day. ITt was very necessary that our Lord Iesus Christ (who (together with his Father and the holy Ghost) made the law of Circumcision, should also keepe the law,Why Christ was circumci∣sed, especially being borne a Iew, made subiect to the law, and vndergo∣ing the lawes curse for our sakes. And as he truely kept the Sabboth, and brake no part thereof, but abrogated the cere∣mony and ended it, by resting that day in the graue, which was the Iewes Sabboth: So he was circumcised with the cir∣cumcision made with hands: albeit in stead thereof he
ordained a new Sacrament: to wit,Old Circumcision. Baptisme for the new co∣uenant in stead of this of circumcision: & the Lords Supper: a new Passeouer in stead of the old, that euening Sacra∣ment of the law. The occasion why these sixe Scriptures are chosen.The learned and ancient Fathers of Christs Church, haue therefore chosen for morning and euening prayer, this day sixe remarkeable Scriptures. And the rather because this feast of the Circumcision fals out very fitly to be celebrated about this time of Christs natiuity, and oftentimes vpon the Sonday. Generall sūme of the two first Lessons.Moses in our first Lesson for morning prayer doth relate Gods ordinance and commandement to Abraham and his family, concerning Circumcision. In the first Lessō for euening prayer he maketh speciall vse of this doctrine. To this Moses agreeeth & S Paul, who meetes with the Iewes vaine boasting in outward circumcision and Iudaisme,Generall sūme of the Epistle & Gospell, & the two second Lessons, calling them to another: that is, to the inward, as appeareth in the second Lesson for morning prayer, And writing to another people he sheweth the truth of this inward circumcision, by that effectuall circumcision of the gentile Colossians, who were circumcised with circumci∣sion made without hands: and this he doth in our second Lesson for euening prayer. In our Epistle for this day he teacheth, that it was not act∣us circumcisionis, that did iustifie Ahraham: but faith was im∣puted to him for righteousnesse, before he was circumcised. In the Gospell for this day, the sequele and subsequents of Christs birth, with the particulars of his circumcision, are by S. Luke related. Mor. Prayer. 1 Les. Genes. 17. Parts.The 17. chapter of Genesis being the first Lesson for mor∣ning prayer hath these chiefe points to be considered of, First how God indenteth with Ahraham, 1. as concerning his free loue and mercifull kindnesse towards him of the one party,1 Gods inden∣ting and coue∣nanting with Abraham, 2. as touching Abrams obedience and dutifulnesse to God on the other party, concerning his obseruation of the Sacrament of circumcision, Ʋer. 1. to the end of the 14.
Internall circumcision requiredSecondly,Gods fauour to Abrahams wife, how he vouchsafeth his merciful kindnes also to Abrahams wife Sarai (whose name he changeth, as he had done her husbands) and maketh her a promise of bea∣ring a child vnto her husband, that was an hundred yeare old, hearing also Abrams request, for his base sonne Ishmael, but establishing his couenant with Isaack the sonne of Sarah the freewoman. ver. 15. to the end of the 22. The third part of the chapter relateth the obedience of Abraham and his family,3 Abrahams o∣bedience. in performing the act of circumci∣sion accordingly, ver. 23. to the end of the 27. the end of the chapter. A part of the tenth chapter of Deuteronomy is the first Lesson for euening prayer,Eue. Prayer. 1 Les. Deu. 10 12 from the 12. ver. to the end of the chapter, wherein Moses, First, chargeth the Israelites,1 Moses his in∣iunction. and straitely enioynes them to feare the Lord, to walke in his wayes, to loue, and serue him ver. 12. to the end of the 15. Secondly, he makes vse of this his generall charge,2 The vse of his general charge by cōmanding a speciall in∣iunction of cir∣cumcision in∣ternall. by en∣ioyning them a speciall circumcision of the heart, and to harden their necks no more: alleaging many reasons to vrge these exhortatiue precepts and commandements, ver. 16. to verse 22. which is the end of the chapter. A part of the second chapter of the Epistle to the Romans,Mor. Prayer. 2 Les. Rom. 2.7. from the 17. ve. to the end of the 29. is the second Lesson for morning prayer: wherein, Saint Paul teacheth the Iew his duty how to behaue him∣selfe, in regard of inward circumcision,Paul schooleth the bragging Iew. who boasted so much of the outward, He therefore doth First,1 A description of the estate of the circumcised Iew. describe the estate of the cireumcised Iew boasting therein: ver. 17.18.19.20. Secondly, he reprehends these Iewes, as, 1. for reprouing and censuring others and not themselues,2 A reprehen∣sion of them. 2. for dishonoring and blaspheming God, and 3. for bragging so much of out∣ward circumcision: ver. 21. to the end of the 25. Thirdly, he shewes the vse of outward circumcision:3 The vse & re∣ferrence of out∣ward circumci∣sion. to wit, that it is to be referred to the inward circumsion, both
in the circumcised and vncircumcised,Effectuall Circumcision of the Gentiles. alleaging seuerall sound reasons for the same, ver. 26. to the end of the 29. the end of the chapter. The second chapter of S. Pauls Epistle to the Colossians, is the second Lesson for euening prayer.Eue. Prayer. Colos. 2. In a part whereof he beateth vpon the former points, prouing it to be true by ex∣perience of that effectuall circumcision of the Gentiles, and namely the Colossians: who as, First, they are complete in Christ,1 That they were complete in Christ. which is the head of all Principality and Power, ver. 10. so Secondly, this is a part of their and our complement, that in him we are circumcised with circumcision made without hands,2 What this complement is; to wit, their spritual cir∣cumcision. by putting off the sinfull bodie of the flesh through the circumcision of Christ. ver. 11. A part of the 4. chapter of S. Pauls Epistle to the Romanes is the Epistle for this day,Epistle. Romanes 4. from the 8. ver. to the end of the chapter. In which he First, propoundeth a proposition concerning blessednes1 A propositiō concerning blessednesse. vpon them to whom sinne is not imputed. ver. 8. Secondly, he disputes the point, determines & concludes it,2 A determina∣tion of this true blessednesse. concerning the true obiect of this blessednes: whether it be the circumcised, or the vncircumcised, he that seeks iusti∣fication by the law, or which is iustified by faith, ver. 9. to the end of the 25. the end of the chapter. The sixt and last Scripture is a part of the second chapter of Saint Lukes Gospell, ver. 15.Gospell. Luke 2.15. to the end of the 21. Where∣in Sant Luke Parts.First, relateth the effects and sequele of the Angels Ser∣mon,1 Effects & se∣quele of the An∣gels Sermon. as touching the birth of our Lord Iesus Christ. ver. 15. to the end of the 20. 2 The History of Christs cir∣cumcision. Effects diuers according to diuerse obiects. Sheepeheards. Others.Secondly, vnto this Saint Luke annexeth the History of Christs Circumcision, ver. 21. there being not aboue 8. daies betweene the one and the other. The effects of the Angels Sermon are diuerse, according to the diuers obiects thereof. First, in the Sheepeheards? secondly, others.
Sheepeheards true, Circumcision of the heartThe Sheepehards are said.1 Talking and conference, First to confer & consider vp∣on that which they heard: they said one to another. Let vs go euen to Bethleem and see this thing. ver. 15. Secondly, they acted that whereof they had conference,2 Walking and performance. so they came with hast, and found both Mary. &c. ver. 16. Thirdly, they did impart it to others,3 Imparting & communica∣ting to others. and hid not their Talent in the ground. And when they had seene it, they pub∣lished abroad the things that were told them of that child. ver. 17. Fourthly, they liued not idlely afterwards,4 Returning to their callings a∣gaine. but applyed themselues to their callings, they returned. Fiftly,5 Glorifying God for all: they glorified and praised God (as they were taught, by the example of the multitude of heauenly souldiers) glorifying and praysing God, for all that they had heard and seene, &c. ver. 20. The effect of the Sheepeheards ruminating,Effects of the Sheepeheards, paines in others and repea∣ting the Sermon in others, is two-fold, according to the two sorts of obiects. First, wondering in the common multitude.1 Wondering in the multi∣tude. All that heard it, wondered at the things that were told them of the Sheepe∣heards. ver. 6. Secondly, Maries, 1. keeping all these sayings, 2. Pondered,2 Pondering in Mary. meditated and well considered of them, in her heart, But Mary kept all these sayings. &c. ver. 19. The particulars of the hystory of Christs Circumcision:Particulars of Christs circum∣cision. are, First the time when1 The time when: it was done, when the eighth day was come, to circumcise him. Secondly, the manner of doing it,2 The manner how. the name which he had when he receiued this Sacrament, his name was called Iesus. Thirdly, the reasons why3 The reasons why he was so named, it was a name giuen vnto him of the Angell before he was conceiued in the wombe. ver. 21.
The Epiphany of our Lord Iesus (that is,Calling of the Gentiles. his appearing to the Wisemen) other∣wise called, the Twelfth day. Agreement of the doctrines of this feast with those of the cir∣cumcision.AS Iesus the child, was the glory of his people Israel: so is he a light to lighten the Gentiles. For otherwise that promise which was made vnto Abrahā (that in his seed all the nations of the earth should be blessed) had not bene indeed accomplished. His name was therefore called Iesus; that he might saue his people: that is to say Gentiles, as wel as Iewes, from their sinnes. The cause and occasion of the choise.The Church of Christ hath therefore thought it fit, next vnto his Circumcision to plaee our Lords Epiphany, his ap∣pearing to the Wisemen the Gentiles, who came out of their country by the blessed direction of a Starre, which brought them to Christ the bright morning Star, which rising from the East visited them. Whereupon they could not but doe as the sheepeheards did, in visiting and doing homage to him. Generall sūme of all the Scrip∣tures in one period.In the two first Scriptures of the old Testament, chosen for the first Lessons, the Prophet Isay foretold that it should be so. And in the foure out of the new Testament S. Luke, S. Iohn, S. Mathew, and S. Paul do record the effecting and accomplishment hereof that it was so. In the first lesson for morning prayer the Prophet Isay in his 40. chapter,Mor. Prayer. 1 Les. Isay 40. more like an Euangelist then a Prophet, First preacheth the comfortable tydings of remission of sins by Christ.Parts 1 Remission of sins preached. Comfort ye, comfort ye, my people, will your God say, speake comfortably vnto Ierusalem, and cry vnto her that her warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned, that she hath receiued of the Lords hand double for all her sinnes ver. 2.2. 2 A prophecy of Iohn Baptists coming.Secondly, the Prophet foretelleth the coming of Iohn Baptist, the great crier, herault and clerke of this great Mes∣siah:
preaching this doctrine of saluation both to Iewes and Gentiles,Great Britaine called among other lands. which were penitent and beleeuers. verse 3, to the end of the 5. Thirdly,3 Doctrine of mans frailty, & the words sta∣bilitie and eter∣nity. the Prophet preacheth as concerning the frailty of mortall man, of the power of Gods word, and perpetui∣tie thereof: at which both Iewes and Gentiles are exhorted to reioyce, because the word that is made flesh is comming. Whose loue and tendernesse (like a shepheard ouer his flocke) whose infinite power also and supereminencie is shadowed out by the Prophet. Both which are applied to the great comfort of Gods Church and people gathered of Iewes and Gentiles. verse 6, to the end of the 31, the end of the chapter. In the first Lesson for Euening prayer, which is the 49 of Isay,Euen. Prayer. 1 Less. Isay 49. the Prophet, First, begins one of his Sermons,1 Isay preacheth to all Iles, ergo, to great Britain, as though he did preach to great Britaine, England, Scotland, and Ireland (for these are Ilands as well as others are,) Heare ye me O Iles, and hearken ye people from farre, &c. Ʋerse 1, to the ende of the 5 verse: where you may heare admirable and most comfortable ex∣hortation. Secondly,2 Isay preacheth Christs salua∣tion to the na∣tions, he speaketh of Christs coming and sauing the nations, that dwell in continents, in lands, not inuironed with the sea, as well as the Ilands: to whom this Sauiour and ro∣yall Redeemer exhibiteth himselfe: For his people shall come from farre, From the North, from the West, and from the land of Sinim. Verse 11. Also, Behold (saith the Lord) I will lift vp mine hand to the Gentiles, and set vp my standart to the people, and they shall bring thy sonnes in their armes, and thy daughters shall be caried vpon their shoulders, &c. verse 6, to the end of the 22. Thirdly,3 He foretels the meanes that he will afford to this purpose. God by his Prophet foretelleth the meanes and helpes that he will affoord to his Church of the Gentiles, speaking euen to the comfort of the Church gathered in great Britaine (which we haue found by experience, And Kings shall be thy foster-fathers, and Queenes shall be thy nurses;
they shall worship thee with their faces toward the earth,1. Baptist preached of the calling of the Nations. and licke vp the dust off thy feete, and thou shalt know that I am the Lord, for they shall not be ashamed that waite for me, &c. v. 13, to the end of the 26, the end of the chapter. In our second Lesson for Morning prayer, Luke 3.1,Mor. Prayer. 1 Less. Luk. 3.1. to the end of the 22 verse, the Euangelist tels vs that Iohn Bap∣tist performed in preaching that which Isay foretold of him, Parts.First, for the matter1 Matter, of his teaching, preaching the baptisme of repentance. Secondly, for the manner,2 Manner, crying. Thirdly, for the place,3 Place, in the wildernesse, and all the coasts about Iordane. Fourthly, for the people his auditory,4 Auditory. All flesh (that is) Gentiles and Iewes shall see the saluation of God. In the second Lesson for Euening prayer, S. Iohn chapter 2, verse 1,Eue. Prayer. 2 Les. Ioh. 1.2. to the end of the 11. verse, shewes an example hereof in the first miracle that Christ wrought at the mariage, his turning of wateo into wine. Iohn 2.9. in Cana a towne of Galile. He being the Sonne of God,Scope of this scripture. and therefore God himselfe perswaded. Iaphet to dwell in the tents of Sem, that they might (being married vnto Christ in truth and righteousnesse) tast of Christs cordiall liquor,Paul preached to the Gentils. euen water metamorphosed and turned into wine. For this cause, and to this end, in our Epistle, Ephes. 3.1,Epistle. Ephes. 3.1. to the end of the 12 verse. S. Paul, Parts.First, vseth these speeches, and deliuers this doctrine to the Ephesians,1 God made Paul a preacher for the Gentils sakes, which were Gentiles, viz. I Paule am a prisoner of Iesus Christ for you Gentiles, if you haue heard of the dispensa∣tion of the grace of God, which is giuen me to you-ward. ve. 1.2. Secondly, he sheweth of what kind and nature this prea∣ching is,2 What kind of preaching it is, by tearming it a mysterie, shewing in what respects it is so intituled. Thirdly, he telleth vs what this mysterie is,3 What the mysterie is, to wit, that the Gentiles should be inheritors also, and of the same body, and partakers of his promise in Christ by the Gospell. Verse 6.
Fourthly,4 That God hath commit∣ted it to him. that the dispensation and Ministery is com∣mitted vnto him by the grace and fauour of God, for the good of his Church gathered of Iewes and Gentiles. verse 7, to the end of the 12. What is that inheritance? what is that promise? what is that Gospell and glad tidings, but that which causeth great ioy to all the people, that vnto all nations is borne a Sauiour, which is Christ the Lord. In the sixt portion of Scripture, chosen out for this daies Seruice written Mathew 2.1.Gospell. Math. 2.1. to the end of the 12 verse, we haue a most comfortable and an infallible testimony of Gods vocation of the Gentiles, and their apprehending Christ, S. Mathew shewes it to be true, First, in the wise religious Gentiles,Parts: which came to see Christ, that true light, verse 1.2.1 Wise men come to see him, Secondly, in king Herod, that crafty and suttle foxe, who vnder the colour of worshipping this king of kings,2 Herod sought to kill him, inten∣ded the destruction of the Lord of life, as verse 3, to the end of the 8, Thirdly,3 Wise men performed what they intended, in the wise mens performing that which they came for. verse 9.10.11, Fourthly, in not persecuting the Babe,4 Wise men did not persecute Christ. by returning any message to Herod (which diuine Oracle in a dreame in∣hibited) but returning to their owne country another way, as verse 12. That this coming of the Gentiles to Christ,Circumstances to proue the truth of the wise mens co∣ming, is a true hi∣story, the first verse of the chapter shewes it, first in the cir∣cumstances Of time1 Time, when it was done, Of place2 Place, where twas done, Of persons3 Persons, which were the actors of it, Of words and speeches4 Words and speeches. that the Gentile wise men vsed, viz. Where is he that is borne, &c. Of the reasons which moued them to speake these words,5 Reasons as motiues first, For we haue seene his starre in the East, secondly, and are come to worship him. v. 2.
2 Herods perse∣cuting, the truth proue the tuth.Secondly,The wise holy, &c. the truth of these things is argued by the effects in Herode and others, for heating of it, first, he was troubled himselfe, secondly, all Hierusalem with him, verse 3. This per∣turbation appeareth by the effects thereof, First, his publicke search and inquisition of his owne people,Hrods publicke and priuate in∣quisition. He enquired of the chiefe Priests and Scribes, the vn∣doubted truth thereof, verse 4, who answer him out of the Scriptures, verse 5. and 6. Secondly, his secret inquisition of the wise men, what time the starre appeared. verse 7. Herods appoin∣ting the wise men as secret intelligencers.The third effect of Herods trouble, is his mission and sen∣ding of the wise men by speciall commission (as secret intelligencers) to bring true word of the businesse, verse 8. 3 The wise mens obediēce argue the truth aforesayd.Thirdly, the truth of these things are argued by the wise mens obedience and performance, as well in deed as in word and questioning. For S. Mathew relates that, Nine fruits of their obedience,First, they went. Secondly, he tels by what meanes they went, how they  were directed in their iourney, And loe the starre, &c.  verse 9. Thirdly, their ioy for this heauenly concomitance and company of the comete. verse 10. Fourthly, they went into the house. Fiftly, they found the Child and the mother. Sixtly, they fell downe and worshipped him, that is, inwardly and outwardly. Seuenthly, they opened their treasures. Eighthly, they offered vnto him gifts, first of gold, secondly of frankincense, thirdly of Myrrhe. verse 11. Ninthly, they returned into their country another way (not intending to go home by persecuting Herod) because God by a dreame did so aduise them. verse 12.
The Iewes are taught the calling of the Gentiles.The first Sonday after the Epiphany. AS the malicious and refractary Iewes do deny Christ to be as yet come in the flesh,Agreements with the former scriptures. so haue they with a deadly and capitall hatred infested that most sweete and comfortable doctrine, concerning the calling of the Gentiles, and of Christs most familiar and gratious appearing vnto them. Wherefore the Christian church hath thought it good to choose out principall Scriptures for the fiue Sondayes fol∣lowing, that Christs Catholicke Church,Occasion of the choice of the Scriptures for the 5 sondaies following. and each member thereof may be further established in this ground and maine point of Theologie: that they may want no assured props to stay them from falling, nor any defences wherewith to vphold them in contending for the maintenance of that faith which was once giuen to the Saints. Our Euangelicall Prophet in the two first Lessons, first,Summe of the two first Les∣sons. doth make the defectiue Church of the Iewes to vnderstand this point, and secondly, teacheth them to trust in him: for tis vaine to haue confidence in idols. And the Doctor of the Gentiles in the Epistle for this day,Summe of the Epistle and Gospell. exhorts the beleeuers to performe another manner of seruice then was vsed by the Iewes, perswading them to offer vp their bodies a liuing sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God. In the fourth Scripture for this day, the child Iesus is a president vnto vs of the spirituall and reasonable seruice and sacrifice of perfect obedience to God his father. The 44. chapter of Isay is the first Lesson for Morning prayer,Mor. prayer. 1 Lesson Isay 44 conteining these chiefe instructions and most com∣fortable considerations. First,Parts. how God offereth himselfe in Iesus Christ vnto his old and first people the Israelites,1 Gods boun∣tifulnesse to the old Iewes. in most ample and com∣fortable manner. verse 1.2. Secondly,2 Gods flowing fauours to the Gentiles, how the riuers and waters of his mercies shall
flow vpon the Gentiles, whom he calleth the thirstie, barren,Iewes are taught, &c. or drie ground. vers. 3.4.5. 3 Gods ffe∣ctig her of, and by what meanes.Thirdly, the Lord confirmeth the effecting hereof by his omnipotent power, mercy, and eternall essence, and that difference which is betweene him the liuing God, and all false Gods and idols: That it is hee which hath put away their transgressions like a cloud, and their sinnes like a mist. Turne vn∣to me therefore (saith he) for I haue redemed thee, as verse. 22. & after the same maner he speaketh ver. 25. of the 43. chap∣ter) &c. See more at large in the text, from the sixth verse of this chapter, to the end of the 28. verse, which is the end of the chapter Euen. Prayer. 1 Lesson Isay 46In the 46. of Isay appointed for euening prayer, the same lesson is taught againe to the Iewes. Parts.First, that as he is, was, and will be their God, and the God of the Gentiles,1 His gratious promise to thē, vrging their re∣liance vpon him. so haue they no reason to flye from him by hauing recourse to idols. Because the end of the chiefe idols, as Bell and Nebo, is ruine and destruction, vers. 1.2. Confusion shall come to the idols, their Makers and Wor∣shippers. 2 Exhortation to giue care onely to him.Secondly, God exhorts his Church to hearken onely to him; because he hath done, he doth, and will doe, whatsoeuer is done,3 Dehortation from worship∣ping of idls, and why. or to be done for them. vers. 3.4. Thirdly, that they may not worship idols, because there is nothing which God hath made, or which man can make which can be resembled vnto that diuine essence and maie∣stie. For I am God (saith he) there is none other, there is no thing like me. Which declare the last thing from the beginning, and from of old, the things that were not done, saying, my counsell shall stand and I will do what I will, I will giue saluation to Sion, and my glo∣rie to Israel, &c. See more from the 5. verse to the end of the 13. the end of the chapter. Saint Paul in our Epistle for this day, Rom. 12. verse 1.Epistle. Rom. 12.1. to the end of the 5. in that his golden exhortation, perswades all beleeuers,God must bee serued of Chri∣stians othr∣wise then of Iewes, Calde∣ans, &c. and namely the Roman Gentiles, to serue God after another fashion then was vsed by the idolatrous
Iewes,Our Lord Iesus the true, &c. or the filthy Chaldeans (a sacrifice which was vn∣reasonable, vnseasonable, and vnacceptable to God,) viz. to the offering and yeelding vp their bodyes a liuing sa∣crifice, holy, acceptable to God, their reasonable sacrifice. The text comprehends,Parts. First his exhortation,1 Exhortation verse 1.2. Secondly, the grounds2 Grounds and motiue hereof, vers. 3.4.5. This was not written for the Romanes onely,Vse hereof to vs also. which were Gentiles, but for our instruction also vpon whom the ends of the world are come. In our fourth Scripture, Luk. 2.42.Gospell. Luke 2.42, to the end of the chap∣ter, the child Iesus that sate in the midst of the Doctors, hea∣ring them, and posing them, being the only votary of obe∣dience, deuoted altogether to his Fathers businesse, teacheth vs what we should do.Generall parts S. Luke in this Gospell first recordeth generally, First, the care and imploiment of Christs parents1 The care of Christs parēts. in seeking out their child in the first fiue verses. Secondly, the care and imployment of the child Iesus2 The imploy∣ment of Christ in doing of his heauenly fathers businesse, and yet not negle∣cting to go downe with his earthly parents to Nazareth, but being also subiect to them in the other 7. verses.Speciall parts of the text. The Euan∣gelist relateth more particularly, First,His parents care is two∣fold. his parents care is either particular in respect of the discharge of their particular and proper duties of coming to the feast and performing that which they came for accor∣dingly, as verse 42.43. Or secondly, more speciall, or more particular for Christ Iesus their child, as ver. 44.45. and in a part of the 46. verse. Christs care & imploiment in his function propheticall,Effects of Christs em∣ployment, wrought diuers effects according to the diuer obiects, as First, in the multitude or greatest part, Christs vnderstan∣ding and answeres wrought astonishment.1 Christs vn∣derstanding and answers wrought asto∣nishment. Secondly, his absence from his parents which arose and was an effect of his imploiment, First, wrought and effected an amazement in his parents.
1. Christs ab∣sence arising of his imployment effected diuer∣sly.Secondly,Our Lords Iesus the true an expostulation or an obiurgatiue question in his mother, Sonne, why hast thou thus dealt with vs, &c. vers. 48. Which question is answered with our Lords demanding of another question, whereby he 1. His parents ignorance is re∣proued.First taxeth their ignorance, which caused their needlesse seeking of him, How is it that ye sought me? 2 His employ∣ment was rhe cause of his ab∣sence from them,Secondly, he sheweth that his employment was the cause of his absence, Wist ye not that I must go about my Fathers bu∣sinesse. verse 49. And that it was an imputation of ignorance vnto them S. Iohn shewes, But they vnderstood not the word that he spake to them. verse 50. Christs obedi∣ence another obiect of his imploiment.Another obiect of Christs care and employment in this his tender age, is his obedience and subiection to his earth∣ly parents, after he had done his heauenly Fathers businesse, Then he went downe wich them, and came to Nazareth, and was subiect to them. Which words and deeds were effectually treasured vp, and pondered in his mothers heart. This was the effect that Christs employment tooke in his mother Mary, verse 51, And Iesus increased. The fruits and effects of Christs per∣fect obedience,Fruites of Christs perfect obedience, were the increasings of God and godly in∣creasings, first in wisedome, secondly stature, thirdly and fa∣uour with God and man. The second Sonday after the Epiphany. Agreement of these Scriptures with the formerAS God doth not cease to draw on the Iewes to repen∣tance, to forsake their idolatry, and to betake them∣selues to him that is, hath beene, and will bee their Iehouah, and Elohecha, as in the 44. and 46. of Isay, may be seene, and did appeare: So is our God mindfull of his mercy to the Gentiles, as was shewed then, and shall now appeare in that which the same Prophet speaketh for, and concerning the continuance & increase of his fauour to the beleeuing Iewes then liuing, and to the faithfull Gentiles which were to liue
afterward.Comfort to Iewes & Gentils, &c. In our two Scriptures of the old Testament the Gospel-like Prophet IsaySumme of the two first Les∣sons. First, cals the Iewes to the consideration of Gods fauours already receiued, and promiseth the continuance of them to the worthy receiuers. Secondly, he exhorts them and the Gentils to haue them in singular reuerence, that bring and preach the happy ty∣dings of this saluation. In our Epistle,Summe of the Epistle and Gospell. the Romane Gentiles are exhorted by a chiefe Preacher of these newes, that seeing they had receiued these seuerall fauours of God, in the seuerall gifts and gra∣ces of God, that they therefore would vse them according∣ly. In the Gospell we are guided by S. Iohn to the wel-spring and fountaine of these cordiall liquors from whom onely we may draw them, and commend them with great glory to God, and reioycing in our selues, to the gouernor of the feast. The 51. chap. of the Prophecy of Isay is the first Lesson,Mor. Prayer. 1 Les. Isay 51. for this morning seruice, affording First, a most worthy preface vnto an excellent Sermon.Parts. ver. 1.1 A preface vn∣to the Sermon Secondly, most singular comfort: first to the Iewes,2 Singular cō∣fort to Iewes & Gentiles. con∣sider Abraham your father, surely the Lord shall comfort Syon. ver. 1.2.3. secondly, to the Gentils, is affoorded as great comfort concerning Christs future appearing to them. Hear∣ken vnto me my people, and giue eare vnto me ô my people, for a law shal proceed forth from me, and I will bring forth my iudgement for the light of the people. My righteousnesse is neere, my saluation goeth forth, and my arme shall iudge the people, the Iles shall wait for me and trust vnto mine arme, &c. ver 4.5.6. Thirdly, all pretext of feare or discouragement3 A preuention of all feare and discouragemēt. is taken away in regard of afflictions or persecutions of the faithfull beleeuers by euill instruments, and wicked men. ve. 7. to the end of the 23. the end of the chapter.
Eue. Prayer. 1 Les. Isay 52.In our first Lesson for euening praer, which is the chap.Preachers of this saluation must be well entertained. following, God by his Prophet, Isay 52. Parts.First, encourageth his people in the best manner, by ta∣king vpon them the strength beauty and puritie which the Lord giueth them.1 Encourage∣ment of his people, ver. 1. to the end of the 6. 2 A speciall cō∣mandemen for the ministers entertaiment.Secondly, he chargeth them to bid such welcome in the best manner, which bring these comfortable tydings with them, and what good shall beside such as hearken vnto them in departing from vncleanenesse and wickednesse, in belee∣uing in Christ, although he shall not make such a glorious shew in the eye of the world, ver 7. to the end of the 14. ver. which is the end of the chapter. Epistle. Rom. 12.6.How like amost cunning Musician doth the chiefe piper of the Gentiles, Romans 12.6. to the end of the 16, ver. war∣ble the harpe of Isay the Prophet, perswading them to pra∣ctise according to their profession,The market that S. Paul shootes at in this porti∣on of Scripture and as they had bene par∣takers of diuers excellent gifts and graces so they would dispense and dispose of them to the glory of the giuer and profite of the receauers, whether minister or peo∣ple. His exhortations are as many and as seuerall as the gifts and graces are,The true ana∣lise. whereof he makes mention, and that is the true and best analyse of the text in my poore iudge∣ment. In our fourth Scripture, being the Gospell written, Iohn 2.1.Gospell. Iohn 2.1. to the end of the 22. ve. The Euangelist tels vs that our Lord Iesus Christ performes in effect that which he promi∣sed & much more. This our Sauiour (I say) doth it, by whom came grace and truth,Scope and drift of this Gospell, & from whom the Church now draw∣eth in generall, and all the stewards and officers of the feast in speciall, the cordiall cheering liquors of his comforting spirit, in far more plentifull measure then heretofore, for the old Iewes had Christ (which was to come) promised as it
were in waters:Christ performes saluati∣on in the largest manner. But in these daies he is performed in wine. And that by the best transmutator, the best and rrue Chimist the onely true transubstantiator of species, substances and qualities. In this portion of Scripture, S. Iohn giues vs a view. First, of an occasion of a miracle.Parts 1 Occasion of the deed. Secondly, of the miracle it selfe2 Miracle and deed it selfe. wrought by our Sauiour. Thirdly, of the consequents or subsequents thereof.3 Consequents and sequele. The occasion is two-fold.Occasion two∣fold. First, the marriage1 The marriage whereunto Christ himselfe, his mother, and his disciples were inuited, ve. 1 2. The second occasion is, the want and penury of wine.2 The want of wine. ve. 3.4. & 5. In the miracle we may consider. First, an introduction1 An introdu∣ction. or preface. ve. 6. & 7. Now there was set there 6. waterpots &c. And Iesus said, fill the water pots with water.Parts of the deed. Secondly, the miracle it selfe,2 The act and deed it selfe. Then he said vnto them: draw out now and beare vnto the steward or gouernor of the feast. ver. 8. The consequence of the miracleConsequent of the miracle. carieth with it, first, te∣stimony1 The testimony: and confirmation thereof, secondly, the gouernors taxing the bridegroomes2 The gouer∣nours reproofe of the Bride∣groome. infrugalitie and want of discreti∣on. The first testimony is drawen from an outward senseTestimony 1 From out∣ward sense. to wit, the gouernours tasting of it, to be wine, though he knew not whence it came. The second is taken from an inward2 From inward sence viz. the know∣ledge and vnderstanding of the seruants that drew the wine. ver. 9. The taxation and reprehension of the Bridegroome, by an argument a diuersis.Bridegroomes reproofe a di∣uersis. First, the frugality and discretion of most men.1 Discretion of most men. Secondly, the infrugalitie and indiscretion of the Bride∣groome,2 Indiscretion of the Bride∣groome. but thou hast kept the best wine till now. The third consequent of the miracle is, the vse that the Euangelist maketh hereof, a subseqent effect hereof,
the faith and beleefe of his Disciples confirmed by this firstChrists saluation is of the largest volume. miracle,3 Consequent an ordinary blessed effect, a confirmation of his Disciples faith. and glorious exhibiting himselfe in this towne bordering vpon the Gentiles neere Tyre and Sydon, ver 11. The fourth consequent is, S. Iohns recording of Christs departure thence,4 Consequent a record of Christs depar∣ture thence, and to what place he went, viz. his remoo∣uing with his mothers kindred and Disciples downe into Capernaum, where also he would do good to the Gentile Captaine, as he did this first miracle in Cana in Galilee, which was called Galilee of the Gentiles, as Matthew 4.14.15.16. The third Sonday after the Epiphany. Agreemēt with the former sele∣cted Scriptures,THat God of might being almightinesse it selfe, and that Father of mercy who is mercy it selfe, and God of all consolation doth out of the plentifulnesse and ouerflowing of his bounty exhibite himselfe vnto his Church & people, whether Iewes, or Gentiles, bond or free, Crete or Arabian, Turke, Scithian or Barbarian. Summe of the two first LessōsAnd therefore by his Prophet Isay, he first offereth him∣selfe vnto all: secondly, and vpon this generall fauour of his exhorts all in generall vnto iudgement and iustice (after the manner of Iohn Baptist, Repent for the kingdome of God is at hand) for my saluation is at hand, and my righteousnesse to bee reuealed. Summe of the Epistle & gospelFrom this exceeding bountifulnes S. Paul in our Epistle, exhorts the Romans to be bountifull and mercifull. And S. Matthew shewes it in our Lords practise of it in deed, in healing the Leper and the Captaines seruant when he was come down from the mountaine, as he had preached mercy and meekenesse vpon the mountaine. The first of the Scriptures of the old Tastament is Isay 55.Mor. Prayer. 1 Less. Isay 55. wherein our Lord Iesus.
The riches of Christs bountifulnesse.First inuiteth most graciously and proclaimeth most ear∣nestly to all the thirsty, comfortlesse, and monilesse,1 Christs gra∣ciously inuites all. the wa∣ters, wine, and commodities continually to be had, and that without money, and monie-worth, at his most cheape and euerlasting faire, ver. 1. Secondly, he reproues them,2 Christ re∣proues ill hus∣bandry in his people. and expostulates with them for their spirituall infrugality and bouring in vaine ve. 2.3. Thirdly, there is a prophecy and promise of Christ vnto the nations,3 A promise of Christ to the nations. ve. 4.5. Fourthly, the Prophet exhorts vs to embrace this salua∣tion, while it may be had. ve 6.4 Exhortation to embrace this saluation offe∣red. Fiftly, he shewes the manner how to apprehend this sal∣uation: to wit, by repentance. Let the wicked forsake his waies, and the vnrighteous his owne imaginations, &c.5 The manner how to em∣brace it: ver. 7.8.9. In the sixt place the Lord sheweth the ordinary meanes whereby6 The meanes whereby, a man commeth to repentance: to wit, the word of the Lord which is compared to the raine and the snow, ve. 10.11. In the seuenth there are promises made to the effectuall re∣ceiuers7 Promises to the effectuall receiuers. of Christ. ve, 12.13. The second of our Scriptures out of the old Testament & the first Lesson for euening prayer, is the next chap. follow∣ing Isay 56.Eue. Prayer. 1 Les. Isay 56 wherein Christ by his holy Prophet. First, makes vse of the former doctrines by his exhorting of all men to do well,1 Vse of the Prophets for∣mer doctrines by exhortation to do well. to keepe iudgement and do iustice: for my saluation (saith he) is at hand to come, & my righteousnesse to be reuealed &c. ver. 1.2. Secondly, there is a promise:2 A promise. first, to strangers in gene∣rall, ve. 3. and secondly, to the Eunuches in speciall, to be∣come members of Gods Church, to dwel in Gods house.3 God graci∣ously taketh a∣way the lets that hinder men in their seruing of God ver. 4.5.6. Thirdly, the Lord taketh away the lets and hinderances of mens embracing the truth by reason of the ignorance, carelesnesse and wickednesse of their Magistrates, and Mini∣sters,
by promising himselfe to be their Sheepheard and lea∣der,Vse of this great fauour, & and sufficiently prouiding for them, ve. 7. to the end of the 12. the end of the chapter: saying. Them will I also bring to mine holy mountaines, and make them ioyfull in mine house of prayer, for myne house shall be called the house of prayer to all people. Christ prfor∣med all this at Pentecost.All this we know was performed in the daies of our Sa∣uiour, and chiefly at that time when he sent downe the lar∣gesse of his bounty at the feast of Pentecost. Now from this exceeding bountifulnesse of our Lord, Epistle. Rom. 12 16. Exhortation to bountifulnesse hindred by re∣uenge.S. Paul, Rom. 12 16. to the end of the 21. ver. which is the end of the chapter, exhorts the Romans, which were Gentils, and in them vs all, and all other Gentils, vnto mutuall kind∣nesse, lowlinesse, peaceablenes, gentlenes, bountifulnesse; & mercifulnesse. For herein shall a man shew himselfe, a gentle Gentile, a right Christian, a sonne of our heauenly Father, who is the onely Father of mercy. And because no∣thing more interrupteth our loue one to another then pride, & haughtines, thinking too well of our selues, wrath, and the effect of wrath, which is desire to be reuenged of him that hath angred vs: our Apostle therefore, Parts.First, exhorts1 Exhortation them to mutuall loue (giuing therewithall caueats against pride and malicious reuenge) and perswades them to haue a generall peace with all men. ve. 16.17.18. Secondly, dehorts2 Dehotation from auengement. Thirdly, exhorts3 Exhortation to giue place to wrath. 4 ConfirmatiōFourthly, alleageth a Scripture, to force his dehortation & exhortation. ver. 19. 5 Description of a true and holy reuenge.Fiftly, concludes herupon what the true, holy, & Christi∣an reuenge is, to do good to our enemy: first by feeding him when he is hungry: secondly, by drenching him when he is thirsty: which who so doth shall heape coales of fire on his enimies head. ve. 20. 6 How a man may performe this hard pre∣cept.Sixtly, because this counsell is durus sermo, and hardly to be digested, but more hardly to be performed, Saint Paul shewes the way how to do it, in the last verse being partly
dehortatiue:Chrsts performes the, &c. Be not ouercome with euil: and partly exhortatiue, but ouercome euill with goodnesse. ver. 21. In the portion of holy Scripture appointed for this daies Gospell,Gospell. Math. 8.1. Math. 8.1. to the end of the 13. we may see the ac∣complishment of Gods promises concerning his bountiful∣nesse in Christ, how they are all yea and a men in him. For S. Mathew tels vs after he had ended his gracious Sermon vpon the mount, he performed in deed that which he spake before in word. First in healing the Leper,Parts as he was going to that proud and vnruly city Capernaum (euen as he was in itinere) as in the first foure verses appeareth.1 Cure of the Leper. Secondly, in his healing the Centurions seruant,2 Cure of the Centurions ser∣uant, at his first entrance into Capernaum, as in the rest of the verses. The first of these cures he performed,How both these were cured by Christ. by touching & spea∣king: the second by speaking only, by his power and word without touching. The first miracle he wrought vpon a Iew an vncleane Leper; the second, vpon the seruant of an vn∣cleane gentile, though purged & made cleane, by his effectu∣all and acceptable faith: yea, so great faith as the like was not in Israel. In the story of the Lepers cure obserue:Obseruations out of the story of the Lepers. first, the occa∣sion which is either generall or speciall:1 Occasion Generall, Speciall. the generall occasi∣on is, the cōcomitance of great multitudes after he was come downe from the mountaine, ve. 1. The speciall occasion the Lepers faith,Speciall occasi∣on, the faith of the Leper. who beleeued, and therefore he spake, and out of the feeling of his misery was vrged to seeke helpe at the hands of the  the greatest Physition of all. ver. 2. The second is the miracle wrought vpon the Leper,2 Obserue the miracle. And Iesus putting forth his hand touched him, &c. ver. 3. The third is the charge and commandement that Iesus gaue him: first, in a prohibitiue manner;3 Obserue the charge which Christ gaue the Leper. see thou tell no man secondly, in a preceptiue manner, which is two fold, the first in shewing himselfe to the Priest: the second, in offering the gift that Moses commanded. ver. 4. In the other relation we haue a preface vnto the Hystory,
confirming the truth thereof by circumstances:Generall parts of the story of the paralitiks cure. Entrance into it. first of the persons, first doing and acting it, secondly, or of the patients or sufferers: secondly, the time when twas done: thirdly, the place where, When Iesus was entred into Capernaum there came vnto him a Centurion, &c. ver. 5. Hystory it selfe. Speciall parts of the hystory▪In the Hystory it selfe the text doth primo aspectu direct our eyes to behold, and our eares to hearken, First, the Centurions petition:1 The Centu∣rions petition. Maister, my seruant lyeth at home sicke, &c. ver: 6. Secondly, to Christs answere,2 Christs an∣swere. I will come and heale him, ver. 7. Thirdly, to the Centuriōs reply vnto some part of Christs answere,3 Centurions lowly reply to some part of Christs answere▪ viz. to these words, I will come: in saying, Maister, I am not worthy thou shouldest come; ver. 8. his reason he rende∣reth for this reply. For I am a man also vnder the authority of another, &c. ver. 9. Fourthly, to our Lords answere, his affectation, appro∣bation, censure, and commendation of the Centurions faith,4 Christ an∣swere and affe∣ctation, his cen∣sure and com∣mendation of the Centurions faith. When Iesus heard it he maruailed, &c. Verily I say vnto you, ver. 10. Vnto this approbation and commendation of the Centu∣rions faith out Lord Iesus annexeth two seuerall causes or reasons: The first, is taken from Gods secret Election of the Gentils:Christs two reasons of this censure. the second, his Reprobation of the Iewes. But I say vnto you, that many shall come, ver. 11. And the children of the kingdome shall be cast out. vet 12. The fift point that we are to hearken vnto is, Christs finall answere vnto the Centurion,5 Christs finall answere, in granting effectu¦ally that which the Centurion had asked faith¦fully. by the granting of his petition in the miraculous cure of his seruants desperate maladie, though the sicke man came not neere Christ bodily, neither came Christ personally neere to him. And Ie∣sus said to the Centurion, Go thy way, and as thou hast beleeued, &c. And his seruant was healed the same houre ver. 13.
God respects fruits of all these fauors.The fourth Sonday after the Epiphany. HE that is so full of compassion both to Iewes and Gen∣tiles,Coherence and connexion of the scriptures for the three former Sondais and rhese two that follow. God lookes for the fruits of his mercy from the trees of his plā∣ting. God requires obedience by the same Pro∣phets mouth by whom he pro∣mised fauour. Summe general of the two first Lessons. Generall sūme of the Epistle and Gospell. as we haue heard in the Scriptures appointed to be read and applied to the Church for the former three Son∣dayes, doth now in these that follow, vrge and require at the hands of Iewes and all other nations, the fruits of such vnspeakable fauours; a walking and conuersation answe∣rable in some measure vnto so great saluation offered. And as in the former Scriptures, by his Prophet Isay he promised such mercies to both sorts of people, making one body in Christ: So by the same Prophet he threatneth them both with punishments (if they proue impenitent) exhor∣ting them to consider well of that which the Lord doth from time to time. Promising to the beleeuers and penitent a withdrawing of his wrath and displeasure, and not to con∣tend with them for euer. In the other two Scriptures which are out of the new Te∣stament: First, the same points of obedience are vrged by S. Paul, euen of euery soule both Iew and Gentile, bond and free: That in their obedience and conscionable subiection to the higher powers, they shew their participation of Gods fauours: Secondly, our Lord Iesus, to teach the disciples o∣bedience and faith, to the fearefull disciples true feare, and religion to the Gergesenes, he causes meteors, elements, winds, sea, demoniacks, diuels, and swine to obey him. Isay the 57 chapter, is the first Lesson for this Morning prayer,Mor. Prayer. 1 Les. Isay. 57. wherein the Prophet tels them, First, of the generality of their blockishnesse, dulnesse,1 A reproofe of their generall blindnesse, in not considering why God takes away the righ∣teous; and an exhortation to repentance. blindnesse, and want of due consideration of Gods punish∣ments in his taking away the righteous and mercifull, be∣cause he will not haue them tast of the afflictions and iudge∣ments to come: for he saith, Peace shall come vpon them, they shall rest in their beds, euery one that walketh before him. And
herewithall he cals the blind vnthankfull and forgetfullGod expects fruits & effects of all. Iewes to repentance,Vnfaithfull and vnthankfull Iewes are called witches chil∣dren. though they be the seed of the adulterer, and of the whore. Verse 1. to the end of the 14. 2 An instructi∣on of others concerning Gods familiari∣ty with the con∣trite.Secondly, he cals the faithfull, lowly and humble, yea the froward couetous persons that will be reclaimed, to con∣sider hereof. That he which inhabiteth eternitie dwelleth also with him that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to reuiue the spirit of the humble,God will be ap∣peased with the peaceable and lowly ones. and to giue life to them that are of a contrite heart. Verse 15, to the end of the 19. Thirdly, the Lord sets downe the fearefull estate of wic∣ked men,3 A description of the fearefull estate of wicked men. who are neuer at quiet, either with themselues or o∣thers, but are like the raging sea, &c. Verse 20.21, which is the end of the chapter. For this cause is the next chapter set out for the Euening seruice, being the 58 of Isay,Eue. Prayer. 1 Les. Isay 58. wherein 1 Exhortation to the Prophet, to reproue the Iews zealously,First, God commands his Prophet to be more earnest in his Ministery against these vnquiet men: nor to be quiet, but to cry aloud, and not to spare, to be as it were, in a rage a∣gainst them. verse 1. 2 Their sinnes are rehearsed in particular, hypocrisie, lip-labour, brag∣ging and meri∣ting,Secondly, God doth particularize some of their sinnes, to wit, first, the sinne of hypocrisie and dissimulation, see∣king of God daily, as though they did righteously like an holy and righteous nation: secondly, nay, their expostulating with God, because of their outward humiliation, Wherefore haue we fasted, &c. verse 2.3. 3 God reproues hypocriticall fasting, and sheweth what a true fast is, and the effects ther∣of.In the third place God reproueth this their fasting, shew∣ing what the true fast is, and what the effects of the true fast are. verse 4, to the end of the 14, the ende of the chapter. The seruant of God, and teacher of the Gentiles, Rom. 13.1, to the end of the 7 verse, in his exhortation vnto sub∣iection,Epistle. Rom. 13.1. ad 7. Summe & scope of it. and obedience to Magistracie, would haue this as a fruit to grow out of the tree of our obedience to God, First, propounding the generall doctrine exhortatiue vnto subiection.Parts. 1 A generall doctrine exhortatiue vnto subiection and obedience to Magistrates, a fruite of the tree of our obedience to God verse 1.
God looks for grapes of these his graces.Secondly, the reasons motiue in the other 6 verses,2 Reasons mo∣tiue to vrge this doctrine, His iniunction or Canon is generall to euery soule without ex∣ception.3 Conclusions exhortatiue that euery one haue his due, but Gods people a∣boue other are tied to obey their Magi∣strates. He chargeth all men of what estate and condition soeuer, Iew or Gentile, male or female, with due obedience to rulers. Thirdly, concluding this point in the 7 verse, That euery man ought to haue his due of others: but chiefly the elect and true seruants of God, euery one of them must yeeld tribute to whom they owe it, custome, feare, honour, to whom it is due, that is, from them and all others.All are disobe∣dient vnto Pro∣phets and Apo∣stles. Now though God by his Prophets perswades all to true and sincere obedience: though Christ by his seruant Paule would haue men to do it, not of feare, but of conscience:Gospell. Math. 8.23. end of the chapter. Summe and drift of it. Our Lord cau∣ses Meteors, Elements, winds, sea, de∣moniacks, di∣uels and swine to obey him, to teach obedience to the disciples, true fare and religion to the Gergelenes. Yet are all, or the most part refractary, rebellious, or forget∣full of their duties. Our Lord Iesus therefore Mathew 8, verse 23, to the end of the chapter, will bring in, as examples of obedience, the most disobedient and vnruely creatures, the most raging, mad and diuelish creatures, the possessed with diuels, the diuels themselues; yea, the very hogs to perswade obedi∣ence vnto them that had so little religion and tast of Gods grace, that were more desirous to haue the countrey rid of Christ Iesus, then to haue his company among them. S. Matthew doth in the first place relate and shew how our Lord teacheth true trust and assured confidence in God vnto his Disciples, by caring for them, and sauing of them, though they were in danger of drowning,Parts generall. A relation of Christs twofold deliuerance, and Christ him∣selfe asleepe. In this part of history S. Mathew doth, First, propound the danger that the Disciples were in, verse 23.24.25. Secondly, Christs rebuke, first, of his Disciples,1 f the disci∣ple, second∣ly, of the winds and the sea,2 Of the demo∣niacks. Thirdly, their deliuerance by Christ out of the danger they were in.Analyse of the, 1 The danger the Disciples were in, 2 Christs reproofe of the Disciples, 3 Their deliuerance out of the danger, Which danger came by reason of the Disci∣ples slendernesse of faith, causing the grossenesse, raging,
and turbulency of the wind and sea. verse 26.Christ teacheth cōfidence, &c. 4 The effect of this miraculous deliuerance.Fourthly, he sets downe also the effect which this mira∣culous deliuery wrought, to wit, an acknowledging of an extraordinary power and preëminence, and per consequens, a diuine power in him whom the maruailing men called a man, And the men maruailed, saying, What man is this, &c. Summe of the relation of the second danger and misery, to wit, of the De∣moniacks.S. Mathews second relation is as concerning the power and authority which Christ hath euen ouer the demoniacks, who are vrged in some fashion to confesse him, and are by that Iesus and Sonne of God, deliuered from that their mi∣serable possession, with such a multitude of diuels and vn∣cleane spirits which vexed them. Analyse of this second,In these men S. Mathew lets vs see not a feare of danger imminent, which was in the Disciples (as is aforesayd) but so present grieuous and tormenting a misery, as can come either to Gentile, Iew, Gergesene, or any other. Their mi∣sery is, 1 The name of their misery,First named, possessed with diuels, 2 Diuerse ef∣fects are men∣tioned either ofSecondly, the Euangelist mentioneth diuerse effects: as first, of their misery,1 Their misery, they came out of the graues very fierce. v 28. Secondly, of Christs power,2 Christs power the force and power of his presence, they cried out, first, saying, Iesus thou Sonne of God, what haue we to do with thee: secondly, Art thou come to tor∣ment vs before the time. verse 29. Another effect of Christs po∣wer describing the Demoniaks deliuerance,Their deliuerance is described by another effect of the powerfull presence of Christ ouer the diuels themselues, and the diuels subiection vnto him, notwithstanding their ma∣licious intent still to do mischiefe. verse 30. 31. 32. Thirdly, the effect of the diuels malice3 The effect of the diuels ma∣lice, vnto the swine, first, his malicious violence, And he hold the whole heard of swine was caried with violence, secondly, the effect hereof, and died in the water. Fourthly, the consequents and effects of this losse of the hogges,4 The conse∣quents and ef∣fects of their losse of their hogges. are expressed, which are, first, either in the heard∣men, secondly, or in others, first, the heardmen fled, secondly, they told all things what was become of the possessed with diuels,
verse 33.Mans waies very light & vain, The second consequent is in others, to wit, the men of the citie: for First, they came out to meete him, Secondly, they besought him to depart out of their coast. Verse 34. The fifth Sonday after the Epiphany. ALmightie God,Summe of the 57 & 58 of Isay, & the coherēce betweene them and these two for this Sonne∣day. who by his Prophet Isay in the 57 and 58 chapters, offered mercy to the Church of the Iewes and Gentiles gathered, or to be gathered: and in lieu there∣of requires that they would not receiue these graces in vain, but bring foorth the fruits of the spirit accordingly, doth now in the 59 and 64 chapters set apart for this daies seruice,Summe of the 59 & 64 chap∣ter of Isay. begin to compare their wayes and workes with his graci∣ous words and deeds, in calling them to an holy conuersa∣tion: and weighing them in his righteous ballances, finds them too light.Summe of the Epistle. And S. Paul perswades the gentile Colossians vnto gentlenesse, meeknesse and kindnesse, which must as garments and ornaments be put on, and of all Christians worne, though the Iewes regarded them not. Our Lord also sheweth (in a parable concerning the state of the Church gathered of Iewes and Gentiles) a reason why the mercies and fauour of God offered to men,Summe general of the Gospell. and ap∣prehended in the receiuing of that good seed of his word, do take no deeper root and worke no better effect in men. The Church of God therefore must (as they do Isay 59,Mor. Prayer. 1 Les. Isay 59,) acknowledge their sinnes vnto almightie God,Summe and scope of the chapter. who neuer∣thelesse is still gracious vnto them by his power, taking ven∣geance of their aduersaries, though they were the Gentiles, and in his mercy calling the Ilands from the West and East,Parts & princi∣pall points, and making a couenant with them. First, there Isay tels them that Gods power is as it was, his fauour in sauing1 That Gods power and fa∣uour in sauing and hearing them as it was, Behold the
Lords hand is not shortned, that it cannot saue. verse 1.Men must pray for reformation of their waies. 2 A reason why God neither deliuers nor heares at some times,Secondly, he sheweth why God at some times doth nei∣ther saue nor heare. The cause is in themselues, But your iniquities haue separated betweene you and your God, and your sinnes haue hid his face from you that he will not heare. verse 2. For your hands are defiled with bloud. verse 3, to the end of the 8 verse. 3 That God doth iustly pu∣nish them,Thirdly, the Prophet in the person of the people ac∣knowledgeth their sinnes, and that God doth iustly punish them for their iniquities, Therefore is iudgement farre from vs, we waite for light, but loe it is darknesse, verse 9. We grope for the wall,4 God doth re∣uenge and re∣quite the fury of his aduersa∣ries. like the blind, verse 10, to the end of the 15. Fourthly, God himselfe cometh forth armed with power, saluation, and righteousnesse, requiting the fury of the ad∣uersaries, verse 16.17.18, and promising the manifestation of Christs spirit vnto the Gentiles,Promiseth the manifestation of his spirit to the Gentiles. The promise was performed by Christ, Mat. 28. And I will make this my couenant with them, My spirit which is vpon thee, and my words which I haue put in thy mouth, &c. verse 19.20.21. which promise Christ himselfe verified, Math. 28. the last verse of the chapter, And loe I am with you alway vnto the end of the world. Eue. Prayer. 1 Les. Isay 62. Summe & drift of the chapter. Supplication & petition after confession of sinnes.Now because after confession and acknowledging of sin by the godly, there followeth supplication and depreca∣tion vnto God for his mercifull fauour, and the remouing of his iudgements and punishments, the Prophet in the 64 chapter takes this course, in the first foure verses, O that thou wouldest breake the heauens and come downe, Parts and prin∣cipall points. 1 Petition, 2 Confession, 3 Begging of mercy in gene∣rall, 4 Intreating it in particular for the citie and the temple. First, beseeching God to reuenge himselfe of the aduer∣saries, verse 1, to the end of the 8. Secondly, acknowledging their sinnes vnto God, ver. 9, to the end of the 16, Thirdly, desiring him to be mindfull of his fatherly mer∣cies promised vnto his children in generall, Fourthly, to shew it vnto his city Ierusalem, and his tem∣ple in Sion in particular.
Saint Paul our gentle teacher perswadeth vs,1 A gentle per∣swasion vnto gentlenesse and meeknesse, by a right and true gentleman. and the Co∣lossians. Colos. 3.12. to the end of the 17,Epistle. Col. 3.12. ad 17. vnto gentlenesse, meeknesse and kindnesse, which vertues must be their and our clothing because God hth in loue chosen them, and made them holy and beloued. verse 12. Secondly, he sets downe the ends or motiue hereof,2 The ends & motiues of this perswasion, and hereunto, As First, that the peace of God may rule in their hearts,The first ende that gods peace may rule in their hearts, because they are called vnto it in one body. verse 15. Secondly, that Christs word may dwell in them as in Christi∣an tabernacles in all wisedome, teaching and exhorting, &c. verse 16.The second, that Gods word may dwell in their hearts, The third end, is the end of all ends, that whatsoeuer they do or speake, it may all be in the name of the Lord Iesus, giuing thanks to the Father by him. verse 17.The third, that they do all in the name of the Lord Iesus, gi∣uing thankes to the Father by him. Saint Mathew chapter 13.24, to the end of the 30.Gospell. Mat. 13.24. ad 30. verse, propounds a parable of our Sauiour Christs to this purpose, and deliuers the vse thereof. The Protasis or parable is of the kingdome of hea∣uen. The Apodosis whereto tis resembled, is,Summe of this Scripture, like vnto a man which sowed good seed in his field. In the parable we may take a view.Parts general First of the sowers good care and diligence,A parable, The applicatiō of the parable. Parts of the pa∣rable, 1 The seedmans diligence, Secondly, of the husbandmens sleepinesse and negli∣gence,2 The labourers negligence, Thirdly, of the enemies interruption and hinderance,3 Interruption and hinderance by the enemy, Fourthly, of the wisedome and precaution, to be vsed in these businesses with patience,4 Wisdome re∣quired in all these businesses with patience. in expecting the time till the good and bad seed may be separated, with care and dili∣gence of the husbandmen and seruants, after the example of the maister, and his precise commandement. The seed-mans good care and diligence is mentioned in the 24 vers. mens sleepinesse in stead of watchfulnesse. v. 25, a cause of the enemies malice and interruption, Then came
his enimy and sowed tares, in the same verse.Examples of meeknesse A confirmation of the truth and vndoubted certainty of the continuall malice and watchfulnesse of the enemy,1 Confirmation of the continual malicious wat∣chfulnesse of the enemy, First, the tares appeared, Secondly, the blade was sprung, Thirdly, and brought forth fruit. verse 26. A second confirmation of the housholders ill successe,2 Cōfirmation of the houshol∣ders ill successe and malice of the enimy. is the seruants certaine knowledge, and consequently their questions hereupon moued to the housholder, which he an∣swereth, teaching them wisedome and warinesse to deale in this businesse. Their first question argueth the truth of the seed-mans goodnesse,The seruants first question. and the seruants acknowledging thereof, though it be propounded interrogatiuely: Sowedst thou not good seed, that is, thou didst sow. Their second question is from their knowledge of the tares,The seruants second que∣stion. but they desired to be fully resolued from whence they came, From whence then hath it tares? verse 27. Their answer they receiue from the housholder,Answer to the first and second question. And he sayd, the enuious man hath done this. The seruants third question. Answer.Their third question is what course is to be taken in such a case, Wilt thou then that we go and gather them vp? verse 28. The answer hereunto is, First, negatiue, Nay, the reason he yeeldeth, Least while ye go about to gather the tares,Reason of the answer. yee plucke vp also with them the wheate, verse 29. Or secondly affirmatiue, 1. In aduising them to haue patience for a time, Let botb grow together, 2. In determining what shal be done, 1. With the tares, And 2. with the wheate. Resolution & determination what shall be∣come of the tares.And secondly, when they shall be so vsed, Thirdly, by whom, First, The tares shall be gathered, Secondly, bound vp in sheaues, Thirdly, they shall be gathered to be burned. All these shall be done at haruest time, and by the reapers,
Patienet expectation.Secondly, the housholder determines what shall be done with the wheateWhat shall bee done with the wheate. and good corne, Gather the wheate into my barne. ver. 30. Septuagesima Sonday. THe History of Christs Gospell as it containeth a most singular methode,Coherence of the doctrines contained in the Scriptures chosen for the three Sondaies following & all the rest. in setting downe first the Aduent and coming of Christ foretold by the Prophets: Secondly, his Incarnation. Thirdly, then his Circumcision. Fourthly, after that his Apparatiō to the Gentiles, & cōti∣nuall fauour to his people, whether Iewes or other nations. Fiftly, his Baptisme, Sixtly, his Fasting, Seuenthly, his Preaching and miracles to confirme his doctrine. Eightly, his Feasting, in eating the Passeouer and ordai∣ning the Supper. And ninthly his Passion. The Christian Church likewise (for the good of all the members thereof) haue in the three Lords daies, or Sabbath,The subiect of the Scriptures chosen for the three Sondaies following. following thought it most fit to chose out such Scriptures, as may best serue for their Humiliation: to prepare and make them fit to receiue such as may be fittest for their instruction in the high mysteries of their redemption: to wit, the Fa∣sting, Temptation, Passion, death, resurrection, ascention, the session of our Lord Iesus, at his Fathers right hand, and his com∣ing to vs once againe, though it be vnto iudgement. Now because nothing can more humble a man then when he shall see, how highly he was in Gods fauour by creation,A very good occasion of hu∣miiation, and how he was and is abased by sin, and fallen by disobedi∣ence, frō such a glorious estate little inferiour to the Angels. Therefore in the first Lesson for this morning prayer,Mor. Prayer 1 Les, Gen. 1. Moses writing the first History shewes, in the first chapter
of the booke of the Creation,Parts. called Genesis.Mans humiliation in consideration, Of his fall from that excellent creation, First, that God made the Chaos,1 The making of the Cahos or Prima materia, or indigested lumpe of nothing. ver. 1.2. 2 The distincti∣on or diuision of the first mat∣ter into forme. the creation of the light & fir∣mament.Secondly, that thereout he distinguished and diuided the seuerall creatures: to wit. 1. the lighs for the first day. ver. 3.4.5. 2. the firmament, which he called heauen, to separate the waters from the waters, for the second daies worke. ver. 6.7.8. Thirdly, that he made the hearbes and trees for the third daies worke, after that the waters:3 The creation of hearbs and trees after the diuision and se∣paration of the waters from the earth. that is, the Seas were gathe∣red together, and that the earth: that is, the dry land appeared, vers. 9.10.11.12.13. Fourthly, that he made the great light of the Sunne and Moone, and the light of the Stars,4 The creation of the Sunne Moone & Stars, for the fourth daies worke, ver. 14.15.16.17.18.19. Fiftly, that he made all creeping things, hauing life, all foules flying, & al fishes swimming,5 The creation of the creatures creeping, flying and swimming, for his fifth daies work, ver. 20.21.22.23. Sixtly, that he made all beasts and cattell, and creeping things of the earth. ver. 24.25. with man and woman, whom he made Lord and Lady ouer the creatures,6 The creation of all beasts of the earth, & of man & woman the Lord and Lady of thē all. ver. 26.27.28. to whō he appointed their diet, wheron they should feed. v. 29. & the diet & food for the beasts, for the fowles, & for the creeping creatures, &c. for his sixt daies worke. ver. 30.31. In the first Lesson for Euening prayer, being the second chapter of Genesis,Eue. Prayer. 1 Less. Genes. 2. Moses will tell and teach vs, Parts.First, that God rested the seuenth day from his worke of creating, though not of propagating and preseruing the creatures.1 God resteth from creating, but not from increasing and preseruing, ver. 1.2.3. Secondly, Moses doth recapitulate in generall, what God did in speciall, in creating the heauen and earth, the vegetals and plants of the field, which he watered with a myst from the earth.2 Moses his ge∣neral recapitut∣lation of Gods special workes, Reasons why God watered the vigitals of earth, with a mist from the earth, 1 Because it had not rayned, 2 Because man was not then made, to husband the earth,
ver. 4.5.6. Thirdly, Moses doth for mans further humiliation shew vs the base matter whereof man this glorious creature was made in respect of his body,3 The mater whereof man was made, and that coelestiall or heauenly matter whereof his soule was made. The Lord God also for∣med the man of the dust or slime of the ground, &c. ver. 7. Fourthly, Moses tels vs that God had a care to prouide as well for mans pleasure, as for his necessity.4 God prouides for mans holy delight as for necessity, 1. in planting a garden eastward in Eden, with all kind of pleasant trees for meate and medicine for man. ver. 8.9. 2. in causing a riuer with 4. streames to ro run 4. waies, to water the garden, as 10.11.12.13, 14. verses. Fiftly, he sheweth that this garden was planted for mans sake; and therefore God placed man therein: but with a pro∣uiso, how he should behaue himselfe in the garden,5 God puts man into the garden, but with a caueat & pro∣uiso how to ea∣ry him, to wit, what he should eate, & what he should not eate, a preceptiue and a prohibitiue commandement. ver. 15.16.17. Sixtly, he doth particularize vnto vs the manner & mat∣ter how & whereof woman was made and broughr by God himselfe to the man, that is, married vnto him. v. 18.19.20.21.22.6 The manner of womans cre∣ation, Seuenthly, that as Adam gaue names to other creatures, according to theit natures, as v. 19. so he first giues the name Mannesse shee man or woman to his wife,7 Adās wisedōe and authority in nominating the creatures & his owne wife, and secondly doth therein shew the neerenesse and deerenesse of a mans wife vnto husband aboue father and mother. ve. 23.24. Eightly, that all these fauours of God were imparted vn∣to man & woman in their innocency,8 Mankind had all these fauours in their innocē∣cy. and they were both naked the man and his wife, and were not ashamed. ve. 25. Saint Paul being a minister of Christ,Epistle. 1 Cor, 9, 24, Summe gene∣rall and scope thereof, a man that should giue light vnto other, doth here make himselfe a patterne of piety and humiliation, teaching by his workes of subdu∣ing his flesh, as by his spirituall and holy words vnto others the true humiliation of soule and body.Parts. This he doth 1. Cor. 9.29, to the end of the chapter. In which Scripture. First, he teacheth by similitudes,1 Teaching by similitudes,
1 Of those that run in a race. ver. 24.Paul an example of humiliation, 2 Of such as proue maisteries. ver. 25. Seondly he teacheth by example and applyeth the simi∣tudes to himselfe.2 Teaching by example ad applic tion of the similitudes, The 1 I therefore so runne ver. 26. The 2 So fight ver. 26. 3 The manner & meanes how Saint Paul doth both,Thirdly, the course that he takes to performe both these, is, 1 , to beate downe his body 2. , to bring it into subiection. Fourthly, he propounds the end why he did both these that God may haue the glory, by his glorious not infamous walking in his ministery, by doing and performing that which he teacheth, and in not being : that is, without honour and credit: as those are which do preach that vnto others which themselues will not practise, the greatest infa∣my that can come to a man in his ministery: yea, or to any priuate person running in the race of holy profession and Christianity.4 He propoun∣deth the end why he doth al. Who are most infamous in their ministery and in the pro∣fession of Chri∣stianity. Our Sauiour in his Gospell written by S. Matthew chap. 20. ver. 1. to the end of the 16.Gospell. Math. 20.1 ad 16 Generall scope thereof. will shew vnto his poeple in the parable of the labourers hired into the vine-yard, how they must alwaies belabouring & doing good, & herein wil also shew the pride & hautines of some men, their vnthank∣fulnes, discontentednes, murmuring, & maliciousnes, enuy∣ing the good estate of others, which ariseth from the meere loue & fauour of God (they doing herein as the diuell did at man as soone as he was created,Parts general when this his aduersary saw how greatly man was of his Creator fauored. The parable1 The parable, reacheth from the 1. ver. to the end of the 15. The vse of the parable is in the 16 ver.2 The vse of it. What the para∣ble is, So the last shall be the first, &c. for many are called, &c. Parts special.The parable is a resemblance of the kingdome of heauen vnto a certaine housholder. In whom we may see First, his loue and care to his Vineyard,1 The houshol∣ders loue and care for his vineyard. in calling, proui∣ding & hiring labourers from the 1. ver. to the end of the 7.
Christ loues whom he will, and how he will.Secondly, his rewarding and payment, his iustice and equall dealing with the labourers,2 His iust dea∣ling with the labourers. ver. 8. to the end of the 15. The housholder calleth and bargayneth alike with his seruants,3 His bargai∣ning with the workfolkes. fiue seuerall times,Fiue times. The first time1 Time is at the dawning of the day. ver. 1.2. The second2 Time is about the third houre. ver. 3. & 4. The third and fourth times3 & 4 Time are about the sixt and ninth houre ver. 5. The fifth time5 Time is about the eleuenth houre, as ver. 6. and 7. The iustice and equall dealing of the housholder is ge∣nerally expressed,Explanation of the housholders iustice and e∣quall dealing. in commanding the steward to call the Labourers from the last to the first, and giue them a peny a peece, their couenanted and contracted hire. ver. 8.9. The truth and confirmation of this iustice,Confirmation of this iust dea∣ling. Saint Mat∣thew sets downe in the truth and equality of the words and agreement passed betweene the aduocate, who takes vpon him the part of the defendant and the clients or laborours, who are the plaintifs and the contradicents contrary suppo∣nents or opponents, These opponents not reckoning aright, nor suppsing a∣right, being the first that were hired, yet had their right, as ver. 10. These enuious and captious labourers do reply vp∣on the housholder their maister.The hired la∣bourers capti∣ous and enuious reply. 1. Secretly by murmuring,1 They mur∣mure. as ver. 11. 2 Openly or outwardly by accusing their maister of in∣iustice and inequality:2 They accuse. saying, These last haue wrought but one howre, but thou, &c. ver. 12. The housholder makes answere to one of the murmurers for all the rest.The houshol∣ders answere to the murmurer, to conten him, is three-fold. 1 In a common plea, a flat deniall of the vniust deed wherewith he was charged, Non est factum:1 Non est factū. Friend I do thee no wrong. 2 By prouing the truth thereof,2 The consci∣ence of the re∣plyer and nt. testimonio opponentis, con∣scientia opponentis, ipsius orese iudicat: Didst thou not agree with me for a peny. ver. 13.
3 By counselling and commanding the murmurer to de∣partProud enuious, & malicious, & contented with his owne, Take that which is thine owne, and go thy way. Of this peremptory counsell and commande∣ment the housholder yeeldeth three reasons.3 A perempory counsell & con∣clusion groun∣ded vpon three foundations. The first is drawne from his owne free bounty1 The free bounty and goodnesse of the housholder. and wil∣lingnesse to shew himselfe as kind to the last that was hired, as to the first. ver. 14. The second is taken from the lawfulnesse of the good disposing of his owne,2 An old rule taken from the lawfull vse of e∣uery mans own after the good pleasure of his will, Is it not lawfull for me, &c. The third from a iust reproofe of the enuious murmurer,3 A iust reprofe and censorious iudgement of the enuious gudgers bad heart & tongue, whose eye is euill and therefore his heart is grudging at his fellowes prosperity, proceeding meerely from the good housholders liberality: arising not from other mens deserts, but from his owne loue and willing bounty. Is thine eye euill because I am good. ver. 15. Sexagesima Sonday. Coherence of the 3 & 6 with the 1 & 2 of Genesis. God gaue man more then a pe∣ny for his work in the garden, Vegetals for meate, and ani∣mals for other vses would not content him. Summe of the two first Lessōs The reason of the choise of these Scriptures is for mans fur∣ther humiliati∣on, Summe of the Epistle and Gospell. Man is to boast of nothing but his infirmity. By this he be∣comes that good lowly ground where∣in that good seed of Gods word fructifi∣th.AS the matter whereof man was made might haue bene a meanes of his humiliation: so all the good which God did towards him, might haue continued his thankful∣nesse and contentednesse with that excellent and glorious estate. And as Gods placing of man in the garden to dresse it and keepe it: yea, giuing him more then a peny for his la∣bour, might haue bene a competent maintainance to a con∣tented creature, who had the creatures vegetating in the garden for his meate and pleasure, and those out of the gar∣den, going, creeping and swimming, for his necessary vses, at his commandement: Euen so he might haue bene so much the better contented, with his estate of innocency, of wise∣dome, and immortality. Christs Church therfore hath chosen two other Scriptures, out of Moses his Genesis for mans further humiliation, to shew man his great downefall, from so excellent glory: That be∣ing
Man did not continue humble, &c.humbled in the sight thereof he might haue nothing to boast of, except it be of his infirmities (as S. Paul doth in the Epistle for this day) and so become that good ground spoken of in the Gospell, wherein the good seed being sowen brought foorth good fruite: that is, out of an honest and good heart, heare Gods word (better then Eue and A∣dam did) keepe it, and bring forth fruite with patience, as our Lord sheweth in the Gospell Luk. 8.15. In the third chapter of Genesis, Moses first expresseth mans fall in two dialogues,Mor. Prayer. 1 Less. Genes. 3. Parts general 1 Mans fall in two dialogues, from the 1. ver. to the end of the 13. Secondly, the effect that this fall wrought2 The effect of this fall, in the cause & caused, 1 In the motiue and instrumentall & procreating cause thereof the serpent. 2 In those that yeelded to the serpents motions the man and woman. ver. 14. to the end of the chapter. The dialogue is two-fold. The first is perswasiue,1 Dialogue perswasiue, betweene the lying sophister the Serpent tempting the woman: and the weake tempted and yeelding woman. ver. 1. to the end of the 7. The second dialogue is reprehēsiue2 Dialogue re∣prehensiue, Effect foure∣fold of the transgression & obiurgatiue, twixt Almighty God, reproouing and chiding the man and the woman, and cursing the Serpent. ver. 8.9.10, 11.12.13. The effect of the trangression is foure-fold:Effect foure-fold of the transgression 1 In Gods cursing the serpent.1 Serpents curse. ve. 14.15. 2 In Gods punishing the woman,2 Punishment of the woman, ver. 16. 3 In Gods cursing the earth for mans sake.3 Punishment of the earth, ver. 17.18. 4 In Gods punishing of man fourefold.4 Punishment of man, which was foure-fold, First, inioyning him to labour with paine.1 Labour with paine, ver. 19. Secondly, in making of clothes2 Clothing, for him to couer his na∣kednesse. ver. 20.21. Thirdly,3 Exile, in sending him out off the garden (where he li∣ued like a King) to til the earth where he toiled like a clown. ver. 22.23. Fourthly, in setting the Cherubines & the blade of a sword4 Terrour by the Cherubines & the fiery sha∣king sword.
shaken to keepe the way of the tree of life,The fall of our first Parents▪ from the sight and hand of man, as v. also 23. tis declared. In the Lesson for euening prayerEue. Prayer. Gen. 6.1 Les. Gen. 6, Moses will shew how that out of the first bad weede and venemous tree of disobedience proceedeth the loathsome fruite of malice,Sūme & scope geenerall, . Wickednesse followed the forgerfulnesse of Gods bene∣fits & blessings. Peccandi nullus finis cum a ratio∣ne disceditur. and murther, vncleane lust, and letchery. And that by how much the more Gods blessing of propagation and multipli∣cation, was vpon the world and Church continued, by so much this their filthinesse was increased: whereupon God brought a plague of waters to wash away the sin and sinners wherein all flesh perished; though he reserued a few, where∣with and by whom he would be obeyed and honored. In the first part of the chapter,Parts of the chapter. one of the speciall crying sinnes is described for all the rest. verse 1.2.3.4. with the displeasure which God conceiued against mankind for this sinne.1 A description of one of the speciall crying sinnes, & Gods displeasure cō∣ceiued, ver. 5.6.7. In the other part: first a relation2 A relation, of Gods fauour vnto Noah,1 Of Gods fa∣uour to his Church, ver. 8.9.10. who (liuing vpon the earth that was so corrupt and filled with wickednesse, cruelty &c.) which with the inhabitants was to be destroyed, as ver. 11.12.13. was therefore to be taken from the earth, and borne vp of the waters in his Arke: which he is commanded to make. ve. 14. In the third part Moses describes the forme and propor∣tion of the Arke.2 Of his iu∣stice to the world. 3 A description of the Arkes forme, ver. 15.16. with the reasons why Noah was to make the Arke. First, Behold I will bring a floud. ver. 17. The second reason is, but with thee wil I establish my couenant, and thou shalt go into the Arke. ver. 18. The vse of which Arke, and end why it was madeThe end why it was made, so capacious, is declared. ver. 19.20.21. In the fourth part Moses doth shew what effect Gods commandement tooke in Noah: to wit, his obedience in all things.4 The effect of Gods comman∣dement in Noe is his obedi∣ence, ver. 22. In the EpistleEpistle. written, 2: Cor. 11. ver. 19. to the end
of the 32.Crying sinnes of the first age, God fauoureth Noah and his, He that saith, Galatians 6.17. I beare in my body the markes of the Lord Iesus. & Colos. 1.24.Summe Gene∣rall of the Epi∣stle. God would prooue S. Pauls word true, I fulfill the rest of the sufferings of Christ in my flesh, &c. doth now shew by his wo∣full experience, how God would haue him (being but a tea∣cher of the truth) to be humbled in suffering for the testi∣mony of the Gospell, not being inferior to any of the false Apostles in that true and constant boasting & reioycing in these things and many more wherein they falsly reioyced.Paul is a good example of a right humbled minister, He is herein a good example of a minister truely humbled in soule and in body fitly prepared to preach Christ crucifi∣ed, to suffer with Christ and for Christ.Parts of the text, First, therefore he perswades them to suffer him (seeing they suffered fooles gladly) to reioyce after the flesh.1 A perswasion to endure his reioycing. ver. 19.20.21. Secondly, he propounds the matter and grounds:2 A propoun∣ding of the mat∣ter and ground first of his outward reioycing in the flesh,1 Of his owne reioycing in the flesh, whereof The first ground is his stocke and kindred.1 In his kindred ver. 22. The second is his place and function,2 In his calling and function. a minister, yea more then a Minister: that is, more then such false Ministers which he sheweth in particular: to wit, in labours more aboundant, in stripes aboue measure, &c. ver. 23.24.25.26.27. Secondly, he propounds the matter of his inward reioy∣cing,2 His inward reioycing which is threefold, as, First, in his daily cumber and care1 Dayly care for all the Churches. ve. 28. Secondly, in his weakenesse and being ouertoiled in his minde and spirit.2 Ouertoyling himselfe, Thirdly, in the manifold scandales which were offered3 Greefe at the manifold scan∣dels offered, vnto the Church, whieh he could not but zealously greeue at, ver. 29. Thirdly, the Apostle propounds the manner of both his reioycings,3 A propoun∣ding of the manner of both his reioycing and the mind or affection wherewith he doth it: to wit, in great humility and weakenesse: that is, of his in∣firmities, ve. 30. as Gal. 6.14, he reioyceth in the crosse of our Lord Iesus Christ whereby the world, &c. Fourthly,4 A confirma∣tion of all by Gods owne te∣stimony he confirmes the truth of this outward and in∣ward reioycing, that it was vnfained, and not false like that
of the false Apostles,Christ shews who are rightly humbled. by taking God himselfe to witnesse the truth that he speaketh. The God, euen the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, which is blessed for euer, knoweth that I lie not. verse 31. In the holy GospellGospell. written by S. Luke, chapter 8, verse 4, to the end of the 15,Luke 8.4, ad 15. Summe and scope. Christ shewes who they are that are truely and rightly hum∣bled. our Lord will tell the people (which came to him out of all cities, as verse 4.) by a parable, which he expoundeth vnto his disciples, who are the true humbled and contrite people indeed, euen such as tremble at his word, Isay 66.2. that is, with an honest and good heart heare it, keepe it, and bring forth fruit with pa∣tience, to the 15 verse of this chapter. In the text consider generally,Parts generall of the text, First, the parable1 Parable, it selfe, Secondly, the occasion that Christ tooke to expound it,2 Occasion of the exposition thereof, Thirdly, our Lords exposition3 Christs expo∣sition, thereof, as he propoun∣ded it. And because the Church of God hath carefully culled out this Scripture for vs:Why the Church hath culled out this text of Scrip∣ture for this time. the better to prepare vs by the fruitfull hearing of Gods word, vnto a more diligent con∣sideration of the doctrines following, concerning the pas∣sion and resurrection of Christ (falling out to be celebrated but 8 weekes after) we ought therefore yet more specially to hearken vnto our Lords Sermon. In the first part whereof, being the parable,Parts of the Parable, he speakes First, of the sower,1 Sower Secondly, of seed,2 Seed, Thirdly, of the manifold successe of this sowen seed,3 Successe of both: that is, o∣perae & olei not∣withstanding the seedmans diligence. The sower is one, the seed is all one, but the successe is manifold,Successe differs from the Sower and seed, that is, fourefold. verse 5. First, some fell by the way side, therefore two discom∣moditiesFirst ground, the way side had two dis∣commodities, grew thereof, for First, Twas troden vnderfeete, Secondly, The soules of heauen deuoured it vp. verse 5.
The godly hearers & faithful practisers.Secondly,Secondly, the stony ground had the faire commodity of springing vp, with the discō∣modity of wi∣thering, some fell on the stones, which though it made a faire shew in springing, yet this glory was turned into shame: for the hopeull springing was turned into an hope∣lesse withering, because it lacked moysture. verse 6. Thirdly, some fell among thornes, and the thornes sprang vp with it and choked it,3 The thorny ground had the discommo∣dity of choking all that came vp verse 7. Fourthly, some fell vpon good ground,4 Good groūd hath all good commodities & effects with∣out any discom∣modity at all, an happy fall, a blessed lot, a goodly heritage: for First, it sprang vp, Secondly, it bare fruit, Thirdly, in great measure, an hundredfold. verse 8. The occasion of the exposition being the second part, containeth First, Christs zealous motiue to attention, He that hath eares to heare, &c. verse 8. Secondly, the Disciples demaund of the exposition of the parable.Second part of the Gospell the occasion of the exposition. verse 9. Thirdly,Third part of the Gospell Christs answer, Vnto you it is giuen, &c. but to o∣ther in parables, that when they see they should not see, &c. v. 10. The exposition of the parable whereof Christ Iesus our Lord expounds two chiefe parts,Christs exposi∣on of the para∣ble and all the parts thereof. as First, what the seed is. verse 11. Secondly, what the fourefold ground and successe of the seed therein is. The first ground is of them beside the way,What the first kind of ground is, by the way side. Those are a kind of hearers, out of whose hearts the diuell takes away the word, least they should beleeue and be saued. v. 12. The second, which is the stony ground,The second kind of ground are such hearers which First, receiue with gladnesse, Secondly, haue no rootes, Thirdly, beleeue for a while, Fourthly, in the time of tentation go away. verse 13. The third, is the thorny ground, who are such hearers,What the third ground and hearers are. which First, are choked with cares,
Secondly, they are choked with riches,Faithfull practisers are &c, Thirdly, they are choked with voluptuous liuing; therefore they bring forth no fruite. ver. 14. Properties of the fourth groūd included in a smal room, an honest and good heart the best place of the body.The fourth soile is the fertile ground, they are such hea∣rers which First, with an honest and good heart and minde heare the word. Secondly, they keepe it. Thirdly, they bring forth fruite with patience. ver. 15. Quinquagesima Sonday. Coherence of the ninth and twelfth with the third and sixt chapters of Ge∣nesis, Summe of the 9 of Geness,THat great and fearefull God, who hauing destroyed mankind, by the floud of waters because of sinnes de∣luge which had ouerflowed the earth, doth now in that mer∣cifull fauour which Noah found in his sight for the preserua∣tio of him and his, giue him also the gracious blessing of in∣crease and multiplication, not in these outward things of his world alone: but in knowledge faith, obedience and o∣ther graces wherein he grew and increased, though not with out his sinne also and infirmities. The nith chapter of Genesis therefore is not an vnfit Scrip∣ture to shew this and other great fauours of God. But the twelfth chapter,Summe of the twelfth chapter of Genesis. maketh plaine vnto vs, how God had a pur∣pose to encrease his Church and not the world alone: and therefore made his first promise to Abram, that he would make a great nation of him, blesse him, &c. Albeit he should haue the performance of this promise, out of his owne coun∣try, kindred and fathers house after his iourney vnto Canaan. How hath the Church of Christ accommodated the thir∣teenth chapter, 1. Corinth. hereunto, which giueth all Gods people to vnderstand,Summe of the Epistle, 1. Cor, 13 Loue the origi∣nall of gifts. thar whatsoeuer gifts and graces God doth increase in men, the gift of loue must be the originall of them: as the ground to beare them, as the heueanly moi∣sture to water them: as the salt to season them, and as the
sure matter of the Churches edification and sustentation.Noah fructifieth internally This loue our onely patterne of loue practised,Summe of the gospell Luk. 18 13. Christs practise of loue. both in prophecying his passion, death and resurrection vnto his Disciples, and in offering himselfe vto the bind man so lo∣uingly, What wilt thou that I do vnto thee, as verse 41. Luke 18. which is the Gospell for the day. In the first of these foure Scriptures, Genesis 9,Mor. Prayer. 1 Les. Gen 9. Parts of the first Lesson, 1 Letters pa∣tents of Gods blessed cōman∣dement for mans Multi∣plication, Authoritie, Meate. more may be seene and found, if thereon we looke more wishly, and search into it more diligenty, First, Gods blessed and blssing commandement goeth forth, as 1 For mans multiplication, verse 1. 2 For mans authority ouer the beasts, soules and fishes, verse 2. 3 For mans meate and food to feed liberally on the ani∣mals, as he did before on the vegetals verse 3. But with this prouiso annexed to his letters parents, that flesh with the life thereof, that is, with the bloud thereof, they should not eate. verse 4.5.6.7. Secondly, God draweth indentures of couenant betwixt himselfe of the one partie,2 Indentures of couenant be∣tweene God himselfe, Noah, and the crea∣tures. Rainbow is the seale set to these indentures and Noah and the creatures on the other partie, that from henceforth, all flesh shall not be rooted out by the waters of the floud. verse 8.9.10.11.12. The confirmation and seale of these indentures is Gods bow in the cloud. verse 13.14.15.16.17. Thirdly, we may with teares behold the subsequence and sequele hereof, that Noah,3 Sequele and effect ereof in Noah and his children, though an holy man, and a hus∣bandman, played not the good husband, but grew intem∣perate in the abuse of the creatures, as verse 18.19.20 21, whose nakednesse in his drunkennesse was vncharitably propalated by Cham. verse 22. but most reuerently couered by Shem and Iapheth. verse 23. the wicked deed of the yon∣ger sonne seene and cursed. verse 24.25. the godly and re∣spectiue loue of Shem and Iapheth blessed, as verse 26.27.4 Part of the chapter oahs Chronicle. Fourthly, the memorable time of Noahs life before and
after the floud, is recorded by Moses. verse 28.29.Abraham beleeued the promise. The first Lesson for Euening prayer Gen. 12,Eue. Prayer. 1 Les. Gen. 12. being bet∣ter looked into will teach vs how Gods fauour to Abraham in a particular promise tooke good effects of faith, loue and obedience. Parts.First, Abram is commanded to go out of his countrey, verse 1,1 Gods com∣mandement for Abrams trauaile, with a good reason or motiue annexed hereunto. verse 2.3. This commandement he obeyed, in taking his iourney. verse 4, whose Itinerarium or iournall, is geogra∣phically set forth. verse 5.6.7.8.9. 2 Abrams crosses were cō∣panions to him in his iourney. His troubles were,Secondly, Moses deliuers vnto vs the history of the cros∣ses and troubles which were concomitants of Abrams iour∣ney, as 1 The famine in the land, verse 10, which though twas generall,1 Generall, yet he had his part and particular share in it, 2 The speciall trouble which he had in that heathen coun∣try, as first, to saue his owne life, secondly, his wiues repu∣tation and honesty. verse 11.12.13. The hard effect which his carefull and troubled pollicy2 Particular. Hard effects of his troubled pollicy, tooke, is expressed to be a malo in peius. For the Aegyptians marueiled at, and gaped on the womans beautie, both people, princes, and king himselfe, and vsed Abram well for his wiues sake, as verse 14.15.16. 3 Abrams deli∣uerance out of his troubles.Thirdly, Moses tels vs how God deliuered his righteous seruant Abram and his wife out of aduersitie, first, by pla∣guing Pharaoh and his house for their lust. ver. 17. secondly, by the checke which the heathen king gaue to Abram. verse 18.19. thirdly, by the kings honourable dismissing of the Patriarch and his wife. verse 20. The Apostle S. Paul in the Epistle for this day, 1. Cor. 13.Epistle. 1. Cor. 13. chapter, teacheth vs the vse of the former doctrine, the end why God bestowes benefits and blessings, gifts and graces vpon the Church of Christ.Summe of the Epistle. The end why God bestowes his graces and blessings vpon his Church. He sheweth also the end of prosperity and aduersity, that they might shew their loue vnto God, in the setting forth of his glory in the Church,
Edification in loue is the end, &c.whereof he is a member,Parts of the E∣pistle, and in a zealous and sincere affe∣ction of loue for the edification of himselfe and Christs Church, in the imployment and dispensation of Gods gifts in the Church. First, the Apostle sheweth that the gifts and graces of God, are to small or no purpose of edifying or profiting,1 Doctrine, Graces & gifts haue slender & fruitlesse vse without loue. Paul is a suppo∣sed exampl of the truth of this doctrine, to such as haue them or vse them to others, except the grace of loue and intent of edifying be mixed and present with them, yea to make it more plaine, he proueth it to be true in him∣selfe, whom he propoundeth for a suppositiue example of demonstration of the former true proposition, If I had the gifts of tongues, of men, and Angels, without loue, I am (saith he) as sounding brasse, &c. verse 1. Secondly, that the gifts of prophecie, knowledge, and all faith, without loue would make him become as nothing, verse 2. Thirdly, to giue all his goods to the poore, and his body to the fire, without loue would profit him nothing, verse 3, Nec est in caeteris contrarium videre; therefore the proposition aforesaid is most true. In the second part of the chapter, that men may the better know loue,2 A description of loue, that men may loue it the better, and so be in loue with such an excellent grace of God the Apostle describes loue by the seuerall effects and properties, either , as in the rest of the chapter, to the end of the 13 verse. The qualities and effects which he doth affirmatiuely,Qualities of loue set downe, by 1 Position, 2 Contraposi∣tion. and by way of position propound, are in number 8, where∣of two are in the 4 verse, one in the 6 verse, 4 in the 7 verse, and the 8 in the 13 or last verse of the chapter. Those which he deliuers negatiuely, per contrarium, or contrapo∣sitionem, are in number 9, three in the 4 verse, 4 in the, ver. one in the 6 verse, and one in the 8 verse. Vpon the last propertie he dilateth longest, because it is loues perma∣nencie, lasting, and continuing longest,Loues lasting & permanency is her best pro∣pertie. which he com∣pareth with, and preferreth aboue prophecying, tongues, knowledge faith and hope, and that in the other sixe ver∣ses,
from a part of the 8 verse, to the end of the chapter:Of Gods graces and benefit. so concluding that loue is the chiefest gift, because it lasteth longest. In the former Scripture S. Paul deliuers to our view a no∣table picture, and yet but a theorie or theorical Idea of Loue.Summe, A comparison betwixt the pi∣cture o loue & Christ himselfe the body and substance of loue. But in the Gospell Luke 18.31.Gospell. Luke 8.31. to the end of the chapter: we may behold the viue-idea, and substantiall body (not an image) of the greatest loue that euer was shewed vnto man∣kind. Who willingly intending to shew his loue vnto man in suffering, dying, and rising againe: first called his twelue Schollers, and foretold all vnto them, though they vnder∣stood it not. Secondly, as he was going in his iourney to Hierusalem about that businesse, he shewed himselfe the sweetest and most louing Physition of soule and body that euer was, not tarrying till the blind man sent for him, but first in coming to the blind man, and offering his louing ser∣uice vnto him:Parts of the gospell, but secondy, also in performing of that which was needfull for the blind mans good. First,1 Christs theo∣ry in foretelling his death, therfore Christ is as a theorick vnto his Disciples, to prophecie and presage vnto his schollers (that they might be ared with patience and humility before it cam) what should betide him at his iourneys end (which was the end of his going to Hierusalem) that is, when he was once come to Hierusalem, and that in the first 4 verses. Secondly, S. Luke tels vs what effect this prophecying Sermon and worthy contempatiue most louing and fami∣liar speech tooke in the Disciples,2 S. Luke tels what effect Christs theory and sermon tooke, they vnderstood none of these sayings &c. verse 34. Thirdly, S. Luke shewes how our God of loue fals a pra∣ctizing of loue in a most speedy, most kind and free healing of the blind man,3 Christs pra∣ctise of loue in the cure of the blind man. wherein we may see 1 The occasion of this miraculous cure, 2 The cure it selfe or forme of the cure, 3 The consequent or effects thereof. Christ gaue the first occasion or on-set hereof, by his
coming neere to Hierico,Christ is the substance of loue, &c. where the blind man was. ver. 35.Christ himselfe gaue the first occasion of this cure. The blind man gaue the second,The blind man giues another. who being in necessity, because he was a beggar, & blind too, begd mercy at the hands of the God of mercy. ver. 36.37.38. And being interrupted by rebuke, yet was more earnest, and his mouth more open with ô sonne of Dauid. ver. 39. Christ himselfe giues further occasion of doing this mi∣racle to this beggar.Christ giues more occasions 1 In making a stand, 2 In giuing out a command, as ver. 40. 3 In parleying with the blind man, 1. for the better ap∣probation of his faith: 2. for the confirmation of Christs vnspeakable loue towards him: 3. for the certainty of the miracle in the sight of them all, as in the end of the 40. & in the 41. verse. The forme of this miraculous cure is,The forme of this cure, Receiue thy sight, not Recipe florum, foliorum, radicum, &e. ver. 42. The effects are two-fold.The effects of the cure. 1 In himselfe, which was cured, immediatly he followed Christ and praised God. 2 In all the people, who when they saw it, gaue praise to God. ve. 43. The first Sonday in Lent. THe Father of our Lord Iesus Christ gaue a commande∣ment of increasing, and a blessing therewith,Dependance of the 19 and 32 chapters of Gene¦sis with the 19 & 12 chapters. that the world might increase after the floud, but chiefly that his Church and holy people might be multiplyed, for the mul∣plying of their praises vnto God in thought,Mankind is mul¦tiplied that he might multiply his praises to God. word, and deed. Our Lord Iesus Christ himselfe propounds no other end of the good and honest hearing of Gods word,Christ pro∣poūds it in the Gospell before going. & receiuing the graces and gifts of God, then a multiplication in fructi∣fication. Saint Paul shewed vs the manner how we should
do all,Pauls argument and subiect is the same. and the salt of loue to God and our neighbours,Sodomites forget the bles∣sing of crescie & multiply and the curse of Deluge wherewith all mens gifts must be seasoned, as we heard in the foure former precedent Scriptures. Summe of the foure Scriptures following.In these 4 following we may see, First in the filthy Sodomites, the slender regard that they had of Crescite and multiplicamini: either of Gods bles∣sing  or of any other benefite or grace of God, or of the late destruction of the world for filthy lust and cru∣elty. Secondly, that notwithstanding their wickednesse not to be named amongst Christians, though blamed and pur∣ged by the showre of fire and brimstone, yet the Lord God would shew himselfe vnto his friend Abraham; most gracious in preaching Christ vnto him, vnder a type and figure of sacrificing his sonne Isaak and in re∣iterating the promise. By my selfe haue I sworne, &c. And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be bles∣sed. Paul and the other Minsters of Christ being workers to∣gether, making vse of the doctrines concerning the publi∣cation of this embassage of blessing and saluation in and by Christ, beseeching the Church of Christ that they would not re∣ceiue this grace of God in vaine. In the Gospell for the day it doth appeare, how our Lord by the Spirit is led into the wildernesse, to buckle with sa∣than, whom he not onely woundeth, but ouercomes, that we in this our Champion and Captaine beleeuing, might not onely ouercome the world, but sin, sathans temptation, and condemnation. Mor. Prayer. 1 Les. Gen. 19.In the first of these foure Scriptures, which is Genesis 19. Moses doth shew vs, PartsFirst, the intertainement of two Angels, two manner of waies:1 The two-fold entertainment of the two An∣gels. to wit, their good vsage by Lot. 2 Their bad vsage by the Sodomits: Their good vsage by Lot is two-fold, the
First, is mentioned in the 1.2.3. ver. the Second, in the 6.7. & 8. verses. The Angels bad intertainment by the Sodomites is two-fold. The first is mentioned. ver. 4.5. The second is in the 9. ver. In the second part of this chapter Moses tels vs how Lot and his family were from these beastly sauages,2 Lots deliue∣rance from Sodom burning, and from Gods fire which burnt all. and from the fire of God preserued, and how filthy Sodom and wicked Gomorthe were consumed: which he expresseth in a large dis∣course from the 10. ve. to the end of the 24. In the third part, how Lots wife was taken in the taile of the fiery showre and storme for looking behind her.3 Lots wiues pu∣nishment in the end and taile of the fiery showre. ver. 26. Fourthly, Moses tels vs how Abraham was a beholder of all these iudgements brought vpon Sodom,4 Abraham saw all this and God was mindfull of his mercy to Lot and Abraham and that God was mindfull of his mercy promised to Abraham and Lot in the midst of these iudgements, ver. 27.28.29. Fiftly, Moses records that ill measure which Lot did mete vnto his God for all the former fauours to him,5 Lots vnthank∣fulnesse to God for all. and his, viz. the taking in of an immeasurable and vnreasonable quantity of wine, whereupon he was prouoked vnto vnsa∣tiable and vnnaturall filthinesse, euen the committing of in∣cest. ver. 30. to the end of the 38. which is the end of the chapter. The second of these Scriptures, Genesis 22. chapter,Eue. Prayer. 1 Less. Gen. 22. doth affoord History. 1 Of Abrahams faith1 The history of Abrahams faith. and obedience in offering vp his sonne Isaak, from the 1. ver. to the end of the 19:Parts. 2 Of the pedigree of his brother Nahor2 The pedigree of Nahor Abra∣hams brother, grandfather to Rebekah which was married to Isaak. ver. 20. to the end of the. 24. In the story of the sacrifice are considered First, Gods commandement to Abraham, ve. 1.2. Secondly, Abrahams faith & obedience, frō the 3. v. to the
end of the 14.Abraham remembers all, & is obedient to Gods, &c, Thirdly, the subsequent effects hereof, from the 15. ver. to the end of the 19. The third Scripture, which is the EpistleEpistle. for this day. written. 2. Cor. 6. ver 1.2. Cor. 6.1. to the end of the tenth, is the edge of the former (and the like doctrines) with an exhortation con∣cluding the doctrine concerning the vse of all,Summe or the most of Gods graces and fauours tendred vnto vs in this glorious ministery of the Gospell, containing mans reconciliaiion vnto God the father by the onely merits of his Sonne Christ our Sauiour. Parts:In the first part wherof S. Paul propounds the exhorta∣tion.1 Exhortatiō 2 Motiues to itIn the next place the motiues wherewith he perswades to it. Parts of the exhortation.The exhortation is so emphaticall and patheticall of it selfe, that vnto good people attending well thereto it were sufficient. For if we respect The mannerManner. of the exhortation, So we therefore as workers together beseech you: Or The matter,Matter, that ye receiue not the grace of God in vaine, as ver. 1. it is no ordinary perswasion, but most pithy and Rhe∣toricall. Grounds of this Rheoricall manner of ex∣horting.The grounds of this elegant Rhetorick are First, most ancient and Canonical Scripture.1 Canonicall Scripture. For he saith, I haue heard thee in a time accepted, &c. cited out of Isay, 49.8. as ver. 2. or Secondly, the honored approued, or rather the honora∣ble conuersation,2 Examples of the holy con∣uersation of the Apostles, and example of the Apostles and ministers of Christ, who 1 Are not scandalous in any thing, because they would auoide the obloquies and reproches of their ministery. ver. 3. 2 But in all things, to thēselues & others are as the ministers of Christ, approued in much patiēce, in afflictiōs in necessities
in distresses,Exhortations and examples, &c. ver. 4. This holy walking and approuednesse of the blessed Apostles, the first pillars of the Christian Church, is nine and twenty times put to the Apostles touch-stone of tryall.The approued∣nesse of the A∣postles in twēty nine times put to the teast and tryall. It hath Three touches in the fourth verse. Foure in the fifth verse. Eight in the sixt verse. Three in the seuenth verse. Fiue in the eight verse. Three in the ninth, and three in the tenth verse. It must needs be good mettall that will abide nine and twenty sayes or examinations.Good and pure mettall, a most golden mini∣stery most ex∣quisit teaching. It must needes be a golden ministery that did abide so many tryals, Exquisitely were those people taught by such kind of teachers, which for their doctrines were so gracious, and for their liues so honorable. In the fourth Scripture which is the GospellGospell. for the day, Math. 4.1.Math. 4.1. we haue a tryall aboue the tryall of Lots patience among the Sodomites,Summe exceeding the tryall of Abrahams faith and obedience, and much exceeding the 29. touches of the Apostles excellence. For here Lots deliuerer and A∣hrahams Sauiour, the Apostles Rabbi and our greatest teacher (before euer he preacheth any Sermon) is set vpon by the aduersarie of mankind, the enemy to all good Sermons: God is heere tryed by the diuell.God is tryed by the diuell. Iesus is led aside of the good spirt to be tempted of the diuell, who is that euill and most wicked spirit? S. Mathew in the forefront of this battell lets vs seeParts of the Gospell. First, the Apparation or preparation of the combatters1 The Appara∣tiō, or prepara∣tion of the two combatters. themselues before there was a stroake strooken betweene them. 1 Iesus Christ that victorious conquerour and Lyon of Iudaes Tribe is thus made ready.How our Lord Iesus Christ is made ready. 1 The spirit leades him aside. 2 Into a solitary place the wildernesse.
3 To this end to be tempted of the diuell. ver. 4.Christs temptation & tri∣all exceeds all other trials. 4 He was prepared by fasting 40. daies and 40. nights. ver. 1. 5 By being hungry. ver. 2. Secondly, the diuell, the roaring Lyon (who is neuer vn∣ready) thus prepares himselfe.How the diuell makes himselfe ready. He knew that occasion was bald behind: hele therefore take his time and oportunity. No better time or occasion, to offer Christ an occasion of bread making, then when Christ is hungry. So he practised with Esau to let go his birthright for a messe of pulse pot∣tage when he came from his hungry pastime of hunting. Then came to him the tempter and said, &c. part of the 3. ver. S. Matthew in the processe of this battell makes mention (as in the second place) of the blowes and stroaks that were giuen on both sides.2 The blowes & stroakes that were giuen on both sides. The first stroake that sathan stroake was,The first stroak giuen by the di∣uill, at one of the principall parts of Christs attributes, the power and almigh∣tinesse of God, intimating thus much, that the particular wil of God must alwaies go with the generall power of God. This is the diuels diuelty,The Italian di∣uels incarnate do reason thus: God can do all things, ergo, he doth turne, and wil turne bread Sacramental in∣to Christs body reall. or rather his villanous sophistry, If thou be the Sonne of God: that is, God Almighty: then let this power of thine be seene in putting it in execution: in be∣ing willing: that is, now at this paritcular time, commanding these stones to be made bread. ver. 3. But thou art of power suf∣ficient being the Sonne of God: ergo, thou must be willing to do it, command that these stones be made bread. The answer vnto this double veny, is with the single and simple sword of the Spirit,Christs answere and award to this blow. which is the word of God, Scrip∣tum est, Man shall not liue by bread onely, &c. ver. 4. The second blow that sathan giues vnto Christ,Sathans second blow, was in an high place vpon the Temples pinacle (as the first was be∣low vpon the ground) In which assault he takes Christs own weapon to wound him withall, prouing in more particular the consequent of his maior proposition expressed before in the first temptation. For the diuel knew that it did not follow necessarily, that because Christ is the Sonne of God,
ergo he must cast himselfe downe.Christs challenge & com∣bate with the diuell. For which cause hele vrge and worke vpon that consequent with the powerfull word of God, though cursedly by detraction he alledgeth, For it is written, that he will giue his Angels charge ouer thee, &c. ver. 5. & 6. The wound & stroak that our Lord God gaue the diuel,Our Lords an∣swere. is with the same weapon, It is written, againe: not simply, it is written. ver. 7. The third bickering place, was higher then the Temples pinacle (the better to accomodate himselfe to the third en∣counter and battell) an exceeding high mountaine, where 1 He takes vpon him like a lyer,The diuels third stroake. to shew Christ more then he could. 2 Like a vaine bragger to giue him more then he had himselfe, and that vpon condition, That Christ would doe to him more then he ought, or should: to wit, 1 To fall downe, and 2 Worship the diuell▪ ver. 8.9. Christ gaue him two blowes, & that with two weapons.Our Sauiour answeres him with a double veny. 1 Wounding him with his powerfull authority, Auoide Sathan. 2 With his old sure weapon. For it is written, thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him onely shalt thou serue. ver. 10. Saint Matthew, Christs standerd bearer, in the third place.3 S. Matthews relation of the successe of Christs tempta∣tion. 1 Displayeth the ensigne of victory, 2 Sounds a triumph of Christ ouer sathan, 3 He sounds the diuels dasterdly retraite, and 4 He sounds amarch of the holy Angels which attended vpon Christ. ver. 11. The second Sonday in Lent. AS the Church of Christ,Coherence of the 27 & 34 of Genesis with the 19 & 22, for the humiliation of the members thereof, hath in the Scriptures before going propounded many examples of triall: first, of patience.
secondly, of faith, 3. of constancy, 4.Our soules and bodies must be tamed, of fortitude and vi∣ctorious conquering. And that the best example of all was Christ himselfe, of whom we must learne, because he is meeke and lowly, who would be humbled, first, by fasting miraculously: secondly, and by temptation diabolicall. And, as fasting after the right manner is a good preparatiue to prayer: so the taming of the body by refraining of lust & vncleannesse, with all the allurements thereunto: yea, the ab∣staining from all other sinnes, as deceit, oppression, couet∣ousnesse, is the true fasting. We haue therefore, Briefe summe of the foure Scrip∣tures.First, in Iacobs beguiling of Esau, by the counsell and perswasion of Rebeckah, a manifest view of a fearefull effect of satisfying the desire and appetite of a man: yea, an holy  mans mouth, and that this sweete and sauory meate had but sower sauce, for the eldest sonne was thereby beguiled of his fathers purposed blessing. Secondly, we may finde the old prouerbe true, Occasio furem, or Occasio meretricem, in Dinalo the Patriarch Iacobs daughter: who feeding her eyes with the sight of the daugh∣ters of the country, gaue occasion to Sechems lust, and losse of her owne virginity. Thirdly. S. Paul doth therefore disswade the Thessaloni∣ans from the two former vices of fornication and defrauding one another, and perswades to the contrary vertues. That being holy and cleane in soule and body we may lift vp pure and innocent hands in euery place. Of which faithfull inuocation, we haue a memorable ex∣ample out of the fourth Scripture in the woman of Canaan the Syrophenician, so zealously praying and effectually ob∣taining her sute at Christs hands. Mor. Prayer. 1 Les. Gen. 27.The first of the foresaid points is in a History related vnto vs by Moses, Genesis 27. In which chapter he deli∣uers,Parts First, the charge that Isaak gaue to Esau1 Esau his charge receiued from his father. to prouide him some venison, that his eldest sonne might be bles∣sed
before the Fathers death. verse 1, to the end of the 4. verse. Secondly, Rebekahs plotting of a deceitfull course,2 Rebekahs de∣ceitfull plot, to in∣tercept the blessing, and to circumuent her eldest sonne. v. 5, to the end of the 17. Thirdly, Moses deliuers Iacobs accomplishing and effe∣cting of this deceitfull designement.3 Iacobs affect∣ing and effect∣ing this plot, verse 18, to the end of the 29. Fourthly, the discouery of this deceit,4 The discoue∣ry of both, with a specimen of Ishaks fatherly loue vnto Esau his sonne, though farre infe∣riour to Iacobs, from the thirtieth verse, to the end of the fortieth. Fiftly, Moses reporteth what bad effect all this bad dea∣ling tooke, to wit, in Esau, his intent to kill Iacob.5 The bad end of all Esaus plot∣ting of Iacobs death. verse 41. which murther was preuented by Rebekah, as verse 42, to the end of the chapter. The second fearefull example is also recorded by Moses,Eue. Prayer. 1 Less. Gen. 34. Genes. 34. wherein First, he lets vs see the occasion of Dinahs deflowring,Parts. 1 Occasion of Dinahs deflou∣ring, drawing on the act. verse 1, Secondly, the filthy act it selfe.2 Shechems act, verse 2.3. Thirdly, the meanes that Shechem made to his father to haue her in mariage.3 The meanes which he vsed to marry the forced woman, verse 4. Fourthly, the course that Hamor Shechems father tooke to bring this to passe, with the consent of Iacobs sonnes,4 Hamors course taken with Ia∣cobs sonnes, v. 5. to the end of the 12. Fiftly, the conditions are rehearsed by the sonnes of Ia∣cob, which the Shechemites were to performe before Iacobs sonnes would yeeld to part with their sister,5 Conditions of couenant on both sides, and the Sheche∣mites consenting to the sayd conditions, from the 13 verse to the end of the 24. Sixtly, the irefull and fearefull act of murther commited by Simeon and Leui,6 Ireful reuenge of this act by Simeon & Leui. vpon the Shechemites, from the 25 ver. to the end of the 29. Seuenthly, Moses sets downe Iacobs dislike7 Iacobs reprofe and dislike of their furious act and re∣proofe
of this murther, with his sonnes answere thereto. ve.Exhortation to cleanesse in soule and body. 30.31. Epistle.The third selected Scripture which is written 1. Thes. 4.11. Thess. 4.1. Summe. to the end of the eight ver. teacheth inward and outward cleanesse, generall and speciall sanctification, holinesse of soule, cleannesse of body, singlenesse of heart, and purity of hands. Parts.S. Paul, Siluanus, and Timotheus, a three-fold cord (which is not easily broken) do combine themselues together, as in the rest of this Epistle, so 1 Exhortations by Paul, Sylua∣nus & Timotheus that the Thessa∣lonians would a∣bound in loue.First, in this louing, painefull, and fruitfull exhortation contained in these words. And furthermore we beseech you brethren, and exhort you in the Lord Iesus, that ye increase more and more, as ye haue receiued of vs how ye ought to walke and to please God. ver. 1. Secondly, the Thessalonians haue a sight of the ground-selles and supporters of this exhortation:2 Supporters & motiues of this exhortation. For nothing can better, or more strongly beare vp the worke and building of an exhortation, then these two pillars, 1 The acknowledging and calling to minde of the com∣mandements giuen of the Apostles by the Lord Iesus ver. 2. 2 The will of God, that is to say, the finall end and pur∣pose of God in ordaining this ministery, to publish such do∣ctrines, to giue such commandements. For this is the will of God, your sanctification. ver. 3 Thirdly, these three holy men deliuer vnto the view of the Thessalrniaoe two goodly branches of this sanctificati∣on.3 The branches of this sanctifi∣cation. The first is the cleannesse and holinesse of the body, to ab∣staine from fornication, as ver. 3.4.5. 4 The fearfull estate of the disobedient to these exhorta∣tiue comman∣dements.The second is the cleanesse and vprightnesse of heart and mind, which must be free from oppression or defrauding our brethren in any matter. ver. 6.7. Fourthly, these three seruants of God haue an especiall care that the former Lessons be well regarded, remembred
and obeyed, and therfore they set downe the fearefull estate of him or them that do despise these or the like instructions. He therefore that despiseth these things, despiseth not man but God who hath giuen you his holy spirit. ver. 8. In the fourth Scripture Math. 15.21.Gospell. Math. 15.21. to the end of the 28, ver. the Euangelist hauing related our Lords reprehension of the outward hypocriticall cleanenesse of the Scribes & Pharises, shewing that euill thoughts, murthers, adulteries,Coherēce with the preceeding doctrines. fornications, do defile the man,Summe History of the precious & vn∣fained faith of the Syropheniciā woman. but not to eate with vn∣washen hands, doth now set downe a true story of the pure, precious & vnfained faith of a Cananitish woman, exercising it selfe in a most zealous and feruent manner of powring forth her petitions, as the incense in the presence of God, & casting all her cares into Christs bosome, who cared for her and for her possessed daughter, speedily deliuering them both out of their aduersity, The text containethParts. 1 An introduction or preface into the history,Introduction, History it selfe. in the 21. and a part of the 22. ver. 2 The history it selfe, from the 23, ver. to the end of the 28. In the preface S. Matthew notes the occasions.Parts of the in∣troduction or preface, 1 Of his going from the Scribes and Pharisies. 2 Of his departure into the coasts of Tyre and Sydon, to offer himselfe vnto this godly and zealous Cananite. ver. 21.22. In the story of the womans petition,Parts of the History Foure sundry passions in the womans prayer and Christs answere to it, we haue the womans indefessible and vnfained suppli∣cation made vnto the Sonne of God, for one and the same thing expressed in foure sundry and seuerall suffrages. The first is, Haue mercy1 Haue mercy on me ô Lord the sonne of Dauid, ve. 22. whereunto she receiues no answere by word. ver. 23. The second is her crying after Christ,2 Her crying after Christ and the Apostles, and the Disciples who would faine haue bene rid of her, because she was im∣portunate. Therefore they are spokes-men to Christ for her.
Our Lords answer is, I am not sent but to the lost sheepe.Rare examples of chastitie▪ verse 23.24. The third is, she came and worshipped him, saying, Lord helpe me,3 Her coming before him with Lord helpe me, verse 25. To this Christ answereth thus, It is not good to take the childrens bread, &c. verse 26. 4 Her humility in acknowledg∣ing her vnwor∣thinesse & mi∣sery; yet not leauing off to vrge her suite. Christs answer to the womans earnest suite.The fourth, is the holding out of her incessant request, (for women will seldome be sayd nay) her yeelding of▪ a full assent and consent vnto her Lords words, perswading her selfe that he would grant her request, in saying, Truth Lord, and though she acknowledged her selfe by birth, na∣tion, and nature, to be no better then a dogge; yet she knew that whelpes eate of the crummes, &c. verse 27. whereto she receiued a twofold answer, 1 That which a dogge could not looke for, O woman great is thy faith, 2 The comfortable answer in graunting that which she made suite for, Be it to thee as thou desirest. And her daughter was made whole the same houre. verse 28. The third Sonday in Lent. Agreement of these scriptures for this day, with the former Scriptures. Briefe summe of these foure Scriptures, 1 Iosephs conti∣nency,THat there might be a growing, and a daily increase of cleannesse and chastitie, of holinesse and puritie of life in such as would see God: The Fathers of the Church do therefore hold on their course of exhibiting examples vnto vs of these holy vertues and exhortations, to embrace them, as to eschew their contrary vices. In the 39 of Genesis is an example of that chast man Ioseph, who though he was tempted to vncleannesse by his Lady and Mistresse, an impudent and vncleane woman, yet he yeelded not a whit to her. 2 Iosephs Phila∣delphy,In the 42 chapter of Genesis, there is a patterne of great loue exercised by Ioseph vnto his brethren, in his straunge and politicke entertaining of them, and yet affording them corne for their money, which is the thing they came for.
Incontinency of Putipliars wife.In Ephes. 5.1. to the end of the 14, is a notable and pithy exhortation,3 Exhortation to loue, that we be imitators of God in all holinesse: namely, in loue (as Christ loued vs) and in refraining of fornication, vncleannesse, couetousnesse, &c. not to be na∣med among saints. In Luke 11.14, to the end of the 28. verse,4 Example of loue. our Lord Ie∣sus Christ proceedeth in prouing himselfe to be that Mes∣siah promised, that seed of the woman, which should bruise the head of the Serpent, not onely in ouercoming the di∣uell, tempting Christ himselfe (as Math. 4.) or miserably vexing the poore Cananites daughter, (as Math. 15.) and driuing him out of her. But in this place also casting out a dumbe diuell out of one which was dumbe, made dumbe by the diuell, as not suffering his enemy Sathan to be at rest any where, either in men, women, or children. Moses in the first of these foure Scriptures,Mor. Prayer. 1 Less. Gen. 39. relates a true historie of a filthy vncleane woman, lusting after a man, oc∣casioned by the beautie of the man, & his well-fauorednesse, vnto whom the holy and chast man would not consent, though the whore tempted him diuerse and sundry wayes, many and often times.Parts. First, there is an introduction or preface vnto the story of Iosephs chastitie,1 Introduction or preface into the history of Iosephs chastity, and Putiphars wiues shamelesse harlotry, verse 1, to the end of the 6. Secondly, there is a relation of the adulterie conceiued in her heart, and committed there,2 Relation of Putiphars wiues harlotry, proued by her gazing on him with her eyes, and mouing the filthy question by her words, in most broad and beastly termes. verse 7. with Io∣sephs resolute and flat deniall, not consenting in heart, nor yeelding in word, and auoiding all occasions of being in her company, verse 8.9.10. Thirdly, Moses will let vs see further the loathsomenesse of the concupiscence,3 Lothsome beastly concu∣piscence of this impudent queane, and the vnsatiable beastlinesse of this queane and strumpet, in assaulting Ioseph by force, draw∣ing on this sinne vpon her with cart-ropes of vncleannesse,
catching Ioseph by the garment,Iosephs constancy following her former suite of fleshlinesse, though Ioseph left his garment in her hand, gat loose from the whore, saued his credit, and kept his vir∣ginitie. verse 11.12. 4 Her plotting of mischiefe a∣gainst Ioseph, for not yeelding to her lust,Fourthly, Moses declareth what mischiefe this beast∣ly woman plotted against this vnspotted young man, first, in charging him with a rape, and thereof accusing him to the men of the house, secondly, to her husband. verse 13, to the end of the 18. Fiftly, how vpon this vniust accusation, Putiphar in his wrath imprisoned Ioseph,5 Putiphars vn∣iust incarcera∣ting of Ioseph. as iniuriously. verse 19.20. Lastly, how God was with Ioseph in all these his trou∣bles,6 Gods loue to Ioseph in all his troubles. and how his afflictions were sanctified to him, turned to his good, and to the good of many others, verse 21.22.23. Eue. Prayer. 1 Les. Gen. 42.For (as Genesis 42 appeareth) hauing such extraordina∣ry fauour afforded him in the prison, and in the house of Pharaoh when he was out of prison,God continued to looke vpon Iosephs afflctiō. in being made Ruler and Lord-steward of Aegypt: he was an instrument of his fathers preseruation,Summe. of his brethren, and all his kindred, co∣ming as strangers to buy corne there, for the prouision of their families. In this chapter therefore the seruant of God Moses will shew vnto vs How Ioseph is not forgetfull of Gods former continued fauours towards him,Ioseph remem∣bers Gods loue towards him in his dutifulnesse to his father, & loue to his bre∣thren. but sheweth his thankulnesse to God, in being charitable vnto strangers, in affording them corne at their need, not in defrauding, circumuenting, or oppres∣sing them, selling it to dayes, or at an high rate, but sending them away loden with come, and their money in their sacks mouths.Parts. In the first part of the chapter Moses maketh mention of Iacobs sending his ten sonnes into Aegypt to buy corne.1 Iacobs sending of his sonnes in to Egypt for corne, verse 1, to the end of the 6. In the second, the manner of intertainement which they had of Ioseph at the first,2 Their hard intertainment at the first, to be charged with trechery, in charging them with trea∣cherie
against the land,Iosephs dutifulnes to his father and that they were but spies. verse 7.8.9. In the third, the answer of Iosephs brethren vnto that ac∣cusation.3 Their answer to this accusa∣tion, verse 10.11. In the fourth, Ioseph vrgeth that poin against them the second time, and their answer. verse 12.13.4 Ioseph challen∣geth thē agai, In the fift part Moses reporteth how Ioseph made triall the second and third time of their loyalty,5 He makes tri∣al of their truth and loyaltie, truth, and sim∣plicity▪ by fetching their yonger brother, from the 14 verse to the end of the 20. In the sixt, we may see the checke and trouble of consci∣ence6 Their trouble and checke of conscience, in Iosephs brethren (for some sins which they had for∣merly committed against their brother) when they saw the troubles and straites they were in. v. 21, to the end of the 4. In the seuenth, Iosephs true and right brotherly dealing with them,7 Iosephs bro∣therly dealing with his breth∣ren, in appointing their sackes to be filled with corne, and their packets of money to be restored vnto them, not∣withstanding his former rough politicke dealing with them. verse 25, to the end of the 28. In the eight part of the chapter, Moses recordeth their relating of all this businesse to their father at their returne.8 Their relation of all to their father, verse 29, to the end of the 35. verse. In the ninth, how old Iacob answered his sonnes,9 Iacobs answer to his sonnes. and de∣nied the sending of his sonne Beniamin into Aegypt. verse 36, to the end of the 38, the end of the chapter. In the third of the Scriptures allotted out for this day,Epistle. our Apostle S. Paule Ephesians 5.1.Ephes. 5.1. to the end of the 14 vers. in setting downe a speciall exhortation of our louing and imbracing of holinesse,Summe. and cleannesse inwardly and out∣wardly, intimates it in a dehortation from fornication,Coherence with the for∣mer chapter. vn∣cleannesse, couetousnesse, and all the vnfruitfull workes of darknesse. And because vpon an occasion of prosecuting the duties of brotherly loue, in the former chapter, he pro∣ceedeth in the same matter and exhortatiue doctrine. Therfore in the two first verses of this 5 chapter,Parts: which
some do ioyne with the former chapter. First, he doth most effectually, though in a generall matter vrge the most sweet doctrine of imitating God in loue,1 Exhortation to follow God in loue, and that is the first part of the Epistle for this day. The second part is a speciall dehortation from certaine vices which hinder this brotherly loue,2 Dehortation from some vi∣ces hindering this loue, to wit, fornication, all vncleannesse, or couetousnesse, filthinesse, foolish talking, iesting, which are things not comely, &c. verse 3.4. The reasons to disswade from these and the like vices,3 Reasons in∣duced to di∣swade from these vices, are three, whereof the first is drawne from the knowledge that the Ephesians had concerning Gods definitiue sentence pro∣nounced against such wicked men, verse 5. the second rea∣son is a caueat or warning to preuent the danger that is imi∣nent ouer their heads, which are deceiued with the ill words or ill example of such men as would perswade to the former vices. verse 6.7. The third reason3 Reason. is drawne from the two-fold estate of the Ephesians themselues, first, Being once darknesse, secondly, But now light in the Lord. verse 8. From which two propositions he draweth many infe∣rences, necessarily concluding vpon the premisses,4 Three neces∣sary inferences are concluded hereupon. and for∣cing his exhortation, as 1 To walke as children of the light. verse 8. The reason he yeeldeth, For the fruit of the spirit is in all goodnesse and righteousnesse and truth. verse 9. 2 To approue that which is pleasing to the Lord. verse 10. 3 To haue no fellowship with the vnfruitfull workes of dark∣nesse. verse 11.Of the last in∣ference, 3 Reasons, The reasons whereof are, 1 Tis ashame to speake of their secret sinnes, verse 12. 2 Secret sinnes are layde open to the light, euen by the light.  verse 13. 3 Because the Scripture saith he, Isay in his 60 chap. verse 14, Awake thou that sleepest, and stand vp from the dead, and Christ shall giue thee light. Gospell. Luke 11.14.28. Summe.In the fourth of the Scriptures our Lord Iesus affords his gracious and free loue to the Demoniacke, which was dumbe
Christ his exceeding loue, &c.(yea blinde also) as Matth. 12.22.Parts. it appeareth casting out that fiend (no friend to mankinde) and not suffering him to rest or haue his abode in the diseased man. S. Luke chap. 11.24. to the end of the 28. ver. sheweth vs in this text. First, the miracle.Miracle. Secondly, the effect of the miracle.Effect of it. The miracle in a part of the 14. vers. in these words: Then he cast out a Diuell which was dumbe, and when the Diuell was gone out, the dumbe spake. The effect is two-foldEffect twofold. very bad, Or very good. Very bad, first, in the people wondering, as in the latter end of the 14. Secondly, in the Pharisies blaspheming: He casteth out diuels through Beelzebub, vers. 15. Thirdly, in others temp∣ting him, and asking him a signe from heauen. vers. 16. The effect was very good in the woman.Effect very good in a good woman, applauding the doctrine of Christ (repelling the blasphemy of the Phari∣sies) making an effectuall Epiphonema or acclamation there∣unto: Blessed is the wombe that bare thee, &c. vers. 27. where∣to Christ assenteth, & teacheth her a further instruction con∣cerning blessednesse, yea rather blessed are they that heare, &c. vers. 28. The bad effects of the Pharisies blaspheming,Christ consures the Pharisies blasphemie di∣uers waies. and the o∣thers tempting, he doth by diuers strong reasons, and most sound arguments confute, cast out, and ouerthrow, The first by a similitude1 A simili of a kingdome diuided against it selfe, which is the Protasis, vers. 17. the Apodosis and applica∣tion. So if Sathan be diuided, &c. because yee say that I cast out Deuils, &c. verse 18. The second is taken ab absurdo2 Ab absurdo, consequente, your children and I doe cast out diuels alike. You will neuer yeelde to this, that your children, or those among you doe cast them out in the power of Beelzebub: Ergo, the assertion is false: v: 19. The third reason is drawne from the efficient cause,3 a causa effici∣ente. and the true, certaine, and most infallible manner of casting out
deuils: to wit, by the fingar & almighty spirit of God,Christ answeres the blaspheming Pharises. which hath commodum consequens, or vtilitatem spiritualem inde subse∣quentem: the kingdome of God is come vnto you, ve. 20. Now after Christ had proued that the diuel is not the doer of the miracle: he doth consequently argue that he is not the minister of the diuell. The fourth reason therefore is taken â maiore ad minus,4 A maiore ad minus. The maister can do, and hath more power to do, that which the seruant cannot do, Christ is of more force and power then the diuell, who is but his vassall. Christ therefore is not the worker by the diuell, nor the minister of the diuell. When a strong man armed keepeth his pallace, the things that he possesseth are in peace, &c. ve. 21.22. 5 A repugnanti∣bus?The fifth reason is taken from the opposite and contrary working and will of the chiefe Maister of the worke, and the second worker the seruant. The diuel is not with Christ, ergo, he is against him. Item, He gathereth not with Christ, ergo, he scattereth. The will of the Maister is to do good, the will of Christs vassall and slaue is to do euill. The will of Christ the great Sheepeheard and Bishop of our soules, is to gather the scattered: yea, the lost sheepe. The diuels will is not so, for he scattereth and destroyeth what he can as many as he can. The sixt argument wherewith our Lord puts the blasphe∣mers to silence is, the wound that he strikes in their conscien∣ces, who contrary to their cōsciences blasphemed the truth)6 Ab aduersari∣rum concessis, Who in their cōsciences grā∣ted, but out∣wardly in words denied the truth. which they had formerly knowne and acknowledged) yea, persecuted the same truth and Christ the author thereof. He therefore sheweth that their latter estate is worse then the former & beginning: & they are in worse case then the man that had the blind & dumbe spirit. For after their vncleane vessels had bene clensed with the knowledge and beleefe of the truth, sathā the vncleane spirit comes & possesseth them, and takes to him seuen other spirits worse then himselfe. ver. 24.25.26.
God forsakes not his people in distresses,The fourth Sonday in Lent. IT must needes be a great occasion of humiliation vnto all the true members of Christs Church,How Christs Church is hū∣bled by the for∣mer, and these consideeations following, when they consider what sins and iniquities they do either commit, or are sub∣iect vnto, whereby they are so vnprepared, either to fast with Christ, or to suffer with him, or to feast and eate the Passeouer with him, to weepe with the woman at his death, or to reioyce with them and the Disciples at his resur∣rection. As then they which haue chosen the former Scriptures haue bene very carefull in the fore-named respect:Coherence of these 4 scrip∣tures with the former. Sūme of these in two generall points, Gods proui∣dence and care ouer our bodies Gods consola∣tion of our soules. so now in these foure that follow for this day, they will teach vnto vs, that notwithstanding the sinnes and transgression of Gods people and others, and the punishments inflicted vpon the committers thereof: yet hath our God a fatherly care ouer them, not to leaue them in distresses, but in his mercifull pro∣uidence, and with his compassionate eies to behold them. For he respecteth them in their bodies, goods and good name, comforting them alwaies and euery way both in soule & bo∣dy: wherefore in the first two Scriptures, being the two first Lessons for this day, we may see the one. In the two of the new Testament, being the Epistle and the Gospell, we shall perceiue the other. Moses in the 43. of Genesis declares the distresses that Ia∣cob and his posterity endured in the land of Canaan,Mor. Prayer. 1 Les, Gen. 43. Parts. 1 The distres∣ses of Iacob and his children in Canaan, by rea∣son of the increase of the famine, who was thereby occasio∣ned to send the second time into Aegypt to buy more food. But withall he was very vnwilling to performe Iosephs con∣dition of sending Beniamin into Aegypt: about which there is great expostulation betweene Iudah the son, & Israel the father, from the beginning of the chapter to the end of the 10. ver.
2 Iacob consēts to send Benia∣min into Egypt with a present to Ioseph,Secondly, the text sheweth,Ioseph brethren comforted, &c. how that in the end Israel yeelded hereunto, in sending his darling away, and perfor∣ming of complements to the Lord of the land, for his chil∣drens better intertainment there, from the 11. ver. to the end of the 15. 3 Iosephs ioyfull welcoming of his brethren,Thirdly, how Ioseph intertained and welcomed them all for his brother Beniamins sake. vors. 16.17. 4 His brethren suspect their in∣tertainment to be but in policyFourthly, how the sonnes of Iacob were stricken with a feare, and a suspition by reason of their heartie welcoming, deeming, and casting in their minds, as if that had bene but a pollicie to take them in a snare, by reason of the money that came in their sackes mouthes at the first. Vpon which point they communed with Iosephs Steward, who led them into his maisters house, intertaining them and their beasts accor∣dingly, vers. 18.24. Fifthly, the text mentioneth their preparation and deliue∣ry of their fathers present vnto Ioseph.5 Their deliue∣ry of the pre∣sent to Ioseph, verse 25.26. Sixthly, of Iosephs conference with them concerning their fathers health,6 Iosephs publike conferēce with them about their fathers health, and their brother Beniamin, Ʋerse 27.28.29. Seuenthly, of Iosephs tender heartednesse and naturall af∣fection towards his brother Beniamin,7 Iosephs tender hartednesse to Beniamin, his ioyfull feasting of them, his inuiting the Aegyptians (though they are by them∣selues) but chiefly of his speciall care that he had of Benia∣min his fathers darling, which also was Iosephs iewell. ver. 30. to the 34. the end of the chapter. Eue. Prayer. 1 Les. Gen. 45.In the 45. chapter of Genesis Moses doth, Parts.First discouer the concealed loue of Ioseph so long kept and contained within him,1 Discouery of Iosephs long con¦cealed loue, and the making of himselfe knowen to his brethren, verse 1.8. Secondly, hee makes mention of Iosephs sending of his brethren for his father,2 Iosephs send∣ing for his fa∣ther, and that most louing farewell which he tooke of his brother Beniamin, & the rest of his brethren, (a good example of brotherly loue  extended and stretched out) with the conference he had with them, which
is not expressed,God makes his people, &c. ver. 9. to the end of the 15. Thirdly, Moses will let vs see the effect of this loue euen in the heathen King and his seruants,3 Effect of this loue in the hea∣then king and his seruants. who not onely reioi∣ced at the tidings and newes hereof, but the King gaue also commanement to Ioseph to send for his father, and to prouide all thinges necessary for the iourney out and in, for their better intertainment, verse, 16. to the end of the 24. In the fourth part of the chapter, Moses declareth what effects this tidings wrought, when it was related vnto old Israel4 Effect that this tidinges wrought in old Israel. in the land of Canaan. First in his swoning for ioy: se∣condly, in the reuiuing of his spirit when he was confirmed, and soundly perswaded of the truth of all things related vn∣to him. Ver. 25. to the end of the 28. the end of the chapter. The Apostle Paul. Galat. 4.21Epistle. Galath. 4.21. to the end of the chapter: as in the former part of the chapter,Summe. he mentioneth that deare and true hearted loue mutually exercised betwixt the Galathians and him: so will hee shew a greater loue of God toward his Church of what nation soeuer, in making them true and naturall childrenGods fatherly loue to his Church, in ma∣king them true and naturall children. after the manner of Ishak children of the promise of the new Testament, the new couenant, not of the letter and law, but of the spirit and grace.Parts. And there∣fore intimates, that God being our father, and vouchsafing vs this prerogatiue in giuing vs Christ, how shall hee not with him giue vs all other things? First therefore the Apostle will propound the matter in controuersie betwixt him and them,1 Pauls propoū∣ding of the matter in con∣trouersie be∣tweene him & them in an al∣legorie. which before had bene so bewitched with the false or Iudaicall Apostles. And this he doth by reasoning ex concessis eorum, after this manner: Tell me ye that will be vnder the law, vers. 21. alleaging the Scripture and text for that which they also knew. ver. 22.23. Secondly, he expoundeth this mysticall allegory2 Exposition of this allegorie. of A∣brahams two sonnes, ver. 24.25.26.27. Thirdly, he concludes hereupon,3 His conclusi∣on thereupon, that we are all children after the manner of Isaac. that we are after the ma∣ner of Ishak children of the promise, not of Hagar the bondwoman,
bondslaues to sinne or Sathan,Christ prouides for the bodies & soules of his children & people. vers. 28. though flshly and bondchildren do persecute and gibe at spirituall children: which mockers, with their mother, are sure to bee expelled for their labour. vrse 29.30. 4 Application of all that he sayd before in exhortation to Gods church to constancy,Fourthly, he will apply all that he had sayd before, and conclude the matter in controuersie betweene them in these words, Then brethren we are not children of the seruant, but of the free woman. verse 31. And hereupon he exhorts the Ga∣lathians to stand fast in the librtie wherewith Christ hath made them free, and not to be intangled againe with the yoke of bondage, as Gala. 5.1. &c. Gospell. Ioh. 6.1. to the 14.S. Iohn chapter 6.1. to the end of the 14 verse, declareth plainely vnto vs that our Lord and Sauiour, that great Pro∣phet which should come into the world, takes care ike a good shepheard of his flocke and sheepe,Summe like a good hous∣holder of his family,Christ the good housholder prouides for his familie. Christ answers the peoples pa∣tiene in hea∣ring, with his most louing care in proui∣ding for them. in feeding their soules, and in feeding their bdies. The people tarried with Christ in the desert vntill the euening: and the Disciples would haue had them dismissed, o prouide food for themselues in the villages ad∣ioyning. This Lord, that is owner of the earth, and the ple∣nitude thereof, meanes to giue them content also that waies, to teach them still whom he had taught before, as to depend vpon his prouidence, so also to instruct them herein, That man liueth not by bread onely, &c. therefore not by the great quantitie of cramming his maw and belly with meate, but by euery word, &c. with Gods blessing vpon that bread and food which he sendeth, making the qualitie,Gods blessing makes the qua∣ity of food to exceed the quā∣titie. through his blessing and miraculous power to exceed the quantitie, not taking the course of earthly feast-makers, in his kind of entertainement. This Scripture offereth vnto our view Parts.First, the occasions giuen and taken by our Lord God,1 Occasion of∣fered and taken by Christ. the most prouident housholder in the doing of this miracle, to wit, first, his departure from the Iewes, who continued their malicious persecution against him: and taking his course ouer the sea of Galile of Tiberias. Secondly, the con∣comitance
and insequence of the multitude to heare him teach, and to see his miracles. verse 1.2.3. Secondly, this Scripture denotes the time,2 Circumstanee of the time, to argue the truth of the miracle, being neere the Iewes Passeouer. verse 4. Thirdly,3 Conference about this fee∣ding of the people, S. Iohn publisheth the conference which our Lord had with Phillip and Andrew, about this businesse. verse 5.6.7.8.9. Fourthly, Saint Iohn sets downe the manner how Christ prepared the people and himselfe4 Christs pre∣paring the peo∣pie and him∣selfe, vnto the performing and sight of this miracle. verse 10. and a part of the 11. Fiftly, the miracle5 Miracle, it selfe, as fist, in the fiue thousand mens eating so much as they would of the bread and the fishe. verse 11. secondly, in the Disciples taking away the fragments remaining, which was more miraculous. verse 12.13. Sixtly, the Euangelist sheweth the effect that this mira∣cle wrought in the beholders.6 Effect that this miracle wrought in the people. They sayd, this is of a truth the Prophet, &c. a sound profession and confession of their faith, an acknowledging of the mightie power of God, and a prai∣sing of him for the same. The fifth Sonday in Lent. THe Lord,Coherence of these 4 scrip∣tures with the former. which had so graciously deliuered Iacob and his posterity from the famine in Canaan, brought them into Egypt, and gat them fauour in the sight of King Pha∣raoh and his subiects, doth now stirre vp another king which knew not Ioseph, to exercise his seruants the Israelites vnder the crosse.Summe. And as they being the members of the Church endured and continued herein by the space of ma∣ny yeares, being the sheepe of Christ:The sheepe were before scattered: now is the shepheard about to be troubled. so now is the head of the Church, the great and good shepheard of the sheepe, a∣bout to be smitten. The great Passeouer therefore drawing neerer and
neerer,Generall sum of the foure Scriptures, Distresses of the members, persecution of the head. wherein Christ our Passeouer was offered for vs:Israelites oppressed, &c. his holy seruants haue thought vpon foure such portions of Scripture as do shew, First, the troubles and distresses wherein God exercised the members of his Church for the triall of their faith and patience, and for the chastening of them for their sinne. Secondly, the persecution by thought, word, and deede, wherwith the Iews persecuted the Lord of life, who though he reproued his enemies of grosse and vpardonable sin: yet not one of them was able to taxe or rebuke him of sinne. Mor. Prayer. 1 Less. Exod. 3.In the third chapter of Exodus the first of the foure Scrip∣tures for this day, the text doth set forth, Parts.First, the maner of Gods calling of Moses1 Gods calling of Moses. to bee a meanes of the Israelites deliuerance out of the Egyptiacall oppressi∣ons, ver. 1. to the end of the 10. Secondly, the singular humility of Mses in acknow∣ledging his vnworthinesse and insufficiencie2 Humility of Moses in ac— knowledging his insufficien∣cy. either to go to Pharaoh, or to bring the Israelites out of Aegypt, verse eleuen, much like the speech of Saint Paule. . Thirdly, the text sets downe how God fitteth and furni∣sheth Moses3 God fitteth and enableth Moses. to this weighty and troublesome function, ver. 12. Fourthly, the desire of Moses to bee further instru∣cted concerning the authoritye of this his Embassage.4 Moses desire to know the authority of his calling. verse 13. Fifthly, the text relates vnto vs Gods answer to Mo∣ses,5 Gods answer to Moses by the effects of his ministery. both concerning his propounded question, verse. 14.15. as also concerning that which Moses was fur∣ther to doe, and in particular about this enioyned busi∣nesse, and the diuers esects, both in the Israelites and in the Egyptians of the true and faithfull discharge of Moses his conscience towards them, verse 16. to the 22. the end of the chapter.
In the fifth of Exodus,Pharaoh and his people oppresse Gods people. Eue. Prayer. 1 Less. Exod. 5. being the second of the selected Scriptures, the text sheweth, First,Parts. how Moses and Aaron do accomplish and performe their duty of doing their message to Pharaoh ver. 1.1 Moses and A∣aron execute their charge. Secondly, how Pharaoh tooke their doing of this message.2 Pharaohs ac∣ceptance here∣of in his 1 Minde. 2 Exceptions. 3 Tyranny. First, with what minde and words he answered the Lord, to wit, with the words and spirit of Atheisme, of irreligion, as ver. 2. Secondly, what exceptions he tooke against the an∣swer which Moses and Aaron made to his speech ver. 3.4.5. Thirdly, how he tyrannized the more ouer the Church of God in oppressing them with vnconscionable, and vnreaso∣nable taske-worke, to which end he sent out his tyrannous precept, which was executed by Pharaohs taskmasters, from the 6. verse to the end of the 14. In the third part of this chapter the text sheweth: First,3 Israelites pe∣tition to the ty∣rant to be eased of their oppres∣sion. how the officers of the Israelites made their lamentable pe∣tition vnto this tyrant, concerning the iniuries of the making of bricke without straw, the beating of the officers, & blame of the people, vers. 15.16. Secondly, the answer that this A∣theist mde (as before) not changing his minde nor wordes any more then the Leopard doth her spots, or the Moore his skinne. Ruling and ouer-ruling Gods people by his will alone, (as tyrants doe) against reason and religion. Ʋers. 17.18. In the fourth part of the text he tels vs how the officers of the Israelites laid an imputation of this tyranny of Pha∣raoh, vpon Moses and Aaron. as vers. 20.21.4 Officers of the Israelites impute Phara∣ohs tyranny to Moses & Aaron. In the fifth part how Moses went to the Lord (his refuge in due time of trouble) expostulating with him about this businesse, and casting his cares into the Lords bosome,5 Moses repaires to God in these distresses. who cared for them all, and in his due time deliuered them, as ver. 22.23. and in the 14. chapter, ver. 13.30. and 31. doth most comfortably appeare. In the 9. chap. of the Epistle to the Heb. ver. 11. to the end of the 16.Epistle. Heb. 9.11. to the 16. Summe. the holy Ghost doth assuure vs of the obtaining of an
eternall redemption by Christ our high Priest,Christ an eternall Redemer whereas the deliuerance of the Israelites was but exernall temporarie & typicall:Deliuerance by Chrit eternall, by Moses exter∣nall ad typical, no mre then their scrifices were, which did san∣ctifie as touching the prification of the flesh ve. 13. Parts.First, therefore the Author of this Epistle, deliuereth this poin positiely, and peremptorily,1 Tis positiuely and perempto∣rily set downe. that the sacrifice of Christ is eternall, and more perfect, nt like that sacrifice of the bloud of bulles and goates. ver. 11.12. 2 Confirmati∣on a minore ad maius.Secondly, this point is confirmed by an argument, a mi∣nore ad mais. If the lesser did so much, how much more then shall the greater do. For if the bloud of bulles and goates, and the ashes of an heiffer, &c. ve. 13. how much more shall the bloud of Christ, which through the eternall Spirit, offered himselfe with∣out spot vnto God, purge your consciences from dead workes, to serue the liuing God. ve. 14. 3 Confirmatiō a causa finali. He did it, that he might becōe the Mediator of the new Testa∣ment.In the third part of this portion of Scripture the holy Ghost proueth the proposition by an argument drawne, a causa finali. The end why this our high Priest vndertook and performed al this good for vs, was, that he might become the Mediator of the new Testament, that through death which was for the redemption of the transgressors, they which were called might receiue the promise of eternall inheritance, ver. 15. For where a Testament is, there is the death of the Testator. ver. 16. In the 8. chapter of S. Iohns Gospell ver. 46. to the end of th 59.Gospell. Ioh. 8 46. ad 59. which is the end of the chapter, the text directeth vs to the sight and consideration of these principall points.Parts. First, that he which was and is our high Priest,1 The innocen¦cy of our high Priest, His enimies an∣swered with ray¦ling. was inno∣cent, because none of them (being all challenged) could re∣buke him of sinne, as ver. 46.47. whereto his enimies an∣swered with rayling and reuiling him, Say we not well, that thou art a Samaritane, &c. ver. 48. vnto which blasphe∣mous slander our Sauiour answereth. ver. 49.50.51. Secondly, S. Iohn will shew vs the obduracie and ob∣stinacy of the Iewes hearts, from whence proceeded rhe ve∣nome and poyson of their tongues.2 Iewes hard— nesse of heart ingendred poy∣son of their tongues. Now know we that
thou hast a diuell:Christ the head was persecuted of the members of his Church maliciously,Our Lords an∣swere to them is three-fold. and contrary to their know∣ledge, indeuouring to maintaine this their blasphemy, Abra∣ham (say they) is dead, and the Prophets. ve. 52, 53. Whereun∣to our Lord makes answere. 1 If I honour my selfe, mine honour is nothing worth:1 His honour is not frō him∣selfe. it is my Father that honoureth me, whom ye say that he is your God. ver. 54. 2 Yet ye haue not knowen him, but I know him.2 The Iewes knew not the Father, ver. 55. 3 Abraham knew him and me, your father Abraham reioy∣ced to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad.3 Abrahā knew him & reioyced ver. 56. Thirdly, the holy Ghost testifieth against these wicked Iewes, misconstruing Christs words, and wilfully persisting in their scandalous obtrectation and obloquie.3 A contestati∣on against these Iewes persisting in their obtre∣ctations. Thou art not yet 50. yeares old, and hast thou seene Abraham. ver. 57. Here∣unto our Sauiour answereth. Verely, verely, I say vnto you, be∣fore Abraham was I am. ver. 59. Fourthly, S. Iohn acquaints vs heere,4 The enemies argument a fu∣stibus or lapidi∣bus. with that vltimum refugium of all persecutors, euen their last argument which they are wont to vse, against the truth and true speakers, Ar∣gumentum à fustibus, or à lapidibus ductum, their open and manifest persecuting by fire and sword, staues, and stones, Then they tooke vp stones to cast at him. Christs answere and a∣uoiding of that argument is, 1 By hiding himselfe. 2 By going out of the Temple, ver. 59. to the end of the chapter. The sixth Sonday in Lent. PHaraohs cruell and hard dealing with the Israelites,Iewes persecu∣ting of Christ worse then Pha∣raohs. was not worse then his hardnesse of heart, nor his obstinacy proportionable for his person, to the Iewes persecuting of Christ, if all circumstances be considered out of the former Scriptures, and out of some of these foure following which are appointed for this day.
More outward signes of con— uersion in Pha∣raoh & his fol∣lowers, then in the Iewes.But if we looke narrowly & more particularly into them,Iewes persecution of Christ, &c. we shall in the former two perceiue, that in Pharaoh & some of his followers there are more outward signes of his al∣teration, and beeter hopes of conuersion, then in the Iewes in Christs time, which were the outward face of the Church either in any inward or outward token of repentance, as in the fourth Scripture being the Gospell for the day, may ap∣peare. Summe of the Epistle.Notwithstanding all this persecution by Pharaoh, and kil∣ling of the Lord of life by the obstinate Iewes, the Epistle chosen for this day, shewes vs, that it was Gods purpose that things should so fall out that Christ should bee thus humbled to the end that wee might learne humilitie of him: That the same minde may bee in vs, &c. as the Apo∣stle exhorteth. The first Scripture for this day, Exodus 9.Mor. prayer. 1 Less. Exod. 9. lets vs see, First, how, s Pharaoh left not off persecuting the people of God,Parts. so the Lord proceeded in plaguing him the fifth time with the murraine and pestilence among his beastes.1 God proceeds in plaguing of Pharaoh, as hee went on in per∣secutng. which God would not suffer to come vpon any of the Israelites beastes, though Pharaohs heart was yet obstinate and would not let the people go to serue God, ver. 1. to the end of the 7. 2 The sixth plague of bliste∣ring scabs as the former was the murraine of beasts.Secondly, that notwithstanding Pharaohs continued ma∣lice, God would further plague him by sending blistering scabbes vpon man and beast, (which is the sixth stroake of Gods heauy hand) in such maner as the forcerers of Pharaah could not stand before Moses, by reason of their contagion, ver. 8. to the end of the 12. 3 The seuenth plague of hayle thunder, light∣ning.Thirdly, the text declareth how God inflicteth a seuenth token of his grieuous wrath and displeasure conceiued a∣gainst Pharaoh, to wit, of haile, thunder, lightning and fire vpon the ground, such as was neuer in Aegypt since it was Aegypt. Against the execution whereof God by Moses ad∣uiseth Pharaoh to get vp his cattell out of the field into the
houses,Exhortations to humiliation, &c. vnto which counsell some hearkned, and some of Pharoahs seruants disobeyed. The effect that this plague tooke in Pharoah was a con∣fession of his sinne,Effect hereof. 1 Pharaohs con∣fessing of his sinne. after his fashion ioyned with an intreaty mde to Moses and Aaron, to pray to the Lord for him, as also a promise to dismisse the Israelites:2 His promise to dismisse the Israelites. vnto which request though Moses condiscended and God was heard of him, yet the hypocrite and false hearted Pharaoh was not so good as his word. ve. 13. to the end of the 35. the end of the chap∣ter. The second Scripture chosen for this day out of the old Testamēt, is Exo. 10.Eue. Prayer. 1 Less. Exod. 10. making mention of two other plagues, wherewith almighty God vexed this malicious deepe dis∣sembling hypocrite.Summe A relatiō of the eight & ninth plague of Gra∣shoppers and palpable darke∣nesse. The one is the sending of the Locusts or grashoppers vp∣on all the land of Aegypt (being the 8. plagueThe 8. plague.) whereof re∣lation is made with the effect thereof in Pharaoh, ver. 1. to the end of the 20. The other is the palpable darknesse and obscurity which was vpon the whole face of the land of Egypt, the ninth scourge wherewith God whipped this slow oxe Pharaoh,The 9. plague and scourge, Pharaoh re∣solues vpon a dismission of the Israelites, but yet with a prouiso. who was so vnwilling in deed, though not in word to per∣forme Gods commandement before. But now after this plague he is content (after his wonted fashion) to let them with a reseruation of their cattell in Aegypt wherewith they should haue done sacrifice, whereof the text makes mention from the 21. to the end of the 29. the end of the chapter. The Apostle S. Paul Philipians 2.5. to the end of the 11.Epistle Phil. 2.5. ad 11. ver. doth exhort vnto humility and humiliation by the ex∣ample of our Sauiour Christ Iesus,Summe that we might attaine to the end of true humiliation, which is exaltation,An exhortation to humiliation that we may at∣taine to exalta∣tion. and by a pa∣tient bearing of the crosse vnto the end, to come to the crowne of glory, the end of our faith, the saluation of our
soules.Christs humiliation, in his passion. Parts. In this portion of scripture conteined in these 7. verses, wee haue, First, an exhortation in these words: Let the same minde be in you that was euen in Christ Iesus,1 Exhortation to bee minded like Christ. verse, 5. Secondly, that this exhortation of being Christianly min∣ded,2 A description of this minde of Christ in his humiliation. might take the deeper impression, the Apostle doth ma∣ny waies describe this minde of Christ: shewing by many arguments and reasons how Christ was humbly minded, and how he was humbled in deed; as 1 Equality with God.First, who being in the forme of God, thought it no robbery, &c. verse 6. 2 Exmanition.Secondly, he made himselfe of no reputation, Thirdly, tooke on him the forme of a seruant,3 Forme of a seruant. Fourthly, was made like vnto man,4 Like to a man Fifthly, was made in shape like a man,5 In shape as a man. verse 7. 6 Voluntary humiliation.Sixthly, he humbled himselfe, Seuenthly, and became obedient to the death.7 Obedience to death. Eightly, euen the death of the crosse,8 Obedience to the cursed death verse 8. Thirdly, the Apostle sets forth the effect and issue of this humiliation,3 Effect of this humiliation his exaltation. to wit, exatation: Wherefore God hath also high∣ly exalted him, and giuen him a name▪ &c. vers. 9. Fourthly, hee describes this name and power of Christ at large,4 A general de∣scription of this name & power of Christ. prouing it to be aboue euery name, further spreading it selfe then any thing created, for 1 In the true subiection of all other creatures1 At this name Iesus, euery knee should bow, coelestium, ter∣restrium, infernarum, verse 10. 2 That euery tongue should confesse that Iesus Christ is the Lord,2 In the true humiliation of mankind in the confession of this power and saluation of Ie∣sus Christ. vnto the glory of God the Father, ver. 11. This is true sub∣iection and humiliation of all creatures, when they all stoup to him, & acknowledge his powerfull name. This is true hu∣miliation of al mankind, that is, of people & nations through the world, when they confesse that Iesus Christ is the Lord, vnto the glory of God the father. Summe.The Gospell for this day conteined in the 26. & 27.Gospell. Math. 26. & 27. ad 56. of the Gospel after S. Matthew vnto the end of the 56. ver. relateth
that most grieuous and lamentable humiliation of our deere Lord and Sauiour.The lamenta— ble humiliation of our deere Sauiour two waies. First, in his enduring and suffering of all things at the Iewes hands, which is his passion1 In his passion before his death. Secondiy, in the exigent and end of his passion, which is his death.2 In his death, the end of all passion, In the 26. chapter, S. Matthew propoundeth, and largely dilateth vpon the one.Our Lords owne analyse of this text. Parts of this Gospell. In the 27. chapter he leaues out no circumstances concur∣ring to denominate the other. Thus, and no otherwise, doth our Lord Iesus himselfe a∣nalyse all this great businesse euen in a few words, saying vnto his Disciples: And the sonne of man. 1 Shall be deliuered, 2 To be crucified. First therefore S. Matthew sets downe Christs intimation hereof vnto his Disciples,1 Christs pro∣phesie and inti∣mation of his passion & death to his Disciples, saying: Yee know that within two daies is the Passeouer, and the sonne of man, &c. verse 1:2. Secondly, S. Matthew makes mention of the first assembly and parliament of Priests, Lawyers, and Rulers in the high Priest Cayphas his hall,2 Part conteins the first Session & Parliament of Priests, Law∣yers, & Rulers, in Caiaphas his hall. verse 3.4.5. Thirdly, because his death, and consequently his buriall is neere, our Euangelist tels vs of Mary Magdalens annointing him with the pretious ointment:3 Mary Magda∣lens anointing him to his bu— riall. for he was worthy of it be∣ing a King and a Priest, verse 6. to the end of the 13. Fourthly, how Iudas indents with the high Priests for mo∣ney to betray his maister Christ,4 Iudas his bar∣gaine & sale of his maisters bloud to the high Priest. verse 14.15.16. Fifthly, how our Lord Iesus celebrateth the Passeouer,5 Christs cele— bration of the Passeouer. & foretold the intended & plotted treason of the traytor Iu∣das, verse 17. to the end of the 25. Sixthly, that our Lord did institute the holy supper,6 Christs insti∣tution of the Supper. & ce∣lebrate the same with his Disciples, ver. 26. to the 30. Seuenthly, S. Matthew declares Christs prophesie & fore∣telling the Disciples weakenesse,7 Christs pro∣phesie of the disciples frailty in being offended at his sufferings, but chiefly at Peters denyall, ver. 31.35. In the eighth place S. Matthew mentioneth Christs going8 Christs going aside to pray.
apart to Gethsemane,Christs preparation to his death. to pray that the bitter cup might passe from him: his Disciples being heauy all that time, the trai∣tor and his consorts coming in with swords and staues to take Iesus. At which time Peter takes vpon him to reuenge, though afterward he and all the rest tooke them to their heeles, ver. 36. to the 56. Ninthly, the Euangelist tels vs how our innocent Lord Iesus is led to the sessions house, where9 Iesus is led to the sessions house, where First, notwithstanding their subornation of false witnes∣ses, and Caiaphas his adiuring of him1 They suborne false witnesses against him, to tell him whether he were Christ the Sonne of God, whereto he answered af∣firmatiuely, yet Secondly, they reproue and argue him of blasphemy,2 Argue him of blasphemy. Thirdly, they conclude, that he is worthy to die,3 Conclude and determine his death, Fourthly, they spat in his face.4 They spat in his face. Fiftly, they buffeted him,5 He is buffeted Sixtly, they smote him with their rods,6 Smitten with rods. Seuenthly, they mocked7 Mocked. him, and in mockery of his prophecy they require him to prophecy, who strucke him. ver. 57. to the end of the 68. In the tenth place S. Matthew sets downe the story of Pe∣ters three-fold deniall of his Maister,10 The history of Peters three-fold deniall, and his hearty repen∣tance for the same ver. 68. to the end of the 73. which is the last ver. of the 26. chapter. Math. 27. chap.In the eleuenth place Saint Matthew relates the time and place of an other session of chiefe Priests and rulers to con∣sult against this sweet and harmlesse Lambe our Sauiour,11 Part of the gospel cōtaines another session of high Priests in Pilats hall. and consequently to take his life from him. That so he being led bound vnto Pilate the gouernour, he might be examined, iudged, and condemned to die. ver. 1.2. of the seuen and twentieth chapter. Iudas despaires after his Mai∣ster was con∣demned.When Iudas heard that his Maister was condemned he re∣pents after a fashion, but despaires of Gods mercy, as all re∣probates and most of the ranke of wicked traitors do, ver. 3. to the end of the tenth. In the twelfth part of this holy Gospell, Christs exami∣nation
is recorded,12 Pilates exa∣mination of Christ. with Pilates putting it to the peoples choise, the deliuerāce of Iesus or Barrabas (for that was their wicked immutable custome,Pilates obser∣uation of the Iewes wicked custome. though thereby they brought innocent bloud vpon themselues and their children. ver. 11. to the end of the 26. In the thirteenth part of this Gospell we may see how they still continued their malice against Christ,13 Their con— tinuance in their contriued malice argued by 14 seuerall actions. for 1 The gouernour Piltates men doe leade him into the common hall. 2 They gather the whole band about him. 3 They strippe him. 4 They put the skarlet robe vpon him. 5 They crowne him with a crowne of thornes (a vegetall com∣ing of the earths curse.) 6 They put a reede in his right hand. 7 They how their knees in mockery, saying: God saue thee, King of the Iewes, 8 They spatted vpon him. 9 They tooke a reede and smote him with it. 10 They tooke the robe from him. 11 And put his owne rayment vpon him. 12 And led him away to crucifie him. ver. 27. to rhe end of the 31. 13 Compelled Simon to beare his crosse. 14 They gaue him vinegar to drinke mingled with gall. ver. 32.33.34. In the fourteenth part of this Gospel, S. Matthew shewes how they accomplished their plotted designement in cruci∣fying him, which when they had done.14 The accom∣plishing of their plotted de— signements, proceeding in their persecu— ting of him 6 manner of waies. First, they persecuted euen his clothes. Secondly, they watch him, Thirdly, they set vp his title. Fourthly, they crucifie two theeues with the Author of truth. Fiftly, the passengers that passed by reuile him, Sixtly, first, the high Priests: secondly, Scribes: third∣ly,
Elders, and fourthly, Pharises mocke him, fiftly,Christs sufferings immedi∣atly before his death. so doe the theeeues, ve. 35. to the end of the 44. 15 What fell out the three houres that Christ was vp∣on the crosse.In the fifteenth part the Euangelist relateth. First, what fell out for three houres together, while Iesus was vpon the crosse, to wit, the lights for the day and night fell to mourning,1 The lights fell a mourning that their Lord and maker should thus be handled of his people. From the sixt howre to the ninth darke∣nesse is ouer all the land  et natura patiebantur. verse 45. 2 The Sauiour fals to crying.Secondly, he relates what befel at the ninth houre. Sinners would not sorrow, the Sauiour of sinners, Iesus the Sauiour of all mourning sinners, mourneth for sinners, crying bit∣terly, crying with a loud voyce, Ely, Ely, Lammah sabachtha∣ni. ver. 46. Hebrewes vnder∣stand not Christs Hebrew.This cry the Hebrewes would not vnderstand, and yet it was Hebrew, as appeareth, ve. 47.48.49. Our Lord cryeth againe, they might haue vnderstood him the second time (but who is so blind as he that wil not see): & so yeelded vp his spirit, yeelded vp the Ghost ve. 50. 3 The relation of those things that befell after Christs death in 5 occurrents.Thirdly, the Euangelist relates what befell after Christs death. First, the vaile of the Temple is rent in twaine, Secondly, the earth did quake, Thirdly, the stones were clouen, Fourthly, the graues did open themselues, Fiftly, many bodies of Saints, 1 Arose, 2 Came out of the graue after his resurrection, 3 And went into Hierusalem, 4 And appeared vnto many, ver. 51.52.53. 16 The truth of all is set downe, 1. by the effects in the Centurion and watchmen, 2. by testimony of the witnesses.In the sixteenth and last part of this Gospell for the day Saint Matthew sets downe the truth heteof by the effects. For First, the hard hearted Captaine the Centurion and the watchmen his souldiers, seeing the earthquake, and what was done,
1 Feared greatly,Subsequents & effects of Christs death, 2 Confesse Christ, saying: Truely this was the Sonne of God. ver. 54. Secondly, many witnesses are cited to prooue this, though they were a farre off, some whereof are  without name expressed ver. 55. and some . They haue their names recorded, that God may be glorified in their constancy, though they were of the weaker sexe, to wit, Ma∣ry Magdalene, Mary the mother of Iames and Ioses, and the mother of Zebedeus children. ver. 56. Now who can better and more truely say, then this our deere Sauiour vpon the crosse in the midst of all these crosses and intollerable torments. O vos omnes, omnes qui transitis, attendite & videte, si est dolor sicut dolor meus. Easter day. THe resurrection of our Lord Iesus Christ,The cause of the Churches choise of these 12. Scriptures for this feast of Easter, Generall sūme of all these 12 Scriptures, being one of the maine pillars whereupon the godly haue built, and must build their saluation: The Christian Churches haue also agreed vpon twelue seuerall texts of holy Scripture to be read and taught among them. By which meanes the day and time is not only cele∣brated as a most solemne feast, but the principall and fundamentall points of religion therein handled in comme∣moration of that holy action, do confirme the faith of the Church of God, that as their head and Sauiour is risen, the first fruites of them that slept, so they shall rise againe to life eternall.Connexion & harmony of these doctrines with the do∣ctrines of the 9 former Son∣daies. And as he died for their sinnes, so they must die vnto sin before they can rise vnto righteousnesse. The doctrines for the nine precedent Sondaies are for the Churches humiliation and casting downe in sorrow and penitency, to bewaile their sinnes, the causes and origi∣nall
of their Sauiours sorrow, passion, and bitter death.Christs resurrection affoords matter of reioycing. The doctrines for the sixe Sondaies following are for the Churches exaltation, lifting vp, exultation, reioycing and comfort.Doctrines of reioycing in the sixe Sondaies foflowing Summe of the eight former Scriptures for this day. Summe of the 4 latter. Eight of these which are out of the old Testament, cho∣sen for this holy feast of Easter, do in types and shadowes set forth and delineate the Churhes deliuerance from the de∣struction of the destroyer, and our Lords resurrection. The foure in the new Testament proue the perfor∣mance, truth, and substance hereof, applying all to the sin∣gular vse and instruction of Gods deare people euery where. The Princely Prophet Dauid in the second Psalme,Summe of the second Psame. the 57. and the 111. Psalmes appointed for the morning seruice in the 113. 114. and 118. for the euening sacrifice, giues vs to vnderstand that God hath decreed this victory of Christ his Sonne ouer sinne,Parts & parti∣cular doctrines. death, and destruction, in his resurrection, and therefore it must be so. For 1 Vaine fuming of Gentils, and fretting of Iewes.First, in the second Psalme Dauid proueth. 1 That albeit the Gentiles fumed, and the people of the Iewes murmured, yet it was all but in vaine. ve. 1. 2 Gods derisi∣on of both.2 There is a reason rendred there, God shall haue them all in derision. ver. 5. 3 Christs kingdome.3 God hath set his King vpon Sion his holy mountaine. ver. 6.4 Christ is Gods naturall & eternall Son. 4 That this King and Christ is his Sonne. ve. 7. 5 Christ must be obeyed.5 Homage and obedience in feare and reuerence must be yeelded vnto this Kingly Sonne. Kisse the Sonne. &c. ver. 12. Summe of the 57 Psalme.The second Scripture, Psalme 57. whose title is, To him that excelleth, Destroy not, a Psame of Dauid on Michtam, when he fled from Saul in the caue.Parts. 1 The ground of his prayer.1 Assureth vs of this truth, that as Dauid prayed vnto God to be deliuered from those that would swallow him vp, Selah: so was he assured that God would send forth his mer∣cy and trurh. ver. 3. 2 Though his soule was among Lyons, though he lay among the
children of men that are set on fire,Gods Church hath a time of breathing, in their afflictions, as they, &c. A description of Dauids eni∣mies, whose teeth are speares and arrowes, and their tongue a sharpe sword. Yet he prayeth in prophecy, and prophecieth in prayer,2 The prayer it selfe. that God would ex∣alt himselfe aboue the heauens, and his glory be vpon the earth. ve. 5. to the 11, being the last verse of the Psalme. In the third Scripture, which is the 111. Psalme.Summe of the 111 Psalme. Parts 1 Dauid giues thanks to God for all the good that he hath done to his Church.1 Thāksgiuing to God for all the good that he hath done to his Church. ver. 1. 2 In the rest of the Psalme he teacheth and describeth vn∣to the Church the magnitude and multitude of these his workes. ve. 2. to the end of the 9. where he makes mention of the Redemption,, he sent to his people, &c.2 A descripti∣on of the great∣nesse and mani∣foldnesse of Gods fauour, 3 The Prophet shewes the end why God hath done these great things for his people: to wit, that men might feare the Lord, which feare is the beginning of wisedome, that the keepers of his commandements haue good vnderstanding,3 The end why God doth all this good to vs. that the praise of this feare endures for euer, and men are to do all things to his praise for euer and euer. ver. 10. the last of the Psalme. In the fourth Scripture, Psal. 113.Summe of the 113 Psalme, Dauid First, exhorts the children which do feare the Lord,Parts. to praise the Lord, ver. 1.1 Exhortation to praise God. Secondly, he performes praises himselfe. ve. 2.3.2 Dauid doth it himselfe, Thirdly, he sheweth fiue reasons hereof in the rest of the Psalme, to the end of the 9. ver. Reade the text.3 Reasns fi to vrge this ∣hortaion▪ In the fift Scripture. Psal. 114.Sum  t 114 Psalme, King Dauid First, sets vs downe an experience of Gods deliuerance of his people Israell out of Aegypt. ve. 1.2. Secondly,1 Experi of God ¦rance  the meanes and manner how God did this 1 By the seas floting and yeelding, 2 By the mountaines moouing & skipping. v. 3.4.5.6.7.2 Mo and manne  they were li∣uered, Thirdly, the Prophet tels vs of Gods preseruation of his people in the desert after their deliuerance out of Aegypt. 1 By turning the rocks into water pooles. 2 By turning the flints into a fountaine of water,3 Gods pse∣uation of srl, ve. 8. being the last of the chapter.Summe of the 118 Psalm, In the sixt Scripture the 118. (where the stone Dauid is a
type of the stone Christ,King Dauid typical stone of Christ the sub∣stantiall stone. reiected of Saul and the people, as Christ was of the rulers, high Priests and people of the Iewes, yet by the Lords doing, he ariueth out of the seas of his troubles into the great hauen of the kingdome of Israel as our Lord Christ did (maugre the malice of his enemies) by his owne power alone arise out of the graue and hell of his torments, at his appointed time, and after that ascend vn∣to glory. Parts.First, therefore the Prophet in rhis 118. Psalme, exhorts the people to praise God,1 Exhortation to Israelites Le∣uites and other that feare the Lord to praise him, whether Israelites, Leuites, or any other, ver. 1. to the end of the 4. Secondly, he perswades and assures himselfe and all the faithfull, by the former experience of Gods deliuerances and fauoures (which he in particular doth relate) that the Lord will proceed in the continuance of his fatherly care & protection ouer him and his Church.2 Assurance of Gods protecti∣on to himselfe and others, And though he hath exercised them by afflictions and chastened them sore, yet sith he is powerfull, he can, and sith he is most louing and iust in his promises, he will not suffer them to be daunted by their enemies or giuen ouer vnto shame or confusion. ver. 5. to the end of the 14.3 Reasons al∣leaged why the righteous must haue songs of ioy in their dwellings, Thirdly, he doth for this cause teach the righteous, that there is great reason, and causes manifold, why there should be in their Tabernacles the voices and songs of ioy and de∣liuerance, singing thus and to this effect, The right hand of the Lord hath done valiantly. ver. 15.16. Fourthly, he promiseth to do this himselfe, & performes it,4 Dauid vowes to do this him∣selfe, & per∣formes it. ver. 17. to the end of the 21. Fiftly, he sheweth 3 reasons thereof.5 He rendreth three occasions threeof, ver. 22.23.24. Sixtly, Dauid himselfe falleth to prayer, the Priests and people performe the same,6 King, Priests and people fall to prayer and thanksgiuing, & so concludeth with Haleluiah, as they did begin, Praise ye the Lord because he is good, for his mercy endureth for euer. ver. 25. to the end of the 29. the end of the Psalme.Mor. prayer. 1 Less. Exod. 12. Summe.In the seuenth Scripture Exodus 12. handling the insti∣tution
of the first and old Passeouer,Passeouer a type of the spiritual, &c, we haue a type of the second and new Passeouer Christ Iesus which is offered for vs. The text affoordeth these chiefe and generall points.Parts. First, Gods precept to Moses and Aaron to teach the peo∣ple euery rite and ceremony.1 Moses is com∣māded to teach euery rite and ceremony, 1 Concerning the killing of the Passeouer. ver. 1. to the end of the 10. 2 Concerning the manner of the eating thereof, from the 11. ver. to the end of the 16. 3 Concerning the feast of vnleauened bread, which also they were to obserue with it. ver. 17. to the end of the 20. The second generall point whereto the text directeth is Moses his relation of these things (as God appointed him) vnto the children of Israel. ver. 21. to the 27.2 Moses obeyed this iniunction, The third is the peoples execution and performance of these iniunctions. ver. 28.3 The people execute all that which they were comman∣ded, The fourth is a mention of the tenth and last plague (the slaying of the first borne4 Relation of the 10 plague, the slaying of the first borne, of Aegypt) which went neerer vn∣to Pharaohs heart then all the rest, as appeareth by the seue∣rall effects. ver. 29. to the 36. The fift is a Geographicall itinerarium or description of the Israelites iourney, with a chtonicle and record of the times.5 A Geogra∣phicall descrip∣tion of the Isra∣elites iourney and a chronicle, 1 Of their dwelling in Aegypt. 2 Of their departure thence. ver. 37. to the 41. Sixtly, the vse of all this is propounded:6 Vse of all is propounded, to wit, the ce∣lebration and obseruation thereof, that it is a night to be kept holy to the Lord, baecause he brought them out off the land of Ae∣gypt, and all Israel must obserue it. ver. 42. The seuenth is the law of this Passeouer7 Law of the Passeouer, prescribed vnto Moses and Aaron. ver. 43. to the 51. the end of the chapter. The eight Scripture Exodus 14. delareth,Eue. Prayer. 1 Less. Exod. 14. that though Gods poore people were deliuered out of the land of Aegypt,Summe yet were they not quite deliuered from the King of Aegypts persecution and pursuite, by himselfe
and his armies.Pharaohs persecution hindred not Gods saluation of his Church. Israel not quite deliuered from Pharaoh, though they were out of his land. God was their deliuerer, though Pha∣raohs rancor in∣creased. And that albeit Pharaohs rancor and malice continued and increased against them; yet the text tels vs, that coming the Lord did come, did not long tarry and in the end deliuered them. If we do suruey the chapter more care∣fully, we shall behold these things, First, how God commandeth his people to remoue their campe towards the sea, because his purpose is, there to pre∣serue his people and to destroy the Aegyptians. ver. 1. to the end of the 4.1 A comman∣dement to pitch their campe to∣wards the sea. Secondly, Pharaoh taketh knowledge hereof, who encou∣raged and prepared himselfe to pursue them vnto destructi∣on, verse 5. to the end of the 9.2 Pharaohs pre∣paration to per∣sue them, Thirdly, the effect that this pursuite wrought in the Is∣raelites3 The effects of this pursuite in the Israelites, is recorded, to wit, 1 A feare of their experienced old enemies. 2 An earnest supplication and prayer to God. 3 An expostulation with, or a murmuring against Mo∣ses, who encourageth them, saying: Feare not, stand still, and behold the saluation, &c. ver. 10. to the end of the 14. 4 God encou∣rageth them to march on, and why,Fourthly, God himselfe encourageth his people to march forward, telling Moses: first, that his people shall go through the sea on dry land, which fell out so, as ver. 11. to the end of the 25. secondly, that the same sea should destroy the Aegyptians, which also came to passe, ver. twenty sixe, to the end of the thirty sixe. 5 Vse that Gods people made of all this.Fiftly, the holy Ghost tels vs how Gods people made vse of all this which was done, 1 In obseruing the power of God. 2 In fearing the Lord. 3 In beleeuing the Lord and his seruant Moses, verse 31: which is the last of the chapter. The ninth Scripture which is the first of the 4. taken out of the new Testament,Mor. Prayer. 2 Less. Rom. 6. written Rom. 6. directeth the Church of God vnto the right & worthy receiuing of the fauours & graces of God,Summe. not in continuing in sin that grace may a∣boūd,
& being dead vnto sin,Gods fauours in deliuering, &c. to liue no more in it: but rather to rise vnto newnesse of life,Parts and that by the example of the Lord of life, our Lord Iesus Christ, his resurrection, S. Paul fiirst, propounds this doctrine in a patheticall question,1 The Proposi∣tion in a pathe∣ticall question. verse 1. Secondly, he proues it by three reasons, ve. 2.3.4. making a Correlary hereupon,2 Proofe by 3. reasons with a correlary vpon them, verse 5.6.7. Wherefore he makes an Hypothesis vpon a former Thesis: If wee bee dead with Christ, wee beleeue that wee shall also liue with him, The assumption and the conclusion are vnder∣stood, verse 8. This argument he proueth by the truth and certainty of Christs resurrection, verse 9.10. concluding the Thesis, and the Hypothesis in these words: Likewise thinke yee also that yee are dead to sinne, but aliue to God in Iesus Christ, vers. 11. In the third part of the chapter he exhorts the Church vp∣on the former doctrines,3. Exhortation vpon the for∣mer doctrine, 1. Let not sinne therefore reigne in your mortall bodies, &c. 2. Neither giue ye your members as wea∣pons, &c. verse 13. Hereunto hee annexeth a concluding rea∣son, ab effecto contrario: For sinne shall not haue dominion ouer you, for yee are not vnder the law, but vnder grace, vers. 14. In the fourth part he propounds another doctrine in a pa∣theticall manner,4 The second proposition of another do— ctrine in a pa∣thetical maner, as he did at the first: What then? shall we sin, because we are not vnder the law, but vnder grace? ve. 15. Which proposition he diuersly proueth and applieth, as ver. 16. to the end of the 23. the end of the chapter. The tenth Scripture,Eue. Prayer. 2 Less. Act. 2. Acts 2. chap. conteines Saint Peters Sermon, concerning Christs resurrection, with the seuerall and contrary effects (in contrary minded people) of Peters Apologie, and his Sermon.Summe Parts. In the text obserue First, the occasion of the defence and Apologie,1 The occasion of the Apology to wit, the coming down of the holy Ghost vpon the Apostles, as they were in vnity and vniformity all together at Ierusalem, cau∣sing them to speake with other tongues, as the spirit gaue them vtterance. At which 1. the multitude marueiled.
2. Some doubted. 3. Others mocked and slandered, saying:Peter preaches of Christs resurrection. They are full of new wine, vers. 1. to the end of the 13. 2 S. Peters an∣swer to the ac∣cusation.Secondly, we may marke Saint Peters answer and A∣pologie. 1 Answering to the reprochfull slaunder by denying the same, and by purging all the Apostles from the crime of drunkennesse, vers. 14.15. 2 Shewing that the effects of Gods spirit in this plentiful manner were prophesied and foretold long ago, vers. 16. to the end of the 21. 3 S. Peters Ser∣mon concer∣ning the Iewes killing of Christ and of his re∣surrection.In the third part of the chapter, wee may heare the ser∣mon of Peter concerning the Israelites, taking, killing, & crucifying the Lord of life, who notwithstanding is risen from the dead, and ascended vp into glorie, vers. 22. to the end of the 36. In the fourth part, S. Luke makes relation of the effects that S. Peters sermon tooke in the hearers, who 4 Effects of this Sermon were manifold.First (being pricked & wounded in heart for their woun∣ding & stabbing of Christ) desired to know what they were to do for the preuenting of Gods iudgement? Whom Peter resolued, vers. 37. to the end of the 40. 2 They that gladly receiued the word, were baptized, 3 The church increased by the nūber of 3000. soules. v. 41. 4 They continued in the Apostles doctrine and holy exercises vers. 42. 5 Feare came vpon euery soule, 6 The word was confirmed by wonders, vers. 43: 7 The faithfull were all together, 8 They had a commmunitie, vers. 44. 9 They sold their possessions for distribution to the needy members of the Church, vers. 45. 10 They vsed publicke exercises in the temple, &c. 11 Society at home ioyfully, & with singlenesse of heart, v. 46. 12 They praised God, 13 They had the peoples good fauour. 14 There was a daily increase of the members of the pri∣mitiue
Church,Blessed effects of S. Peters, &c besides those soules that were conuerted be∣fore, v. 41. to the end of the 47. the end of the chapter. In the third Scripture of the new Testament, being the 11. in number. Colos. 3.1. to the end of the 7.Epistle Coloss. 3. ad 7. verse, S. Paul makes a most holy vse of this doctrine:Summe for First he teacheth (and to that end exhorteth) that it must of necessity follow,Parts: 1 Generall ex∣horratiue do∣ctrine to seeke things aboue. 1 That those which be risen with Christ must seeke those things which are aboue, &c. vers. 1. 2 They must set their affections on things which are aboue, &c. verse 2. Reasons to proue these doctrines. 1 For ye are dead, & your life is hid with Christ in God, ver. 3. 2 Reason à sine vltimo omnium fidelium: When Christ which is our life shall appeare, then shall yee also appeare with him in glory. verse. 4. In the second part of the Scriptures hé doth more parti∣cularly exhort them,2 A more par∣ticular doctrine exhortatiue. and 1 Concludes vpon the premisses after this manner: Mor∣tifie therefore your members which are on the earth, fornication, vncleannesse, inordinate affection, euill concupiscence, and coue∣tousnesse, which is idolatry, vers. 5. 2 Declares how Gods iudgement cometh vppon such sinners, verse 6. 3 He rubs the Colossians memories with their old former estate: for he shewes, that they walked (that is) delighted in them once, when they liued in them, ver. 7. but now they must be forsaken and forgotten, as vers. 8.9.10. of the chapter. In the fourth Scripture which is the twelfth and last of those that are chosen for this solemne feast, Saint Iohn the lo∣uing and beloued Disciple, chap. 20.1. to the end of the 10.Gospell. Ioh. 20.1. ad 10. Summe. verse,Parts. demonstrateth and confirmeth the truth of Christs re∣surrection. First, hee denoteth the time when our Lord rose:1 The time whē Christ rose. that is,
vpon the first day of the weeke, early when it was yet darke,Testimonies infallible, &c. when Mary Magdalen came to the sepulchre, and saw the stone taken away from the tombe, vers. 1. 2 Mary Magda∣lens paines and eare to certifie this to others.Secondly, Saint Iohn records (for another confirmation hereof) the care and paines that Mary Magdalen tooke to signifie the truth of this incident vnto Peter and Iohn, vers. 2. 3 Extraordina∣ry haste of Iohn and Peter,Thirdly, the truth is confirmed againe by the extraordi∣nary haste of these two witnesses vnto the place and se∣pulchre, where they found the linnen cloathes wrapped vp, but not the body, from the 3. verse to the end of the 8. 4 Iohn is a see∣ing and a be∣leeuing witnes of the resurre∣ction,Fourthly, the holy Ghost proues it to bee so, that Christ was risen, because Iohn did see it and beleeue, though (before that) they knew not the scriptures concerning Christs resur∣rection, vers. 9. 5 The two A∣postles retur∣ning to their fellowes to cer∣tifie the same; beside the se∣quent testimo∣ny of the An∣gell, & Christs own appearing to them two se∣uerall times,Fifthly, by their returning to their owne home, where the rest of the Apostles were to certifie the same vnto them, and there to expect further confirmation both by others & their owne sight and testimony, vers. 10. as in the rest of the chap∣ter. 1. By the Angels testimony hereof. 2. By Iesus his own appearing vnto them the same day at night. 3. By his ap∣pearing to them when Thomas was absent. 4. And eight dayes after, praesente Thoma incredulo. The first Sonday after Easter. Coherence of these Scrip∣tures with the former, The reason of the chocie of these 4 Scrip∣tures.AS the twelue Scriptures formerly selected out of the old and new Testament, for Easter day, haue made the doctrines concerning the passion, death, and resurrection of our Lord very manifest vnto vs: so these that are culled out for the fiue Sondaies following, do serue not onely to teach and peswade men to beleeue all the premisses: but to shew their faith, and beliefe in their holy conuersion. That so they may be the better fitted to make benefite of Christs
Ascension,Examples of punishments, &c. another great poste vpholding Gods house: without which glorious act of our king of glory, the Church had neuer beene inriched with such riuers of Gods graces out of the holy sanctuary, as did flowe forth to them at the feast of Penthecost. Now in the two first parcels of Scripture chosen for this day out of the old Testament,Summe of the two Scriptures of the old Te∣stament. we may behold fearefull ex∣amples of vnbeliefe, gainsaying and contradiction in Core Dathan and Abirom, and in the peoples murmuring (who all paied very deere for it) as also in king Balaks perswading Balaam to curse Gods people, and in Balaams willingnesse to go with king Balaks messengers. But in the two out of the new Testament,Summe of the two Scriptures out of the newe Couenant. we may perceiue what paines S. Iohn taketh to perswade Gods Church to be∣leeue, and what infallible testimonies he propounds to con∣firme vs in the assured and vndoubted truth of the death and resurrection of our Lord Iesus Christ. The first of the foure Scripture written, Numbers chap. 16.Mor. Prayer. 1 Les. Num. 16. relateth two histories. The first,Parts. concerning the rebellion and punishment of Corah and his company,1 Corahs conspi∣racy. ve. 1. to the end of the 40.Two histories. The second is as touching the peoples murmuring2 The peoples murmuring. with their punishment, ve. 41. to the end of the 50. the end of the chapter. In the first part of the first history,Parts of the first history. we may see, 1 Who the rebels were. 2 VVhat number of consorts and conspirators they gat to ioyne with them. 3 VVhat their rebellion was. In the second part of the historyThe second part of the first history. may be seene, how hey∣nously Moses tooke it when he vnderstood of it, and what course he tooke about it, as 1 In reprouing them. 2 In calling, and twise summoning the rebels to appeare before the Lord, ver. 4. to the end of the 19.
The third part of the first hi∣story.In the third part,Vnbeleeuers and rebels punished. a commandement of the Lord concer∣ning a separation to be made betweene the innocent and the disobedient: that hee might in an extraordinary manner visite the iniquity of those rebels vpon their heads, verse 20. to the end of the 3. The fourth part of the first history.In the fourth part of this first history is recorded, what was done with 250. Censors of those offenders, which offered the fire, being not of the seed of Aaron, vers. 36. to the end of the 40. Parts of the se∣cond history.In the second history obserue, First, the multitudes murmuring, the next morning, ver. 41. to the end of the 43. Secondly, Gods separating of Moses and Aaron from the murmuring congregation, that hee might quickly consume the murmurers with the plague, which was performed in∣deed by the death of fourteene thousand and seuen hundred beside those that dyed of Corahs conspiracy, vers. 44. to the end of the 46. Thirdly, the attonement which was made vnto God for them, and the staying of the plague, ve. 47. to the end of the 50. which is the end of the chapter. The second selected Scripture, Numb. 22.Eue. Prayer. 1 Less. Num. 22 tels vs the hi∣story of Balak the king of Moabs, sending for Balaam the Prophet to curse the Israelites,Summe. because this king & his peo∣ple were afraide of their great multitude the rather because they saw what Gods people had done before to their ene∣mies the Amorites.Parts. Balaks message sent to Balaam.First, the holy Ghost relates the embassages of the Princes of Moab sent vnto Balaam vpon the former occasions, and the answer of Balaam vnto them. The first mes∣sage. The answer, The second message. The answer.The first message is expressed, ve. 2. to the end of the 7. The answer of Balaam to this message, as God appointed him to speake, to wit, to deny their request, or to go with them, ve. 8. to the end of the 14. The second embassage which the king sent, is related, v.
15.King Balak through vnbeliefe persecutes Gods people. to the end of the 17. Balaams answer, as God willed him, was, that he would go with them, but he would neither say, nor do more then God enioyned him, ve. 18. ad 20. Secondly, the holy Ghost declares how God was displea∣sed with Balaams forwardnesse in going:2 Gods indig∣nation for Ba∣laams forward∣nesse in going. and therefore sent his Angell to stand in the way, to be against him, whom Ba∣laams beast seeing, was afraid, and by speech reproued her maister, because of his hasty violence toward her, verse 21. to the 30. Thirdly, the text mentioneth the Angels reprouing of Balaam,3 The Angels reprouing of Balaam. who confesseth his sin, and hath warrant from God to go with the kings messengers: but with Gods former Prouiso, verse 31. to the end of the 35. verse. Fourthly, how the King himselfe meets Balaam,4 The kings meeting of Ba∣laam, and his conference with him. expostu∣lateth with him about his refusing to come at the first, and offers him preferment to performe the mischiefe that was in the Kings minde. And how Balaam answered him, went with the King: who brought him vp into the high places of Baal, that thence he might see the vtmost part of the peo∣ple, v. 36. to the end of the 41. the end of the chapter: S. Iohn the Apostle and Euangelist in the third Scripture, written 1. Iohn. 5.4. to the end of the 12.Epistle. 1 Ioh. 5.4. ad 12. verse, sheweth vnto Gods Church how they shall ouercome rebellion and dis∣obedience, murmuring, and distrust of God, incredulity,Summe yea the world it selfe, or any other enemy to mans saluation.Parts. First he propounds the doctrine, ver. 4.5. For all that is,1 Proposition, borne of God ouercommeth the world, and this is the victory, &c. Who is it that ouercommeth, but he which beleeueth that Iesus is the sonne of God? Secondly,2 A relation how Christ ob∣tained this vi∣ctory, because Iesus Christ is the obiect of our faith & beliefe, to the end that in him by beleeuing, wee might bee more then conquerours, S. Iohn tels vs how Christ gat this victory for vs, saying: He came by water and bloud,3 A twofold confirmation by a testimony heauenly, earthly, and it is the spirit that beareth witnesse hereof also, for the spirit is truth, ve. 6. Thirdly, he proues this truth by a two-fold testimony.
First heauenly, bearing record in heauen, Father, Word,Vnbeliefe and rebellion is ouer∣come by faith in Christ Iesus. and holy Ghost, which as they are one God, so they agree in one ve. 7. The second testimony is earthly, to wtt, 1. the Spirit, our acknowledging of God the Father in Christ by faith, according to the testimony of the holy Ghost, witnessing vnto our spirits that we are Gods children. 2 Is water, id est, our iustification. 3 Is bloud, that is, our iustification, vers. 8. 4 Vse that S. Iohn makes of these two testi∣monies, 1 by application, 2 by conclusionFourthly, of these two testimonies S. Iohn makes vse, first applying them, and secondly concluding the necessity of our apprehending of Christ by faith: and in the third place, consequently, of attaining euerlasting life by possessing of Christ by faith, without which no man hath a right and true spirituall life, either in this world and life, or in the life to come. Application.His application is in the 9. and 10. verse: If we receiue the witnesses of men, &c. He that beleeueth in the Son of God, hath the witnesse in himselfe, and on the contrary, &c. Conclusion.His conclusion and consequence: And this is the word, that God hath giuen vnto vs eternall life, and this life is in his sonne: that is, Christ hath wrought and brought vs this life by his death and resurrection, verse 11. He that hath the sonne, hath life, and he that hath not the sonne of God, hath not life, verse 12. For it is a necessary consequent, that who so beleeues in Christ, hath Christ dwelling in him, hath a spirituall life and conuer∣sation here, but a most happy and coelestiall in the life to come. In the fourth Scripture (recorded also by S. Iohn, chap. 20. vers. 19. to the end of the 23.Gospell. Ioh. 20.19 ad 23) we haue a most infallible assu∣rance of our Lords resurrection,Summe. from himselfe, and his own appearing vnto most of his Disciples: that they might con∣fidently rest vpon him who gaue them his blessed peace, which passeth all vnderstanding, his gracious and holy spi∣rit, which should neuer faile them, his holy presence and power of remitting and retaining sinnes, which should bee
perpetuall among them and their successors vnto the end of the world.Christs often appearing to many after his resurrection These fiue verses conteine Christs first apparition,Parts. Christs first ap¦parition proued which was most manifest and perspicuous, as appeareth, First, by the circumstances of time, place, and persons:1 by circum∣stances of time place, and per∣sons. The same day at night, which was the first of the weeke, & when the doores were shut, &c. vers. 19. Secondly, S. Iohn proues the truth hereof by the manner of our Lords behauiour in the presence of his Disciples,2 by the maner of Christs be∣hauiour before his Disciples, when hee had said: Peace bee vnto you, hee shewed them his hands and his feete. The effect of which demonstration, Saint Iohn sets downe, and by way of Exegesis proues the truth aforesaid: Then were the Disciples glad, when they had seene the Lord, vers. 20. Thirdly,3 by Christs re∣peating of his former salutati∣on, being the preface or in∣troduction to 3 fauours, Saint Iohn proues it by Christs iteration of his former salutation and deprecation, being as a prologue and preface to three notable fauours which he vouchsafed vnto his Difciples and their successors, the true and faithfull mi∣nisters and seruants of Christ. The first fauour is the glorious authority of their institu∣ted ministery: As my father sent mee, so send I you, verse  21. The second is a confirmation of this authenticke autho∣rity,  1. by a symbole of breathing, 2. by giuing of that which the breathing signified: Reeeiue the holy Ghost, verse. 22. The third is a gracious and free promise of the power∣full  efficacy of his authentike ministery consisting in a two∣fold power. The first is of loosing and remitting of sinnes:Ministerial po∣wer is two fold losing binding of sin The second of binding and retaining of offences: Whose sinnes soeuer yee remit, they are remitted, and whose sinnes soeuer ye retaine, they are retained, verse 23.
The second Sonday after Easter. MOst truly & wisely said the wisest king: That he which is vpright in his way,Coherēce of the 4. former scrip∣tures with these foure. Summe of the two out of the old Testament, is abhomination to the wicked: and a wicked man is abhomination to the iust, Pro. 29, 27. Which may appeare in the two Scriptures chosen out of the old Testa∣ment for Gods seruice vpon this day, in Balaks following his further suite vnto Balaam to curse Gods people, the flocke of God, whom the malicious King called his ene∣mies, though they neuerthelesse were blessed of God by the mouth of the slye Prophet Balaam. Summe of the two out of the new,The other two portions taken out of the newe Testa∣ment, do First exhort vs for Christs sake, with meekenes, as Christs sheepe to suffer afflictions with patience. Secondly, and make knowen to vs the singular loue, and most vigilant care that our Lord the great good Sheepheard had, and hath ouer his flocke and sheepe. Mor. prayer. 1 Less. Num. 23The first of the foure for this day, written Numbers 23. doth in the. PartsFirst part thereof declare vnto vs, that notwithstanding King Balaks outward religious obedience,1 Balaams bles∣sing of the peo∣ple whether he would or no, in building of seuen Altars, and being at more cost in offering seuen Bul∣lockes, and seuen Rammes, being still in hope to atchieue his purpose: yet was Balaam vrged volente nolente, to blesse the people of God. All which is shewed from the first verse to the end of the tenth. 2 Balaam wil not curse so much as the vt∣most part of Gods people, no more then God can recall his blessing.In the second part of this chapter, the holy Ghost relates vnto vs how the king cometh vpon the prophet with a fresh charge, & a new supply of tempting Balaam, playing small game (as the diuell doth vsually) before he will sit out, desi∣ring him to curse but the vtmost part of the people for his sake, whose expectation is deceiued: for God repents him
not of his blessing to recall it:Whom God loueth, he finally loueth. Whom he loues, hee loues to the end, vers. 11. to the end of the 24. In the third part of rhe chapter,3 God will not suffer Balaam to be a Neuter, who before was an Ambldexter, this instrument of the di∣uell continueth still in his calumniation, and professed en∣mity vnto Gods Church, and therfore vrgeth Balaam (who in the sight of God was an Ambidexter before) to shew him∣selfe now to be on no side, & to become a Newter: neither to curse them, nor blesse them at all. Of whom the King recei∣ued an answer much like the former, verse 25. to the 30. the end of the chapter: For a most gracious blessing came vppon Balaam himselfe, and the people of the Lord had multitudes of blessings pronounced to come vppon them, as appeareth in the next Chapter, being the 24. The second of the Scriptures for this day, being Num∣bers 25.Eue. Prayer. 1 Less. Num. 25. sheweth the truth of the old Prophets wordes, a true Prouerbe:Summe and scope of it, That the Leopard cannot change his spottes: no more can they doe well which haue an euill habite, or are accustomed to doe euill, Ieremy 13. verse 23. For the Israelites whom God deliuered, as before,Israelites for∣getful of Gods late blessings, and whom hee so louingly blessed (as wee haue seene) forget this deliue∣rance, Gods fauour and blessings: and they fall to filthinesse in committing of whooredome with Moabitish wo∣men, as also of spirituall whooredome with Baal-Peor the Moabites idoll.Parts. First therefore their wickednesse is by Moses related,1 A reproofe of their vnthank∣full wickednes. ve. 1. to the end of the 3. Secondly, God visites their sins, by commanding Moses to hang vp the chiefe rulers of the people,2 God punish∣eth their hor∣rible iniquities, which either drew them to the wickednesse, or hindred them not from it, vers. 4.5. In the third part of the Chapter,3 Phinehas exe∣cuteth iudgmēt vpō the malefa∣ctors & turneth away Gods in∣dignation, Moses makes men∣tion of the Israelites bringing out the Madianitish wo∣man Cosby before rhe congregation, who had commit∣ted whooredome with Zimri, for which wickednesse God
tooke away 24000 Israelites:Israelites vnthankfulnesse and forgetfulnesse punished. but the plague was stayed by zealous Phinehas his executing of iudgement vpon the ma∣lefactors, ve. 6 to the end of the 15. 4 Gods com∣mandement vnto them to fight with the Madianites, and why.In the fourth part of the chapter, a commandement is gi∣uen by God vnto Moses, to fight with the Midianites: who troubled Gods people with their wiles, in drawing them to commit idolatry with Peor, and fornication with Cosby, ver. 16. ad 18. the end of the chapter. The third of the Scriptures written, 1. Pet. 2.19. to the end of the chapter,Epistle 1 Pet. 2.19. to the end of the chapter. exhorts the sheep of Christ, First, to behaue themselues like sheepe, in bearing affli∣ctions with patience,Scope and summe. Exhortation to patience in af∣fliction, and in∣nocency of life whether they come with our desert, & through our demerite, or not. Secondly, to walke innocently, and to bee harmelesse, as the Lambes and Doues of Christ, because wee are vnder the conduct and gouernment of so meeke a sheepheard, our Lord Iesus Christ, the sheepheard and Bishop of our soules. Parts.S. Peter in these seuen verses, Reasons and perswasions to vrge the do∣ctrine of pati∣ence.First, propounds the doctrine of patience, and endu∣ring of wrong for a righteous cause, to bee a most necessary lesson for euery Christian to learne and practise, being a thing so commendable, and thanke-worthy, or praise-wor∣thy. This is his First reason. For this is thanke-worthy, if a man for con∣science toward God, endure griefe, suffering wrongfully, verse 19. The second reason is drawen à disparatis: for 1 Patience in abiding punishment for a mans fault, is no com∣mendation at all. 2 Patience in suffering for wel doing is accepted of God, verse 20. The third reason is drawne à fine: For hereunto yee are called. The fourth ab exemple, wee must imitate Christ, who suffered for vs beleeuers, leauing vs an example that we should
follow his steps,Patience in affliction necessary, vers. 21.A more speciall propounding and application of the example, This example is in more particular propounded and ap∣plyed, verse 22.23.24.25. The fourth of the Scriptures written, Iohn 10. vers. 11. to the end of the 16.Gospell. Ioh. 10.11, ad 16 doth plainly set before our eyes, that in∣finite loue, and that vnspeakable care which Christ,Summe that great Sheepheard, had of the sheepe, his people and flocke: So that as the precedent Gospell confirmed vnto vs the cer∣tainty of his resurrection, to make vs righteous:Agreement hereof with the former Gospel, euen so doth this assure vs of his vnmeasurable loue, and most vigilant carefulnesse of our continuance in this righteousnesse, our safe keeping and preseruation in the Church militant, and our euerlasting happinesse with him in the triumphant.Parts. This loue and care is first propounded in a generall Thesis:1 A Thesis gene∣rall. I am the good Sheepheard. For from the goodnesse of the Sheepheard, proceedes the care and loue that he hath of,2 An applica∣tion of this The∣sis by Antithesis, Foure notes of difference to discerne a good Sheepheard frō an hireling, and to the sheepe. Secondly, Saint Iohn explaneth this Thesis by an Anti∣thesis of a badde sheepheard and a good, an hireling and a true sheepheard: for one opposite and disparate appeareth best by another. The good sheepheard is discerned from the hireling, 1 By his full resolution, vnfained affection,1 his vnfained loue, and inward kindnesse to the sheepe: The good sheepheard giueth his life for the sheepe, vers. 11. 2 By a mutuall knowledge betwixt him and his sheepe:2 The mutuall knowledge be∣twixt him and his sheepe, I know mine, and I am knowne of mine, vers. 14. 3 By a rare effect of this knowledge and loue3 The effect of this knowledge and loue, in the per∣formance of this his intended and purposed resolution, the spending of the best iewell he hath vpon them: to wit, his life:The spending of his life for his sheepe, I lay downe my life for my sheepe, &c. verse 15. 4 By another effect of his loue, to wit, the care he hath of the absent, as well as of the present sheepe:4 The care of the absent sheepe, or the future sheepe, as well as of the present, Other sheepe also I haue, which are not of this fold, vers. 16.
A shadowing, A liuely de∣scription of the hireling, The hireling is shadowed two waies. The hireling is liuely set forth three waies,The hireling is 1. either shadowed,Christ perseuers in his care∣fulnesse towards vs, or 2. liuely set forth. He is shadowed two manner of waies, 1 He is an hireling, and not the Sheepheard. 2 The sheep are not his. He is liuely set forth in his colours, that is to say, descri∣bed by his bad effects: for 1 He leaues the sheepe, 2. he flees, 3. he suffers the wolfe, first to catch some, secondly to scatter the rest, verse 12. Two reasons of the hirelings carelesnesse of the sheepe.The reasons why the hireling deales thus, are rendred by our Lord Iesus Christ, prouing also excellently the first Thesis, and concluding it by Antithesis. The first reason is taken from the vsurpation of his place, he is an hireling: Ergo, he flyeth. The second reason is drawne from an effect of this vsur∣pation: He hath no care of his sheepe. The third Sonday after Easter. Coherence of the foure for∣mer Scriptures with these 4,THe two former Scriptures of the old Testament, ap∣pointed for the precedent Lords day, gaue vs a view of King Balaks tempting of Balaam to do and speake contrary to Gods direct will and commandement. Moses in these 2. appointed for this day, takes a contrary course, in exhor∣ting the people to take nothing from the word and com∣mandement of God,Summe and scope of these two out of the old testament, or to adde any thing thereto: not to de∣cline to the right hand, nor to the left. S. Peter teacheth men to make vse of this pure doctrine, in walking, and honestly cōuersing among men,Summe of the two out of the new testament, in abstaining from fleshly lusts which fight against the soule. And S. Iohn in recording the words of our Lord Iesus, concerning his returne after his Ascensi∣on, doth assure the faithfull members of Christs Church, of the comfortable assistance of Gods holy spirit, to enable thē both in their vpright and faithfull beleeuing, and in their holy walking.
Exhortation to constancy, &c.Moses in the first part of these Scriptures,Mor. Prayer. 1 Less. Deut. 4. written Deut. 4. doth in the forefront of the chapter, First propound,Parts. 1. A generall doctrine exhortatiue1 Doctrine ge∣nerall exhorta∣tiue, and dehor∣tatiue. of hearkning vnto, that is, obeying the lawes of God, 2. A do∣ctrine dehortatiue, or a caueat to beware of addition vnto, or detraction from Gods word. vers. 1.2. In the second part hee yeelds reasons to force the former doctrines taken from the recitall of that good which God had done for them in former time which obeyed him,2 Reasons of the doctrines, and how he dealed with them which disobeyed him, vers. 3. to the end of the 13. In the third he propounds a more particular dehortatiue doctrine cōcerning the eschewing of idolatry,3 A more par∣ticular exhor∣tatiue doctrine. prohibited in the law of God, deliuered him in the two Tables on mount Sinay: which part of the law they ought not to breake: for the Lord their God is a consuming fire, and a iealous God, vers. 14. to the end of the 24. In the fourth part he threatneth the people,4 A threatning of such as fall to idolatry, and denoun∣ceth against them Gods iudgments which wil ouertake such as God hath blessed with his benefites, & yet corrupt them∣selues with idolatry, verse 25. ad 28. In the fifth part Moses teacheth,5 A promise of mercy to the beleeuers and penitent, that as God is displeased with idolatry & forgetfulnesse of his ordinances, so he will be pleased with them when they shall repent and forsake their sins, and after their returne to God, shall call vnto him for mercy in their feeling of his punishments, and the smart of his roddes: which hee proueth, as before, by experience of Gods former dealing with them, vers. 29. to the end of the 40. In the sixth part the holy Ghost makes mention of the three citties of refuge,6 The cities of refuge. and as in an epilogue or conclusion, sheweth the briefe summe of that which was deliuered be∣fore in this fourth, and in the third chapter. In the second of these Scriptures, Deut. 5.Eue. Prayer. 1 Les. Deut. 5. Moses keepes on in the same course wherein he began,Parts.
1 Exhortation to obedience,First exhorting,Exhortation to continu∣ance in obedience. and by reasons perswading them to obey the lawes and ordinances of God, which he being Gods mi∣nister, doth repeate the second time, and makes application of some of those lawes to the Israelites at that time, vers. 1. to the end of the 21. 2 A relation of the effects of Gods speech in the people whē God spake to them out of the fire, cloud, and darknesse,In the second part of this chapter, Moses rehearseth what effect Gods speech (out of the midst of the fire, cloude, and darknesse) tooke in the multitude, in their being afraid, that God should speake to them any more: and therefore do in∣treate that Moses might go betweene God and them, to heare what the Lord saith, and so to report it to them, vers. 22. to the end of the 27. 3 God is plea∣sed that Moses shal go betwixt him and the people,In the third part Moses declares how God condiscended to this their request, and thereupon concludeth, that Gods people ought to obey the Lord in all things, not to turne to the right hand, nor to the left, verse 28, to the end of the 33. which is the end of the chapter. Scope and summe of it. Exhortation to righteousnesse and holinesse of life,In the third selected Scripture, Saint Peter in his first Epistle and second Chapter, verse 11. to the end of the 18.Epistle 1 Pet. 2.11, ad 18. playeth and harpeth vpon Moses his harpe, piping the same Lesson vnto the dispersed Iewes and strangers: That seeing they were once not a people, but now the people of God,Parts a chosen Generation, a royall Priest-hood, an holy Nation, they would now therefore show forth the vertues of him that hath called them out of darknesse into his maruailous light. 1 Exhortation generall to re∣ligion, and the practise thereofFirst, he generally exhorteth vnto religion to Godward, and to practise it amongst men, vers. 11.12. 2 Exhortation speciall to shew this religion in their submission to authority,Secondly, that they shew this obedience to God in their submission to all maner ordinance of man for the Lords sake. 1. Whether to the King, as the superiour ordinance, vers. 13. 2. Or to the gouernors as inferiour and subordinate powers vnto the King,3 He vrgeth these exhorta∣tions by foure preceptiue The∣ses, vers. 14.15.16. Thirdly, because S. Peter would haue this doctrine of submission and lowlinesse practised of all Gods people,
and vnto all:Exhortation to the pra∣ctise of true religion, and to the intent that none be left out vnto whom honour belongeth, He makes his former axiome to be  in saying: Honour all men, Loue brotherly fel∣lowship. ver. 17. Fourthly,4 The lowest estate and de∣gree in euery family is taught his duty. he exhorts the people which are of the lowest degree in a family vnto this subiection and submission, which must be practised of good seruants, not to their good and courteous maisters, but to the bad and froward. ve. 18. As in the precedent Gospell our Lord Iesus hath most bountifully shewed his loue towards his flocke,Coherence hereof with the former Gospell and hath wirhall continued his loue in caring for all his sheepe. So in our fourth Scripture selected for this day, written Iohn 16. ver. 16. to the end of the 22. he giues them and vs to vnder∣stand, not of his generall loue and care alone,Sūme & scope of this Gospell, but also of his most speciall and particular fauour. For albeit his chiefe ser∣uants and schollers were ignorant,Christ prepares an antidote a∣gainst the Dis∣ciples troubles. and did therefore doubt what their Maister should meane by these words. After a while ye shall see me, &c. yet he resolueth their doubt herein. And although multa cadūt inter calicem suprema{que} labra, many crosses and afflictions, many ouerthwart blowes, many mi∣series and troubles should befall them betwixt his absence and departure from them, and his bodily presence and re∣turne vnto them.Our ioy in Christ exceeds all earthly sor∣rowes & coun∣teruaileth thē. Therefore doth he neuerthelesse won∣derfully and most sweetly comfort them in these words of this Gospell with that maeasure of ioy which shall farre exceed all portions of sorrow whatsoeuer. Of this portion of Scripture there be two generall parts.Parts. In the first S. Iohn sets downe the doubtfulnesse of mind and the obiection which the Disciples made.A doubt pro∣pounded. An answere rē∣dred. Secondly, the solution and plaine answere which Christ maketh vnto their troubled minds and questioning tongues. In the first we may respect: first,What the doubt was, What effect it had. what that doubtfulnesse and hard obiection was: secondly, what effect it wrought, and what came of it. The doubtfulnesse was diuese:The doubtful∣nesse is diuerse, first, out of Christs owne words set down in two propositions, the 1. is, After a while ye
shall seeme: the 2. is A little while, and ye shall not: secondly,Christs comforts in af∣flictions vnspeakeable. out of the reason which he rendreth of his speech and words which his Disciples obserued not, For I go to the Father, ver. 16. 1 Effect of their doubtful∣nesse was con∣tention.The first effect of their doubtfulnesse was contention a∣mong the Disciples, questioning and reasoning about the words of Christ, 1. about both his positions, ver. 17. 2. a∣bout the expositions of them most easie, A little while and ye shall see me &c. yea, a great expostulation hereabout, what is this that he saith. 2 Effect is ig∣norance.The second effect is, the reason and originall of this their doubtfulnesse, and consequently of their contention, which is ignorance. We know not what he saith, ver. 18. In Christs solu∣tiō what things are to be thought vpon.In Christ Iesus his solution let vs regard: first, his readi∣nesse, sufficiencie, and fitnesse to answere.1 Readinesse & sufficiency in him to answere. Because he knew (being God) that as they had enquired among themselues; so they would enquire and aske of him. Now Iesus knew that they would aske him, and said vnto them; Do you enquire among your selues of that I said, A little while, &c. ver. 19. secondly, the answere it selfe containing his vehement asseueration in foretelling couertly,2 The answere which contai∣neth a prophe∣cy, 1 His departure,1 Of his de∣parture. in these words, Ye shall weepe and lament and the world shall reioyce, &c. ver. 20. 2 His returne2 Of his re∣turne. and coming againe, Your sorrow shall be tur∣ned into ioy, in the same verse. Explanation of both by a simi∣tude of a womā in trauell.This he explaneth by a similitude, whose 1 Protasis is of a woman in trauell, and her deliue∣rance. ver. 21. 2 The Apodosis is: first, the Disciples sorrow for Christs absence. And ye now therefore are in sorrow: secondly, their ioy of Christs returne. But I will see you againe, and your hearts shall reioyce, and your ioy shall no man take from you ver. 22.
Moses exhorts to the propagation of the knowledge of God,The fourth Sonday after Easter. IN the two first Lessons appointed for the morning and euening seruice of this day,Summe of the two first Lessōs Moses that faithfull seruant of God doth more particularly teach and exhort the old people the Iewes. He teacheth them why God gaue those lawes to him, to deliuer vnto them: and therfore exhorteth them to obey and doe them, not generally alone, but in par∣ticular also. S. Iames teacheth that there is one only fountaine from whence euery good and perfect gift commeth,Summe of the Epistle. whether the law to the Iewes, or the Gospell and word of God to Iewes and Gentils & therefore exhorts men to walke accordingly.Scope of the Gospell. S. Iohn the beloued Disciple doth discouer Christs intire loue to his Church,Mor. Prayer. 1 Les. Deut. 6. in giuing them a most cordiall amulete to apply to their sorrowfull hearts, that they might con∣stantly continue and perseuer in faith and obedience,Parts. not∣withstanding Christs bodily departure from them.1 He propoūds the finall cause and end why God gaue his ordinances to the people. Moses in the first of the chapters being the sixt of Deute∣ronomy, doth First, by way of introduction and insinuation propound to the Iewes the finall cause of Gods exhibiting all those lawes and ordinances vnto them.2 He exhorts them to obe∣dience. vers 1.2 Secondly, he exhorts them to performe it, that is to say,3 He perswades them to haue care also of o∣thers by cate∣chizing and in∣structing them. Particular du∣ties to be per∣formed for the better remem∣brance of the lawes of God. to shew by effect that they haue heard them; because they haue obeyed and done them for their owne parts, or at least should do them. ver. 3 to the end of the 6. Thirdly, that they would endeuour that others also may performe, them to wit their children, with whom they are charged, & vnto whom they must continually rehearse these lawes. Which duty of rehearsall, that it may with a better will and more ease be done, he tels them what courses they are to take, to wit,
1 Thou shalt talke of them when thou tariest in thine house.The Irreligious must not be communicated withal. 2 As thou walkest by the way. 3 When thou liest downe. 4 When thou risest vp. 5 To bind them for a signe vpon thine hand. 6 Let them be as frontlets betweene thine eyes. 7 Write them vpon the posts of thine house, and vpon thy gates. ver. 7.8.9. 4 He giues ca∣ueats & admo∣nitions against vnthankfulnes and forgetful∣nesse of God in prosperityFourthly, that in their prosperity and the ouerflowing measure of Gods blessings, they take heed of vnthankful∣nesse, pride of heart: and forgetfulnesse of God, least Gods wrath kindle against them, and so they perish & be destroy∣ed. ver. 10. to the end of the 15. 5 He dehorts frō murmuring against God,Fiftly, he dehorts thē from tempting the Lord any more as they once did in Massah: but rather that they keepe the commandements of the Lord their God, &c. ver. 16. to the end of the. 19. 6 He exhorts fathers to pro∣pagate this do∣ctrine to their children & po∣sterity.Sixtly, that euery father ought, hereafter, in time to come, as well as for the time present, be very carefull in the best manner to propagate and spread this doctrine and religion vnto posteritie that the children may obey God as wel as the fathers, and so Gods mercy may be shewed vnto thousands in them that loue him and keepe his commandements. ver. 20. to the end of the 25. which is the end of the chapter. In the second Scripture of the old Testament, which is the first for euening prayer, written Deut. 7.Eue. Prayer. 1 Less. Deut. 7. Moses in the first part of the chapter dehorts Gods people (when they are come into the seuen pleasant lands) from ioyning in affinity with the people thereof,1 Dehortation from ioyning in affinity with the irreligious, shewing how dangerous it will be, 2 Reasōs of the dehortation,1 In respect of corrupting them with their religion: and 2 Of purchasing Gods displeasure against them. ver. 1. to the end of the 11.2 Exhortation to the obediēce hereof and of all other pre∣cepts, In the second part Moses doth, in the Lords name, allure and intise the Israelites to the obedience hereof and of all o∣ther commandements, by a promise of the Lords mercies,
loue and blessings to bee vouchsafed to them,Obedience to the Gospell commanded and a with∣holding of such punishments from them, as he is wont to inflict vpon the obstinate rebellious and refractary people. ver. 12. to the end of the 15. In the third,3 Praecept to depopulate the enimies coun∣tries with a cau¦tiō not to serue their idols. God by Moses giues them an expresse com∣mandemēt as touching the depopulation & vtter ouerthrow of the seuen nations as also a precaution, & forewarning not to serue their idols, least it turne to their destruction: preuen∣ting and taking away all obiections of feare, or whatsoeuer else which might forestall and hinder their constancy and courage in that race and course of obedience, ver. 16. to the end of the 26. which is the end of the chapter. Iames the seruant of God preaching and writing to the 12 Tribes that were scattered,Epistle. Iam. 1 17. ad 21. which liued in the time of the Gospell,Summe of it is obedience to the Gospelll. exhorts them to the worthy receiuing and obeying Gods word and Gospell, chapter 1.17. to the end of the 21. The first reason is the ground and originall, beginning,1 Generall rea∣son to vrge it. proceeding and efficient goodnesse, the well-spring of euery good and perfect giuing. ver. 17.2 Reasō to per∣swade to it. The second is a fruite and effect of this goodnesse, to wit, this Father of lights begetting vs (with the light) this word of truth. ver. 18. He 1. exhorts generally vnto three duties of obedience,Parts to the Gospell.1 Exhortation general to three duties Euange∣licall. The first is, swiftnesse to heare, The second is, slownesse to speake, The third is, slownesse to wrath. ver. 19.Reason of the exhortation. A reason is rendred to forc and vrge these three. For the wrath of man doth not accomplish the righteousnesse of God.2 Exhortation special to swift∣nesse in hearing and the right way to it. ver. 20. 2 He specially exhorts vnto the first general, to wit swift∣nesse and readinesse to heare, fitnesse thereunro, & performance thereof in the right manner. First,by 1 Laying aside impediments. by laying aside that which may hinder our true and right receiuing of Gods word, all filthinesse, and superfluity of
maliciousnesse.Gods spirituall comforts are greater then all, &c. 2 Receiuing the word with meekenesse.Secondly, by taking vnto vs or receiuing in the right manner, viz. with meeknesse, the word that is grafted in vs, which is able to saue our soules. ver. 21. Gospell. Scope and drift of it.Because the Disciples were sad after that Christ had fore∣told to them his departure, our Sauiour therefore in this Scripture Iohn 16.5. to the end of the 15. giues them a most comfortable receit, which is of his owne making. First, Christ doth propound his departure1 Christs de∣parture is pro∣pounded. and the cer∣tainty thereof, in the the 5. & 6. verses. 2 Christ ac∣quaints them with the cordi∣all fruits grow∣ing thereout.Secondly, he comforts them with the cordiall fruits and pleasant effects arising thereof in all the rest of the verses. As touching his departure obserue, 1 His propounding thereof in a plaine thesis. Now I go to him that sent me.2 Obseruations & considerati∣ons as touching the departure of Christ. 2 His reprehension and finding fault with the Disciples sadnesse, whose hearts were full of sorrow, because he had talked with them about his departure, though there was lit∣tle reason for this their sorrow, as appeareth in these words: None of you asketh me whether goest thou. ver. 5.6. 2 Considera∣tions in Christs consolation.In his strong consolation, which is so full of power and efficacy as arising and issuing out of his departure there are two considerations, First, the ratifying thereof by his owne testimony and testification, yet I tell you the truth. 2 Reasons of Christs iustifi∣cation.Secondly, the confirmation of this testimony, by two ge∣nerall reasons, whereof the 1 Is drawne ab vtili, a commodo, the 2. ab inutili, ab incom∣modo. The commodity that cometh of his departure redoun∣deth to themselues, It is expedient for you that I go away. The discommodity and hurt also wil be theirs, if they shal still enioy his bodily presence. If I go not away, the comfor∣ter will not come to you. But if I depart I will send him vnto you. ve. 7.
Gods holy spirit comforts mans soule in all distresses.And now least,Discourage∣ments for Christs bodily departure are not so many as the benefites, blessings, & gra∣ces are which the Comforter will bring with him. Christs propounding and promise of the successie fruit and benefite of his departure (as it were a∣loofe off and in generall termes) should haue dismaid the Disciples: for they might haue alleaged that the enioying and presence of Christ their Maister was the greatest com∣fort that could be to them: they might haue obiected that the giuer and author of a benefite is greater then the benefite it selfe, wherefore as he sheweth the necessity of his ascensi∣on and departure: so in particular he tels them what bene∣fites, blessings, and graces, this commforter will bring with him, as First, when he comes he shall reprooue, as ver. 8.9.10.11.1 Comfort is in reproofe. Secondly, he shall teach comfortably as.2 Comfort is in teaching, ve. 12.13.14.15. The reproofe and reprouing wherwith this paraclete shall reprehend, our Lords sets downe 1 Thetically,The Comfor∣ters reproofe is two waies pro∣pounded, And when he is come he will reprooue the world of sinne, of righteousnesse and iudgement, ver. 8. 2 He doth demonstrate it, hypothetically, or exgetical∣ly, according to the three occasions of reproofe, vnto ech whereof he annnexeth a seuerall reason in the other three seuerall sequent verses. Looke the text nine, ten, eleuen, verses. A teaching comforter also they haue great neede of,The Comfor∣ters teaching is also two waies demonstrated, be∣cause though Christ hath many things more to say vnto them, yet such is the Apostles weakenesse (for want of that guide and director) that such a multitude of doctrines they cannot now beare away. ver. 12. Whereupon, for their more speedy and manifest comfort he doth First, shew them who and what this comforter is, in the be∣ginning of the 13. ver. Secondly, what this comforter shall do and performe, in the rest of the 13. ver. and in the 14. and 15,
The fifth Sonday after Easter.Gods fauours past and present are sufficient motiues to obedience Reasons for the choise of these Scriptures fol∣lowing.THe Church of Christ continuing their purpose in the chosing of those Scriptures which may best perswade Christians vnto a daily resurrection & newnesse of life, that they may be the better fitted not onely to beleeue Christs Ascension, but that they themselues also shall reape a benefite thereby in ascending also where he is, haue there∣fore set apart these foure that follow. Sūme generall of the two first Lessons.Whereof the two former of the old Testament do let vs see most cleerely what God hath done for the Israelites in the midst of their distresses, 1. to teach them to depēd vpon him alone and neuer to forget his benefits, 2. as also that he did not any of these good turnes vnto thē for their owne righteousnesse, or any thing that was in them, but for his owne names sake. Sūme generall of the Epistle and Gospell.The two latter of the new Testament, are most pitthy ex∣hortations, whereof the one is made by S. Iames, for the doing and practising of Gods holy word, the point that Mo∣ses doth so often inculcate: The other is Christs owne ex∣hortation vnto his Disciples, to pray for the coming of that comforting spirit which the Father hath promised for the Sonnes sake, to send downe to them in aboundant mea∣sure, whereby they shall be the better enabled to speake and do the will and pleasure of God. Mor. prayer. 1 Less. Deut. 8,The faithfull seruant of God Moses, in the 8. chap of Deu∣teronomy, being the mouth of God to the Israelites, vrgeth and concludeth:Parts. first, in a generall manner, a necessity of their obedience to all the commandements of God,1 Exhortation to obedience by motiues of fauours past & fauours to come by rea∣son of the benefits which they looke for; which he sets down in these words: first, That ye may liue: secondly, and be mul∣tiplyed: thirdly, and go in and possesse the land which the Lord sware vnto your fathers. ver. 1. Or else those whereof they
haue bene already partakers,Particular fauours doe vrge particular obedience. as 1 Gods leading them 40. yeares in the wildernesse to humble and proue them, to know what was in their hearts, whe∣ther they would keepe Gods commandements, or no. ve. 2. 2 Gods feeding them with Manna. 3 His preseruing their rayment miraculously. 4 Giuing them such health all that forty yeares space that their feete sweld not in all their trauell. ver. 3.4.5. Secondly,2 Insinuation of more parti∣cular obedience by a more par∣ticular descrip∣tiō of the good∣nesse of that land. God by Moses intimateth and requireth the former obedience in a particular manner, by telling them of that great fauour, his bringing them into that good land of promise, and (that they may more carefully and effectually obey him) by his describing the goodnesse and excellent commodities of the land vnto them. verse 6.7.8.9. Thirdly,3 A caueat a∣gainst forgetful∣nesse. least in the aboundance of Gods fauours and ouerflowings of these plentifull cups, they should grow wanton, like feed horses, and idle headed like drunken men; he therefore annexeth an old caueat, a dehortation from obliuion and forgetfulnesse of God (who hath done thus well by them) implying on the contrary, an exhortation to that former and accustomed obedience, so often exhor∣ted vnto, from the tenth verse to the end of the eigh∣teenth. Fourthly,4 Threatnings against the dis∣obedient and i∣dolatrous. there is a denunation of threatnings of their vtter ruine, when they shall forget the Lord their God, and walke ydolatrously: yea, that the Lord will destroy them with as feareful a destruction,Eue. Prayer. 1 Less. Deut. 9. as wherewith he had or would destroy the heathen and nations that had neuer knowne his name. ver. 19.20.Parts. 1 The certain∣ty of the Isra∣elites enioying the land & the Prouisoes annex∣ed to their grant and pat∣tent. In the ninth chapter of Deuteronomy, which is the first Lesson for euening prayer, Moses First, acquaints the people with the certainty of their passing ouer Iordaine, to go in aed possesse nations greater and mightier then themselues: but with all, that they vnder∣stand,
1 Not for their righteousnesse, but for Gods mercies sake.First, that it is not for their righteousnesse,Mans righteousnesse no cause of Gods bountifulnesse. they being a stiffenecked people, but because God had promised it to their fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob. 2 For the wic∣kednesse of the nations that were to be ex∣pelled.Secondly, for the wickednesse of those nations, verse 3.4.5.6. In the second part of the chapter, that the Lord by Moses, his Minister and instrument, might preuent this pride of heart in the Israelites,2 Moses preuēts the pride of the stiffenecked Iewes: proo∣uing that their righteousnesse cannot be the cause of Gods fauour. in trusting to their owne righte∣ousnesse, as making it a motiue, or a cause of this or any other fauour of God; he proueth that it cannot be so, alleaging. First, the continuance of their rebellion, from the time of their departure out of Aegypt vntill now. ver. 7. Secondly, how they prouoked the Lord to anger in Horeb with  the molten calfe. ver. 8. to the end of the 21. 3 How they grieued the Lord in Taberah. 4 How they vexed him in Massah, 5 In Kibroth-hatta-auah. ver. 22. 6 Likewise, when the Lord sent them from Kadesh-bar∣nea,  saying: goe vp and possesse the land, how they rebelled a∣gainst God, beleeued him not, nor hearkened to his voyce &c. At which time Moses fell downe 40. daies, & 40. nights, as before, because the Lord had said that he would destroy them, &c. ve, 23. to the end of the 29. which is the end of the chapter. Epistle. Iam. 1.22. ad 27. Scope of the text.Saint Iames chapter 1.22. to the end of the 27. the end of the chapter, writing to some of the refractary Iewes, who were willing to heare and talke of Gods word, but would not walke therein; propounds vnto them a most peremp∣tory and exhortatiue doctrine of doing the word in worke (and so of being blessed in their deedes) and not of hearing onely. Parts:The Scripture containeth 1 DoctrineFirst, a doctrine exhortatiue. And be ye doers of the word,
and not heares onely,Gods word must be performed & obeyed, not spoken of onely. deceiuing your owne selues. Secondly, a confirmation2 Confirmati∣on. of this doctrine by a simile whose, 1. Protasis is, ve. 23.24. 2 the Application or Apo∣dosis of the simile is, ve. 25. Thirdly, that blessed and holy vse,3 Vse and ap∣plication by ex∣hotation to 3 duties. which S. Iames maketh of the doctrine, and the simile, applying them to some spe∣ciall & principall points of practise. 1 The refraining of the tongue, 2 To visite the fatherlesse and widdowes in their aduersities. 3 To keepe himselfe vnspotted of the world. ver. 26.27. Thus much of the two first Lessons and of the Epistle for this day, now of the Gospell. Though the consolation concerning the Paraclete and consolator the spirit, was, or might haue bene vnto the Dis∣ciples very great and vnspeakeable: yet these weake Disci∣ples not knowing the certaine time when this promise should be performed are here in this Gospell. Iohn 16. verse 23. to the end of the 30. verseGospell. Ioh. 16.23, ad 30 Summe of the Gospell. allured and tolled on, stayed & supported in their weake faith, to waite yet a little while longer for the comfortable coming of that blessed com∣forter. For this cause: first,Parts general our Lord Iesus perswades them to pray1 Perswasion to prayer, vnto the Father for this spirit: and this he doth by a most familiar and plaine speech, which he vseth vnto them. This oration and speech of his reacheth to the end of the 28. ver. Secondly, the Disciples do make answere to this oration.2 Disciples an∣swere to Christs oration con∣sists of three parts. 1 In yeelding to his plaine speech which he vseth vnto them. 2 In acknowledging that they were ignorant before, but now they know what he meaneth, as also, 3. In confessing  their faith. All which they performe in the twentieth nine and thir∣tieth  verses, being the two last of the chapter.Parts of Christs oration The speech that our Lord maketh to them consisteth
1 Of an exhortation to prayer,Men must expect till God performe, &c. 2 Of a promise thereto annexed Parts & groūds of Christ ex∣hortation.The exhortation is drawne, 1 From the subiect, ground and forme of prayer which  the Disciples had not kept, whereof Christ tels them, hither∣to haue ye asked nothing in my name. 2 From his absolute commandement. The ground of prayer and forme which was vnobserued of them is expressed. verse 23. as in part of the 24. Hitherto haue you asked, &c. The absolute commandement,Parts of Christs abso∣lute comman∣dement. Aske, and ye shall receiue, that your ioy may be full. This commandement containes, 1 An effect: Ye shall receiue 2 A notable end of prayer, that your ioy may be full. Partts of Christ promiseThe promise sutable to this exhorration Christ makes, First, either by preuenting that which they might haue  alleaged concerning the oportunity of prayer, Secondly, or by assuring them of being heard in their requests and prayers.Parts of Christs Antici∣pation▪ To preuent their obiection he first tels them, that there  was a time wherein he had spoken vnto them in a tropicall & borowed speech. Secondly, that he will not speake to them any more in parables. Thirdly, but he will now speake plainely to them of the Father, ver. 25. At which day, vpon which time, they shall aske and pray to the Father in his name. ver. 26. Proofes of the effect of their prayers.The assurance, that they shall be heard, he First, groundeth vpon Assumpsit, of the Fathers loue to∣wards  them. ver. 27. Secondly, he thereupon inferreth these words. And I say not vnto you,Proofes that they haue re∣ceiued this As∣sumption by ef∣fects in the re∣ceiuers. that I will pray to the Father for you. That they haue receiued this Assumpsit, he prooues by by the effects which it worketh in them. For hee saith.
1 You loue me,God will heare the prayers of his elect, 2 You beleeue that I am come out from God, ver. 27. The second of these effects he confirmes by his owne two-fold testimony.Proofes of the second effect by Chricts own testimony. 1 I am come out from the Father, and came into the world. 2 Againe, I leaue the world and go to the Father. ver. 28. The Disciples answere is analysed before. The glorious Ascension of our Lord. BEcause the Ascēsion of Iesus Christ is one of the Articles of our Christian faith,Reason and oc∣casion of the choise of these Scriptures. and a principall element or fun∣damentall point of Christian Religion: Therefore the fa∣thers of the Church haue chosen ten portions of Scripture for the establishing and confirming of Gods people in the true knowledge. vnderstanding and vse of this most necessary point of doctrine. Sixe of them are proper Psalms,Generall sūme of the sixe pro∣per Psalmes. Summe of the two first Lessōs which do in many excellent doctrines typically and pro∣phetically manifest the same. Two more texts of Scripture, to wit, Deuteronomy 10. and 2. Kings 2. are sure proofes hereof. For Moses in his repeating the law and renuing the Tables, and Elias in his ascension and assumption, Moses I say and Elias two faith∣full witnesses do talke with all good Christians concerning this truth. Out of the new Testament and couenant we haue Saint Luke in the beginning of his second booke called the Acts of the Apostles,Generall scope of the Epistle and Gospell, and Saint Marke in the latter end of his tractate and booke of the Gospell, without type, figure, or mystery, most plainely setting downe by infallible circum∣stances of time, place, and persons the performance and acting of this glorious ascension of our Sauiour. In the first Scripture Psal. 8.Mor. Prayer. 8 Psalme, King Dauid doth most pa∣thetically
sing forth the praise of God,Scriptures to proue the Ascension of Christ, Parts: whom he cals our Lord (that is in Iesus Christ) how excellent is thy name in all the world (and makes that the end & Epiphonema of his Psalme) which hast set thy glory aboue the heauens.1 Proposition of the Ascensi∣on in a patheti∣cal but prophe∣tiall song, For Christ God with the Father sits at the right hand of God in glory aboue the heauens ver. 1. Secondly, he proues this proposition,2 Confirmati- of the proposi∣tion by three effects, 1 By effect of that strength which God hath esta∣blished  out of the mouths of babes and sucklings. verse 2. 2 By an other effect of Gods glorious workmanship of the heauens, Moone, and Starres, &c. ve. 3. 3 By another effect of Gods glorious creation of man, a creature little inferiour to the Angels: vnto whom (being Gods little world) he hath subdued the creatures of the great world, beasts, foules, fishes. ver. 5.6.7. 15 Psalme, Speciall scope and drift of it. Parts of the dialogue,In the second Scripture, Psal. 15. the Propher doth by way of a dialogue, in a question and the answere which he makes to it himselfe, tell the Church of their participation of this spirituall benefite, not onely of ascending into hea∣uen, but of dwelling in Gods Tabernacle, and of hauing their many mansions in their Fathers house and resting in that holy and spirituall mountaine of that new Ierusa∣lem: so constant and perdurable an abiding, as thereout none can remooue them: which estate hath no variable∣nesse in it, and whosoeuer remaineth therein shall neuer be  moued, The question is prounded in the 1. verse. 21 Psalme, Scope of the Psalme, Parts of the Psalme.The answere in the other foure. In the third Scripture, Psal. 21. the people of God doe praise the Lord for the strength, victory, and glory, which he gaue to their King, First, saying that their King Dauid shall reioyce therein.  ver. 1. Secondly, rendring many reasons for the same in the 11  verses following.
Confirmation of Christs Ascen∣sion & our dwelling in heauen,Thirdly, referring whatsoeuer was typically spoken of  Dauid, vnto our Lord Iesus Christs Ascension and exaltation in his strength, Be thou exalted ô Lord in thy strength, so will we sing and praise thy power. verse thirteenth and last of the Psalme. The fourth Scripture, being the twentieth foure Psalme,Eue. Prayer. 24 Psalme, Partes of the Psalme, and the first of the proper Psalmes for euening prayer sheweth First, who it is that shall ascend into heauen, to make heauen ready for vs,1 Who it is that shal ascend to make heauen ready for vs, to whom the gates and euerlasting dores must be opened, by whom the innocent in hands, the pure in heart, tongue, and deed, must enter. Euen he of whom all men and creatures do hold in capite: for he is the chiefe Landlord, Domini est terra, he is, Dominus terrae. ver. 1.2. Secondly, Dauid moues two questions, and annexeth an∣sweres to them.2 Dauids two questions and his answeres. The first is concerning such as shall enter into heauen by  Christ. ver. 3.4.5.6. The second is concerning Christ himselfe, the dore by  whom we must enter, to whom the dores and powers of heauen must be opened and subiect, must yeeld and doe ho∣mage. ver. 7.8.9.10. In the fift Scripture. Psal. 68.68 Psalme. Dauid, First,Parts. prophecieth and speaketh perspicuously of this point concerning Gods arising and scattering his enimies,1 Gods exerci∣sing of his po∣wer in the de∣struction of his enimies who in his power, in his performance of his promises in his fauours, and in his victories, exceedes all things, and all Kings without comparison, from the first verse to the end of the 17. Secondly, much more manifestly in speaking of Christs Ascension2 A most ma∣nifest mention of Christs As∣cension, in the time past (as the manner of the Prophets is) Thou hast gone vp on high, thou hast led captiuity captiue, &c. and so forward to the end of the 35. ver. the end of the Psalme.
Speciall scope of it.In the sixt Scripture being the 108 Psalme,108 Psalme, Moses ascending vnto the mount with the new Tables a figure &c. Dauid pro∣phecieth and speaketh of Christs triumphing ouer his eni∣mies, as if the banners of this triumph had bene already displaied. 1 ThanksgiuingFirst, giuing thanks to God in saying, that his heart, his tongue and instruments are ready to praise God for the fame ver. 1.2.3. Secondly, he alleageth the reasons and grounds of his re∣ioycing.2 Reasons and grounds of this reioycing. ver. 4, Thirdly, he prayeth that God would exalt himselfe aboue the heauens.3 Prayer for Gods exaltatiō ver. 5. & 6. Fourthly, he groundeth this prayer4 Ground of this prayer. vpon Gods holy speech and promise which must needs be performed, as ver. 7.8.9.10.11. Fiftly, he prayeth for the Churches good,5 Prayer for the generall good of Gods Church, that God would send helpe in trouble, resting and relying himselfe and them vpon Gods power and mercy. ver. 12.13. The seuenth Scripture chosen for this day, Deut. 10. doth in Moses his going vp into the mountaine with the new hewen Tables in his hand,Mor. prayer. 1 Les, Deut. 10, Scope of the text. mystically deliuer vnto vs, that the Mediator twixt God and man must ascend vnto the Fa∣ther to fetch and procure a second fauour, viz. in Christ, not of the law which Moses gaue, but of the Gospell and grace, that grace and truth which came by Iesus Christ. Parts.In the first part of the chapter Moses relateth Gods com∣mandement vnto him concerning his hewing of the two Tables1 Gods com∣mandement to hew the Tables to write the law in, and his obseruing of Gods com∣mandement therein. ver. 1. to the end of the 5. In the second part he discourseth of the Israelites iournall2 The Israelites iournall. at that time, vers. 6. and 7. In the third, of Gods separating the Tribe of Leui3 The Tribe of Leui. at that time to beare the Arke of the couenant of the Lord, verse 8.9.4 The time of his staying in the mount. In the fourth, of the time that he tarried in the mount, and
of Gods commanding him to go before the people in the iourney,The assumption of Elias, a fi∣gure of Christs Ascension. verse 10.11. In the fifth,5 Vse and Application of all to the Is∣raelites, the text makes mention of the vse that the Is∣raelites are to make of all this, from the 12. verse to the end of the 22. the end of the chapter. The eighth Scripture chosen for this day,Eue. Prayer. 1 Less. 2, King. 2. Parts of the chapter, 2. Kings. 2. mentioning Eliahs assumption into heauen, is a perfect fi∣gure of our Lords Ascension into heauen: in which chap∣ter are conteined these principall things: First, the circumstances of the conferences about Eliahs taking vp.1 Circumstan∣ces of the con∣ference about the Assumption of Eliah, And Secondly, the miraculous deede of Eliah before his ta∣king vp.2 The miracle of Eliah before his assumption. Thirdly, the conferences themselues,3 Conferences themselues, as 1. Between Eliah and Elisha. 2. The conference had about this matter betweene the children of the Prophets at Bethel, and them of Iericho with Elisha, ve. 1. to the end of the 7. The miraculous deed of Eliah, is the diuiding of the wa∣ters of Iordan with his cloke, that he and his successor might go ouer, verse 8. The fourth occurent in this history is the request which Elisha made to Eliah,4 Elisha his re∣quest to Eliah, vers. 9.10. The fifth is the immediate signe preceding the Assump∣tion,5 The signe go∣ing before the Assumption, which also proueth the same: to wit, the Charet of fire, and the horses of fire, separating Eliah and Elisha, ver. 11. The sixth is the Assumption it selfe,6 Assumption it selfe, and manner thereof: So Eliah went vp by a whirle-winde into heauen, ve. 11. The seuenth part of the chapter conteineth the subsequents of Eliahs Assumption.7 Subsequents of Eliahs assūp∣tion, which are 6 in number, 1 Elishaes testimony who beheld it. 2 The extasie wherein he was for the time testified: first,  by his crying out My father, my father, &c. secondly, by  the tearing of his owne clothes. ver. 12,
The third subsequent is Elishaes taking vp of Eli∣ahs cloake, and diuiding the waters of Iordane with it,The truth and act of our Lords Ascension, verse 13.14. The fourth is the testimony of the children of the Pro∣phets at Iericho, who not seeing Eliah any more, did desire to send 50. strong men to seeke him, contrary to Elishaes ad∣uise, ve. 15.16.17.18. The fifth is Elishaes healing of the venemous waters of Iericho, and the earthes barrennesse, verse 19.20.21.22. The sixth subsequent is the Beares tearing of the forty two children which were cursed by Elisha, for moc∣king him, verse 23.24.25. a ratifying and confirmation of Elishaes calling, and of Gods doubling the spirit of Eliah vpon him. The ninth selected Scripture written Acts 1.1. to the end of the 11. verse,Epistle Acts 1.1. ad 11, Scope generall, Parts of the text, appointed for the Epistle, doth most manifestly, without mystery or type, relate vnto vs the truth of our Lords ascension. It is recorded by the pen of S. Luke, who First makes a preface1 Preface, or introduction vnto this his se∣cond booke, The Acts of the Apostles, by comparing it with his former Treatise of the Gospell, vers. 1.2.3. 2 Mandate of Christ to his Apostles,Secondly, S. Luke expresseth our Lords charge that he gaue to his Apostles to abide at Ierusalem, and there to waite for the promise of the father, concerning the holy Ghost. verse 4.5. Thirdly, hee sets downe the speech that Christ made to his Apostles before his ascension.3 Christs speech before his as∣cension, The occasion whereof was ministred by a question which the Disciples propoun∣ded, verse 6.7.8. 4 Circumstan∣ces denomina∣ting the truth of his ascensiō,Fourthly, the holy Ghost by Saints Lukes pen sets down circumstances of the time, place, and witnesses, with the manner of Christs Ascension, and a testimonie of another Article of our Faith concerning Christs returne,
and comming againe to iudge the quicke and the dead,Christ ascended vp to send the blessed Comforter down. ver. 9.10.11. The tenth Scripture written, Marke 16. Ʋerse 14.Gospell Marke 16.14 Scope & drift generall, to the end of the Chapter, sheweth, that now in deede our Lord Iesus is ascending to prepare a place for the elect, and to send downe the Comforter to his Dis∣ciples, and the rest of his Church. But before his As∣cension hee leaues a charge with his Schollers, who af∣ter they had receiued it, they doe readity put it in exe∣cution. In his last appearing therefore to his 11. Disciples as they fate together, which was immediatly before his Ascension,Considerations to be obserued in Christs ap∣pearing to his Disciples before his ascension. must be considered. First, what hee spake, what his wordes were, and what charge hee gaue to his Disciples,1 Dicta. and the whole Church. Secondly, what he did or wrought miraculously.2 Facta. The first is set downe in the fiue first verses, and to the end the the 18. The second, which is the two folde miracle,Obseruations concerning his words. in the 19. verse. His speech and words do conteine, 1. Either introduction,Introduction. 2. Or instruction and institution.Institution. His introduction conteines a reprehension, whereby he casts in the Disciples teeth their incredulity, and hardnesse of heart, verse 14. In his institution and instruction,Institution cō∣teins 2. points. regard 1. Either the things themselues which hee commandeth, instituteth, promiseth, or threatneth. 2. Or the consequence and sequele of the successe of some of those things. The things themselues which bee by him commanded, are, 1. The publishing of the doctrine, ve. 15.
Mandate com∣prehends two points. Doctrine, Baptisme, Efficacie of the promise to the beleeuers and obedient. Force of the threatning to the vnbelee∣uers.2.Christs charge to his Disci∣ples at his Ascension. The sealing vp of the doctrine of the new Testament with Baptisme. His promise is most large, conteining and comprehen∣ding in it the saluation of the beleeuers, and such as are baptized. His threatning is as generall, conteining and concer∣ning destruction, and the condemnation of the vnbeleeuers, vers. 16. The obedient vnto the doctrine of the couenant and be∣leeuers shall haue the doctrine confirmed vnto them fiue wayes,Doctrine fiue waies confir∣med. to wit, by fiue signes. 1. By casting out of Diuels, 2. By speaking with new tongues, verse 17. 3. Taking away, or driuing away serpents, 4. A safety and Antitode against the drinking of deadly things. 5. The healing of the sicke, by the imposition of hands, verse  18. The miracle is two-fold, Miracle in his Ascension. Session at his fathers right hand. Apostles obedi∣ence wherein it consisteth. Confirmation of the Disciples obedience by 2. reasons.First, our Lords ascending into heauen. Secondly, his sitting at the right hand of God, verse 19. The Apostles doe readily, and with all alacrity execute their maisters will: for 1. They went forth, 2. They preached euerywhere. This Saint Marke proues by two arguments, both which are drawen from two places. 1. From the efficient and principall cause, the Lord, who helped their preaching by working with them. 2. Form the effect: for God confirmed their Ser∣mons and teaching by effect, viz. of subsequent mi∣racles.
The Sonday after Ascension day. AS the Authors of our Leitourgy, and Fathers of the Church, haue out of the old TestamentPrincipal scope of the two first Lessons out of the old Testa∣ment. chosen for this day two remarkeable Scriptures, wherein the old people of God, the Iewes, are strictly tyed to the obseruation not onely of the substance, but of the precise manner and forme of Gods seruice: not to serue God after their own fansies, nor to be parciall to others herein, be they neuer so neere, or deere vnto them:Chiefe drift & scope of the E∣pistle & Gospel So out of the new Testament they bring in our Sauiour Christ comforting his Disciples, and new people of the new Church, and S. Peter heartning on Gods people a∣gainst all troubles and persecutions which may betide any of them in their constant profession, practise and discharge of their duties in this new seruice of the Gospell, and suffe∣ring for righteousnesse sake as Christians. The first of the foure Scriptures written Deuteronomy 12.Mor. prayer. 1 Less. Deut. 12 Summe of the chapter. teacheth the old Iewes, and in them all Gods' people, that reformation must begin at the taking away of deformities, or deformations, which doe hinder all good and perfect re∣formation. After which they may begin to take order for the establishing of good lawes both for the right manner of the worship of God, and the performance of their duties of of loue one towards another.Parts of the chapter, Moses therefore in this chapter, First telleth the Israelites, that if they will obserue the or∣dinances and lawes of God, it must herein appeare in the vt∣ter ruinating and destroying all the places of Idols,1 A comman∣dement to de∣stroy and ouer∣throw all idola∣trous places, &c. which the Nations (where they shal come) haue set vp, verse 1.2.3. Secondly, he teacheth them that there is a quite contrary course to be taken, as concerning the worship of God, and about the place which God hath chosen to bee worshipped in, whereunto they shall resort,2 A comman∣dement to re∣sort to the place of Gods true worship. and to none other, and
thither to bring their burnt offerings, tithes,No dreaming idolatrous wor∣shippers must be beleeued. &c. ver. 4. to the end of the 14. Thirdly, God by Moses giues all the people liberty to eate any kind of flesh which they desire: but with this Pro∣uiso, that they eate not the bloud thereof,3 A comman∣dement, or tol∣leration to eate flesh, but not with the bloud thereof, vers. 15.16. Fourthly, there is a commandement giuen concerning the place where they are to eate4 A comman∣dement touch∣ing the place where they are to eate. their tithe, and in the enioying of these blessings, and reioycing in the vse of them, the Le∣uite must not be forgotten, vers. 17.18.19. Fifthly, there is a more particular licence giuen them for the eating of flesh in their priuate houses,5 A comman∣dement for the eating of flesh in their priuate houses. when they are far from the place where God is worshipped: but the former interim and prouiso must be kept therein, to wit, not to eate the bloud thereof, vers. 20. to the end of the 28. Sixthly, a caueat is giuen to the Israelites concerning their behauiour when they shall bee in quyet possession of the heathen lands, which is, that they bee not caught nor snared with the heathenish and idolatrous worship,6 A comman∣dement & ca∣ueat to take heed of idola∣trous worship, but rather to detest all such abhominatiō, to do as God hath commanded, to put nothing to his precepts, nor to take ought therefrom. Eue. Prayer. a Less. Deut. 13.In the second Scripture out of the old Testament, Deu∣teronomy. 13. PartsFirst, there is an inhibition against such as shal hearken to that Prophet, or dreamer1 A dehortati∣on from hear∣kening to drea∣mers. of dreames, who by the successe & euent of his dreames shall thereby seeke to draw them from Gods true seruice, & a penalty of death vpon the dreamers head, vers. 1. to the end of the 5. Secondly, there is a law made against the brother, daugh∣ter, wife, or friend, that shall entise secretly to the seruice of other Gods,2 A law made against such as shall entise to the worship∣ping of a strāge God. with a caueat to Gods people not to hearken to them, vers. 6. to the end of the 11. Thirdly, there is a law made against Apostataes,3 A law & pu∣nishment a∣gainst Aposta∣taes and their followers. wicked men, which endeuour to seduce the people to serue orher Gods: also what punishment shall be inflicted vpon them and vpon the citties where they dwell, verse 12. to the
end of the 18.Exhortation to Christian sobriety, &c. which is the end of the chapter. In the third Scripture appointed for this day, written 1. Pet. 4.7. to the end of the 13. verse,Epistle 1 Pet. 4, 7. ad 13. Summe & scope of the text. the Apostle exhorts the faithfull to a sobriety, and holinesse of conuersation, to con∣tinuance in praier without fainting, or wearines, to feruency in loue, & the fruits thereof in the dispensing of outward blessings, and inward graces, and to the patient bearing of Christs crosse, wherein men must not thinke strange, but rather reioice.Parts. In this portion of Scripture may bee ob∣serued, First, the ground of doctrine whereupon S. Peter buil∣deth his exhortations:1 The founda∣tion of the ex∣hortations. Now the end of all things is at hand, in the moity of the 7. verse. Secondly, the exhortations2 The exhorta∣tions. from this foundation of do∣ctrine, which are First generall,1 Generall to 3. vertues, as 1 To sobriety. 2 To watching in praier, that is, continuance in prayer. 3 To the embracing of Feruency in loue, (that is, true  loue without dissimulation: for dissembled loue is colde  loue) in the rest of the seuenth verse, and in the eighth verse. Secondly, speciall exhortations,2 Speciall vnto 2. vertues. as 1 Vnto hospitality, vers. 9. 2 To the true and faithfull dispensing of the seuerall gifts  and graces of God, whether it be 1 The gift and grace of teaching. 2 Or any other ministration, that all bee done in the right manner, and to the right end, vers. 10.11. 3 Speciall exhortation from the first doctrine is to pati∣ence vnder the crosse,3 Speciall ex∣hortation vnto patience vnder the Crosse. that men would not thinke it strange when God puts them into his fining pots of afflictions, which Saint Peter calleth a fiery tryall, but rather that they would reioyce, inasmuch as they are partakers of Christs sufferings, &c.
In the fourth portiō of Scripture,A precious double An∣tidote against sorrowes. written Iohn 15. verse. 26 to the end of the 27. and in the 16. chapter vers. 1. to the end of the 4.Gospell. Iohn 15.26.27. & vers. 1. of the 16. chapter to the end of the 4 Summe of the text. is conteined an amulete of comfort for Christs Di∣sciples, and all the faithfull to weare next their hearts, and as an amulete internall and most cordiall to receiue into their earts against troubles and persecutions which were coming vpon them,An amulete in∣ternall and ex∣ternall for all beleeuers. and likely to accompany them, and the whole ministery and true Church of God to the end of the world. So that albeit, when our Lord ascended, hee told them that they should haue signes and miracles to confirme the doctrine of the Gospell, and faith of the beleeuers: yet he also prophesied, and foretold them, that there would bee meanes vsed to interrupt their proceedings, and faithful dis∣charge of their duties. Barracadoes of spirituall com∣fort against all enemies.Therefore he prepares them against those times with such barracadoes of consolation, as against which all the cannon shot of their enemies being bent, should neuer batter, much lesse ouerthrow the fort of their faith. Parts of the text.In the end of the 15. chapter he promiseth this effectuall comfort.1 Promise of Comfort. In the beginning of the 16 hee presageth and foretelleth their troubles,2 Presage of their troubles. The promise that hee makes is concerning the comfor∣ter, the efficient of their comfort, the holy spirit whomPromise of comfort by the holy Spirit, whom, Christ describeth,1 Christ descri∣beth 4. waies. First, by his diuine nature, to wit, his essence with the Fa∣ther and the Sonne, his Omoousie. Secondly, by his person distinguished in the deity: Whom  I will send from the Father. Thirdly, by his proceeding: Who proceedeth from the Fa∣ther, and the Sonne, Fourthly, by his office, and faithfull execution thereof, the Spirit of truth. Secondly, our Lord describes the holy spirit by the ef∣fects,2 Description of the comfor∣er by the ef∣tects. as 1. His owne testifying of Christ, he shall testifie of me, v. 26.
The cause why persecutors breath out threatnings against Christs Church.2. The testimony of the spirit, by, and in the Apostles: And yee shall witnesse also, because ye haue beene with mee from the beginning, ve. 27. In the first verse of the 16. chapter Christ wraps vp this his cordiall amuleteThe wrapping vp of this Amu∣lete. in a peece of the best silke of his holy san∣ctuary, in shewing them the vse of this comfortable amulete, and why he made it: These things haue I spoken to you that you should not be offended. In the second part of this Gospell he presageth their two sorts of troubles.Presage of two sorts of trou∣bles. 1. Their excommunication, 2. The losse of their liues. Both which shall bee done to  them by their enemies, by reason hereof (which is no reason,  or at least a tyrannicall reason) they are conceited in them∣selues,The bad and mad conceit of the enemies in persecuting the true seruants of God. Christ shews a right cause of the enemies rage against the Church. Christ renders a reason of his presage, & why hee made it no sooner. That they serue God in persecuting and killing the Apo∣stles, ve. 2. But Christ proues that is not so, and that it rather ariseth and groweth of ignorance, because they haue not knowne the Father, nor me, ve. 3. Secondly, Christ tels the Disciples, 1. Why he made this presage vnto thē of these troubles, that when the houre shall come, yee might remember that I tolde you them. 2. In this his discourse hee answereth an obiection or question which they might haue propounded, to wit, Why hee did not make this presage any sooner. His answer is: And these things said I not vnto you from the beginning, because I was with you, ver. 4. Whitsonday, called Pentecost. HE that is truth it selfe must needes bee true of his word,Coherence of these doctrines & holy Scrip∣tures with the former. as good as his word, and iust in the performance of all his promises. Our Lord Iesus Christ promised the primi∣tiue Church, that hee would send them a Comforter about
this time,Summe and scope of all these Scrip∣tures chosen out for this day, and as vpon this day hee performed.Christ keeps his promise as touching the comforter And be∣cause so great a benefite came vnto the Church by Christs sending of this author of comfort, of wit and wisedome spirituall in such a plentifull measure: Therefore vpon this day, (which we call in our idiome, Whitsonday, or Witsunday) the Fathers of the Christian Church haue chosen sixe Scrip∣tures out of the old Testament, and one out of the booke of Wisedome, being Apocripha, and foure out of the new to bee read and expounded, that all Gods people, whether Iewes or Gentiles, may know, beleeue, and with thankfulnesse ac∣knowledge: That God the Father hath for his sonne Christs sake, sent the holy Ghost, that spirituall Comforter, in most plentifull and aboundant manner to bee Christs Ʋicar and substi∣tut in the Church, to be president, and with them continually pre∣sent vnto the end of this visible world. Mor. prayer. 45. Psalme. Drift & end of the Psalme.The first of the Scriptures chosen for this day, being the 45. Psalme, is also selected for the feast of Christs Natiuity, intreates of the externall and internall gifts, blessings, and graces, ornaments of truth, righteousnesse and mercy, which God for Christs sake hath bestowed vpon his Church mi∣litant and triumphant. Of this Psalme because there was no particular analyse before, but of purpose omitted, and left for this place:Parts special. therefore now regard therein, First, an introduction,1 Introduction. or entrance into the matter thereof, shewing the contents of the Psalme, ve. 1. Secondly, a commendation2 Commenda∣tion. which is two-fold. 1. Of Christ the bride-groome from the 2. verse to the end of the 8. 2. Of Christs Church the bride, ve. 9. ad 16. The third part of the Psalme is a glorious conclusion3 Conclusion. of this commendation, with a golden Epiphonema and song of reioicing to bee sung of all kinde of people for euermore. verse 17.47. Psalme. Scope of the Psalme. The second Scripture, which is the 47. Psalme, speakes not allegorically,Parts. as did the former, nor so mystically: for
the Prophet Dauid,Gods Church do, and must reioyce for this fauour. both King, and an head of the Iewish people, a chiefe member of that church, First exhorts the Gentiles to reioyce and giue thankes to God. ve. 1.1 Exhortation to thankfulnes. Seeondly, he yeelds foure reasons of this thankes,2 Reasons and grounds hereof in the next foure verses. Thirdly, he repeates his exhortation3 Repetition of his exhortation againe, the more ef∣fectually to vrge the people to thanksgiuing, because Christ our King is ascended with triumph to his father, to prepare a place for the elect, and to send downe the blessed Paraclete for their euerlasting comfort. ve. 6. In the fourth part of the Psalme hee returneth to a forti∣fying of his exhortation with 3.4 A further for∣tification of the exhortation. other reasons conteined in the 3. last verses of the Psalme, 7 8.9. In the 104. Psalme,Eue. Prayer. 104. Psalme. which is the third scripture chosen out for this purpose, Dauid First rowseth vp his soule and spirit to praise the Lord,Parts. whom he calles Iehouah, Deus mi, that is, his God in Christ,1 A rowsing vp of himselfe, or Christ his God, ve. 1. Secondly, by the workes of his creation,2 An incitation & prouocation of others, and continuall preseruation, in the rest of the Psalme (being 34. verses more he argueth Gods magnificence, glory, & maiesty. All which may be applyed vnto Christ: (for such as the father is, such is the sonne) ascending vp into the heauens with glory, and his glorious sending down of the holy Ghost at this Feast. In the 145. Psalme,145, Psalme, Summe and scope of the Psalme, being the fourth of the proper Psalms for this day (hauing as many verses but one, as there be He∣brew letters) there bee also as many motiues and reasons to moue and stirre men vp to praise the Lord: because of his incomprehensible greatnes, glorious maiesty, & wonderfull works. If for the works of his creation, redemption, & pre∣seruation (as it is at large proued in the Psalme) much more then for mans regeneration & sanctification by the spirit of grace, the assurance of his saluation and glification. For as the eyes of all creatures we vpon the Lord (x∣pecting
their meate from him) who giueth them their meate in due season:All creatures wait vpon God for his comfor∣table prouision & preseruation; Gods Church waite for the promise of the Spirit, & haue it performed to them. so the Apostles and Church of Christ,This feast with other, was comman∣ded to be kept in the time of the Law waited (as Christ commanded them) at Hierusalem, for the promise of the holy Ghost, which was performed vnto them accor∣dingly, when the day of Pentecost was come. In the fifth selected Scripture of the old testament, Deut. 16. Moses among orher lawes and ordinances to be obser∣ued of Gods people,Mor. prayer. 1 Les. Deut. 16, which here hee doth repeate, makes mention of the keeping of this feast of Pentecost. Parts of the chapter.In the first part of the chapter hee propoundeth vnto the Iews, the obseruation & celebration of the Passouer,1 Obseruation of the Passeo∣uer. v. 1. ad 9 In the second he speaketh of celebrating this feast of Whit∣sontide, which he calleth the feast of Weekes, ver. 10. ad 12. 2 Obseruation of Pentecost.In the third part he propoundeth vnto them the obserua∣tion of the feast of Tabernacles,3 Obseruation of the feast of Tabernacles, vers. 13. ad 17. In the fourth part Moses takes order with the Israelites about the choosing of Iudges and Officers in all their cities, setting downe the duties and offices of these Magistrates in their places,4 Election of Iudges. ve. 18. to the end of the 20. In the fifth hee rubs their memory with that old ordinary law against idolatry,5 A law repea∣ted made a∣gainst the plā∣ting of idola∣try. that there should bee no groue of any trees planted, or any pillars set for the vse of idolatry, ve. 21. to the end of the 22. the end of the chapter. Eue. Prayer. 1 Less. Wisd. 1. Scope of the text.Salomon, or Philo the Iew, in the first chapter of the booke of Wisdome, being the first lesson for Euening praier (though it be Apocripha Scripture) yet in the phrase of the canonicall Scripture, and in Salomons stile, takes occasion to speake of this holy spirit, which is called the spirit of wisedome. Parts.The chapter containeth, 1 Exhortation vnto Rulers.First, an exhortation to the Iudges & Rulers of the earth, to affct this wisdome, to loue righteousnesse, and the Lord who is the author thereof. Vnto which exhortation, many reasons are annexed,2 A caue to take heede of vices. ve. 1. t the end of the 10. Secondly, a caueat to beware of diuers vices which doe
hinder and interrupt men in the course and way of righte∣ousnesse,Christ keepes his promise to the Christian Primitiue Church. to wit, vnprofitable murmurings in heart, slande∣ring with the tongue, &c. Ʋerse 11. to the end of the 16. the end of the chapter. The first of the foure holy Scriptures out of the new Te∣stament, being the second Lesson for morning prayer,Mor. prayer. 1 Les. Act. 10, 34, to the end of the 48. Summe & scope thereof, and written Acts 10.34. to the end of the 48. which is the end of the chapter, doth euidently shew the accom∣plishment of Christs promise, as touching the sending of the holy Ghost vnto the Christian Church gathered toge∣ther of Gentiles, as well as Iewes. In the text we may obserue,Parts of the text. First, Saint Peters Sermon, wherein he proueth this point by the Scriptures, and other sure testimonies,1 The Sermon vers. 34. to the end of the 43. Secondly, the effect of this sermon,2 The effect of the Sermon, to wit, 1. How the holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word.1 Effect▪ 2. How Peter commaunded that the seale should bee set to the word, that is,2 Effect, that they should bee baptised in the name of the Lord Iesus Christ, vers. 44. to the end of the 48. the end of the chapter. The next of the Scriptures out of the new Testament,Eue. Prayer. 2 Less, Act, 19, 1 ad 20, Scope of this Scripture, Acts. 19. ve. 1. to the end of the 20. being the second Lesson for euening prayer affoordeth another proofe and experi∣ence of the accomplishment of Gods promise by the hands & ministery of S. Paul, (a teacher of the Gentiles) a new rai∣sed vp notable instrument to set forth Gods glory. In the text these things are principally to be considered.Parts of the text, First, the dialogue betwixt Paul and the Disciples at E∣phesus, vers. 1. to the end of the 4.1 Conference, Secondly, the effect of this conference2 Effects of the conference, and dialogue. 1. In their partaking of the sacrament of Baptisme. 2 In their receiuing the inuisible grace of the holy Ghost,
which appeared by their speaking of tongues,Blessed effects of the coming downe of the Comforter, and prophe∣cying, vers. 5.6.7. 3 S, Pauls pains in preaching,The third consideration is the paines and exercise which S. Paul tooke and vsed by the space of three moneths preaehing in the synagogue, and disputing by the space of two yeares in the schoole of Tirannus, vers. 8.9.10. 4 The fruites & effectual subse∣quents of this his paines,The fourth obseruation and consideration is concerning the effect of S. Pauls paines, vers, 11.12. to wit, 1. In his working of miracles to conforme his do∣ctrine. 2. In causing the man in whom the euill spirit was, to ouercome and preuaile against the Exorcists, verse 13.14.15.16. 3. In the general feare that came vpon all, in their beliefe, confessing and shewing their workes. 4. In the burning of the Bookes of curious Artes, which were rated at such a great price, when the word of God grew so mightily, and preuailed, & that sacred volume of Gods booke was esteemed of a farre greater value: ver. 17.18.19.20.Epistle Acts 2.1, ad 12, Summe of this Scripture, Parts of the text, The third of the Scriptures of the new Testament chosen out for the Epistle, written Acts 2.1. to the end of the 12. verse, sheweth vnto vs the acting & effecting of all that was by Christ our Lord promised,1 Circumstan∣ces related to proue this truth of the holy Ghosts descen∣sion by Moses figured, or by the Prophets prophesied. For in the text, by the circumstances of time, place, persons, maner of doing, & effect of the deed that was done, it is so truly demonstrated, that none need to doubt of the comming downe of the holy Ghost. 2 How the A∣postles were prepared to the fit and worthy receiuing of this diuine ap∣parition two waies,First, S. Luke truly recordeth the time when, the place where, and the persons that were partakers of this fauour, & receiued this grace of God, vers. 1. In the second place hee notes how God prepared the A∣postles to the worthy receiuing, and fit entertaining of this diuine, and miraculous apparition. 1. By the sound from heauen, as of a rushing and mightie winde.
Comfortable comfirmations of the comforters coming downe,2. By the effect of this sound: And it filled all the house where they sate, vers. 2. In the third place Saint Luke sets downe the apparition  it selfe.3 The appariti∣on described by two argu∣ments, 1 ab efficiente, 2 ab effectis, 1. There appeared vnto them clouen tongues like fire, and it sate vpon each of them. 2. He sets downe the end why there was such an appari∣tion, and the effect thereof. 1. Generally they were all filled with the holy Ghost, 2. Specially, and they began to speake with other tongues, as the spirit gaue them vtterance, vers. 3.4. In the fourth place S. Luke relates the consequence of this strange apparition, and the blessed effects thereof,4 Consequents and blessed ef∣fects of this ap∣parition, 1. In the astonishment, wondring and marueiling of the multitude of all the people of all nations vnder heauen, fea∣ring God, which dwelt at Hierusalem,1 Multitudes wondring, 2. The speech that all the people vsed at the sight and hearing of this miracle ve. 5. to the end of the 12.2 The peoples talking, 3. In some which mistooke and mis-vnderstood the miracle, and therefore mis-spake of it, and slandered it.3 Some mens mis-prision and mis-taking, O∣thers mocked, and said: They are full of new wine, vers. 13. Because the Disciples for-going of their Maister, and his departure from them,Gospell Iohn, 14, 25, to the end of the chapter, Scope of this Gospell, could not but bee a trou∣ble to their mindes, and a corrosiue to their hearts: From this perturbation and feare of minde, Christ disswades them all. Affoording eleuen arguments vnto his eleuen Apostles, furnishing them all iointly, and each of them particularly,Parts. with sufficient groundes of comfort for their confirmation,Eleuen argu∣ments of com∣fort to preuent perturbation & feare of minde, and establishing. And now therefore in this last of the foure Scriptures out of the new Testament, appointed for the Gospell, written Iohn. 14. ver. 25. to the end of the chap∣ter, our Lord teacheth them to beleeue that which hee had before affirmed concerning this saying of his: Yee haue heard that I said vnto you, I go away, and will come vnto you, vers. 28.
1 Reason. Ab effecto in e∣lectis,The first kinde of reason is drawne from the effect,Variety of reasons to com∣fort mens troubled soules. and is set downe in the affirmatiue part, the effect I say, 1. In the Apostles, and all the elect: If any man loue me, he will keepe my word. 2 Ab efficiente patre.2. From the efficient the Father: And my Father will loue him. 3 Ab efficiente & effecto in patre & filio,3. From the efficient and effect in the Father and the Sonne: 1. Wee will come vnto him, 2. Wee will dwell with him, vers. 23. 4  cōtrario effe∣ctu,The fourth argument is drawne from the contrary effect in the negatiue part: Hee that loueth not mee, keepeth not my word. As if hee should say: Will not beleeue that I will come againe, or send them a comforter in the meane while till I come. 5 Ab authoritate verbi diuini,The fifth argument is taken from the authority of that word which was affirmed and spoken: The word which yee heare is not mine, but the Fathers which sent me, ve. 24. 6 A Christi ipsius testimonio.The sixth argument is also drawne à testimonio, from Christs constant & continuall testifying hereof: These things haue I spoken being present with you, ve. 25. 7 A Spiritus san∣cti testimonio.The seuenth from the testimony of the holy Ghost: But the comforter which is the holy Ghost, &c. ve. 26. 8 Ab effectu pa∣cis Christi in ele∣ctis,The eighth is drawne from an effect which Christ wor∣keth and performeth, which may be a sufficient, and most effectuall meanes against all troubles, to wit, his leauing of peace with them, ver. 27. 9 Ab effectu amo∣ris Christi in cor∣dibus electorum,The ninth from a proper effect which the true loue of Christ should haue wrought in their hearts, to wit, peace & ioy: If ye loued me, ye would verily reioyce, because I said, I go to the Father, vers. 28. 10 à fine dictorū horum à Christo hoc tempore pro∣latorum,The tenth is taken à fine, the end why he spake that which he had said vnto them: And now haue I spoken to you, before it come to passe, &c. vers. 29. 11 à fine quorun∣dam dictorū qua tempore futuro a Christo non sunt proferenda.The eleuenth and the last argument is also drawne à fine, from the end, cause, and reason why hee con∣cealed
many things.The holy mystery of the Trinity, Hereafter I will not speake many things: for the Prince of this world cometh, and hath nought in mee. ver. 30. But it is that the world may know 1 That I loue my Father, 2 That I performe this loue in effect: to wit, in doing as the Father hath commanded me, ver. 31. Trinity Sonday. EVery one of the subsistances in the deity,Doctrine of the subsistence, in the Trinitys are by them∣selues in many places of holy Scripture most plainely set forth vnto vs: As the subsistence or person of the Father begetting the Sonne ab aeterno, and creating all things by the Sonne: The person of the Sonne being begotten, creating the world (being God with the Father) and redeeming his people. The person of the holy Ghost neither made, crea∣ted, nor beggotten, but proceeding from both, being God with both: and therefore a worker with both, in the creati∣on, but chiefly in the recreation, regeneration, and sanctifi∣cation of all the elect. Now because these three persons are not three Gods,Reasons of the Churches cho∣sing of Scrip∣tures for this day, but one God, by these subsistences, not diuided (though distin∣guished) in these persons combined and vnited: The fathers of the Christian Church haue (in the principall Scriptures culled out for their Leitourgie) not omitted the confirmation also of this deepe point of Thcology, the mystery of the ho∣ly Trinity, appointing two portions out of the old Testa∣ment, and three out of the new,Mor. Prayer. 1 Less. Gen. 18. for the proofe and manife∣station thereof.Parts. The first text of Scripture is written, Genesis 18.1 Elohim ap∣peared to Abra∣ham in three personall di∣stinct Angels. where Mosts First, sheweth that God appeared to Abraham, the which God Moses nameth the Lord, ioyning the name
Elohim of the 3. persons vnto the name of Iehouah,Elohim appeared to Abraham, the name of the diuine essence and vnity of the God-head: Moses seeing how God appeared to him, that is to say in 3. Angels, whom Abraham tooke for three men. ver. 1.2. 3 Abrahā spake to one as to three and to three as to oneSecondly, Abraham in his entertaining of them, spake to one as to three: when he said, Lord, if I haue found fa∣uour now in thy sight, go not I pray thee from thy seruant, an ordinary familiar speech vsed by all the faithfull, when they speake to Elohim all three persons together, giuing them the essentiall title of the God-head vnder the name Iehouahiah or Adonai. ver. 3. to the end of the 8. 3 The Angels phrases of speech are both plurall and sin∣gular,Thirdly, in the question which they propounded to A∣braham, then they said vnto him, whereis Sarah thy wife, ver. 9. And he said, (that is the Lord, as ver. 13. and 14. ver. 10) I will certainely come againe to thee according to the time of life, and Sarah thy wife shall haue a sonne, &c. vnto the end of the 12. verse. 4 Iehouah by the 3 Angels expostulated with Abraham,Fourthly, in the Lords reproouing question, or ex∣postulation with Abraham about Sarahs laughing, verse 13.14.15. 5 The men did rise vp, and Ie∣houah said,Fiftly, Moses saith, the men did rise vp from thence, and looked toward Sodome, ver. 16. And the Lord said: shall I hide from Abraham the thing which I do. ver. 17.18.19. There is Gods reuealing of the citties destruction to Abraham. Then the Lord said, because the cry of Sodom and Gomorthe is great &c. ver. 20. 21. There is Gods determination of the execu∣tion of his iudgement. 6 Abrahams supplicating for Sodome, and Ie∣houahs answe∣ring him.Sixtly, it is manifest that God by these three Angels spake to Abraham, euen God in three persons, by these three persons, these heauenly persons, not onely by that which first, Moses relateth before, but secondly, also by Abrahams earnest supplication for Sodome in sixe seuerall rquests, and the Lord answering euerytime, verse twentieth two ad thirtitieth two: & thirdly, by that which Moses rela∣teth in these words: And the Lord went his way when he had left communing with Abraham, &c. ver. thirtieth three to the
end of the chapter.Elohim appeared to Ioshua, In the second Scripture written Ioshua the first chapter it is said,Eue. Prayer. 1 Less. Ioshua 1, Proofes for the doctrine of the Trinity. First, that Iehouah, that is, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, spake vnto Ioshua the sonne of Nun, verse 1. All three are reduced vnto one essence, where it is said,1 Iehouah Fa∣ther, Sonne, & holy Ghost spake to Ioshua. vnto the land which I giue them, verse 2. Also Euery place haue I giuen you that the sole of your foote shall tread on, ver. 3.4. No man shall be able to withstand thee all the daies of thy life (It was I am that speake to him Iohn, 8.58.) as I was with Moses, so will be with thee, verse 5. It was the third person in the Trinity from whom proceeded the graces and gifts of strength, valian∣cy, valor, and good courage, meditation in the booke of God day & night, with all other good gifts commended and and commanded to Ioshua, as verse sixe, seuen, eight, nine, Haue not I commanded thee, saying, be strong and of a good courage. Secondly,2 Iehouah Elo∣him made the promise to Io∣shua and encou¦raged him to fight his bat∣tels, that it was Iehouah Elohim who made this pro∣mise and so incouraged Ioshua, appeareth by that effect which Gods voyce and word tooke: first, in Ioshuaes charge and precept to the officers of the people, to the Reubenits, Gadites, and halfe the Tribe of Manasseh, ver. 10. to the end of the 15. secondly, in the peoples yeelding obedience to Ioshuaes iniunctions, and their incouraging of their Captaine with the word of the Lord before spoken, onely be strong (that is in the Lord) and of a good courage, The third Scripture for this day writen Matthew 3. be∣ing the second Lesson for morning prayer,Mor. prayer. 2 Less. Math. 3. wherein the Euangelist maketh records. First, of the time, place and authority of Iohn the Baptist,1 Iohn Baptist preached in the name of the three persons. his preaching, straitnesse of life, and baptisme, verse 1. to the end of the 12. Secondly, of S. Iohns baptizing of our Lord Iesus, the
Author and institutor of this Sacrament,2 Iohn Baptist baptised our Lord one of the three per∣sons manifested in the flesh. Inexpugnable proofes of the Trinity by Iohn Baptist, &c. verse 13.14 15. Thirdly, the sequele, proofe and approuing of this bap∣tisme, and of Christ the person baptized by a most perspi∣cuous confirmation of the mysterie of this holy and sacred Trinity.3 The proofe and sequele of all by the chiefe testimonies of all, 1 In patre testificante 2 In filio testificato. 3 In spiritu sancto super filium descendente & veniente. ver.  16.17. to the end of the chapter. The fourth Scripture is Reuelation 4. chapter ver. 1. to the end of the chapter:Epistle Reuel. 4. chapter, Scope of it, is a reuelation of the mystery of this holy Trini∣ty, Wherein the mysterie of the holy Trinity is declared vnto Saint Iohn in a vision of Iehouahs ho∣ly and glorious Maiestie. First, in the description of the throane and him that sate thereon. ver. 1.2.3. 1 By a descrip∣tion of the throne and him that sate on it,Secondly, in expressing the concomitants of this Maiesty and throne, with the ornaments and other things gracing this throne, ver. 4. to the moity of the 8. ve. Thirdly, in a relation of the praises which are ascribed to this vnity of Essence in Trinity of persons.2 By a descrip∣tion of the con∣comitants and attendants vpō this rhrone. 1 By the 4. beasts, in the rest of the 8. ver. and in the 9. 2 By the 24. Elders in the 10. and 11. verses, the end of the chapter,3 By a congra∣tulation of all the elect vnto this vnity in Trinity. In the fift Scripture written, Iohn 3.1. to the end of the 15. ver. the Euangelist in the dialogue betweene our Sauiour and Nicodemus concerning regeneration proueth plainely the truth of this point of our Christian faith concerning the mystery of the Trinity.Gospell 1 Ioh. 3.1. ad 15. Summe of this Scripture, For Nicodemus acknowledgeth the person of the Father, and the Sonne, in these words, a teacher come from God, ver. 2. the person of the holy Ghost in these words of Christ, Verely, verely, I say vnto thee ex∣cept a man be borne of water and the spirit he cannot enter into the kingdome of God. ver. 5.
Testimonies not to be contradicted to proue the mystery of the Trinity,It is a singular and most excellent Scripture to shew the way to heauen here vpon earth:The vse of this holy Scripture. the way to be Christs true Disciples and his deere sheepe, as the Scripture appointed for the Gospell vpon Tewsday in Whitson-weeke descri∣beth the false sheepeheard, and the true.Parts. In this text of Scripture regard First, the occasion1 Occasion. of Christ his doctrine and instruction, ve. 1. and in a part of the second ve. Secondly, the doctrine2 Doctrine, & instruction it selfe, from thence to the end of the 15. ver. The occasion is deliuered and related in these circum∣stances:Circumstances of the occasion foure. first, in the person, name, or calling of him that mi∣nistred this occasion: secondly, in his action, he came to Iesus:  thirdly, in the time when he came, by night: fourthly, in the  end of his coming, to confesse Christ, or to confer with him,  to be instructed of him, ver. 1.2. Our Sauiour Christ his instruction is deliuered in manner of a dialogue,The Doctrine is deliuered in forme of a Dia∣logue. as catechizing this old ignorant doctor vpon one of the first points of religion, wherein he was as blind as a beetle, though a teacher in Israel. Of this dialogue there is First, a generall proposition set downe by our Sauiour,Parts of the Dialogue. verse 3. concerning regeneration,1 Proposition concerning re∣generation. prouoking and vrging Nicodemus to answere and reply, though he did it but rudely, as verse 4. Secondly, Christ makes a particular explanation of his former generall proposition, telling, expounding and shewing the manner2 Explanation of this generall proposition by setting downe the manner how it may be. how this may be, to wit, of water and the spirit. ver. 5. Thirdly, our Lord prooueth this his explanation by a distinction3 Explanation proued by a di∣stinction. of the two sorts of births, That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh, &c. ver. 6. Fourthly, our Sauiour concludes the generall propositi∣on4 The genall proposition is concluded: by preoccupating and preuenting Nicodemus his mar∣uailing at the strange words and new proposition which was first set downe, Maruaile not that I said vnto thee. &c. ver. 7.
5 Nicodemus is dehorted from maruailing at this doctrine of regeneration.Fiftly,Infallible testimonies of the ef∣ficacy of Gods Spirit & power. Christ Iesus vrgeth the point of dehorting Nico∣demus, by a simile, wherein he resembles the wind and brea∣thing of the holy spirit to the ordinary spirit and wind tha bloweth, Spiritus vbi vult spirat, &c. ve. 8. Sixtly, Nicodemus (as not contented with Christs answere, though it was true, full and peremptory6 A reioynder of Nicodemus to Christs an∣swere, though it was full and pe∣remptory,) in a third speech he makes a reioynder to Christs answere, a slender, a lamen∣table and most ignorant reply, like many in our Courts of Chancery and else where, and like those idiots, who in reasoning and disputing, do either deny the conclusion, or begge the question,Christ answeres the old Doctors reply 3 waies. saying, as Nicodemus saith heere: How can these things bee, verse nine. For which cause euen for his crooked and senlesse talke Christ takes him vp roundly, 1 Condemning him of grosse and shamelesse igno∣rance. Art thou a teacher in Israel and knowest not these things. ver 10. 2 Pronouncing the truth & certainty of Diuine know∣ledge, Verily, verily, I say vnto thee: we speake that which we know, &c. ver. 11. 3 Not excusing but pittying the ignorance and incredu∣lity of the Iewes. If when I tell you earthly things, yee beleeue not,7 S. Iohn relates two vnanswera∣ble reasons to maintaine his thesis withall. &c. ve. 12. In the seuenth place, or seuenth part of this Scripture, S. Iohn relateth two impregnable reasons, which our Lord alleageth to maintaine his proposition withall, or rather his conclusion, The first is taken from a most sure ground, Christs Di∣uinity in his omnipotent Ascension,1 Reason from Christs Diui∣nity in his om∣nipotent Ascen∣sion. and Diuine des∣cension. For no man ascendeth vp to heauen, &c. verse thir∣teenth,2 Reason from th publication of th Gospell which is  re∣sembled to the lifting vp of the serpent. The other is taken from the publication of this truth, the holy ministery and preaching of this word, wherein the preaching of the Gospell of Christ Iesus, the preaching of the crosse is 1 Resembled to a course vsed in the time of the law, by
Moses,Theory & practise must go together to wit, his lifting vp of the serpent in the wildernesse, verse 14. 2 The end of this ministery is expressed,2 The end of this preaching is declared. the end why Christ must thus be exalted and lifted vp, both by his death vpon the crosse, and by the preaching of the crosse, that who∣soeuer beleeueth in him should not perish, but haue life eternall, verse 15. which our Sauiour Christ cals the kingdome of God, whereunto none can enter except he be borne againe, as he said before, The first Sonday after Trinity IN the former part of the yeare the Christian ChurchCoherence of the combinati∣ons of the Scriptures for the former part of the yeare with these that follow in the 25 Sondaies af∣ter Trinity. The former serues for The∣ory. The latter serues for pra∣ctise. hath chosen out such principall and remarkeable portions of Scripture for the most part as may best confirme and esta∣blish Gods people in the maine grounds of the theoricke and contemplatiue part of Christian Religion. To wit, in the truth of God, concerning Christs Aduent, his Incarnation, his Birth, Circumcision, Baptisme, Life, Preaching, Fasting, Prayer, Suffering, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, his Sending downe the holy Spirit, and concerning the Mystery of the holy Trinity. But now in the twentieth fiue Sondaies after this feast of Trinity (which make vp the other halfe of the yeare) they chosen such texts of holy Scripture as may most fitly stand Gods people in stead for their obedience and practise of this truely knowne and professed Christian Religion. Heere therefore shall we finde either dehortations from sinne, vice, and wickednesse,Generall drift of all the Scrip∣tures following or exhortations to righteous∣nesse, vertue, and holinesse. Heere shall we finde examples to terifie vs from the one, or promises and rewards to per∣swade vs to embrace the other, For example sake we may behold in the two out of the old Testament, chosen for the first Sonday after Trinity,Summe of the two first Lessōs how Ioshua or Iesus, appointed by the greatest Iesus for a
Lieutenant on earth to bring his people ouer Iordaine,God by his grace & spirit in∣courageth Ioshua and the, &c. into the promised land, did conquere & ouercome those enimies of God which lay in his way. And how he and Gods people do acknowledge these victories to proceed from the victo∣rious Lyon of Iudaes Tribe. Likewise in the two portions of the new Testament, the Christian Church is first, exhorted vnto the practise of the first fruite of faith, which is loue one towards another, and secondly,Summe of the Epistle & Gos∣pell. there is an example Luke 16. (& that a most feare∣full one) of the punishment of him which was vncharitable and vnmercifull, without loue towards him that stood in greatest neede of his charity and helpe, In the chapter appointed for morning prayer, first Les∣son written Ioshua 10, the text sheweth Mor. prayer. 1 Less. Ioshua 10First, how this great Captaine Ioshua, one of the worthies of the world was in great straite by reason of the fiue Kings of the Amorites which besieged Gibeon. ver. 1. to the end of the 7.Parts. 1 Ioshuaes di∣stresse. In the second part of the chapter is related Gods incou∣raging of Ioshua and the discomfiting of the enemies, and in their fight how the hailestones slew more then the Israelites slew.2 Gods incou∣raging him. ver. 8. to the 11. In the third part how the Lord assured Ioshua of future victories by an extraordinary signe contrary to nature, to wit, of Gods staying the course and motion of the Sunne at Ioshuaes prayet.3 Gods pro∣mise to him of future victories ver. 12. to the 14. In the fourth part the text sheweth how Ioshua dealt with these fiue Kings which were hidden in the caue,4 How Ioshua vanquished the fiue Kings. verse 15. to the end of the 27. 5 Of his taking of many citties and the King of Gezer.In the fifth & last part the text makes relation of Ioshuaes taking of Makkedah, Libnah, and Lachish, of slaying the King of Gezer of his taking the citties of Eglon, Hebron, & De∣bir, ve. 28.43. to the end of the chapter. In the Scripture set out for the first Lesson at euening prayer Ioshua 22.Eue. Prayer. 1 Less. Ioshua 22, may be seene what care the ten Tribes and
the halfe Tribe tooke for the true obseruation of the wor∣shipping of God aright,Loue, a chiefe fruite of the Spi∣rit and practise of godlinesse. Summe of the text. in the place where the Tabernacle was (the place which God had appointed to put his name there) in being ielous of the two Tribes and the halfe, who had built an Altar only for a thankfull memoriall, and wit∣nesse, after they were returned to their possessions. First,Parts. the text mentioneth Ioshuaes commending of Reu∣ben, Gad, and halfe Manassehs Tribe,1 Ioshuaes com∣mendation of the two Tribes and the halfe, & his exhortation to them. for their obedience to Moses and to himselfe, giuing them leaue to returne to their possessions with great blessings, but with this prouiso, that they take diligent heed to continue and be constant in this their commenced loyalty, ver. 1, to the 9. Scondly, the two Tribes build an Altar, whereof when the other, Tribes and the halfe heard of,2 Emulation of the ten tribes and the halfe, at the two tribes. they were reproued. ver. 10. to the 20. Thirdly, how the two Tribes and the halfe answered their brethren as touching this matter.3 Answere of the two tribes and the halfe touching the matter. ver. 21. to the end of the 29. Fourthly, the acceptation of this answere by Phineas the Priest, and the Princes of the congregation:4 Phinehas his acceptation of this answere, with their rela∣tion hereof vnto the children of Israel, who praised God for it, and would not go against them in battle, ver. 30. to the 34. the end of the Chapter. In the Epistle for the day written, 1. Ioh. 4.7, to end of the 21. verse,Epistle 1. Ioh. 4.7. ad 21, Principal scope & drift thereof. which is the end of the chapter, the fathers of the Church haue made choise of a most speciall and princi∣pall exhortation, made by the pen of that louing, and beo∣ued Disciple, concerning brotherly loue, the principall fruit of the Spirit (as S. Paul witnesseth, Gala. 5.22.) the first day of S. Iohns Calender, the last of the yeare:Parts of this text. the first to begin the yeare with, to proceede therein, and the last to make it vp withall This Scripture comprehends First an exhortation,1 Exhortation conteining and propounding this doctrine of loue. Beloued let vs loue one another, in the first part of the 7. verse.
2 ConfirmatiōSecondly,The wicked glutton had no practise of loue to Lazarus. it containes reasons vrging this exhortatiue doctrine, from the other part of the 7. verse to the end of the 20. verse. Thirdly, a conclusion,3 Conclusion. And this commandement haue wee of him, that he which loueth God, should loue his brother also. ve. 21. Gospell Luk. 16.19. to the end of the chapter. Summe of this Gospell, Coherenece of this with the former Gospel,In that portion of Scripture set a part for this daies Gos∣pell being Luke 16.19. to the end of the chapter we haue a picture of an vnmercifull & vncharitable man, without any loue to God or his neighbour and therefore hated of God for his labour. Our Sauiour Christ hauing in the precedent Gospell discoursed of regeneration vnto Nicodemus and the Iewes, telling them that whosoeuer hath not the celestiall and spirituall, which is the second birth, cannot see or enter into the kingdome of heauen, will now in this Gospell shew by examples (of a wicked rich man, and an honest pa∣tient poore man) the estate of the regenerate and godly, as also of the vnregenerate and vngodly, in this life and in the life to come. Vse of this Gospell two— fold.1 To teach vs a principall duty and fruite of regenerati∣on, the shewing of mercy, a fruite of sincere loue. 2 And to teach vs to detest the vaine pelfe & pleasures of  the world: so that though they shall increase vpon vs, not to  set our hearts vpon them: Nor that we should thinke that they are giuen vs to keepe, or to abuse, in spending them. But rather to distribute them & cast them vpon the poore, euen vpon the waters, where after a few daies we shall find them. Three sorts of men to be loo∣ked vpō in this Gospell.In this portion of Scripture we must looke vpon two sorts of men with both our eyes; and vpon a third, who sets vs downe the state of them both: that with the eyes of our vnderstanding, of our hearts, soules, & mindes, we may the better see them. 1 Vpon a rich man for three causes.First we will looke vpon the rich man with our right eye, for he is a goodly sight to behold, being 1 Clothed in purple without 2 Fine linnen within
3 Faring,The wicked mercilesse Diues was poore in pitty and piety. first, wel, secondly, & delicately euery day. v. 19. Secondly, we will behold Lazarus with the left eye,2 Vpon Laza∣rus wee looke with our left eye for fiue causes▪ ouer our shoulders, or through our fingers, and why, 1 He is a begger, 2 He lyeth (like a spitler) at the rich mans gate. 3 He is full of sores. ver. 20. from such a creature we will  turne our faces, and our backes too, For 4 He is so miserable that he desireth (a dogs almes) the  crummes that fall from the rich mans table: a very base minded  beggar that hath no wit to aske a greater almes. 5 So loathsome is his body to be looked vpon, and that  because his vlcers are so noisome, and the poore man left helpelesse of Physicke & Surgery, that the tongues of the dogs (not the hearbe Dogs-tongue) are faine to be his balmes and oyles to embrocate his sores, and as externall captaplasmes to abate the fiery heate of his furious malady. ve. 21. These and such sights, would cause the turning of a dainty stomack, if the eye should only behold them. Thirdly, S. Luke after all this tels vs, First, of the conclusion, and determining of the poore mans misery. Secondly,3 The end of the poore mans misery, and the beginning of the rich mans vnhappinesse: Lazarus his spi∣rituall and An∣gelicall buriall. of the introduction and beginning of the rich gluttons vnhappinesse. This he doth, first, by speaking of the death of them both, which was their common end, se∣condly, by setting downe their seuerall estates while they were both dead and aboue the ground. First, in stead of an hearse and foure men to cary him, Lazarus hath an heauenly and spirituall portage, by bles∣sed Angels, not to any other graue then into Abrahams bosome. The rich man wants no exequialsRich mans earthly exequi∣als. or funerall rites and ce∣remonies while his body was on earth, ver. 22. But being soule and body in earth, and in the depth of earth in hellish torments, was there tossed vp & downe of the hellish hags & feends, where (he blaring out his tongue like a thirsty dog) saw Abraham a far of and Lazarus in his bosome. ver. 23.
The rich mans repentance in hell & his two-fold supplicatiōThe sense of whose torments and beholding of Abra∣ham and Lazarus draue him.Diues his pitty in hell came too late, First, to cry, to intreate and speak for himselfe. Father A∣braham  haue mercy on me, and send Lazarus. ver. 24. To which request he receiue a two-fold answere. 1 Sonne, remember that thou in thy life time, &c. ver. 25. 2 Besides all this there is a great gulfe set, &c. ver. 26. Secondly, Diues will play small game before he will sit out, and therfore is a petitioner the second time. He saw that himselfe was cassiered, that for himselfe in hell there was no mercy, therefore in heauen no redemption: he supplicates for his fiue brethren. ver. 27.28. To this Abraham answeres him, They haue Moses and the Prophets, ver. 29. The gluttons exception to Abrahams an∣swere,The damned glutton takes exception to this answere: and as a man not resolued, reasons still against the truth which Abraham spake concerning that ordinary course which God taketh in conuerting of men. Nay father Abra∣ham: but if one came vnto them from the dead, they will amend their liues. ver. 30. Abrahams an∣swere to the ca∣uill of damned Diues.Vnto this his cauil he receiues also Abrahams answer most peremptorily set downe, which is this: If they heare not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be perswaded, though one rise from the dead againe. The second Sonday after Trinity. Reasons for the choise of these 4 Scriptures,BEcause obedience to God and mutuall loue one towards another, are the ends of the two great commandements as Christ Iesus saith, Math. 22. therefore do the Authors of our Leitourgie, in this their choise. proceed in selecting of Scriptures accordingly. Scope of the two first LessōsFor the two Scriptures of the old Testament do giue vs to
vnderstand:Gods loue to the Israelites, first, that though Gods people Israel were sold into the hands of Iabin the King of Canaan for their sinnes wherein they continued; yet vpon their repentance and o∣bedience to God, the Lord was mercifull to them in raysing vp Deborah a Prophetesse, to iudge and rule them, and to be a meanes of their deliuerance out of the hands of Sisera, the generall of Iabins army. For which cause, secondly, Deborah and Barak the two instruments of this deliuerance do make a memorable Halleluiah and thanksgiuing to Iehouah after the victory which he gaue them. The first of the Scriptures of the new Testament is an exhortation to constancy,Scope of the Epistle & Gos∣pell and perseuerance in our contem∣ning the world, and continuing in mutuall loue one towards an other: The second which is the Gospell, tels vs in a pa∣rable, how Christ the great feast maker shewes his vnspeak∣ble loue to all men: and therefore makes seuerall kinds of inuitations of diuers sorts of guests, vnto the great and gra∣cious supper of faith, obedience to God, and mutuall loue to the brethren & beloued of God. Howbeit most of them, if not all, proue vnthankfull recusants, and vnmannerly, and therefore vnworthy. The first of these foure Scriptures, Iudges 4.Mor. Prayer. 1 Less. Iudges 4, doth in the First part let vs see that Gods iudgement followed the wickednesse of his owne people,Parts. in that the Lord stirred vp that mighty King of Canaan (which had 900 Chariots of iron,1 God puni∣sheth his people for their sinnes. to vexe the Israelites very sore for twentie yeares toge∣ther. ver. 1. to the end of the third. In the second part of the chapter is related,2 God is mer∣cifull in his pu∣nishments. how the Lord was mercifull vnto his people and therefore deliuered them out of the hands of this their strong enemy, as 1 By the destruction of the host & army of Iabin by the aduise of Deborah & aide of Barak. v 4. to the end of the 16. 2 By the dishonorable death of Sisera (that fled away on foote) who died by the hands of a woman, Iael, Hebers wife v. 17. to the end of the 24. the end of the chapter.
Eue. Prayer. 1 Less Iudges 5.The second of the foure Scriptures is, Iudges 5. chapter,Gods loue in af∣flicting his people, containing First,Parts. a congratulation of Deborah and Barak vnto the Lord their God for his auenging of Israel.1 Deborah and Barakes thanks∣giuing to God. ver. 1.2. Secondly, an inuiting or incitatiue exhortation vnto Kings and Princes to heare this song.2 Their exhor∣tation to Kings and Princes to heare this song. verse 3, to the end of the 11. Thirdly, Deborahs speciall and couragious prouoking of her selfe and Barak her asistant,3 A speciall in∣citation of her selfe and her assistant to thanksgiuing vnto thanksgiuing in her rehearsing vp those Tribes which helped; and those which ioyned not with them are by her reproued. ver. 22. to the 28. Fourthly, she doth in her song describe 4 A description of the enimies force and of Gods power in ouercoming it.1 The multitude and strength of her enemies. ver. 19. 2 Gods power and heauenly strength, with the meanes which he vsed to accomplish his purpose. ver. 20. to the end of the 23. Fiftly, the text sets downe the manner and meanes of Si∣seras death,5 Siseraes death by the wife of Heber the Kenite. v. 24, to the 30. 6 Deborahs con∣clusion of her song with a prayer.Sixtly, she concludes her song with a couragious prophe∣ticall and constant prayer. 1 Against al Gods enemies for their destruction: So let all thine enemies perish ô Lord, 2 For all Gods friends and louers, but they that loue him shall be as the sunne that riseth in his might. ver. 31. to the end of the chapter. Epistle. 1 Ioh. 3.13. ad 14The third of the 4 Scriptures written 1. Ioh. 3.13. con∣taineth, Parts.1 A dehortation, 2. an exhortation, 3. an inference, con∣clusion or corrolary vpon both. The dehortation1 Dehortation is, Maruaile not my brethren though this world hate you. ver. 13. The reasons of this dehortation whereby explicite he per∣swades to mutuall loue, are in the 14.15.16.17. verses. The exhortation2 Exhortation is framed not for an intent of an out∣ward loue in word and tongue onely, but a loue in the right
manner,Exhortations to faith, obedience, and loue. & of the best fashion, to wit, in deed and in truth. v. 18. The grounds and reasons of this exhortation, are in the 19.20.21. and 22. verses. The conclusion or inference vpon the premisedConcusions or inference vpon the pre∣mises. dehorta∣tion and exhortation is in these words. This is then his com∣mandement, that we beleeue in the name of his Sonne Iesus Christ and loue one another, as he gaue commandement. ver. 23. The perswading reasons wherof do follow, ve. 24. which is the last verse of the chapter, In the fourth Scripture chosen for this daies Gospell, written Luke 14. ver. 16. to the end of the 24. ver.Gospell Luk. 14.16. ad 24. Christ Ie∣sus doth in a parable set downe the course which God taketh in calling men to his kingdome. Shewing that no excuses wil serue the turne here, much lesse at the day of iudgement,Scope & chiefe drift of this Gospell. for such as refuse (though with excuses) being called to come, shall be counted vnworthy to tast of the heauenly and spirituall danties at the Lords board in the kingdome of grace, or in the kingdome of glory. For as in the former Gospell we might heare that the wic∣ked rich mans intreaty for himselfe or his fiue brethrē while he was in hell,Coherence of this with the former. was to no purpose to answere for his incredu∣lity & disobedience to God, or his sauage vnmercifulnesse to poore Lazarus: So in this portion of Scripture it will ap∣peare that notwithstanding the excuses, 1 Of the farme-buier, which ambitiously desired to bee hastily rich, 2 Or of the oxe-buyer, that carelesse worldling which was not at leisure, 3 Or of the voluptuous and fleshly liuer, the new mar∣ried man, who said, I cannot come: yet was the sentence de∣finitiue pronounced against these inuited guests.Considerations in the parable are two-fold. Two generals In the parable we may consider generals and specials The first generall is concerning him that made this feast, who it was, a certaine man,
The second is, what he did. He made a great supper,Christs loue in calling, &c. there∣fore the certaine man is a great man: which is also proued by his generall inuitation, he bade many, ver. 16: Two specials,The specials are 1 The inuitation of guests, ver. 17. 2 The commination or threatning of the vnthankfull, though inuited guests. ver. 24. The inuitation is two-foldInuitation twofold, the first, the second, summons At the first summons, or former call, three sorts of guests are inuited.At the first summons three kinds of guests are inuited. 1 The worldly Farmer. ver. 18. 2 The Marchant grasier, or the carking and caring carle,  the husbandman. ver, 19. 3 The fleshly and voluptuous new maried man. ver. 20. The second summons occasioned through the contuma∣cy, vnwillingnesse,Second sum∣mons is two-fold. and vnthankfullnesse of the three (which were first called) is also two-fold. For First, the seruant returnes and brings answere to the goodman of the house, and feast-maker, who in his anger causeth to be inuited foure other sorts of guests: first, the poore: secondly, the maimed: thirdly, the halt: fourthly, the blind. ver. 21.22. The second call of the the latter inuitation (occasioned hereupon, that there was roome for more guests, though foure sorts were called already) is, Go out into the high waies and compell them to come in, that mine house may be filled, verse 23. The great Mai∣ster of al, threa∣neth all the vn∣worthy.The ground of which call and commandement, is a reso∣lute sentence, or commination in the anger and indignation of the great maister of the feast. For I say vnto you, that none of those men which were bidden, shall tast of my supper. verse 24.
The third Sonday after Trinity.Examples of Hannahs patience and humility, and Helies sonnes violence, pride, and villany. AS pride and haughtinesse of minde are the poyson and destruction of the gifts and blessings of God,Principal scope of these foure Scriptures, in men and Angels: so humility, meeknesse, and patience, long suf∣fering, and brotherly kindnesse, are the antidotes and pre∣seruatiues of all graces, and gifts, and of all blessings which God bestowes vpon men in this life:Summe of the two first lessons in two contra∣ry examples, wherefore there is a most fit choyce of two Scriptures out of the old Testament: both which are examples, First of humility in Hannah,1 Hannah, who after her obteining of a child by her prayer to God, in her meeke, modest, & shame∣fast kinde of speech vnto God, not vttering words that were audible to mens eares. 1. Sam. 1.13. doth in her thankesgi∣uing to God, who gaue her the child, dehort from proud & presumptuous speeches, and disswade from arrogancie in words, chap. 2. ve. 3. A second example we haue on the left hand, and contra∣ry side, concerning the pride, rashnesse, and presumption, the violence, filthinesse, and villany of Elies sons,2 Elies sonnes, with Gods iudgement vpon them, and vpon their father, not punishing them for the same. S. Peter, that warme spirited Apostle,Summe of the Epistle and Gospell, who was taught humility, both by the humble life and do∣ctrine of his maister, frames an exhortation to this purpose in the Epistle. And our Sauiour Christ being full of patience and long suffering; yea, humility it selfe, vttereth three pa∣rables to this purpose in one chapter, whereof two are set out for the Gospell, to wit, that of the lost sheepe, and that of the lost groat. In the first of the foure Scriptures.Mor. Prayer. 1 Less, 1 Sam, 2. 1. Samuel. 2. the text doth First set downe the humble and lowly song and prayer of Hannah,1 Hannahs song and prayer, ve. 1. to the end of the 10.Parts.
2 A report of Samuels vpright¦nesse, and the Priests sonnes wickednesse.In the second part the text makes report,Christ sharply punisheth the sins of the Priest and his sonnes, 1. Of Samuels faithfull ministering vnto the Lord before Eli the Priest, ve. 11. So 2. Of the wickednesse, disorder, violence, and filthinesse of Elies sonnes, ve. 12. ad 17. 3 Hannahs pro∣uision and care for her son, and Gods proui∣dence towards her.Thirdly, the text shews vs, what motherly prouision Han∣nah made for yong sonne Samuel, and how fatherly and gra∣ciously God dealt with her in blessing her with fiue children more, ve. 18. ad 21. In the fourth place may be seene how foolishly and slen∣derly the fond father Eli reproued his wicked sonnes.4 Helies fond re∣prouing of his children, and God his re∣proofe of him. But withall how God tooke the matter into his owne handes: and by a man of God sharply reproued him, and denoun∣ced iudgements against him, against his sonnes and posteri∣ty: howbeit the Lord promiseth to stirre vp to himselfe a faithfull Priest that shall doe after his owne heart: vnto whom Elies posterity shall crouch for a peece of siluer, and a mor∣sell of bread, verse 22. to the end of the 36. which is the end of the chapter.Eue. Prayer. 1. Less. 1. Sam. 3 1 A famine of Gods word for the filthy wic∣kednesse of the Priests.In the second Scripture written 1. Samuel. 3. appoynted for the first Lesson at Euening prayer, the holy Ghost shewes vs, First, how for the wickednesse of Ely and his sons, God brought a scarsity of his word: For the word of the Lord was precious in those daies, ve. 1.2.3. In the second part of the chapter, the text maketh men∣tion of Gods three-fold calling of Samuel, and of Samuels answer and obedience at the fourth call,2 Gods calling of Samuel three times, & Samu∣els answering the fourth time verse 4. to the end of the 10. In the third, the holy Ghost tels vs how the Lord made his purpose knowne to Samuel, concerning the subsequent iudgements to be executed vpon Ely and his children,3 Samuel is made acquain∣ted with Gods intent concer∣ning the pu∣nishments of Ely & his sons. ver. 11. to the end of the 15. 4 Samuels rela∣tion hereof to Ey.In the fourth, how Samuel relateth the Lords purposed iudgements to Ely, ve. 16 to the end of the 18.
In the fifth, how God fauoured, blessed, and increased his gifts in Samuel.5 God increa∣seth his bles∣sings in Samuel, as appeareth by three effects. 1. In effecting that which Samuel spake. 2. In giuing him faithfulnesse, roundnesse and soundnesse in his place. 3. In Gods speaking to him, and reuealing himselfe to  him by word, as before by vision, ve. 19.20.21. to the end of  the chapter. Saint Peter in the third scripture for this day, written in his first Epistle,Epistle 1. Pet, 5.5. ad 11 Scope of this text of Scrip∣ture. Chapter 5. verse 5. to the end of the 11. as an heauenly harper plaieth vpon the sweete instrument of exhortation, singing thereto a song and dittie of hu∣mility.Parts. First therefore he pipes to the yonger in speciall, the les∣son of submission.1 He sings a song of submission to the yonger. Secondly, to all in generall, as harping still vpon the same string, ve. 5. and 6.2 Hee sings it to all. Thirdly, he perswades all Gods people to depend vpon their Lord, and to cast all their care on him. ve. 7.3 Hee exhorts men to depend vpon God pro∣uidence. Fourthly, he exhorts to sobriety and watchfulnesse, al∣leaging most sound reasons for their watchfulnesse, and re∣sistance of the aduersary, ve. 8.9.4 He strikes vp the measures of sobriety, tempe∣rance & watch∣fulnesse. Fifthly, hee prayeth to God for their confirmation, whereof assuring himselfe hee praiseth God for the same, vers. 10.11.5 His prayer & praises to God Saint Luke in our fourth portion of scripture for this day, written, chap. 15.1. to the end of the 10. put apart for the Gospell,Gospell. Luk. 15.1. ad 10. Scope and end of this Gospel, Coherence hereof with the former. sets forth, and commends vnto vs the singular and vnspeakeable loue of God in Christ, in his patience, long suffering, and mercifulnesse vnto vs poore wandering sheepe, most miserable and wretched sinners: So that not∣withstanding mens vnthankfulnesse in comming to God so slackely, or their pride and impenitency in not coming at all, or their ignorance in comming vnwillingly: yet
wil not the maister of the feast be without guests.Christs vnspeakeable patience, &c Christs com∣passion toward mankinde, and his patience in the expectation of sinners re∣pentance.Our Euangelist therefore will in this text giue vs a good rellish and taste of the sweetnesse, I say, of Christs compas∣passion, and mercy, his patience in waiting for the conuersi∣on of wandring sinners, and his reioycing for their returne to the sheepe-fold, and true repentance for their wandring. Parts of the text,First, Publicans and sinners heard of the gracious words which proceeded out of Christs mouth, where vpon they re∣sorted to heare him,1 Occasion of their coming to Christ, ve. 1. Secondly, this being a scandall to the Pharisies and Scribes, causing them to murmure,2 The Pharisies murmure at Publicanes good, and to reproach him with these wordes: Hee reciueth sinners, and eates with them, vers. 2. Thirdly, our Lord therfore remoues this stumbling block, ouerthrowing the cauils and reproches of the Pharisies in 3. parables:3 Christ re∣moues this blocke out of the way by 3. parables, all which are conteined in this chapter, and two of them in this Gospell, whereof The first is of the lost sheepe,1 Of the lost sheepe. from the 3. verse to the end of the 7. The second is of the lost groat,2 Of the lost groat from the eighth verse to the end of the 10. The third of the spendthrift, and prodigall child,3 Of the lost, or prodigall child, vpon whom Christ the true sheepeheard, spends the rest of his speech, from the 11. verse to the end of the 31. which is the last verse of the chapter. The fourth Sonday after Trinity. Reasons and occasions of the choice of this text,BEcause rashnesse in mis-iudging of other men, and selfe-loue in an ouer-weening of our selues, and carying of sinister opinions, and preiudicate affections of that which other men do or speake to vs: yea many times of that which God himselfe speaketh and doeth for vs, as also of such crosses as God inflicteth vpon vs. Forasmuch, I say, as these are great blockes and beames in our way to loue, and doe
interrupt our mercifulnesse one towards another:Examples of plaine and sim∣ple dealing in Samuel. yea, they are as trumps and hinderances in our course of religion and godlinesse towards God. Therefore the holy Ghost, in the two Scriptures out of the old Testament, will giue vs ex∣amples, First of Samuel, who walked vprightly, dealt plainly,Summe of the 2 first Lessons, and like an hypocrite, either with the Israelites, or with Saul their new-gotten King. Secondly, of the Israelites, who in their owne opinions, and rash iudgments thought it better to be ruled by a king, then by a Idge and Prophet. These people therefore were payed home in Gods anger, euen by this King, of whom they made such account, & thought they had gotten a great iewell of him. In the other two scriptures chosen out of the new Testa∣stament,Summe of the Epistle and Gospell, 1. S. Paul doth exhort vs to be of his opinion con∣cerning the afflictions of this life, and not to follow our owne fleshly opinion, which thinketh, that no affliction is pleasant for the present time. 2. Our Lord doth giue vs many precepts perswasiue and dissvasiue, to command and com∣mend mercifulnesse and brotherly kindnesse vnto vs, and to forbid rash and heady iudging and condemning of our brethren, being the occasion and entrance into our owne ruine and condemnation. In the first Lesson for morning prayer, written 1. Samuel. 12.Mor. Prayer. 1 Less, 1 Sam, 12 the text First manifesteth to vs,Parts. the vprightnesse and innocency of that holy man of God Samuel, ver. 1. ad 5.1 A relation of Samuels vpright¦nesse, and the Israelites wic∣kednesse, that hee might thereby take occasion (as hee doth indeed) in the second part of the chapter, to taxe the Israelites, & to reason against them for their sins and vnthankfulnesse in receiuing Gods benefites, ver. 6. to the end of the 19. In the third part of the chapter Samuel disswades the Is∣raelites from forsaking the Lord,2 A caueat to beware of defe∣ction and apo∣stacy, and falling to a further de∣fection and Apostacy: exhorts them to feare the Lord, and
to serue him in truth with all their hearts:Of hypocrisie, pride, and ouer∣weening in Saul & the Israelites. which if they doe not, he denounceth iudgements against them and their new obtained King, ve. 20. ad 25. the end of the chapter. Eue. Prayer. 1. Les. 1, Sam. 13 Summe and scope of it.In the first Lesson for Euening prayer, written in the nex chapter of the same booke, 1. Samuel 13. the holy Ghost sets vs downe an example (which we are to auoyde) of a bold, foolish, and rash hypocrite (though a King,) who supposed that hee might haue serued God after his owne fashion and will, and not as God in his word commandeth. Parts.The first part of the chapter makes mention of the warre betweene the Israelites and the Philistines,1 Victory of Saul & Ionathan against the phi∣listines. and the victory which Saul and Ionathan obtained, ve. 1. to the end of the 4. The second part sheweth how the Philistines seeke to be reuenged2 Philistines seeke for a re∣uenge. of the Israelites, and therefore gathered an Ar∣my like the sand of the sea in multitude, which put the Israelites to a plunge. When Saul saw that the people were in this straite, he offered a burnt offering, vers. 5. to the end of the 10. The third part of the chapter containeth Samuels repro∣uing of Saul, and his denouncing of Gods iudgement a∣gainst him,3 Samuels re∣proofe of Saul, & denouncing Gods-iudge∣ments against him ve. 11. to the end of the 14. 4 The strength and pollicy of the Philistines, the weaknesse & insufficiency of the IsraelitesIn the fourth part the holy Ghost sheweth how strong and politicke the Philistines were, and how weake and vn∣furnished the Israelites were, who had neither sword nor speare among them, verse 15. to the end of the 23. which is the end of the chapter. Parts.The third scripture written Rom. 8.18. to the end of the 23.Epistle Rom. 8.18. ad 23 vers.1 Doctrine touching the inequality of the afflictions heere, with the glory hereafter. containeth First, a Thesis, as touching the inequality of the af∣flictions of this life, with the glory that shall bee shewed to vs, vers. 18. Secondly, the double foundation and ground-worke
whereupon he buildeth this doctrine,Commandements & exhortations to mercy in censuring our brethren. 2 Confirmatiō hereof, which is two-fold. as most excellent rea∣sons whereby he proues the doctrine. The first is drawne from the feruent desire of the crea∣tures (subiect vnto vs) groaning vnder their burthensome bondage, waiting for liberty and dissolution, verse 19.1 Creatures desire of liberty to the end of the 22. The second is taken from the experience that the sonnes and daughters of God haue of their owne sighing and groa∣ning vnder the burthenous bondage of their sinnes,2 Gods chil∣drens desire of liberty from sin waiting for the Adoption, euen the Redemption of their bo∣dies, verse 23. The fourth Scripture, written Luke. 6.36.Gospell Luk. 6.36. ad 42 to the end of the 42. verse, instructeth vs in the particular du∣ties of loue and charitie in our mercifull carriage of our selues one towards another, as in other things, so also in our charitable iudging and censuring of one a∣nother.Coherence of this Scripture with the former Gospel. So that as the last Sonday wee had in the Gos∣pell, a most excellent patterne of Gods gracious and free loue towardes vs in Christ Iesus: so in this hee meanes to teach vs how to bee imitators and follow∣ers of this patterne and example of charity to others and to our selues, as deriued from our selues, and beginning at our selues. Two generall things Christ performes,Parts of this text. as we may see in this scripture, which is a part of that heauenly Sermon made vpon the earthly mountaine. First he perswades,1 Perswasion. and that in the 3. first verses. Secondly, he disswades,2 Disswasion. and that in the other foure. He perswades vnto many duties by his two-fold comman∣mandementPerswasion, by his two-fold cōmandement, and authority, 1. Preceptiue,1 Preceptiue. 2. Prohibitiue.2 Prohibitue. In his preceptiue authority, he commandes mercy, 1. in generall, 2. in speciall:Perswasion to mercy, 1. in generall, and 2. in speciall, Be yee mercifull, as your father also is mercifull, vers. 36. In his authority prohibitiue, he forbids 1. Preiudice, or rash iudgement, that is, iudging and
accusing one another before the time.Disswasion 1 From rash iudgement, Hypocrites and censuring Philautists are blinde, 2. Vtterly to condemne one another2 Vtterly con∣demning one another. vpon so rash a cen∣sure, vers, 37. For it is a point next the worst, being against reason, therefore against law, that one and the same man should be a party to accuse, and a party to iudge and con∣demne his brother. The mercy whereto Christ perswadeth, is two-fold, con∣sisting either Christ per∣swades to spe∣ciall mercy. which consists1. In Forgiuing,1. in forgiuing, as in the latter end of the 37. vers. Forgiue, and yee shall be forgiuen. 2. Or in giuing:2. in giuing, Giue, and it shall be giuen to you, a good mea∣sure, pressed downe, running ouer, &c. ve. 38. 1 Christ dis∣swades from hypocrisie, and sharply re∣proues the sin & the sinner, Three bad ef∣fects of hypo∣crisie.In Christs disswasory speech we may see, that 1. He disswades the Disciples from that dangerous sinne of hypocrisie. Secondly, hee sharply reproues the hypocrite himselfe, and the sin of hypocrisie, as being the sinne which 1. Hinders all men from performing mercifulnesse in the true and right manner. 2. It furthers them in rash iudging and condemning. 3. It interrupts the course of pardoning and forgiuing  one another, and the true habite of liberality, which consist∣eth  in a right manner of giuing and lending. Christ his simi∣le to demon∣strate the dan∣gers of hypo∣crisie,This our Lord doth by a parable or simile resembling the hypocrite accusing and iudging, and the brother hypocrite accused and iudged of him, vnto the dangerous estate of two blinde men falling both into the ditch, by their blinde lea∣ding of one another.2 Christ dis∣swades from selfe-loue, ve. 39. Secondly, Christ the great Maister disswades his scholers from selfe-loue, and ouer-conceiting themselues, as proud hypocrites are wont to doe, in thinking that they are ei∣ther too great, or too good to indure reproaches by bad men and hypocrites.Christs reprofe of the hypo∣crite, verse 40. The Disciple is not aboue his Maister. Our Lord sharply reproueth the hypocrite by a pa∣rable.1 by a simile. 1. resembling him, (and therein shewing in what a
predicament hee is) vnto a very absurde and vnreasonable man,Saul is commanded to obey God, which hee refuseth. which wil pretend to do impossibilities, to wit,, suppo∣seth that he spyeth a mote in his brothers eye, when a beame (which is inough to couer the face, much more the eye, if it bee within it) is in the hypocrites eye, ve. 41. Secondly, Christ aduiseth (and yet reproueth the hy∣pocrite.)2 By shewing the hypocrite the cause of his blindnes, which he neither seeth nor knoweth. 1. To cast the beame out of his owne eye. 2. Shewes him the good he shall get by it, and the bene∣fite arising thereof: And then shalt thou see perfectly to pull out the mote that is in thy brothers eye, vers. 42. The fifth Sonday after Trinity. THe foure portions of holy scripture which the Fathers of our Church haue chosen for this 5.Summe of the two first lessōs, and of the E∣pistle & Gospel for this day, Sonday after Tri∣nity, are such as do exhibite and yeeld, 1. either examples of Gods punishing the hypocrites, and disobedient vnto his voyce, as the two chapters out of the old Testament, or 2. they be commandements & exhortations to perswade vnto obedience, to perswade vnto well doing: yea, if the case so require, to suffer for the same, as may appeare in the other two chosen out of the new Testament. The first of them written, 1. Sam. 15. First sets downe Gods precise commandement giuen to King Saul by Samuel,Mor. prayer. 1. Les. 1, Sam. 15 concerning his vtter destroying of A∣gag, of his people and cattell, without respect or partiality,Parts: vers. 1 to the end of the 3.1 Gods precise commandemēt to King Saul, Secondly, how that Saul disobeyed this straite comman∣dement of the Lord, ver. 4. to the end of the 9.2 Sauls disobe∣dience, Thirdly,3 Gods dis∣pleasure con∣ceiued against Saul. the holy Ghost recordeth and obserueth the Lords displeasure conceiued against Saul for his presump∣tuous sinne, and Samuels conference with Saul about it, his conuincing him of it, his sharpe reprouing and censuring
of Saul for it, ve. 20. ad 23.The Philistines are Gods whips for Sauls disobedience Fourthly, the text makes mention of Sauls acknowled∣ging his sin,4 Sauls acknow∣ledging of his sinne, with the seuerall requests which the hypocrite makes vnto Gods Prophet, ver. 24. ad 31. 5 Samuel per∣formeth that which Saul would not doe,Fifthly, how Samuel executed Gods iudgement vpon A∣gag, and refused to come any more at Saul, though afterward he mourned for him, verse 32. ad 35. which is the end of the chapter. The second portion of Scripture written 1. Sam. 17. lets vs see how God punished the wickednesse of Saul by the Philistines (which were enemies to God and his Church) albeit in his mercy and goodnesse he deliuered them out of their enemies hands,Euen. prayer. 1, Les, 1, Sam, 17 Scope of the chapter. and his seruant Dauid out of the vncir∣circumcised hands and tyranny of their Champion Goliah. In the first part of the chapter the text declareth how af∣ter the battell was pitcht betweene the Philistines and Israe∣lites, Goliah the Philistines Champion, trusting in his strength, and not in God, defieth Israel,1 Goliah the Philistines Champion challengeth & defieth all Is∣rael, the hoast of the Lord, vers. 1. ad 10. Parts.In the second part of the chapter is shewed, how Dauid being sent by his father to see how his brethren fared in the battell, tooke occasion vpon the rumor of the chal∣lenger to take him to taske,2 Dauid taketh Goliah to taske presuming vpon the experi∣ence of Gods former fauour to him, in killing the Lyon and the Beare, that the vncircumcised Philistine should therefore bee deliuered into his hands, verse 11. to the end of the 40. In the third part of the chapter is related how this great Gyant,3 The manner of their sight. The means and successe of both the combaters, and this little Dauid, 1. Parled of the matter concerning the combat. 2. How Dauid with the weake meanes of a sling and a stone, ouercame him: and how God gaue a little man a great deale of strength to cut off the che challengers head with his owne heauy sword, ve. 41. ad 51. 4 Israeliies vi∣ctory ouer the Philistines.In the fourth part, mention is made of the Israelites
victory ouer rhe Philistines,Exhortations to obedience, that is, to embrace the fruits of the spirit, and the rumor of Dauids valiant act, in the eares of Saul, vers. 52. to the end of the 58. which is the end of the chapter. The third portion of holy scripture, written 1. Pet. 8.Epistle. 1. Pet. 3, 8.14. to the end of the 14. verse. conteines First, exhortations1 Exhortations. to embrace the fruites of the spirit,Parts. as vnity, louing kindnesse, pittifulnesse, and curtesie, ve. 8:9. Secondly, the reasons and grounds2 Reasons and groundes to force them. to vrge these exhor∣tations, as 1. Testimony of scripture, ve. 10.11.12. 2. Ab vtili & incolumitate: Who is it that shall harme you, if you follow that which is good, ve. 13. 3. Ab anticipatione, Gods people may alleage, that they may do well, and yet be punished for it. The answer to this obiection is consolataria: Feare not their feare, neither be troubled. For blessed are ye, if yee suffer for righteousnesse sake. ve. 14. As in the former Gospell our Lord Iesus taught vs,Gospell. Luke. 5.1 ad 11. Coherence of this Gospell with the former that charity must begin at our selues, taking heed of that dange∣rous sin of hypocrisie, either in our reprouing & censuring of others, or in any other Christian duties: and that from our selues this charity must proceed vnto others, and be practi∣sed in our mercifulnesse generally and specially: so in this scripture, comprised Luk. 5.1. to the end of the 11. ve. Christ our Lord after his wonted maner, proceedeth in causing the streames and floods of his fauour and mercifulnesse to flow ouer the people that came to heare him.Parts. And he calleth Apostles (such as he will appoint to teach them) whom he calleth Men-catchers, or fishers of men, a far better occupation then the Fish-catchers, or Fish-mon∣gers trades, as they are now vsed.1 Occasion of the deede. In this holy scripture Saint Luke will haue vs to consi∣der in the first place,2 The deede it selfe, the occasion of Christs act and deede, this calling of his, which is two-fold, of the people
and of the Apostles in the 1.2.3. verses.God practiseth true loue in calling his Apostles, &c. Secondly, the act and deed it selfe in the other 8. verses: Parts of the oc∣casion.The occasion of the deede hath these branches belong∣ing  to it. 1. Circumstances of the time, persons, and place. ve. 1. 2. Christs three-fold preparing of himselfe to that deed, as taking occasion thereof, to wit 1. By his espying and seeing the two ships, 2. By his entrance into one of them. 3. By his commanding of Simon Peter to thrust a little from the shore, that hee might teach the people out of the ship, vers. 3, The act & deed of Christs cal∣ling the Apo∣stles is twofold,Our Lords two-fold calling, which is his deede obserued by S. Luke for the second part of this parcell of Scripture, is either, 1. Generall, in his drawing of men in generall, to the fel∣lowship of the Church, and society of the faithfull, as in the latter end of the 3. verse: And hee sate downe and taught the people out of the ship. Or 2. Speciall, in calling of Peter, Iames, and Iohn to the of∣fice of the Apostleship, wherein Luke respects, 1. Christs constant calling of the Apostles. Or 2. The efficacy thereof, and obedience of the Apostles vn∣to this calling: for when they had brought their ships to land, they forsooke all and followed him, vers. 11. Christs constant calling is set forth, Confirmation of Christs cal∣ling the Apo∣stles,1. In a miraculous tipe and figure of the taking that mul∣titude of fishes, thereby confirming his doctrine, from the 4. verse to the end of the first two clauses of the 10. verse. 2. In that which answereth the tipe, to wit, the forme and substance of the calling it selfe, expressed in these wordes: Feare not, from hence forth thou shalt catch men, in the rest of the tenth verse.
God punished sinne in Dauid his beloued.The sixth Sonday after Trinity. GOd is not a God that loueth wickednesse of the vn∣godly, godly, neither shall any euill dwell with him.Summe of the two first Lessōs Psal. 5.4. Hee will punish sin and vnrighteousnesse in Dauid (though he were his deere child:) much more the iniquity of Saul, an hypocrite & reprobate, going on still in his malicious wic∣kednesse. These truthes are confirmed by examples out of the two first Lessons taken out of the old Testament.Summe of the Epistle and Gospell, And forasmuch as sinne may not be continued in, that grace may abound: therefore are wee exhorted to the death and dete∣station of sin, and to the life of righteousnesse, by S. Paul in the Epistle: and we are told what this holinesse and righte∣ousnesse is wherein wee must walke in our way to the king∣dome of God, by our Sauiour in the Gospell. In the first of the 4. scriptures chosen for this day, written 2. am. 12. the holy Ghost doth,Mor. Prayer. 1 Less, 1 Sam, 12 First shew vnto vs how the Prophet Nathan is sent to king Dauid1 Nathan is sent to awakē Dauid to reproue him for his sinnes,Parts. to vrge him to the true acknowledging of them, and repentance for them, and to pronounce Gods intended punishments for those sinnes which he had committed, ve. 1. ad 14. In the second part of the chapter the text tels vs how God humbled Dauid by punishing that child with sicknesse2 Dauid is hum∣bled by the childs sicknesse which was conceiued in adultery, ve. 15. ad 23. In the third, that God shewed his fauourable countenance vnto Dauid.3 God is fauo∣rable vnto Da∣uid. 1. In giuing him Salomon of her that was the wife of Vriah. 2. In his victory against Rabbah a chiefe cittie of the Am∣monites in his vtter conquest and subduing of them ve. 24. ad 31. the end of the chapter.Eue. Prayer. 1 Les, 2, Sam, 21 Scope of the chapter. The second scripture for this day, which is the first lesson
for Euening prayer,Sauls sinne is auenged after his death, 2. Sam. 21. chap. makes relation of Gods executing his fore-denounced iudgements vpon malicious wicked men,Parts. and of his louing mercy and fauour to Dauid, and his seruants. In the first part of the chapter may appeare how God pu∣nished Sauls sinne of killing the Gibeonites, by three yeares famine in Dauids daies:1 God puni∣sheth Sauls sin in Dauids daies and what course Dauid tooke that the Gibeonites might bee auenged of Sauls bloudy house: which being effected, God was then appeased with the land, vers. 1. ad 14. 2 Dauids mani∣fold victories.In the second parr of the chapter is recorded what victo∣ries God gaue vnto Dauid against the wicked Philistines by the hands of Dauids worthy Captaines, ver. 15. to the end of the 22. the end of the chapter. The third selected portion of Scripture, Rom. 6.3. to the end of the 12.Epistle. Rom. 6.3. ad 12. verse, doth, 1. Doctrine.First propounds a general doctrine concerning the mor∣tification and viuification of all the children of God, ver. 3. Secondly, the seuerall vses of this doctrine2 Seuerall vses of this doctrine are made and applyed to Gods people, veese 14. to the end of the 11. Thirdly, a dehortation from delighting in sinne,3 Dehortation from deligh∣ting in sinne. and vnrighteousnesse, and obeying it, is deriued from the for∣mer doctrine and application thereof: Let not sinne therefore reigne in your mortall bodies, that yee should obey it in the lusts thereof, vers. 12. In the fourth Scripture chosen out for the Gospell of this day, Matthew. 5.20, to the end of the 26.Gospell. Math. 5.20. ad 26. verse, we may learn thus much principally:Principal scope of the text, and coherēce here∣of with the for∣mer Gospel, That after our Lord had called his people by the preaching of the word, & of the Gospell, and more specially called his Apostles by a singular, and more excellent kinde of calling, to the office of preaching that holy word of righteousnesse: Hee now therefore doth exhort both teachers and scholers vnto a principal dutie,
which they ought to performe.Righteousnes commended and commanded to Gods people. Being one of the first of the fundamentall and cardinall vertues which comprehends all others, which he commends vnto all, and from whence ma∣ny other singular and worthy effects do spring and arise: yea, and wherein all other vertues and graces whatsoeuer, must bee accomplished and performed. It is the vertuous grace and gift of Righteousnesse whereof our Sauiour makes mention in that most heauenly Sermon, preached vpon an earthly mountaine. In this portion of Scripture wee may beholdParts of the text, 1. The dostrine1 Doctrine. of our Sauiour: or 2. The dehortation2 Dehortation, which hee vrgeth and draweth from that peremptory doctrine. 3. The vse and application3 Vse and ap∣plication. of both. In the doctrine respect, 1. either the proposition pro∣pounding it, 2. or the reason confirming it.Parts of the doctrine, The proposition1 Proposition, is: Except your righteousnesse exceede the righteousnesse of the Scribes & Pharisies,2 Reason, or (as one paraphrasi∣cally reades it) Except you do in righteousnes exceed the Scribes & Pharisies, ye shal not enter into the kingdome of heauen, ve. 20. This proposition of righteousnesse,Scribes & Pha∣risies knew not true righteous∣nesse, Christ gaue the true definition of it, our righteous Sauiour proueth, 1. by shewing their mistaking of righteousnesse by the vnrighteous and false interpretation of the 6. & 7. com∣mandements, by the Scrtbes and Pharisies, 2. by yeelding his owne most righteous, true, internal, and spiritual exposition of them. Wherein our Lord makes a difference betweene Phari∣saicall righteousnesse, consisting in outward act, as vers. 21.The difference is shewed by examples and rules, and that most true, and vnfained righteousnesse of the 6. commandement: for the performance whereof he requireth those that bee his, to auoid 1. Anger, the cause of murther in heart, 2. Contempt of our brother in deeds. 3. Railing, and reproaching in words by euill speeches, which two last are the effects of anger, the grounds of mur∣ther, if not murther it selfe, ve. 22.
Hypocrites and harisies do al∣waies mistake true righteousnes.The vse and application of this doctrine thus plainely proued, is deliuered,Application deliuered 1. In an exhortation1 In an exhor∣tation. to vnity, brotherly loue, and recon∣ciling of our selues to our offended brother, vers. 23.24. If then thou bring thy gift to the Altar, &c. as if he had said: Thou canst not offer thy gift, that is, performe any sacrifice, or seruice to God, till thou be reconciled to thine offended brother. Secondly, the vse hereof is deliuered by a doubling of this exhortation2 In the dou∣b ing of this exhortation, of agreeing with our aduersary quickely, (making no delayes:) which friendly exhortation, and good counsell for friendly concord and agreement, is drawne from that good and benefite which the offender shall get and reape in auoyding the danger of further contention:4 Dangers a∣uoided by hear∣kening vnto the exhortation to wit, 1. Censuring by the Iudge, 2. To be committed to the Officer, 3. To be imprisoned, 4. Neuer to go out of the said danger, ve. 25.26. The seuenth Sonday after Trinity. Coherence of these with the former.THE Fathers of our Church intending to continue our medication and contemplation of the former precedent doctrines, concerning our forsaking of sinne, and betaking our selues to righteousnesse, doe now in the two first Scriptures, which are chosen out of the old Testament,Summe of the 2 first Lessons, confirme vnto vs the iustice, truth, and faithfulnesse of Gods promises. That albeit God puni∣shed Dauids offences with the rodde, and his sinne with scourges, yet his mercies did hee not take quite a∣way from him, as hee did from Saul. For which cause Dauid is thankefull vnto God for his manifold mer∣cies, in deliuering him out of all his miseries, chiefe∣ly out of his enemies handes, and namely from Saul.
And he is sorrowfull that he offended God in numbring the people:Dauid reioyceth for Gods deliuerances. and therefore prayeth that his people might be de∣liuered from that plague of pestilence, which was a punish∣ment vnto him for his trusting in the multitude of his peo∣ple & not altogether depending vpon Gods al-sufficient po∣wer and particular prouidence. The first of the two out of the new Testament conteines a most golden exhortation of S. Paul (though he saith,Summe of the Epistle, hee speakes grosly) vnto a resolute yeelding vp and duoting our selues from sinne vnto obedience, from vncleanesse and iniquity to righteousnesse and holinesse. The fourth and last for this day,Summe of the Gospell. sheweth that though we many times may be at the brinke of despaire and in penury of the food of our soules and bodies, and all this punish∣ment comes vpon vs for our fulnesse and ouerfulnesse of the sinnes of our soules and bodies, yet is our God most merci∣full vnto vs in Iesus Christ. And therefore he will teach vs here to depend vpon his gracious prouidence, who can and will, hath, and doth continually prouide euery way for vs. The first text of Scripture, writen 2. Sam, 22.Mor. Prayer. 1 Less. 2. Sam. 22 conteineth, First, the circumstances of the time and occasion of Da∣uids making and singing of this song,Parts.1 Circumstan∣ces of the song. being the preface and entrance into it. ver. 1. Secondly, the song it selfe,2 The song it selfe. in all the rest of the verses, In the song we may heare and see First, what he singeth.1 What hee sings, ve. 2.3.4.Parts of the song, Secondly, why he sings2 Why he sings this song, to wit, 1 Because God had deliuered him out of distresses and grieuous troubles: which he sheweth from the beginning of the 5. ver. to the end of the 28. 2 Because after these deliuerances God vouchsafed him a greater fauour, to be a victorious conquerour: which hee sets downe from the beginning of the 29. to the end of the 46. verse.3 Why God did thus much for Dauid, Thirdly, the Prophet doth shew in the closing vp of his
song, the end why God did all this for Dauid,Dauid is humbled in the sight of his sins. euen for the glory of his name, that he might, now, as he hath, and will alwaies appeare to be the liuing and louing God aboue all, blessed for euer: and therefore he praiseth him more particu∣larly and with greater zeale. ver. 47. to the end of the 51. the end of the chapter. Eue. Prayer. 1 Lef, 2. Sam. 24The second Scripture for this day is written, 2. Samuel 24: shewing, Parts.First, how God for the punishment of the Israelites mo∣ued their King against them to number the people,1 God moued Dauid to num∣ber the people for the punish∣ment of their iniquities. and ther∣fore Dauid commanded Ioab to do it, v. 1. to the end of the 9. In the second place how Dauid is exceedingly grieued for this sinne.2 Dauids sorrow for this sinne, ver. 10. In the third, how God in mercy punished him, in that God suffered him to choose one of the three punishments which the Lord by Gad the Seer and Prophet had set downe vnto him,3 God in mer∣cy punished him in giuing him free choise of his punish∣ment, ver. 11. to the end of the 16. In the fourth place, how Dauid acknowledgeth his sinne to the Angell, & prayeth to God for the peoples deliuerance from the pestilence. ver. 17. 5 Dauid con∣fesseth his sin to the Angell,In the fift how the Prophet Gad appointed Dauid to reare an Al & to sacrifice vnto the Lord, whereupon the Lords wrath was appeased towards the land, and the plague cea∣sed from Israel,5 He is com∣māded to reare an Altar, ver. 18. to the end of the 25. which is the end of the chapter. Epistle Rom. 6.19. to the endIn third Scripture, Rom. 6.19. to the end of the chapter, the Apostle Paul. Parts.First, frameth his most plaine exhortation, whereto hee maketh a preface,1 Exhortation verse 19. 2 Grounds of it by three rea∣sons.Secondly, he sets downe the ground of his exhortation, 1 By a reason drawne a contrarijs or disparatis and the vse  of this reason and argument. ver. 20.21.22. 2 Is drawne ab incommodo or á periculo, for the wages of  sinne is death,
Christs care & prouidence ouer the concrite which depend vpō him3 Ab vtili, but the gift of God is eternall life through Ie∣sus Christ our Lord, verse twentieth three, to the end of the chapter. The fourth Scripture for this day, is out of the Gospell written Marke 8.1. to the end of the 9.Gospell Mar. 8.1. ad 9: A Scripture like this for the 25. Sonday after Trinity. a like whereunto is chosen also, though out of another Euangelist, for the 2.5. Sonday after Trinity. In which portion of Scripture wee may see, that as our Lord Iesus Christ did in the former teach his Disciples and the people a perfect rule of righteousnesse, for the maintenance and increase of loue and charity among them;Coherenece of this with the former Gospel, Scope of this Gospell. so in this he will perswade them to depend vpon his godly and fatherly prouidence, who is both able and wil∣ling to supply all their wants. He will shew himselfe care∣full to prouide all such things which belong to this present life, and to that which is to come.Parts of the text. He will giue them suffici∣ent, neither too much, nor too little, that they may not steale and so take his name in vaine. This text containeth two generall heads, First, Christs preparation to the miracle1 Christs pre∣paration to the miracle. (whereby he confirmes this prouidence, from the first verse to the end of the seuenth. Secondly, the doing of the miracle2 The doing of the miracle. it selfe, which confir∣meth his doctrine, and the faith of his people, in the eighth and ninth verses. In our Lords preparation to the miracle Saint Marke notesParts of the preparation. First, the occasion which Christ tooke, by reason,1 Occasion which is two∣fold. 1 Of the time of their neede and penury, when they had nothing to eate. 2 Of the estate of the people, being in multitude many, Iesus called his Disciples. ver. 1. Secondly,2 Christs de— liberatiō which is twofold. Saint Marke obserues our Sauiour Christ his deliberating 1 With his Disciples for the tryall of their faith, verse  2.3.4.
2 With himselfe,Christ feedes the body, as well as the soule. wherein hee sets downe the course that he will take (like a good maister of the house) 1 Inquiring what prouision of victuals they had, verse fifte. 2 In preparing and making ready the dinner: which pre∣paration consisteth, 1. In commanding the people to sit downe on the ground 2 In causing the meate to be made ready, to wit, 1 Of the seuen loaues, which loaues were prepared, 1 By giuing thanks, viz. blessing them 2 By his breaking them. 3 By his causing the Disciples to fet the loaues before the people ver. 6. Of the fishes which are also prepared and made ready. 1 By Christs blessing them: that is, giuing thanks, 2 By the Apostles distributing of them. ver. 7. Parts of the working of the miracle,The second generall part of this Scripture is the wor∣king of the miracle, which bee compared with former circumstances, as this, First, they haue but seuen loaues: Secondly, the people are in the wildernesse Thirdly, they haue but a few fishes, The deed is proportionable to the three for∣mer circumstan∣ces,The act of the miracle answereth these three circum∣stances. 1 The people eate and were suffised. 2 There are seuen baskets of fragments taken vp. ver. 8. 3 They which eate and were suffised were foure thousand. All which our Lord sent away as witnesses of this miracle  confirming the doctrine which he taught, & strengthening their weake faith. ver. 9. The eighth Sonday after Trinity. Coherence of these 4 with the former,THe Lord our God (as hath bene shewed before) doth charge Kings and people with obedience, and punish∣eth
them for their disobedience to his commandements.Gods plagues vpon Ty∣rants & false Prophets. Now in these foure Scriptures we haue examples of Gods punishment vpon a Tyrannicall King and vpon dis∣obedient, deceiptfull and false Prophets:Sūme of these foure. as also his louing mercy in the preseruation, protection and prouidence, to∣wards and ouer the true & faithfull Prophets, sheepeheards and flockes of God. Wherefore a portion of Scripture is also chosen out for the Epistle, sutable to these examples, in the old Testament, and caueat of Christ in the new, where∣in we are exhorted to bring forth the good fruits of the Spi∣rit, as good trees, and good hearted people (for we are det∣ters vnto the Spirit, detters vnto God) not to liue after the flesh: for that is a life here which causeth death and destru∣ction hereafter. In the first of the foure Scriptures for this Lords day (being 1. King 13.Mor. prayer. 1 Less. 1. Kin. 13.) these points are principally deli∣uered.Parts. First how the Prophet that came from Iudah, cried out against Ieroboams Idolatry at Bethel, ver. 1.1 The Prophets reproouing of Iereboams idola∣try. to the end of the third. Secondly, how the King is punished both for his wicked deed of stretching out his hand,2 The Kings punishment for his boldnesse & tyranny. and his tyrannous com∣mandement, Lay hold on him: but by the Prophets prayer to God, his hand is restored to the former estate, ver. 4. to the end of the 6. Thidly, how the Prophet,3 The Prophet is seduced though he vow¦ed the contrary though he denied to dine wih the King, or to take a reward of him, was neuer∣thelesse seduced by an old false Prophet at Bethel to eate bread in that Prophets house, verse seuenth to the end of the nineteenth. Fourthly,4 God iudgeth the dissembling Prophet for his wickednesse. how the dissembling Prophet receiueth his doome from the Lord by the mouth of the Prophet which brought him backe againe, and of the effect of this sentence, by the Lyon which met him and slew him, albeit his car∣case was vneaten, & afterward fetched and buried by the old
Prophet, ver. 20. to the end of the 32.Gods comforts and care of true and faithfull Prophets, 5 Ieroboam is ra∣ther worse then better for these examples of Gods iudgmētsLastly, how Ieroboam made no vse of any of these punish∣ments which lighted vpon himselfe and others, but turned againe, making of the lowest of the people Priests of the high pla∣ces: all that would (tag and rag) might consecrate themselues, Which sinne was the cause of the vtter subuersion of Ierobo∣ams house, ver. 33. to the end of the 34. which is the end of the chapter. Eue. Prayer. 1 Less. 1. Kin. 17 Scope of the chapter,The second of the Scriptures of the old Testament. 1. Kings 17. containes a memorable and miraculous example of Gods fauour and speciall preseruation of his true Prophet Elias in the yeares of the famine. Parts.In the first part of the chapter Eliah dischargeth his duty vnto Ahab in foretelling him of the famine to come.1 Eliah tels A∣hab of the fa∣mine that was coming. ver. 1. 2 God makes the rauens to be caters for Eliah at Cherith.In the second part the text relates how God appointed the rauens to bring him bread & flesh morning and euening, at the riuer Cherith, ver. 2. ad 6. In the third part how Eliah was prouided for by the widdow of Zarepthah, through Gods miraculous blessing, when the former meanes failed him, and that the riuer of Cherith was dryed vp,3 The widdow furnisheth Eliah of victuals though Cheriah was dryed vp. verse seuenth to the end of the sixe∣teeenth. Lastly, how, for the further confirmation of the widdowes faith, Eliah by the power of the Lord did miraculously raise vp the widdowes son,4 The widdows faith is confir∣med by a mira∣cle wrought vp∣on her sonne. ver. 17. to the end of the 24. the end of the chapter. In the third chapter for the day, which is the Epistle written,Epistle Rom. 8.12, ad 17 Summe of the text, Rom. 8.12. to the end of the 17. vers. our Apostle wil manifest vnto vs who are the true sonnes of God, either be∣ing in the estate of Kings, Prophets, or people, who are good trees (as Christ speaketh in the Gospell) and who bee corrupt trees, which must be hewen downe and cast into the fire. The Apostle Parts.First propounds a most true and peremptory concluding
exhortation,Exhortation to walke spiritually. out of the premisses,1 A thesis or conclusion ex∣hortatory, chiefly out of the verse preceding, being the eleuenth, his conclusion is, Therefore brethren we are detters, not to the flesh, to liue after the flesh. v. 12. Secondly, he doth establish this proposition, with most firme and infallible arguments.2 A confirma∣tion hereof by argumēt drawn The first is drawne a disparatis,1 A disparatis, If ye liue after the flesh yee shall die: but if you mortifie the deeds of the body by the spirit, yee shall liue. ver. 13. The second is drawne ab effecto triplici,2 Ab effecto tri∣plici. First, to be led by the Spirit of God, is to be the Son of God, is an effect thereof, For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, &c. ver. 14. 2 An effect of being the Sonne of God by Adoption, is  not the spirit of bondage to feare againe (as when we were slaues to sinne) but a spirt of boldnesse, loue, and liberty, wherby we cry Abba father. ver. 15. 3 An other effect of the Spirit, is testimony to our spirits that we are the children of God. ver. 16. The third and last argument,3 Argument a fine set downe in forme of a sorites, whereof there be 6 steps which is hypothetically set downe, which is, a fine, the reward propounded, our in∣heritance. And this reason is set downe in the forme of a most sweete and comfortable Sorites or Gradation, consisting of sixe staires or steps, 1. If we be children, 2. we are also heires, 3. euen the heires of God, 4. heires annexed with Christ, 5. if so be that we suffer with him, 6. that we may also be glorified with him. The fourth Scripture, Math. 7.15. ad 21.Gospell Mat. v. 15. ad 21 Generall scope of the text. chosen for this day, is a notable steele-glasse, wherein popish recusants, re∣cusant sectaries, all schismatikes, heretickes, time-seruers and hypocrites, of what estate and condition soeuer, either of the Magistrates, Ministers, or people, & all workers of iniquity whatsouer, may view & behold thēselues within & without. Our Lord Iesus Christ,Coherence of this Gospell with the for∣mer. who in the former Gospel fed the people with food corporally, to teach mē to depēd vpō him only; doth in this Gospell instruct them in their soules spiri∣tually, that they may know, how to try the spirits, that is,
how and by whom their soules are fed aright,A perfect looking glasse for al Recusants, Temporizers, &c. with heauenly food and spirituall: for by painting and describing the false Prophets he points at the true. Parts.Of this part of our Lords Sermon vpon the mount there be two discourses.Two kind of discourses, Parts of the generall dis∣course. 1 A generall, 2 A speciall. Of the generall there be two chiefe parts, In the first he aduiseth both teachers and learners to be∣ware  of false Prophets, false teachers, Reasons drawn and vsed to proue and vrge the caueat,In the second he yeelds reasons for this caueat, which are drawne. 1 From an outward adiunct attending vpon them, to wit a rough garment wherwith they would deceiue, an outward couer of sheepes clothing, that is their deceit. 2 From an effect or exegeticall reason proceeding from the former, the end of the first & worse then the first, to wit, their cruelty in their murther, and that of the worse kind, in∣ward and yet violent murther, inwardly they are rauening wolues. ver. 15. This proues their deceitfull hypocrifie, and in the end their shamlesse villany, to begin (as Paul Rom. 7.11. speaketh of sinne) first with deceit, and secondly with cruelty and slaughter. Sūme & scope of the speciall discourse, Marks & notes of false pro∣phets.In our Lords speciall discourse and description hee sets downe the true notes and markes whereby to know false Prophets, that honest men (which are soonest beguiled) might not be beguiled by them, The first marke is their actions, which Christ here cals by the name of fruits,The first badge of a false Pro∣phet. and so begins his Allegory, by their fruits shall ye know them. Those deedes or fruits, and workes of false Prophets are manifested by a similitude taken from trees,Illustration of their deeds by a similitude, which being of one species, do not degenerate, or bring forth fruits of an other species. The ProtasisProtasis. or simile is, Do men gather grapes of thornes, or
figges of thistles.A true steele-glasse for false Prophets, &c. ver. 16. As if he should say, look for no plea∣sant or commfortable grapes, from sowre, pricking, tearing, and bloudy thornes. The application or assumption of the simile is,Apodosis or ap∣pl cation. Proofes of this Application, So euery good tree bringeth forth, &c. ver. 17. The proofe of this Apodosis is taken 1 From naturall reason of the seuerall natures and quali∣ties of good and bad trees, A good tree cannot bring forth euill fruite, & e contrario, ver. 18. 2 Is drawne from the contrary end or effect of a tree of contrary nature, Euery tree that brings not forth good fruite is hewen downe &c. ver. 19. The conclusion which Christ inferreth and repeateth out of the premisses, Therefore by their fruits ye shall know them,Conclusion vp∣on the premisses ver. 20. The second badge and note of a false & murthering Pro∣phet is his faire tongue:The second marke of a false Prophet is to brag of good words and of their good deedes, For the hypocrites and false Pro∣phets will affoord good wordes vnto God himselfe, much more vnto man. First, they will not blush to say what they haue spoken, and in what manner they haue spoken, in thy name prophecied. Secondly, they will not be ashamed to say what deeds they haue done, and in what manner they haue done them, in thy name cast out diuels, &c. Whereupon saith he (whose eyes are as a flame of fire) Lord, Lord, shall be in their mouthes. But not euery one,Christs censure vpō their words and deedes and his condemna∣tion of both. that is such that saith, Lord, Lord, shall enter, &c. v. 21. For as Christ will professe vnto them, that he neuer knew them, that is, ac∣knowledged them for his Prophets, because they did not the will of his Father. So this shall be a reward of their ser∣uice continually, attending vpon them that haue vsed such double diligence, to wit, condemnation it selfe, a depri∣uation of entrance into the kingdome of heauen, as in the latter end of the 21 verse.
The ninth Sonday after Trinity.Example of the good Prophet Eliah, bad∣ly handled by a wicked King and his wife. Summe of the two first LessōsTHe foure Scriptures culled out for our Leitourgie and seruice of God for this day, doe affoord vs, first most pregnant examples on the right hand, of a godly Prophet, and good magistrate: without any deceit or tyranny, most truely and faithfully discharging their duties, secondly, the other on the left hand, of an vngodly King and Queene against their consciences persecuting Gods Prophet, both which appeare in the chapters out of the old Testament: againe the other two portions doe make vse of examples,Drift and pur∣pose of the E∣pistle and Gos∣pell. both of these, and of other vnlike these, that men should take heed of sinning against their consciences, with a do∣ctrine and eaueat giuen by our Sauiour, how to make good vse of all Gods gifts: yea, of a bad example, to wit, of the vniust steward, which abused the gifts of God. In the first of the chapters appointed for morning pray∣er, 1. Kings 18.Mor. prayer. 1. Les. 1. Kin. 18 these things are chiefly to be considered of. Parts.First, how in the third yeare of the famine, Eliah at Gods commandement shewed himselfe to persecuting Ahab,1 Eliah exhibi∣teth himselfe to Ahab the perse∣cutor. al∣though that good noble Lord Obadiah aduised him to the contrary, ver. 1. to the end of the 15. 2 Ahab deales but churlishly with him for his newes.Secondly, the text relateth that vnkind conference that passed betweene King Ahab and the Prophet Eliah at their first meeting; and yet Ahab was aduised by Eliah to assem∣ble all Israel together, and the 450 Prophets of Baal, ver. 16. to the end of the 20. 3 Eliah made demonstration of a difference between true & false Prophets.In the third part of the chapter the holy Ghost sheweth that God, by his answering by fire, did put a difference be∣tweene the 450. false Prophets & their idolatrous seruice, & that one true Prophet Eliah, who performed true seruice to God, ver. 29. to the end of the 39.
God comforteth Eliah. though hee fled from Iesabell.Lastly, how Eliah gaue commandement, first,4 What course Eliah took with the false Pro∣phets. concer∣ning the slaying and execution of all Baals Prophets, se∣condly, that Ahab would prepare himselfe to go to Izreel be∣fore the raine, which the Prophet obtained by his prayer at the hands of God, ver. 40. to the end of the 46. which is the end of the chapter. In the second of the Scriptures 1. Kin. 19.Eue. Prayer. 1 Les, 1. King. 19 it may appeare. First, how Ahab and Iesabell did breath out threatnings against the Prophet Eliah,Parts. for which cause he fled from them into the wildernesse, where being at a low ebbe,1 Ahab and Ie∣sabels threat∣nings caused E∣liah to flee. he was so∣dainely comforted, out of the riuer of Gods mercies, by an Angell which brought him sustenance: In the miraculous strength whereof he trauelled 40. daies euen vnto Horeb. ver. 1. to the end of the 8. Secondly,2 Gods fitting and preparing of Eliah to pro∣ceed in his duty the text makes mention of Gods preparing of Eliah, 1 By conferring with him, 2 By the strange and fearefull sights confirming the pre∣sence of God. For he prepareth Eliah, 1 For other businesses, as for the annointing of two  Kings & a Prophet, Hazael, Iehu, and Elisha, so 2 To receiue an answere from God concerning his opi∣nion about the fewnesse of the true worshippers of God in Israel, ver. 9. to the end of the 21. the end of the chapter. The Epistle for this day, which is the third of the holy Scriptures, being a part of 1. Cor. 10. v. 1. to the end of the 13.Epistle 1. Cor. 10.1, ad 13. Scope of the Epistle. calleth to our remembrance very many things which God did to his people the Israelites, both in hi mercy and loue,Parts. in his Iustice and heauie displeasure. Therefore Saint Paul First, makes relation of the fauours which God vouch∣safed to the fathers.1 A relation of Gods fauour to some of the fathers. ver. 1. to the 4. Secondly,2 A relation of his displeasure to others. he speaks of Gods anger kindled against some of these, whom he so fauoured. ver. 5.
3 The vse that Gods Church is to make of both. The old Iewes not to be imi∣tated in these or other sinnes.Thirdly,Examples of Gods iustice, &c he shewes what vse the Corinthians and all other the members of Gods Church are to make of these and the like examples, to wit, not to follow or imitate them, or any of them in any sinne whatsoeuer, ver. 6. Of which sinnes and their punishments hee recapitulates and nameth some, as 1 Concupisence or lusting after euill things. ver. 6. 2 Idolatry, ver. 7. 3 Fornication, ver. 8. 4 Tempting of Christ, ver. 9. 5 Murmuring ver. 10 4 A second vse of the former examples.Fourthly, Saint Paul repeates the former vse of exam∣ples, and addeth a second thereunto, to wit, our admoniti∣on. They were written to admonish vs, that liue in these daies,5 His conclu∣sion & infernce wh is tw-fold, vpon whom the ends of the world are eome, verse 1. Fiftly, he concludeth hereupon, and inferreth 1 Exhortation1 An exhortation to perseuerance and constancy ve. 12. 2 Consolation2 And affordeth vs a most singular chaine of consolati∣on in tentation, in affliction, in punishments, and whatsoeuer aduersities. There hath no tentation taken you, but such as appertaineth to man, and God is faithfull which will not suffer, &c. but will euen giue the issue with the tentation, that yee may bee able to beare it. ver. 13. The last of the foure Scriptures for this day, is written Luke 16.1. to the end of the 9.Gospell. Luke. 16.1 ad 9. Drift & chiefe purpose of this text. the summe whereof is this. Because Gods people ought to haue a godly and honest care, as in obtaining and prouiding, so in like manner for the dispensing, disposing of, and em∣ploying of such graces, gifts, and worldly blessings as God hath betrusted them withall: Therefore our Lord Iesus, by whom and from whom, wee haue all gifts graces and benefits of the soule, minde, body, and of the goods (which some call bona fortunae) will in this portion of
Scripture teach his schollers,Christ teaches men how to vse graces, gifts, & benefits, how to be good husbands, how to bestow that which he hath giuen or rather lent them, with wisedome and discretion, with liberality and chearefulnesse which the vniust steward mentioned in Christs parable doth here, and which the ill husbands mentioned in the other ex∣amples did not in their times and places obserue else where.Coherene of this Gospell with the for∣mer. Our former Gospell taught vs to know a true Prophet from a false, of whom we must beware and take heed. This teacheth vs to try our selues,Parts of the text, Parable Application, Parts of the parable. whether we be good stewards or bad, iust, or vniust. This our Lord doth in a parable in the eight first verses of the chapter, and in the application of this parable, in the 9. In the parable we may respect First, the persons doing and suffering, Secondly, the things done and suffered, Thirdly, the issue and end of both, The persons are either agent, or patient, the giuer and the  receiuer, the creditor and the debtor,Persons two-fold. the Lord and his ste∣ward. The which because they do both of them reciprocally concurre together (the one for his small profit) in the first seuen verses, must therefore coniunctim & not diuisim be han∣dled and spoken of together, The end of both, and the conclusion of the similitude is this: The Lord the giuer, and the most free lender,The end and issue of the things and per∣sons. is now become the patient, and yet commends the bad and vniust agent (who was to be cassiered) He is commended for his prouidence and wisedome, for frustra sapuisset si sibi non sa∣peret. He sets downe this as a maxime amongst his children (to the shame of vs all, whether we be great or little) where∣fore the children of this world, are wiser in their generation, &c. verse 8. An application of the persons,Application of all three. the things and the issue of both is made with an exhortation, accommodated and fitted vnto the parable. And I say vnto you, make you friends with the riches of iniquity, that when you shall want, they may receiue you into euerlasting habitations. ver. 9.
The tenth Sonday after Trinity. Summe of the 2 first Lessons, with the reason and choise of al foure ScripturesTHat the sinnes committed wilfully and obstinately, by wicked people and persecuting rulers, might appeare out of measure sinfull: and therefore to be abhorred and de∣tested of Gods people, & the iudgements imminent for such iniquities preuented: the fathers of the Church doe pro∣ceed in the history of this wicked King Ahab, and of his malicious wicked wife Iesabell, killing Naboth vniustly, and shewing the enuy of their hearts in speaking of the good Prophet Michaiah slanderously. Summe of the Epistle and Gospell,Vnto these two chapters of the old Testament they at∣texe two of the new. In the first whereof S. Paul in the e∣numeration of Gods fauour towards the Corinthians in spe∣ciall, and the Church in generall, first to call them from ido∣latry, and secondly to bestow vpon them the seuerall graces and gifts of the spirit, drawes on Gods people from conten∣tion to concord, and the performance of the seuerall & mu∣tuall duties of loue. In the second our blessed Sauiour Christ, that spirituall King and Prophet entring into Hierusalem, bewaileth the citty and people by reason of their crying & obstinate sins: foretelling also their ruine, for their contempt of their true Messiah, and purging the materiall temple from such as did grossy profane it, and withall shews the right vse of it. In the first of the Scriptures set out for this day, written 1. Kings 21.Mor. Prayer. 1 Les. 1 Kings 21 Parts of the chapter. mention is made of these incidents follow∣ing, 1 Ahabs ill dis∣position vpon his couetous af∣fection.The first is of King Ahabs splenetick disposition and cankered sullen stomack in refusing his meat, because poore Naboth refused to sel or exchange his land with him, ver. 1. to the 6.
Ahah & Iesabell proceed in persecu∣ting, & so doth Eliah in reproouing.Secondly,2 Iesabels deui∣lish practise to obtaine Naboths vineyard, her nose beeing as long as her hus∣bands. how Iesabell his wife, which was more then halfe maister, did practise deuilshly by the Nobles & Elders (whō she had at command) to obtaine this vineyard of Naboth by hooke or by crooke, and to giue her husband the possession of it, ver. 7. to the 16. The third occurrent is, Gods sending of his Prophet E∣liah to reprooue Ahab and Iesabell,3 Eliahs re∣proofe of them both and de∣nouncing Gods iudgements a∣gainst them. and to denounce Gods iudgements against them, for this and their other wickednes ver. 17. to the end of the 26. The last is Ahabs humbling of himselfe after the Prophets threatning of Gds iudgements,4 Ahabs hum∣bling himselfe. and of Gods acceptation of Ahabs humiliation. ver. 27. ad 29. the end of the chapter. In the second Scripture written, 1. Kings 22.Eue. Prayer. 1 Les. 1. King. 22 are these things recorded, First, how before the battell fought by the King of Iudah and the King of Israel, against the King of Syria,1 The 400 false Prophets doe encourage the two Kings to fight. the King of Israel had hope and encouragement of the victory by 400 Prophets. ver. 1. to the 12: Secondly, how Michaiah (of whom Ahab pronounced saying, I hate him,2 Michaiah makes answere to Ahab without flattery for he doth not prophecy good vnto me but euill) is sent for. Who flatters not Ahab but tels him truely what will be his successe in the battell. ver. 13. to the end of the 23. Thirdly, how Michaiah prophecies against Zidkijah,3 Michaiahs prophecy a∣gainst swagge∣ring Zidkijah, which smote him on the cheeke, and demanded of him in enuy, When went the spirit of the Lord from me to speake to thee, ver. 24.25. Fourthly,4 Michaiahs im∣prisonment, how Ahab rewarded Michaiah with imprison∣ment for his labour. ver. 26.27.28. The fift is a record of the battell & successe thereof,5 A record o Ahabs ill suc∣cesse in the battell. fought by Ahab and Iehoshaphat against the King of Aram. ve. 29. to the end of the 40. In th sixt place there is a record of Iehoshaphats raigne & his acts. ver. 41. to the 50.6 The time of Iehoshaphats raigne. In the seuenth place there is a memoriall of the
short raigne of Ahaziah Ahabs sonne (which was but two yeares) and of his wicked acts,7 The short time of the raigne of Aha∣ziah Ahabs son. ver. 51.52.53.Exhortatiō to the Church, &c. which is the end of the chapter and the end of the booke. The blessed Apostle S. Paul in the apportionated Epistle 1. Cor. 12.1. to the end of the 11.Epistle 1. Cor. 12.1. ad 11. verse. 1 The Corinthi∣ans former e∣state is remem∣bred,First, rubs the Corinthians memories with their former e∣state of gentilisme and idolatry, withall assuring them of Gods fauour, in conuerting them, and giuing them the holy Ghost, whereby they make a sound profession of faith, in acknowledging God in Christ Iesus, verse first, second third. 2 A propoun∣ding of the o∣riginall of the diuersity of gifts admini∣strations and o∣perations.Secondly, he propoundeth the originall cause efficient & the ground of the diuersities of all gifts, administrations & operations, ver. 4.5.6. Thirdly, that the edification, profiting and doing good in the Church is the end why the manifestation of the spirit is giuen. ver. 7. 3 Edification is the end why the manifestati∣on of the spirit is giuen,Fourthly, this he proueth by instanting of nine seuerall gifts and graces, to wit; Two in the eight verse, Two in the ninth verse and 4 A proofe her∣of by the in∣stance of nine seuerall gifts & graces. How this Gos∣pell depends vpō the Epistle and the other two Scriptures.Fiue in the tenth verse Whereupon he inferres that in the conclusion, which he assumed in the proposition, to wit, that the selfe same spirit workes all these things, distributing to euery man seuerally as he will. ver. 11. Now because examples do make doctrines very plaine (as hath bene said heretofore) & sith they are most palpable de∣monstrations of the truth of probabilities: Therefore Christ our arch-teacher, (a greater for wisedome then Salomon) will in this portion of Scripture, Luke 19.41,Gospell Luk. 19.41. ad 48 shew vnto vs a woefull,Summe A liuely exam∣ple of vnthrif∣ty Ierusalem and her punishment but yet a liuely example, of that prodigall, vnthrif∣ty, carelesse, vniust, vnwise, & vnthankfull steward of Gods gifts and graces, that citie & people of Hierusalem: & how
dearly they bought the mis-spending of those gracious gifts and fauours of the Lord.Ierusalem a prodigall child pit∣tyed before her destruction. In this text S. Luke relates,Parts and ge∣neral analyse. First, either what this king our Lord Iesus did,1 What Christ did. and that in the first 6. verses. and part of the 7. of this text. Secondly, or what the Iewes did,2 What the Iewes did. as in the rest of the 47. verse, and in the 48. Those things which Christ did,Circumstances of the things that Christ did were 1. Either at his entrance into the citty, vnto the end of the 44. verse. 2. Or what he did at his being in the cittie, ve. 45.46. At his entrance into the citty, or drawing nigh the citty  Ierusalem, S. Luke tels vs,What things he did at his en∣trance into ihe Cittie. 1. That he beheld it, he viewed and surueyed it, 2. He relateth what maner of suruey it was, to wit, a com∣passionate view, he wept for it. ve. 41. 3. He sets downe the reason of this compassionate view,  which Christ himselfe First doth deliuer in a most passionate speech:Reasons why Christ viewed Ierusalem with such compassiō. O if thou hadst knowne at the least in this thy day, those things which belong vnto thy peace. And Secondly, our Lord tels the Iewes of the cause of their  carelesnesse, and the issue thereof, to wit. 1. Want of foresight, & preuenting of Gods iudgements:Effect of Ieru∣salems careles∣nesse. But now are they hid from thine eyes. ve. 42. 2. That the issue hereof is Gods imminent iudgement, as necessarily following this their heedlesnesse: For the dayes  shall come vpon thee, that thine enemies, &c. ve. 43. and shall make  thee euen with the ground, ve. 44. 3. Our Lord sets downe the cause of this certaine iudge∣ment, and future ineuitable desolation, for that they knew not the time of their visitation, as in the end of the 44. verse. Christ being in the citty,Christ visits the Church Archi∣episcopally, as he did view the Citty like a King. and in his Archiepiscopall visita∣tion, and there beholding the Church as farre out of square as the common wealth (the Priests and people now liuing as the secular Kings, Priests, and people, persecuters of the former times) now deceased.
1 Hee begins to reforme by ca∣sting out noto∣rious candali∣zers ipso facto,First he begins to reforme by casting the Marchants,Christ visits Ierusalem with com∣passion, before her desolation. (the crafty Marchants) thereout, ve. 45. Secondly, he warrants his discipline and correction by te∣stimony of Scripture (the best ground of all) It is written, mine house is the house of prayer,2 Hee warrants his discipline by scriptum est. ver. 46. Thirdly, our Lord shewes, that hee had iust cause thus to disciplinate them:3 Hee shewes a cause & an oc∣casiō ministred by themselues. But yee haue made it a denne of Theeues. ver. 46. Fourthly, when hee had swept the Church cleane, and whipped out the theeues, then was it a place for the truth to bee taught in,4 He preacheth in it himselfe after hee had clensed it. and for the Author of truth to teach in: And hee taught dayly in the Temple, in the beginning of the 47. verse. Saint Luke sets downe Christs entertainment by the Scribes.Notwithstanding all this our Lords compassion, not∣withstanding his prophesie of their destruction, his diuine and most effectuall reformation, S. Luke tels vs, 1. How this passionate and compassionate Sauiour was entertained, to wit, what reaxe and racket the high Priests, Scribes, and El∣ders of the people played with him, they intending to blow him vp, they sought to destroy him. ve. 47. All their mis∣chiefe was but in vaine.Secondly, the Euangelist also sheweth how that all which the Iewes imagined, it was but vaine, they wanted time to dry their powder, they lacked oportunity: They found not what they might doe to him. They found no blots in his life or doctrine, they could picke no holes in his coat (it was without staine) for his life and his doctrine were all one, and agreed together.Reasons hereof 1 He was with out fault. 2 The people followed him. Therefore the people hanged vpon him, when they heard him: Therefore the Rulers could not taxe him of sinne, verse 48. The eleuenth Sonday after Trinity. Coherence of these 4 Scrip∣tures with the former.TO the intent that the loathsome sinnes of couetusnesse, contempt of Gods word, and tyranny prctised against the Ministers thereof: as also incredulity, pride, and beastly
hypocrisie might be shunned and auoyded of all Gods peo∣ple,Examples of Gods iudgment vp∣on tyrants, and couetous persons. and the contrary vertues and graces of God,Sūme of these and the reason of the choyce. imbraced and followed. There are now for this day also foure Scrip∣tures not much differing from the former chosen and sele∣cted:Scope of the 2 first lessons. For as God by Eliah denounced iudgements a∣gainst Ahab and Iesabel, for their couetousnesse and cru∣elty: so before this iudgement was fully executed vpon them both, there is brought in by the way, an example of Gehezi, who for his lying and couetousnesse, was plagued with leprosie. The two Scriptures out of the new Testament do teach,Scope of the Epistle & Gos∣pell that as the Gospell and word of God must bee beleeued in generall; so euery part and parcell thereof, to wit, Christs re∣surrection from the dead, and our rising againe also. And as this faith is required both in the Corinthians and all other Churches of Christ: so a good fruite and effect of this faith doth God expect at our hands, that is, to pray vnto him a∣right, without pride, hypocrisie, vaine-glory, or iustifying of our selues, and despising others, without exalting our selues, and casting downe others. In the first Lesson for morning praiecr, 2. Kings. 5.Mor. Prayer. 1 Less. 2 King, 5 the text recordeth, First,Parts. an example of Gods great loue and fauour vouch∣safed vnto an heathen, a Syrian, an idolater,1 An example of Gods loue to a Syrian, to ause him and others to confesse that there is no God in all the world, but in Israel. As 2. of his wrath and iustice poured out,2 An example of his wrath to the bad seruant of a good Pro∣phet, Parts of the first example, and inflicted vpon the wicked seruant of a godly and righteous Prophet. In the first, which is the story of Naamans cleansing from his leaprosie, these things are to bee considered, as the text doth affoord them. First the introductions into the cure of this Leaper.1 The introdu∣ction into the cure of Naaman conteining 4. circumstances, 1. The report that Naamans seruant made to him of E∣lisha the man of God. 2. By the letters of the king of Aram to the king of Israel.
3. By Naamans coming to the Prophet Elisha,Iesabels pasport is sea∣led with Dogs teeth. and stand∣ing at his doore. 4. By the counsell which his seruants gaue him, to be ad∣uised of the Prophet, ve. 1. ad 13. 2 The cure it selfe.The second relation that the text maketh, is of the cure it selfe, ver. 14. 3 Naamans ac∣knowledging Gods power, & his thankfulnes to Elisha.The third is of Naamans acknowledging the power of God, and his thankefulnesse to Elisha, verse. 15. to the end of the 19. The fourth is Gehezies greedinesse couered with a grosse and shamelesse lye (concerning his maisters needinesse) for which he is of Elisha reproued,4 Gehezies gree∣dinesse couered with dissimula∣tion and lying. and in Gods iust iudgement by his maister with Naamans plague of leaprosie punished, ve. 20. ad 27. the end of the chapter. Eue. Prayer. 1 Less. 2 Kin. 9.In the first for Euening praier, 2. Kings. 9. the text de∣clareth, Parts general1. What was done before that base & ignominious death  of Iesabel the Queene mother. ve. 1. to the end of the 29. 2. The maner & accomplishment hereof, when all things were fulfilled for her destruction.Two things done before Iesabels death. 1. The things done before her death were these. 1. How Elisha sent a messenger to annoynt Iehu, and to  deliuer a message to Iehu for his effecting of the Lords word & commdement, as touching the rooting out of Ahabs house, and Iesabels being eaten vp with dogs, ve. 1. ad 10. The second is how the report o Iehues annointing, and his conspiracy against Iehoram being come to Iehorams eare, (because Iehorams messengers returned not) he and Ahaziah met Iehu, who after a peremptory parley on Iehues part, were both of them smitten by Iehu, and Iehoram was slain by him: which Iehu with his followers smote Ahaziah also in the field of Naboth the Iesraelite.The accom∣plishment and performance of Iesabels destru∣ction. ve. 11. ad 29. 2. The holy Ghost recordeth Iesabels destruction and ex∣ecution, according to the fore-denounced iudgement of God, which was performed at Iehues commandement, verse
30. to the end of the 37. the end of the chapter.Christ ministers antidotes, & cures the leprous in soule, Our Apostle Paul in the third of the selected scriptures, 1. Cor. 15. ad 11.Epistle. 1. Cor. 15, 1, ad 11. (to vrge & inforce the truth of God vnto the Corinthians concerning the resurrection from the dead,Scope of the text. which some among them denyed) doth First proue this truth by his preaching, & their receiuing the Gospell, conteining principally Christs death,Parts. 1 He proues the resurrection by his preaching the Gospel, & their receiuing, his buri∣all and resurrection. ve. 1. ad 4. Secondly, he lledgeth testimonies & witnesses to proue his proposition, because in the mouth of two or three witnesses euery word, &c.2 He proues it by testimonies of persōs which saw Christ after his resurrecti∣on. 1 Testimony, 2 Testimony, 3 Testimony, 4 Testimony, 5 Testimony, 6 Testimony, His testimonies are 6. or rather 500. but of 5. sorts and kindes. 1, He was seene of Cephas, that is, Peter. 2. He was seene of the twelue Disciples together, ve. 5. 3. Of mo then 500. brethren at once. ve. 6. 4. Of Iames. 5. Of all the Apostles. vers. 7. 6. Of Paul himselfe, ve, 8.9 10. Thirdly, S. Paul concludes the truth of this proposition: Wherefore, whether it were I, or they, so we preach, and so yee haue beleeued, therefore it is true, ve. 11.3 He concludes this point ex praemissis, That portion of Scripture which is appointed for the Gospell, is Luk. 18. ve. 10. to the end of the 14. erein,Gospell. Luk. 18.10. ad 14 Sūme & scope of this text. Christ sets downe a cure for all diseases, be∣cause the state of Gods people and Church is so lamentable, by reason of their sinnes, and the punishment due to them. Therfore Christ Iesus the true & only Physitian to cure these leprosies, will shewe the helpe and cure for the one, and a preuention or antidote against the other: for Christ that came to heale all our sicknesses and diseases, will, as a good Physitian, so regard his patients, that he will endeuour both to take away the cause of the malady (be it in the principall parts) and also the symptomes and effects thereof. He will here prescribe a course that the sicke soule must take, oppres∣sed and polluted with the vncleannesse and leprosie of sin,
and fearing a sepration from God,Miserere mei Domine, is the best medicine for a sicke soule. euen his most heauy iudgements for the same. Parts generall of this text.It i true, hearty, and earnest prayer vnto God, not hypo∣criticall,1 A difference betweene vn∣fained & fained prayer. proudly, and arrogantly iustifying our selues. Hereof Christ Iesus in the parable of the Pharisie and Publicane, will, First giue a touch. And 2 A Censure of both by our Sauiour. Particular ana∣lyse of the text,Secondly, in few words set downe a good censure and commendation of th one, with his dislike and reproofe of the other. In this text mst bee regarded, 1 Occasion of Christs speechFirst the occasion of Christs speech: He spake this parable vnto certaine which trusted in themselues, that they were righ∣teous,2 The speech it selfe intreating of the two men praying, Pharisies thāks giuing without prayer, Pulicanes true and penitent prayer, Publicanes be∣hauiour & pre∣paration to prayer Publicans praier & forme therof consisting in 3, chiefe pointes, and despised others, ve. 9. The second generall is our Lords speech it selfe, wherein mention is made, 1. O the Pharisies, Lord I thanke thee, for hee vttered no part of any petition, or prayer, ver. 11.12. 2. Of the Publicanes Miserere, his humble, heartie, and penitent prayer: Lord bee mercifull vnto mee a sinner. wherein, first the Publicanes behauiour is recorded by our Sauiour, as 1. In standing a farre off. 2. Not lifting vp his eyes. 3. In striking his breast. Secondl our Lord records the Publicanes prayer, the forme whereof Christ reporteth to consist, 1. In a confession of his sinnes, 2. In his confidence and trust in Gods mercies. 3. In crauing mercy and pardon at Gods hands for for his sins, verse 13. 3 Our Lords censure both of the estate of the Publican & of the Pharisie, & the reason which he yeelds of this censure,The third mention which S. Luke maketh, is our Lords censure both of the Publicanes and Pharisies estate, which censure is two-fold, in that 1. The one departed to his house iustified, 2. And not the other, to wit, the Pharisie. Of which true censure Christ giues the reason: For euery
one that exalteth himselfe,Gods words shall not faile till all be fulfilld shall be brought low, &c. ve. 14. The twelfth Sonday after Trinity. RIght precious in the sight of the Lord is the dath of his Saints, and whosoeuer sheddeth mns bloud,Coherence of these 2. first les∣sons with the former going before. by man shal his bloud be shedde, and that there shall fall to the earth nothing of the word of the Lord, which he spake of the house of Ahab, by the hand, that is the ministery, of his seruant Eliah, the first lesson for Morning prayer this day, doth proue most manifestly. Now although God appointed Iehu to be the instrument of his wrath, to see eecution done vpon Ahab,Sūme & scope of these two for this day, vpon his sonnes, his kinred, and familiars: yet because he regarded not to walke in the law of the Lord God of Israel with all his heart (for he departed not from the sins of Ieroboam: therefore the Lord sought for himselfe Hezekiah a faithfull king, who put down the brazen serpent, destroyed idols, and set vp the true ma∣ner of Gods worship againe, as may be seene in the first les∣son for euening prayer. Of these and such like examples the Apostle Paul will shew the vse and sufficiency, not of the law onely,Scope of the Epistle, which was glorious, and what Moses and the Prophets spake was effe∣cted: but of the ministration of the Gospel also, of the spirit and saluation, as in our Epistle is to bee seene. Therefore haue the fathers of the Church chosen out a portion of Scripture, answerable to the three former,Scope of the text chosen for the Gospel, and to the precedent Gospel concerning a charitable worke of our Sauiour, a fruitfull worke of the spirit, performed vpon a man that was diseased in his tongue and eares. That the man might heare Gods word better then he did before: and with his tongue speake more plainly to the praise of God. That the ministery of the Gospell might appeare to be very per∣spicuous, no parabalical, vnperfect or stammering ministe∣ry, as the law was.
Mor. prayer. 1 Less. 2. Kin. 10The first of the scriptures, 2. Kings. 10.Iehu is the executioner of Ahabs children, and Baals Priests. is a Chronicle and Register of these principall and remarkable things. Parts. 1 Iehues politike letter to the protectorus of Kings sonnes,First concerning Iehues policy intreating by letters with the protectors of Ahabs 70. sonnes to set vp the best and fit∣test of them vpon his fathers throne, a thing which they re∣fused, rather yeelding homage to Iehu altogether, ve. 1. ad 5. 2 Iehues letter and mandate for the heads of the 70, sonnes of Ahab,The second is of another letter framed & sent to the great men of the citty to this purpose: That they would send the heads of Ahabs 70. sonnes vnto him with all expedition: which was performed by them accordingly, that Gods iudge∣ment might be fully accomplished vpon Ahabs house,3 Iehues putting to death the 42 brethren of A∣haziah, ve. 6. to the end of the 11. The third is concerning Iehues putting to death the 42. brethren of Ahaziah.4 Iehu slew and destroyed all which remai∣ned to Ahab in Samaria, accor∣ding to the Lords commā∣dement, ve. 12.13.14. The fourth is Iehues slaying all in Samaria, that remained vnto Ahab, till he had vtterly destroyed Ahab, and that in the presence of Iehonadab, the son of Rechab whom he tooke with him to witnesse▪ and beheld his zeale that hee had for the Lord, ve. 15.16.17. 5 Iehu destroies all Baals Priests and all the in∣struments of i∣dolatry,The fifth is of Iehues politicke dissembling of a seruice for Baal, to the end hee might destroy all Baals seruants, i∣dols, and vtensiles of that filthy house, ver. 18. to the end of the 28. 6 Gods accep∣tance of Iehues seruice in all this businesse,The sixth is as touching the reckoning that God made of Iehu for performing of this seruice, althoagh otherwise he was not found in the true worship and seruice of God, verse. 29, 30.31. 7 Gods anger against Israel, and his punish∣ment vpon thē.The seuenth is of Gods wrath kindled against Israel, and giuing them ouer into the hands of Hazael, ve. 32.33. The last is a record as touching the time of Iehues reigne, and of his successor and heire Iehoahaz,8 A chronelo∣gy of Iehues reigne, ve. 34.35.36. Euen. prayer. 1, Les, 2, Kin, 18The second of the scriptures which is the first lesson for Euening prayer, 2. Kings. 18. recordeth these things fol∣lowing.Parts. 1 The time and maner of Heze∣kiahs reigne.First the time of Hezekiahs reigne, the holy and vpright
manner of his seruing God,Hezekiah is Gods instrument to glorifie him more then did Iehu and gouernement of his king∣dome, not hauing his like among all the Kings of Iudah, be∣fore or after him. ver. 1. ad 8. In the second place the time of Shalmanezers taking of Samaria, and Israels captiuity, with the cause thereof,2 The time of Shalmanazers taking Samaria is re∣corded. ve. 9. ad 12. In the third,Senacheribs be∣sieging the strong citties of Iudah. a relation is made of Senacheribs besieging all the strong citties of Iudah, & of the composition, or ran∣some that Hezekiah gaue to Senacherib, vers. 13, to the end of the 16. In the fourth,4 Senacheribs blasphemous Ambassage to Hezekiah. the text makes mention of Senacheribs blas∣phemous embassage sent to Hezekiah by the mouth of Rab∣shakeh, & of the conference between Eliakim & this wicked rayler: with the answerlesse answer of the people vnto him, and the gouernours report of that blasphemous legacy and embassage vnto their king Hezekiah, ve. 17. to the end of the 37. the end of the chapter. S. Paul in the Epistle for this day, written, 2. Cor. 3.4. to end of the 9.Epistle 2. Cor. 3.4. ad 9. Scope of the text. verse, teacheth to trust in God, and that through Christ, contrary to the blasphemous counsel and message of the king of Assyria, S. Paul teacheth both Ministers of the Gospell, and people, to relye vpon God,Parts. who giueth ability and sufficiency to performe an effectuall, and spirituall mi∣nistery. The text containeth First, a proposition1 A proposition or Thesis concerning the dignity and excellency of the new Testament, and ministery of the Gos∣pell, ve. 4.5, and a part of the 6. Secondly, a confirmation of this proposition,2 Confirmation of this proposi∣on by three ar∣guments. which is three-fold. The first is taken from the different subiect or substance of the law & Gospell, the old and new Testament,1 A diffrente subiecto legis & euangelij. the one be∣ing of the letter, the other of the spirit. ver. 6. The next reason is drawne à comparatis,2 A comparatis. a comparison be∣ing made betwixt the ministration of death, and the mini∣stration of life of the spirit.
The third reason is also à comparatis,3 A comparatis Exhortation to trust in God. the comparison being made betveene the glory of the Lawes ministery, which is the ministration of condemnation, and the glo∣ry of the Gospels ministery, which is the ministery of righteousnesse, vers. 9. The fourth Scripture for this dayes seruice, which is Marke. 7.31. to the end of the 37.Gospell Mark. 7.31. ad 37. Scope of the text. vers. yeelds vs an exam∣ple of the effect of the glorious ministery of the Gospell, this spirituall ministration: For euery worke of charity being a fruite of the spirit; much more must the healing of a man diseased in his tongue and eares be a great worke, especially being acted in such a miraculous manner, by the greatest, and most charitable Physition of our soules and bodyes, who because he would haue men to exercise the former duty of depending vpon him onely, as the author of all goodnesse, and of praying vnto him for a supply of all our wants, will in this miracle shew his power and his loue, that as hee can heale all diseases, so hee will heale all such as come to him in faith: hee will respect such as resort to him in sincerity, without hypocrisie, as the Publicane did in the former Gospell, and this deafe man mentioned in this text,Parts of the Gospel. wherein Saint Marke offers to our consideration, either 1 Occasion.First the occasion of the miracle, verse. 31.32. 2 The miracle,Secondly, the miracle it selfe, 3 The conse∣quence,Thirdly, the dependance or consequence thereof, ver. 34: ad 37. the end of the chapter. Occasion two-fold.The occasion is two-fold. 1. Christs trauelling by sea in the sea of Galile, &c.  because he departed againe from the coasts of Tyre and Sy∣don,  vers. 31. 2. Occasion was in them that brought the deafe man to him. vers. 32. 2 Effect of the miracle.In the miracle regard, 1. The forme1 Forme. and maner of doing thereof, vers. 33.34.
Christ power and his loue must cause vs to trust in him.2. The effect of it: His eares were opened,2 Considerati∣ons in the se∣quele of the mi∣racle. the band or string of his tongue was loosed: Ita vt recte loqueretur, verse. 35. The consequence or sequele of the miracle, 1. In our Sauiour Christ, who (after his wonted maner) inhibited the publishing thereof. 2. In the people, who were trumpets of Christs fame  vers. 36. This arose from their astonishment at the miracle, which caused them to report thus: He hath done all things well, he maketh both the deafe to heare, and the dumbe to speake, verse 37. The 13. Sonday after Trinity. THe name of the Lord is a strong Tower to his people,Summe of the two first Lessōs for this day. and those shall not bee guiltlesse which take this name in vaine, as it will appeare in Iosiah that good king, who rightly esteemed of Gods word and Sacraments, and of Se∣nacheribs punishment for his rayling and blasphemy. Wherefore the Scriptures of the new Testament doe also continue to shew in other doctrines and examples that the ministery of the Gospell,Sūme of the E∣pistle & Gospel that exceeding and glorious mini∣stery (the most excellent way and meanes to publish Gods name, whose substance also is the promise of saluation to all true beleeuers) hath the inseparable concomitance, depen∣dance and accident of obedience to God, and charity to our neighbours: without both which, it is (as without faith) im∣possible to please God.Mor. prayer. 1 Less. 2. Kin. 19 The first Lesson for morning prayer, 2. Kings. 19.Parts. contai∣neth these principall incidents and occurrents.1 Hezekiahs mes∣sage to Esay the Prophet con∣cerning Sena∣cheribs blasphe∣my. The first is as touching that message which king Heze∣kiah sent by his chiefe Steward to the Prophet Isaih concer∣ning the blasphemy of Senacherib, & the comfortable answer which the prophet returned to the king from the Lord, ve. 1
to the end of the 7.The good King Iosiah made a godly reformation. 2 Rabshakeh sent other, & worse messages of blasphemy to Hezekiah, who praieth to God against the blasphemy, for the auenging thereof.In the second part of the chapter is related, how Rabsha∣keh sent other messengers to Hezekiah, with a worse and more blasphemous message then before. Which letter being read of Hezekiah, he spread it before the Lord in the Lords house, praying to the Lord to auenge this blasphemy, and to blesse and preserue his people out of the hands of the king of Ashur, ve. 8. ad 19, The third part of this chapter containes an answer to this zealous praier of Hezekiah,3 Gods answer to Hezekiahs zealous prayer. sent from the Lord by the hands of Isaiah, concerning the safety and preseruation of the peo∣ple and citty of Ierusalem, and the destruction intended and denounced against the king of Ashur, and his army, ver. 20. to the end of the 34. 4 The effecting of Gods de∣noūced iudge∣ments.The fourth and last part relateth the effecting and accom∣plishment of Gods denounced iudgements vpon the kings army, and vpon his owne person, by the Angels destroying of an hundred fourescore and fiue thousand, by the slight of Senacherib himselfe, and by his owne sonnes massacring him as hee was about his idolatrous seruice, verse 35.36.37. the end of the chapter. Euen. prayer. 1, Les, 2, Kin, 23The first lesson for Euening prayer 2. Kings. 23. contai∣neth many excellent and remarkeable records. Parts.First how the yong king Iosiah did reade the law of God himselfe,1 Iosiah after the ouerthrow∣ing of all idola∣try, reades the Law. after hee had ouerthrowne idolatry, and destroied the idolatrous Priests with the Coniurers, &c. vers. 1. to the end of the 28. Secondly, how the dayes of this good yong king were cut off by Pharaoh Necho king of Aegypt,2 The vntimely death of this godly yong Prince, ve. 29.30. The third is of the short time and reigne of Iehoahaz sonne, and how hardly Pharaoh Nechoh dealt with him and his land,3 The short reigne of Iehoa∣haz, and made Eliakim (whom he called Iehoiakim) king in stead of Iosiah his father, whose Chronicle also is briefly set downe, vers. 31. to the end of the 37. the end of the chapter.
Christ performes his promise to the be∣leeuers, as iudgments vpon the vngodlyNow then as the former scriptures haue taught vs,Coherence of the two former chapters with the Epistle. that God is iust in his iudgement against blasphemers and idola∣ters, & true in his promise for the preseruation of his Church and the members thereof, liuing vnder,Epistle and in the time of the Law: So Saint Paul in the portion of scripture chosen for this dayes Epistle, Galat. 3.16. to the end of the 22. vers.Gal. 3.16. ad 22. Parts. First proues that the interstitiall time of the 430. yeares betweene Gods making of the promise to Abraham,A 1. propositi∣on. Time changeth not the purpose or promise of God. Confirmation of the 1. propo∣sition by two reasons, and the giuing of the Law, could not disanull the Couenant, that was before confirmed of God, in respect of Christ, that it should make the promise of none effect. This is the first propo∣sition. vers. 17. The first reason is in the 16. verse. à testimonio scripturae: Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He saith not, and to thy seeds, &c. The second is ab absurdo: If inheritance of life eternall, and  whatsoeuer God hath promised to the beleeuers, were of the law, then it cannot, or could not bee by the promise: for it were absurd to hold, that it should bee by the law, and by the promise. ver. 18. His second proposition is concerning the vse of the law,A 2. proposition concerning the vse of the law. in the meane while till the coming of Christ, and full perfor∣mance of the promise. Where the Apostle answers the que∣stion, or preuents an obiection: Wherefore then serueth the Law? it was added, because of transgression, till the seed came, &c. verse. 19.20. The third proposition is concerning iustification by faith,A 3. proposition is as touching iustification by faith. which is also deliuered in the preuenting of an obiection, or answering to a question, which may arise out of the former arguments. The question is concerning the opposition, or contradiction betweene the Law and the promise. The answer whereunto, is,  It may not so bee:His argument to proue the proposition. or as it is vsually read God forbid in the negatiue part. Wherunto he frames this ar∣gument, & inferres the truth of iustification by faith. For if there had bene a law giuen, which could haue giuen life, surely righteousnesse should haue beene by the law. But there is no such
law, therefore the Scripture hath concluded all vnder sinne,Christ describes true righteousnesse. that the promise by the faith of Iesus, should bee giuen to them that beleeue. vers. 21.22. Our Lord Iesus Christ in the GospellGospell Luk. 10.23. to the end of the 37. vers.Luk. 10.23 ad 37 will instruct vs effectually in the true righteousnesse apprehended by faith in Christ bringing forth fruits of godlinesse to God,Sūme & scope of the Gospell for this day. and charity to our neigh∣bour. In these verses he wil make vse of the former miracles, in telling the Disciples how happy they were that had seene and heard (or rather beleeued in him whom they had seene and heard) and by teaching of the Scribe, he wil proceed to teach the Disciples more lessons of iustice and iustification, and perswade them to the exercising of charitable workes,Parts of this text. without which none can attaine eternall life, S. Luke there∣fore doth heere set downe in writing, for our instruction, a two-fold speech which Christ made. First, Christs confe∣rence with his Disciples,1 With his Dis∣ciples, ve. 23.24. Secondly the conference that he had with the Scribe,2 With the Scribe, in the 13. verses following. His comforta∣ble conference with the Disci∣ples,Among many worthy comforts which he vouchsafed vn∣to his Disciple, in reuealing that vnto them which others knew not, this is one notable consolation which in secret he pronounceth vnto them, First, that their eyes were blessed, as ve. 23, Secondly, that they were blessed and happy, aboue the happinesse of Prophets and Kings, ve. 24. This is the speech which Christ made to them. The colloquy betweene the Lawyer & him, consisting of two questions,The conference or colloquy betweene the Lawyer and him is two-fold. 1. A question moued by a certaine expounder of the law, and answered in the 25.26.27.28. vers. 2. Another question propounded by the Lawyer, and  answered by our Sauiour, being the substance of the Gos∣pell, the perfect preacher of righteousnesse, and the practi∣ser of mercy, as in the rest of the verses. How eternall  is attained.The first question is concerning the manner and way of
attaining euerlasting life,True faith, and true charity, makes true righteousnesse. ve. 25. Our Lords answer is by as∣king another question, vers. 26. which the young Scribe an∣swers, ve. 27. and Christ censures the answer, and determines the question, ve. 28. The Lawyers pride which he brought with him,The second question which the Lawyer made, and the good opinion hee conceiued of himselfe by Christs com∣mending of him, occasioned him to aske Christ a second question: Who then is my neighbour? vers. 29. He receiues his answer by our Lords vttering of a pa∣rable of the trauailer which fell among Theeues, from the 30. verse to the end of the 35. Whereupon our Sauiour ex∣amines the Lawyer the second time: Which now of these three thinkest thou was neighbour, &c. verse 36. The Law∣yer answered in the former part of the 37. verse: He that she∣wed mercy. Iesus out of this his answer, directs him how to liue here,Christ answer the first questi∣on, & applies the second an∣swer to the Scribes consci∣ence. that hee may liue for euer hereafter, and so answeres his maine & great question propounded at the first, and this he doth in the othe part of the 37. vers. in these words: Go and do thou likewise. The 14. Sonday after Trinity. THe former texts of Scripture,Comparison of the combinati∣ons of the first lessons from the first Sonday after Trinity, with these that follow from this 14 Sonday to the 25 after Trinity, which were to be read in our Church for the first lessons at Morning & euening prayer, were culled out of the bookes of Ioshua, and the foure bookes of Samuel, and the Kings, being for the most part historicall, affoording vs examples of holy life, and instructions of doctrine, with particular mention and rela∣tion of Gods fearefull iudgements executed vpon the diso∣bedient, and contemners of his word, whether Iewes or Gentiles, with his speciall fauours vnto those that haue de∣lighted in his laws, and walked in the spirit, and not perfor∣med the workes of the flesh. The Scriptures of the old Testament that do follow, are
taken out of the Prophetical bookes of three great Prophets,Righteous men, and good Rulers are hard to finde. Ieremy,Sūme & scope of these sele∣cted scriptures. Exekiel, and Daniel, and 3. small ones, as Ioel, Micah, Abacuk▪ and that worthy booke of the Parables, or Prouerbs of Salomon, wherein most bitter menaces of Gods anger be thundred out against the Church of the Iewes, and their cit∣ty Ierusalem for their grieuous sins of vnthankfulnesse, ido∣latry, & all kinde of vnrighteousnesse, and most comfortable doctrines of Gods sauing health both to Iewes and Gen∣tiles, which bee penitent, which acknowledge and em∣brace effectually that Christ, and word of saluation offered. And to proue the proposition of S. Paul true, that all haue sinned,Mor. Prayer. 1 Les. Ieremy 5. and haue failed of the grace of God naturally, and that righteousnesse is not by the law, nor in the time of the law. The Prophet Ieremy in the first of these chosen scriptures,Parts. Ieremy chap. 5. is 1 Ieremies first search.First, willed and commanded by the Lord, to search in the streetes and citty of Ierusalem, among the people for a righteous man, that for his sake he might spare the citty, vers. 1. whereof a reason is rendred, to wit, their double dealing, faire speech, and protestations of goodnesse out∣wardly, but deceit and falshood inwardly, which the Lord detesteth. vers. 2.3.4. 2 Ieremies secōd search-Secondly, the Prophets second search is for a righte∣ous and good Ruler among the great men, which because hee can neither bee found in the house of Israel, nor Iudah: therefore shall Gods iudgement hasten towards them, by the Chaldean, Grecian, Persian, &c. vnderstood by the Lyon, VVoolfe, and Leopard, verse 5. to the end of the 19. 3 Gods third commission to Ieremy concer∣ning the de∣nouncing of iudgements.The Lords third mandate to the Prophet, is concerning the publishing and denouncing of these future iudgements against Iacob and Iudah, which shall bee irreuocable, and most certaine in the Lords decree: As the sands doe binde in the sea by the Lords perpetuall decree, &c. whereunto
is annexed a memorial of the Lords former fauours towards them,Ieremy is Gods baily to serue writs vpon King & people. in giuing raine both early and late, and reseruing vnto them the appointed weekes of the haruest. Which fauours of God, with many others their iniquities (which are in parti∣cular set downe) haue turned away and hindred good, ver. 20. to the end of 31. which is the end of the chapter. The first Lesson for this euening seruice is written, Ier. 22. continuing other matters giuen in warrant, charge,Eue. Prayer. 1 Less, Ierem. 22 Scope of this chapter. and com∣mission vnto the Prophet, which he as the Lords special bay∣ly and chiefe officer must in particular discharge, and serue vpon them all,Parts. as First, vpon the King himselfe, his seruants and people,A first warrant which Ieremy must serue vpō the King him∣selfe▪ his seruāts and people. 1 That he and they do execute iudgement, 2 Rid their handes of euill. 3 And performe their duties according to the will of the Lord. That they may be partakers both King and people of speciall fauours of God, if they obey, and of grieuous punishments if they will not hearken, verse 1. to the 12. The second warrant that he serueth is vpon the couetous and proud oppressor whether he be king or subiect,A second hee must serue vpō the couetous & proud oppres∣sor. & that is a wofull warrant, and a warrant of wo, because his house is built by vnrightenesse, and his chambers without equity, ver. 13 to the 19. The third is as it were a proclamation of an exigent or out-lawry against the people, Priests, and king himselfe,A third is a proclamation of an exigent or out-lawry vpon people Priests & King himselfe. They must bee all attached body, goods, & liues, at Nebu∣chadnezzars pleasure. for their contempt of the former processes, for their senseles∣nesse and security in their sinnes, and pleasing themselues in their wickednesse, wherein because they were so confoun∣ded, therefore confusion should be their punishment. They should be led by Nebuchadnezzar the king into the land of Babell or confusion, into an other countrie where they were not borne, and there they shall die: yea, Coniah himselfe shalt be as a despised or broken idoll, or as a vessell wherein is no pleasure, &c. ver. 20. to the end of the 30. which is the end of the chapter.
In our Epistle Gal. 5.16. to the end of the 24. ver. we haue a godly,Exhortation to righteous and spirituall walking. a goodly, and a golden exhortation vnto righteous∣nesse, which he calleth by another name and phrase, to wit, walking in the spirit. For seeing that all the elect people of God, do through the Spirit wait for the hope of righteous∣nesse through aith, it followeth necessarily, that they must walke in the Spirit, or else they can neuer obtaine that which they hope for, Parts of the text,The text containeth First, an exhortation.1 Exhortation 2 Confirmatiō Exhortation is to walke in the spirit.Secondly, the confirmation or establishing thereof. The exhortation is, Then I say, walke in the spirit. The first reason,1 Reason to vrge it. a consequenti vtilitate, or a priuatione, vel preuentione contrariorum effectuum, And yee shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. ver. 16. 2 Reason,The second is taken from the contrary, to wit, from that contrariety, repugnancy & strife which is betweene the flesh and the Spirit. ver. 17. 3 Reason,The third ab vtili, a deliuerance from the bondage of the law. And if ye be led by the spirit, yee are not vnder the law. ver. 18. 4 Reason,The fourth is, a descriptione contrariorum, a manifest laying open and discouery to all mens view of the repugnant war∣riours which fight these contrary battels, 5 Reason,The souldiars of the flesh, & in the flesh, are described, & their wofull, wages is appointed them. ver. nineteenth, twen∣tieth, twentieth one. 6 Reason.The spirituall combatters are bewrayed & named, whose Princely priuilege is set downe, to wit, that there is no law therefore no punishment against them, verse twentieth two, twentieth three. The ground of which priuilege and their letters pattents are sealed by Christ himselfe,The priuileges of spirituall souldiers are sealed by Christ They are Christs, therefore they haue crucified the flesh, with the affections and the lusts thereof. ver. 24.
Christ exerciseth perfect charity and righteousnesse to the miserable lepers.Our gracious and mercifull Sauiour doth not onely teach his Disciples, and the crafty proud tempting Lawier,Gospell. as be∣fore, the exercise of Christian charity,Coherenece of this with the former Gospel. Scope & drift of this text. and neighborly righ∣teousnesse, but in this portion of Scripture also, Luke 17. ver. 11. to the end of the 19.Luk. 17.11 ad 19. euen by his owne example in hea∣ling of ten leapers, poore distressed soules, banished from mens society, instructeth vs in that rule which he gaue to the Lawyer. Go and do thou likewise. And in that mandate which God by Ieremy, sent to the King, Priests, and people of Israel and Iudah This Scripture affoordeth two generall or principall parts.Parts of the text. The first is the occasion offered to our Sauiour of doing this miracle,1 Occasion of this miracle. and shewing this mercy, in the eleuenth, twelfth and thirteenth verses. The second is the miracle it selfe,2 The miracle it selfe, in the other 5 verses. The occasion is two-fold,Occasion is two-fold, 1 That which he tooke of himselfe purposely, which is two-fold: 1 By trauelling to Hierusalem, through the midst of Sa∣maria and Galilee. ver. 11. 2 By entring of purpose (into a certaine towne) in a part of the 12. ve. where in his omniscient praescience he foresaw that the miserable leapers would meete him. The second occasion which hee tooke of others, to wit, by reason of the misery of the ten foule diseased leapers, in the rest of the twelfth verse, vnto the end of the thir∣teenth. In the second generall of this text (which is the miracle) ate two speciall parts:Parts of the miracle, First, either the mercifull and miraculous worke it selfe,1 The worke it selfe, consisting of two branches.2 The sequele of the worke, Parts of the worke. 1 Christs commandement Go shew thy selfe to the Priests. 2 The cure it selfe, As they went, they were clensed,  verse: 14.
The second speciall is the sequele of the miracle,All that are clensed in body bee not clensed in soule. or that effect that this benefit and good turne (which Christ did) tooke in them to whom it was vouchsafed, which effect is two-fold. 1 Thankfulnes in one.1 Thankfulnesse in one of them. ver, 15.16. 2 Vnthankful∣nes in the nine.2 Ingratitude in the other nine, in all the rest which were clensed, which sinne of theirs Christ 1 Reproueth: ver. 17.18. 2 For the shaming of them he doth cōmend the stranger. 3 Rewardeth his thankfulnesse, his thankfullnesse I say, proceeding from a true faith, with giuing him a free gift, to wit, the end of his faith, euen the saluation of his soule, so well as the free healing of his corporall leprosie: Arise, go thy way, thy faith hath made thee whole. verse ninteeenth. The 15 Sonday after Trinity. STill do the the fathers of our Church, in the choosing of fittest Scriptures for our Leitourgie,Reason for the choise of these Scriptures. Scope of them all together. bethinke themselues of those which do chiefly make mention of the fruits of the spirit, obedience, righteousnesse, despising the world, reioy∣cing in the crosse of Christ, and depending vpon Gods particular prouidence in particular necessities, without im∣moderate & carking care after the adiuncts of this world, wherefore they bring in the Prophet Ieremy. Summe of the two first LessōsFirst, at Gods commandement, commending the Recha∣bites for their obedience, and condemning the Iewes for their disobedience. Secondly, ratifying of the Iewes condemnation by a se∣cond booke or written roule, though the King had cut and burnt the first. Summe of the Epistle & Gos∣pellIn the first out of the new Testament, the reoycing in the flesh and outward reioycing in things that profit not, is forbidden. And in the second, which is the Gospell, a see∣king
king,Example of the Rechabites con∣tinuall and constant obedience. first, after Christs kingdome and righteousnesse there∣of is commanded. Our first Lesson for morning prayer out of the old Testa∣ment. Ierem. 35.Mor. prayer. 1. Les. Ier. 35. conceines First,Parts. a memoriable example of the Rechabites continuall and constant obedience1 A memoriall of the Recha∣bites continuall and constant obedience. vnto their fathers commandement, notwithstanding the Prophets remandement to the contrary ver. 1. to the 11. Secondly, the vse that Almighty God maketh of this ex∣ample2 The vse of this memora∣ble example. vnto the houses of Israel and Iudah, with his reproo∣ching and condemning them for their disobedience, and his commending and well intreating the Rechabites for their gratefull obedience, ver. 12. to the 19. the end of the chapter. The second Scripture out of the old Testament, Ier. 36.Eue. Prayer. 1 Les. Ierem. 36. remembreth vnto vs these things. First,Parts. that the curses which Ieremy had denounced against Iudah, and Israel,1 Gods man∣date to Ieremy to record the curses in a booke. must be recorded and set downe in a booke by Ieremy & Baruch, that the King and people might there∣by, as by the last warning, be drawne to repentance, ver. 1. to the end of the 15. Secondly,2 The effect of this recording. what effect the writing and reading of this rowle tooke in the Kings counsellers, and the people, ver. 16. to the end of the 25. Thirdly, what became of Ieremy the inditer, and Baruch the writer of this rowle.3 How Ieremy & Baruch were dealt withal for it. ver. 26. Fourthly, how God gaue commandement for the wri∣ting of an other rowle though the King had cut and burnt the former, ver. 27. to the end of the 32.4 Gods man∣date for the writting of an other rowle. which is the end of the chapter. The third portion of Scripture appointed for the EpistleEpistle. Gal. 6.11. to the end of the 18.Gal. 6.11. ad 18. Scope of the text. the end of the chapter, con∣teines doctrines exhortatiue or rather cohortatiue vnto an
holy,True & faithful Apostles reioyce in af∣flictiōs not in popular fame or deceit. godly and spirituall walking. In shewing loue and practising the fruits thereof towards the ministers of Gods word, in exercising liberality towards them and the house∣hold of faith, Parts.The parts hereof are 1 The false A∣postles suttle dealing is vn∣masked,First, a discouery of the bad dealing of the false Apostles who ambitiously affecting popularity call the people to the ceremonies of the law. ver. 11.12.13. Secondly, S. Pauls holy practise to the contrary in his re∣ioycing in the crosse of our Lord Iesus Christ,2 Saint Paul deales in a con∣trary manner. and by his ex∣ample perswading others to doe the like. ver. 14.15.16.17. 3 His fare-well to the Ephesians,Thirdly, his valediction and prayer concluding the Epi∣stle. ver. 18, GospellAs Paul the seruant of God is painefull in his perswasion to cheerefull liberality, so his Maister Christ is farre more carefull in disswading from too much carking and distrust∣full carefulnesse, a kind of insatiable greedinesse and coue∣tous longing after food & rayment. In this portion of Scrip∣ture therefore Math. 6.24. to the end of the 34. ver.Mat. 6.24. ad 34 The agreement of this Gospell with the Epistle which is the end of the chapter,Summe prin∣cipall of this Scripture, because euery one should know that couetousnesse & greedy aking together the adiuncts of this life, and the immoderate care after necessaries for the bodies maintenance, proceedeth from a distrust in the Lord, and his particular prouidence, the greatest vnthankfulnesse of all. And for that our Lord and Sauiour hauing viewed the estate of euery mans body, & knowing each mans minde & heart, he seeing also the wants of the one, supplyeth the same, and will satisfie the other with the fulnesse of his neuer-failing fauour,Parts of the text. In this text our Lord doth it, for First, he disswades men from indeuouring to effect vaine and impossible things,1 A disswasion frō attempting impossibilities, to wit, in seruing God and riches, which are two contrary conmmanders, No man can serue two maisters. ver. 24. 2 A confirma∣tion of this de∣hortation by many worthy and most pithy arguments, many worthy and most pithy arguments,Secondly, Christ Iesus the good sheepeheard, puls his wandring sheepe (caught in the bushes and cares of this
world) out of these dangers:Immoderate care after world∣ly necessaries reprehended, that they may be the better fit∣ted to seeke after the kingdome of heauen, with the happi∣nesse of the future world: and this he doth in the rest of the verses: The proposition is a prohibiting commandement pe∣remptorily set downe as a resolute and determinate conclusi∣on in three seuerall verses of this text.Parts of the disswasion con∣sisting in 3 cō∣mandements, The first in these words. Therefore I say to you: be not care∣full. ver. 25. The second is, Threfore take no thought. The third is, Care not then, that is, care not for the mor∣row, ver. 34. The branches of this inhibition being as the reasons and grounds therof, are seuen appeals which Christ here maketh.Reasons for these comman∣demēts are the seuen appeales following, The first appeale that he maketh is to life.1 Appeale is to life, Is not the life more worth then meate, in the end of the 25. verse: The second appeale is to the body,2 Appeale to the body, and the body then ray∣ment, in the same verse. The third is the foules3 To the fouls of the heauen, they neither sow, nor reape, and yet your heauenly Father feedes them. ver. 26. The fourth is to their own consciences, they knowing the weakenes4 To their own consciences for their weaknesse of their owne power, Which of you by taking care is able to adde one cubite. ver. 27. Fiftly, he appeales to the vegetals,5 To the vege∣tals, and sends the people (which carke & care without measure) to the lillies of the field, ve. 28. comparing the lillies brauery (who take no care at all) with Salomons glory. ver. 29. applying this example of comparison, & necessarily concluding thereupon, Wherefore if God so cloath the grasse of the field. ver. 30.31. His sixt appeale is to the Gentiles.6 To the Gen∣tiles, His seuenth to theit heauenly Father▪7 To the care of their heauenly Fa∣ther. For your heauenly Fa∣ther knoweth that you haue neede: both which appeales are in the two and thirtieth verse. Now when men are by their Lord God and mercifull Sa∣uiour pulled and reskued out of the consuming fire of the care of this world, he
3 Part of this Gospell is a perswasion to seeke after heauenly things.First, aduiseth them what to seeke after,Christs kingdome and the righteous∣nesse thereof must bee sought after. and what to fa∣sten their eyes vpon, to wit, the kingdome of God, and the righ∣teousnesse of this kingdome. Secondly, he promiseth vnto such as seeke and finde this kingdom, that adiuncts shal be bestowed vpō such subiects, to wit, that meate, drinke and clothing shall be cast vpon them. Gods people are the subiects, and they be the greater: these things are but adiuncts, and they are the lesser, ver. 33. of the text, and last but one of the chapter. The 16. Sonday after Trinity. Summe & co∣herence of the 2 first Lessons.TThe former point of doctrine concerning Gods pro∣uident care by the Prophets and ministers of the word with whom he will take order for the instruction, reprofe & comfort of the members thereof, is heere confirmed by his speaking to another of his Prophets, in the chapters and Lessons of the old Testament. Summe of the Epistle & Gos∣pellWherefore the fathers of our Church haue chosen two out of the new, as parallel vnto them. In the first whereof Saint Paul will encourage the Ephesians against the troubles which he suffered at the hands of the Iewes, for preaching this mystery concerning the saluation of the Gentiles. And in the second our Lord himselfe doth confirme it, by his om∣nipotent and miraculous power of raising a man to life that was dead, and caried forth to be buried. The first Lesson for this morning prayer Ezech. 2.Mor. Prayer. 1 Les. Ezech. 2. contai∣neth these chiefe points.Parts. 1 God prepares Ezechiel for his function.First, Gods fitting, encouraging, and enabling of the Pro∣phet Ezechiel vnto that waighty and troublesome charge of prophecying and preaching vnto the rebellious and impu∣dent house of Israel. ver. 1 to the 4. In the second part of the chapter, God foretelleth the successe of Ezechiels labours,2 God tels Eze∣chiel what will be the successe of his labours. to wit, disobedience and re∣bellion
of these thornes and scorpions,Ezechiel must discharge his duty e∣uen amongst the rebellious Iewes, able (euen with their lookes) to terrifie him, ver. 5.6. In the third place God vrgeth his Prophet more vehe∣mently with the discharge of his office and function,3 God harges the Prophet more deepely with the care of doing his duty least the Prophet himselfe also do incurre the sinne and punishment of rebellion. And therefore God giues him the rowle of a booke written full of woes both within and without. ver. 7.8.9.10. the end of the chapter. The first Lesson for euening prayer is Ezech. 14.Eue. Prayer. 1 Les. Ezech. 14. Summe of the chapter. wherein God deales in more particular manner with the sinnes of the Iewes, and those irreuocable plagues which hee inten∣deth to send vpon them and theirs, for all those their ini∣quities. First,1 Gods threat∣ning of the Iewes, God menaceth one of the most grieuous iudge∣ments (that are in the world) to come vpon these rebels, to wit, his laying of the iniquity of the false Prophets vpon the idolaters and false worshippers of the true God, in v∣sing these words of them, and to them: That I may take the house of Israel in their owne heart, because they are all depar∣ted from mee through their idols. verse 1. to the end of the 11. Secondly, that though these wicked idolaters beeing iust∣ly punished for their sinnes2 God tels thē that other mens righteousnesse shall doe for deliuerance frō their sinnes, (by famine, by noisome beasts, by sword and by pestilence) did beare themselues in hand, that they should fare the better for their true Prophets, and for the righteous men that liued among them, God sheweth the case to be otherwise, for he saith. If Noah, Daniel, and Iob, were among them, they should deliuer but their owne soules by their righ∣teousnesse, ver, 12. to the 21. Thirdly, God affoordeth comfort vnto his little flocke,3 Comforts vnto Gods cho∣sen, vnto the remnant of his chosen people, picked of out the multitudes, which shall be destroyed out of Ierusalem, ve. 22. 23. the end of the chapter. The third of the Scriptures for this day. Ephes. 3.13. to the 22,Epistle Ephe. 3.13, ad 22 Summe of the text, the end of the chapter, is a consolatory exhortation
vnto the Church of the Ephesians,Comforts in af∣fliction to pre∣uents discou∣ragements,Christ faithful seruants proceed with comfort in the midst of afflictions. to preuent all discourage∣ment and fainting, for, or by reason of any afflictions or troubles which himselfe did suffer. And therefore the Apo∣stle prayeth to the God of comfort for the increase of this courage in them: giuing thanks vnto God, as hauing at∣tained it at his hands already. Parts.The exhortation1 Exhortation. is in the 13. verse, Wherefore I desire that ye faint not at my tribulations for your sakes. His prayer2 Prayer. is in these words, For this cause I bow my knees, ver: 14. to the 19. His thanksgiuing3 Thanksgiuing vnto him, therefore that is able to do ex∣ceeding aboundantly. ver. 20.21. the end of the chapter. Gospell. Luk. 7.11. ad 16. Agreement of this Scripture with the Epistle and with the former Gospel.Saint Pauls incouragings of Christs Church are very great and manifold, but the comforts of Saint Pauls Lord and Maister Christ Iesus, who is the resurrection and the life (one of his encouragements and consolations) do far ex∣ceed all. Our Lord Iesus Christ taught men in the former Gospell to depend vpon his fatherly prouidence, for meate, drinke and rayment: for he that made the body and gaue life vnto it, will not deny the meanes of the liues maintenance. In this holy Scripture,Scope of this text, Luke. 7. ver. 11. to the end of the 16. it is proued by example and most euident demonstration, that God can and will doe all the former good for vs, ecause hee raiseth the dead vnto life againe. Much more can hee continue life by such meanes as maintaine life, according to the good pleasure of his will.Parts. The euangelist in his relation, First sets downe the iourney of Christ, as the occasion of the miracle.1 Occasion of the miracle, ver. 11. Secondly, the miracle it selfe2 Miracle it selfe of Christs raysing vp the dead corps of the yong man, as in the rest of the verses. Parts of the miracle,In the miracle consider, 1 The description of the things done, ver. 12. to the end of the 15. 2 The effect and sequele of all, ver. 16.
God comforteth & confirmes his Church in raysing vp the dead,In the description these circumstances denominate the truth of the History,Parts of the description, as 1 The circumstance of the place, as he went into a city cal∣led  Naim. 2 The persons which accompanied Christ, to wit. 1 His Disciples, 2 A great multitude of people, these are noted in the occasion. In the miraculous deed which was done let vs consider of the passion before we can come to the action:Parts of the miracle, 1 Passion, 2 Action, before or at which passion S. Luke by way of preface doth againe ex∣presse some circumstances,Parts of the Passion, as 1 Of the place where our Lord Iesus was at that time immediately before the miracle, as hee drew nigh the gates of  the citty. 2 For assurance that hee was dead already vpon whom  the miracle was wrought, It is said, there was a dead man ca∣ried out, to wit, to be buried. The third circumstance is, what estate the dead man was  of, to aggrauate the passionate sorrow of the mother and friends. The text saith, he was the onely sonne of his mother. 4 The estate of his mother is set downe, she was a wid∣dow. 5 The simpathizers in her sorrow, her complangents,  much people of the citty was with her. ver. 12.Parts of the action: In the action let vs behold the actors loue to man∣kind. 1 Towards the widdow, whom when he saw First, he inwardly pittied, Secondly, hee outwardly with his words comforted her in forbidding her to weepe. ver. 13. 2 His philanthropie toward the dead man, set forth by  Christs ceremoniall performances, as 1 His coming to the coffin, 2 His touching it, 3 His causing of the bearers to make a stand.
4 His words, which are also to be obserued,The child is not punished for the fathers sinnes. being these. Young man, I say vnto thee arise, ver. 14. 1 The effect of these deeds and words we shall see in the yong mansEffects of these deeds & words of the actor, ei∣ther in the yong man, or in o∣thers, being restored to life in three arguments, as 1 The dead man sate vp, 2 He spake. 3 Christ deliuers him to his mother. 2. The effect that the miracle tooke in others must be also considered, 1 In their astonishment, 2 In their acknowledging of Gods power and his loue, teir saying thus. A great Prophet is raised vp. And God hath visited his people. ver. 16. The 17. Sonday after Trinity. Coherence of of these foure Scriptures with the former  foure.THe 4. Scriptures which are chosen out for this daies ser∣uice, are not much different from those of the former day. First, whether we respect the two out of the old Testa∣ment, wherin God reprocheth & vpbraideth the Iewes for their vnthākfulnes & disobedience, & their mis-conceiuing, therfore affirming that God punished the child for the fathers sinne:Summe of the two first Lessōs secondly, or these two out of the new Testament. In the first wherof Christs scholler doth exhort his schollers to answere their profession, in an holy life, & namely in practi∣sing of charity and concord.Sūme of the E∣pistle & Gospel But in the second S. Pauls Maister fulfils the commandement of loue & charity in do∣ing charitable workes & teaching humility vnto proud ex∣alters of themselues. Parts.The first Lesson for morning prayer is Ezech, 16.Mor. Prayer. 1 Les. Ezech. 16. contai∣ning these generall points. First, the Lord by his Prophet doth cast in the Iewes teeth their abominable vnthankfulnesse1 A reproofe of the Iewes vn∣thankfulnesse, and neglect of all those
benefits whereof he had made them partakers:God i both iust and mer∣cifull in his iudgements. yea those va∣rieties of iewels wherewith hee had decked and inriched them. ver. 1. to the 14. In the second place the Lord doth most plainely and in particular taxe and reproue them for their abuse of his be∣nefites and graces, by their pride, contempt of his word,2 A reproofe of their abuse of Gods benefites by their pride & contempt of his word. and diuers sorts of idolatry, verse fifteenth to the end of the thirtieth foure. In the third part of the chapter the Lord calleth out his defectiue and Apostate people (termed by the name of an harlot) to heare her doome, euen Gods definitiue sentence a∣gainst her for her manifold iniquities and abhominations, ver. 35. to the 46. In the fourth place (to aggrauate the heauinesse of their punishment) he sheweth that they had exceeded Sodome and Samaria in sinning:4 He describes the greatnesse of their sinnes. and therefore they must accordingly re∣ceiue and be partakers of iudgements and plagues propor∣tionable and correspondent. ver. 47. to the 58. In the fift and last part of this chapter God affoordeth plentifull mercy and fauour vnto the penitent and faithfull,5 Gods loue to the penitent & beleeuers. making an euerlasting couenant of pacification with them, verse fiftieth nine, to the end of the sixtieth three, which is the end of the chapter. The second text of Scripture which is the first Lesson for euening prayer,Eue. Prayer. is Ezchiel, 18.1 Les. Ezech. 18. Scope of this chapter. wherein God sheweth him∣selfe equall in his iustice, and in his iudgements more mer∣cifull then they tooke him for, (which supposed that he pu∣nished the children for the fathers faults) whereupon they brought vp a prouerbe: In the chpter we may take view of these things.Parts & chiefe points, First, how the Lord by his Prophet reprooueth and for∣biddeth the vse of this prouerbe.1 A prohibiti∣on of the vse of the prouerbe, The Fathers haue eaten sowre grapes &c. ver. 1.2.3. Secondly, the reasons of this prohibition2 Reasons for the prohibition and reproofe doe follow.
1 From that generall title and interest which the Lord God challengeth in all soules,No wicked man is dbarred from saluation if hee can truely repent, Ehortations to sanctimony. 2 From the particular title which he hath in the soule of the father, and in the soule of the sonne: twixt both which there is a difference, and therefore the soule that sinneth, whe∣ther of the father or of the sonne, it shall die. ver. 4. 3 A confirma∣tion of the first prohibitiue pro∣position taken frō God three∣fold dealing with men.Thirdly, God confirmeth the former truth, as touching his iustice. by that course that he will take 1 With a righteous and iust man. ve, 5. to the 9. 2 With his vnrighteous and vniust son, that is, a theefe a murtherer, an vsurer, &c. ve. 10. to the 13. 3 With his good grand-child, which feareth the Lord, & doth as his grand-father did, but not as his wicked father did. ver. 14. to the 20. Fourthly, vpon these former decrees of the Almighty, set downe in particular,4 A generall proclamation grounded vpon the former par∣ticulars contai∣ning two parts. vpon the particular and seuerall e∣states and occasions of people, the Lord now descendeth to a generall proclamation, wherein 1 No wicked man is excepted, or from life exempted, if he will repent. ver. 21.22.23. 2 No righteous man hath any interest in this proclama∣tion,  after he is apostate from righteousnesse: for then hee is also exempted from life. ver. 24. 5 God an∣sweres their ob∣iection & con∣tes it.Fiftly, the Lord answereth their absurd obiection, or ra∣ther their impudent deniall of the conclusion and begging the question, yet ye say the word of the Lord is not equal, Heare now ô house of Israel, is not my way equall. Their position God confuteth, and confirmes his own by former instance induced in the fourth and 3 part, 1 Of a righteous man falling away from goodnesse, 2 Of a wicked man departing from euill and returning to goodnesse,6 A perempto∣ry conclusion concerning the truth and iu∣stice of Gods iudgements. ver. 25. to the 29. In the sixt & last part of the chapter the Lord concludeth peremptorily the truth of his iudgements, that they are most iust in iudging, euery one according to his waies: whereupon he exhorts them to repentance and newnesse of life: Because
he is so far from punishing the good for the bad: that he de∣sires not the death and destruction of the bad, but rather that hee should returne, grow good, and liue for euer, ver. 30. to the end of the 32. the end of the thapter. The teacher of the Gentiles, exhorts the Ephesians chap∣ter 4.1. to the end of the 6.Epistle Ephes. 4.1. ad 6. Scope of it. (a Scripture set apart for this daies Epistle) to walke an holy and sanctified life, because they are thereunto called. The partsParts. hereof are First, an exhortation,1 Exhortation. in the 1. 2 & 3. verses. Secondly,2 Confirmatiō Parts of the exhortation. the grounds and reasons whereon it is builded ver. 4 5.6. In the exhortation regard, First, the manner of it, discouering the zeale and loue of  the exhorter, his earenestnesse and care to exhort them, though he was a prisoner, his singular loue to beseech & in∣treate where he might command. Secondly, the matter which is generall or speciall Generall, to walke worthy of the vocation whereunto they are called. ver 1. Speciall, in shewing this worthy walking by the effects and fruites of the spirit, alwaies produced & growing from good trees. These acceptable fruites are First, humility of minde, 2. meekenesse outwardly, 3,Fiue goodly fruits of wor∣thy walking. long suffering, 4. supportation one of another through loue. 5. an inde∣uour to keepe the vnity of the spirit in the bond of peace. ver. 2.3. The ground is manifold and most sure, wheron hee buil∣deth both general and speciall exhortations,Confirmation of this exhorta∣tion, but chiefly to peace by 8. reasons, but principally the fifth branch of the speciall, an indeuour to keepe the vnity of the spirit, &c. For the confirmation whereof and perswa∣sion thereunto there be three reasons in the fourth verse. The first is drawen from the vnity of the body, there is one body, the second from the vnity of the spirit one spirit, the 3. one hope of calling. These in the 4. ver. 4. one Lord, 5. one faith 6. one baptisme, ver. 5.7. one God, 8. one Father, 1. of all, 2. aboue all, 3. through all. 4. in you all. ver. 6.
The matter and manner of the fourth Scripture chosen for the GospellGospell. for this day, Luke 14:1. to the end of the 11.Christ finds fault with pride and hypocrisie, Luk. 14.1 ad 11. is little differing from the former preceeding Gospell:Agreement of this with the former Gospel, Parts of this text, Saue onely that in this our Sauiour Christ performeth two things, and there he did but one (though as much & more then both these) the raysing of a dead man to life, for First, in this text he healeth the man that had the dropsie, in the first sixe verses of the tex.1 The cure of the hydropike man, Secondly, he doth administer physicke to them at the lest (if he doth not heale) that is,2 The physi∣king of them that were swel∣led with pride, Parts of his miraculous cure of the hydro∣gike man, to their pride, arragancie, and hypocrysie, which chose out the chiefe roomes at feasts, ver. 7.10 the end of the. 11. In the first and maine generall point of this Gospell, wee must obserue (as oftentimes heretofore) 1 The common kind of occasion and opertunity that Christ tooke, to the end he might do good, to wit, his com∣ing  to the chiefe Pharisies house, to eate on the Sabboth day. 2 The occasion which they offered him, to wit, of watch∣ing and obseruing his behauiour, first, hereupon propoun∣ding to them two questions, ver. 3. to the 5. secondly, of hea∣ling the hydropick, ver. 4. To his first question they would not answere. To his second, which of you hauing an oxe, &c. they could not answere. Parts of his ministring phi∣sicke to the proud persons.Our Sauiour and teacher of the best ciuility, beholding the boldnesse and want of good manners in the guests which were at the Pharisies table, takes occasion also to rub their memories, and to mend their manners: 1 Teaching them ciuilitie,1 He teacheth them manners and ciuility, as in the eighth, ninth, & tenth verses. Secondly, teaching them Diuinity the true ground of good ciuility,2 He teacheth them the ground of ci∣uility, as in the eleuenth verse.
God will not heare obstinate wicked men,The 18. Sonday after Trinity. IN the two former chapters for our two first Lessons out of Ezekiels prophecie,Summe of the 2 first Lessons. the fathers of our Church will de∣monstrate vnto vs, First, that God is so highly displeased, with his people the Iewes, for their disobedience, contempt of his word, and pollution of his Saboths, &c. that 1. Their praiers should be abhominable to him. 2. Yea that their filthy and polluted citty Ierusalem, that pot whose summe is therein, should also be destroyed. Secondly, in the two latter portions taken out of the new Testament, they will 1. Teach the Corinthians, and in them,Summe of the Epistle & Gos∣pell vs, and all other Gentiles, to praise the Lord our God, for the diuers gifts and graces of God, bestowed vpon vs in Christ Iesus In whom we are made rich in all things, 2. And ac∣cording to this thankefulnesse to shew our loue to God, and our charity to our neighbours. The first Lesson for this Morning prayer, Ezekiel 20.Mor. Prayer. 1 Les. Ezech. 20. comprehends these chiefe things of note and conside∣ration.Parts First, that God refuseth to answer the forgetfull and blas∣phemous Iews,1 God will not answer the blas∣phemōus Iews, when they shall come to require of him, and pray to him, vers. 1.2.3. Secondly, God causeth the Prophet to let them see that herein hee dealeth but in iustice with them,2 God herein deales iustly, & not rigorously with them, by reason of their owne forgetfulnes of his benefits & continuall prouo∣king of him to indignation by their sinnes, whereof hee na∣meth some particulars, as first their idolatry with the idols of Aegypt: yea, after that the Lord had shewed his fauour towards them, and powred foorth his wrath vpon the Aegyptians themselues which were their enemies, verse. 4. ad 9.
2, Their rebellion in the wildernesse,The Iewes destruction of themselues. after he had brought them out of Aegyp, ve. 10. to the end of the 26. 3 The Iews are the cause them∣selues of the multiplication of Gods iudge∣ments,Thirdly, the Lord by his Prophet telleth them how they are the meanes of the augmenting of his iudgements, by adding of more blasphemies (as they are called, ver. 27,) vn∣to their former iniquities. And that their continuance in i∣dolatry, is the cause why hee giues them ouer to their owne hearts lusts, to be polluted with their idols, vers. 27. to the end of the 39. In the fourth place the Lord offers mercy to the remnant4 God offers mercy to the remnant, that shall returne from the captiuity to serue him in Ierusa∣lem, ve. 40. to the end of the 44. In the last part of the chapter the Lord denounceth a grie∣uous iudgement against the people of the South,5 Iudgements denounced a∣gainst the peo∣ple of the south meant and vnderstood by the forest of the South, vers. 45. to the end of the 48. the end of the chapter. In the first Lesson for this euening prayer, Ezech. 24.Eue. Prayer. 1, Les, Ezech, 24 the Lord by two parables vttered by his Prophet (for the surer confirmation of the execution of his iudgements,Scope of the chapter,) foretels the vtter destruction of Ierusalem. Parts. Two parables,The first parable is of the seething pot,1 Of a seething pot, vers. 1. to the end of the 14. The second of Ezechiels wife,2 Of Ezeckiels wife, which dyed, for whom God forbad him to mourne, vers. 15. to the end of the 27. which is the end of the chapter. Epistle. 1. Cor. 1, 4, ad 8, Scope of it,The third portion of Scripture is full of comfort to the beleeuers, the Gentiles, as the former two were full of terror to the defectiue Iewes, and idolaters of Iudah and Ierusalem. It is written 1. Cor, 1.4.Parts. to the end of the 8 vers. and is (after the Apostles salutation and praier to God for them) First, an holy gratulation and thankesgiuing1 Thanksgiuing to God in a part of the 4. vers. Secondly, the motiues and grounds of his thankesgiuing2 Grounds of his thankesgi∣uing, are propounded, which are,
The beleeuers are comforted, and they praise God for it1. The grace and fauour of God which is giuen them in  Iesus Christ, as in the rest of the 4. vers. 2. The fruits of this grace manifesting so blessed a tree,  That in all things ye are made ready in him, in all kinde of speech, and in all knowledge. as vers. 5.6. and 7. 3. Motiue is Gods finishing, confirming and establishing  of this commenced worke in them vnto the end, and to this end & purpose, (which is the chiefest end) that yee may bee blamelesse in the day of our Lord Iesus Christ, verse. 8. The subiect matter of the Gospel, written Math. 22. ve. 34. to the end of the 46.Gospel. Math. 22.34. ad 46. chosen for this day, is concerning a principall fruite of the spirit, which is loue, heeretofore so often commanded and commended,Scope of the text. and now vrged by our Sauiour vpon a question moued by a tempting Lawyer, vers. 35.36 and answered by our Sauiour, vers. 37. to the end of the 40.Analyse, Why Christ propounds the question con∣cerning his di∣uinity, And because God is the principall obiect of this loue, Christ Iesus the sonne of God, (who knew the Scribes heart, which tempted him, and the Pharisies ignorance in one of the maine grounds of Theologie, to wit, Christs eternall diui∣nity) demaundes a question of the assembly of Pharisies, whereby he puts them also to silence, as he did the Saducies in the 34. verse of this chapter. The question is, what thinke ye of Christ?  Whose sonne is hee? vers. 41.42. This question they answer after a sort, but would not stand by their answer,  when once it was infringed by Christ, vers. 43.44.45. Whereupon our Lord displaieth and discouereth their weaknesse and vnfitnesse.Their weaknes in answering, is discouered, 1. Both in their answering him for that time. And 2. In propounding any questions vnto him for euer after▪ vers. 46.
The 19. Sonday after Trinity.Memorable examples of faith, Reason and oc∣casion of the choice of these Scriptures,AS faith is the gift of God, so it is one of the principall fruits of the spirit, and therefore necessarily and most fitly to be commended vnto vs by the fathers of the Church among these and other fruits of the spirit. Sūme of the 2, first Lessons,In our two scriptures of the old Testament, wee haue seuerall eamples of the miraculous power of faith. In the first of the new, a dehortation from infidelity, from wal∣king in ignorance, and in all the lustes of the Gentiles, & works of the flesh. In the second we haue an example of an euangelicall patient cured of his spirituall & bodily dis∣eases,Sūme of the E∣pistle & Gospel by the euangelicall and Arch-physition of soule & bo∣dy, that God of loue: yea, that God which is loue, with that his heauenly medicament of a true, precious, simple, and liuely faith, which he also gaue to the patient. Mor. Prayer. 1 Les, Daniel. 3.The third chapter of Daniel is the first lesson for morning prayer, recording these principall occurrents. Parts.The first is as loathing Nebuchadnezzars decree for the worshipping of that golden image which he had set vp,1 Nebuchadnez¦zers wicked de∣cree, ve. 1. to the end of the 7. 2 The 3, chil∣dren which would not o∣bey it, are con∣demned to the hote furnace,The second is how Shadrach, Meshek and Abednego the Iewes, are accused by the Chaldeans vnto the King, for the breach of that idolatrous statute, who being conuented, exa∣mined, and found guilty, are condemned vnto the hote fiery fornace, vers. 8 ad 23. 3 God deliue∣reth his three seruants out of this danger,The third is how the three seruants of God are by faith deliuered from the persecutors elementall fire, though se∣uen times in heate graduated and increased. Whereupon the Monarch and his counsell maruaileth, praiseth God for the same, & maketh a grieuous penal statute against the blasphe∣mers of the God of Shadach, Meshek, & Abednego, & he pro∣motes these constant men in the prouince and Monarchy of
Babel,A remarkable example in Daniel, ve. 24. to the end of the 33. the end of the chapter. The 6. chapter of Daniels prophesie,Euen. prayer. 1 Less, Daniel, 6. is the first Lesson for Euening prayer, containing these principall incidents.Parts. First,1 An act is made by the malicious no∣bles to bring Daniel within the compasse of his life, how the enuious Officers and Councellors of Da∣rius, the Monarch of the Medes and Pesians, deuise an act of praying and petitioning vnto Darius onely, and not vn∣to God. Of the breach whereof because Daniel, whom they hated, is culpable, he therefore is conuented, found guilty, and must abide the penalty of being cast into the Lyons denne, vers. 1. to the end of the 18. Secondly,2 Daniel is mi∣raculously pre∣serued both frō the Lyons, and his Wooluish accusers, how Daniel by faith in God is deliuered from this danger, as the three seruants of God Shadrak, Meshak, & Abednego were from the fire preserued miraculously, though his accusers were suddenly by the same Lyons destroyed, and deuoured, vers. 19. to the end of the 24. Thirdly, Darius makes a law,3 Darius his law made for a ge∣nerall feare of God, that all people shall feare and tremble before Daniels God, giuing most diuine reasons for this his law, verse. 25. to the end of the 28. which is the end of the chapter. S. Paul Ephes 4.17. ad 32.Epistle Ephes. 4, 17.32. Scope of the text. the end of the chapter, with his old rhetoricke and logicke, perswades & proues to the Ephe∣sians, that though they were Gentiles, yet were they not to liue and walke as other Gentiles in the vanity of their minde. But sith we are all (saith hee) to meete together in the vnity of faith and knowledge of the sonne of God (when wee are once gathered together by the Ministery of the word, and working of the Spirit:) Therefore your walking (saith hee) must not bee as theirs, which hauing their cogitation darkened, are strangers, from the life of God, through ignorance, because of the hardnesse of their heart. First therefore,1 A generall dehortation. hee being througly warmed with the zeale of Gods spirit, makes a long and most zealous (though but a generall) dehortation. ve. 17. to the end of the 24.
2 Speciall de∣hortation.Secondly, from this generall,Holy obedience must be ioyned with true faith. hee drawes and driues ma∣ny specials, vers. 25. to the end of the 32. which is the end of the chapter. Parts of the generall,In the dehortation, that the heathenish life might bee the more loathsome to them, hee 1. Describes, and paints it out in his colours, vers. 17, 18.19. 2. He opposeth the Christian life, and the learning of Christ, vnto that life, ver. 20.21. making also a true descrip∣tion of the Christian life, which is the new life, the renewed life, the life of the new man, of the regenerate man, verse. 22.23.24. His speciall dehortation is to many speciall ends:Special dehor∣tation is to ma∣ny special ends, from many speciall vices, for that they may affect diuers vertues, he dehorts from sundry vices: 1. To the intent that euery one may speake the truth to his neighbour, he dehorts from lying.1 From lying, vers. 25. 2. That they may be peaceable in spirit, he forbids sinfull and diuellish anger,2 From diuel∣lish anger, vers. 26.27. 3 From idlenes which is a kind of theft,3. That men may affect an honest contentation with their owne goods lawfully gotten, hee forbids idlenesse, which is a kinde of stealing, and a cause of stealing, and commaunds labour, that thereby a man may bee the better fitted and enabled to giue cheerefully, then to take vnlawfully, vers. 28. 4 From corrupt talke,4. That men may speake, do, and thinke to good purpose, vnto edifying, that they may speake peaceably, kindly, and to Gods glory, he 1. Forbids all corrupt communication. vers. 29. all bitternesse, anger, and wrath, ve 31. And 2. hee com∣mands curtesie, tender heartednesse, and forgiuing one another, e∣uen as God (saith he) for Christs sake forgaue you, vers. 32. Gospel. Math. 9.1. Scope of the text.That great God of loue, euen our Sauiour Iesus Christ, who in the last daies Gospel, did teach vs to loue him aboue all, & in the first place: and our neighbours as our selues (for his sake) in the next or second place: He, I say, being the foun∣taine
of goodnesse,Christ is mercifull to the faithfull beleeuers. cannot but shew it in his owne example to a beleeuer as appeareth in this text. Matth. 9. vers. 1. to the end of the 8. by his healing of a bedred man, the man sicke of the palsie. In the recording of this most charitable deed,Parts of this scripture, S. Matthew sets downe, 1. The miracle1 The miracle, in the first 7. verses. 2. The effect of the miracle2 The effect of the miracle, in the 8. verse. In the miracle wee may note 1. The description thereof in the 1. and 2. verses.Parts of the miracle, 2. Christs beating bcke of that secret reproach and vn∣iust  scandall which they brought against the worker of this  miracle from the third verse to the end of the 7.Parts of the description, The description conteines circumstance. 1. Of occasion being two-fold. 1. Either Christs comming to his owne citty, vers. 1.2. 2. Or their bringing to him a man sicke of the palsie. 2. Christs act so diuine, to wit, Remission of sinnes, filling the Paralytickes heart and soule so full of comforte: Sonne, bee of good comfort, thy sinnes are forgiuen thee. vers. 2. Christ repelles their slander (though it were but in their thought.)Christs repel—ling their slan∣der, though it were but in their thoughts, three wayes, 1. By reproouing it, ve. 3. and 4. 2. By confirming his reproofe by this position deli∣uered by way of a question: Whether is it easier to say: Thy sinnes are forgiuen thee, (which are the cause of mala∣dies) then to say: Arise from thy lamenesse, and walke,  vers. 5. 3. By applying this proposition, in shewing them the  vse hereof, and of his speech: And that yee may know that the sonne of man hath authority in earth to forgiue sinnes, &c. vers. 6. This authority and power he putteth in execution by ef∣fect of his commandement: And the palsie man arose, and de∣parted to his owne house. vers. 7.
Effect of the miracle,The effect which this miracle tooke, is two-fold,The doctrine of repentance is vrged. 1. The multitude maruailed. 2. They glorified God, yeelding a reason for both, because he  had giuen such power to men, vers. 8. The 20. Sonday after Trinity. Reason of the choyce of these 4 Scriptures,TRue and vnfained repentance is a chiefe grace of God, and gift of the spirit, as well as faith. And because they are twins and sisters, either borne both together, or the one but a short while after the other, Therefore such as haue made the choyce of the fittest scriptures for our Leitourgy haue set apart one out of Ioels prophesie,Faith & repen∣tance are twins and another out of the prophesie of Micah, seruing most fitly for this purpose. As also 1. Out of the holy Epistle to the Ephesians, a pithy ex∣hortatiō to this purpose. And 2. out of the Gospel, our Lords feruent, frequent, and seuerall calling of men to repentance, to be wedded to their Bride-groome Christ in truth and in righteousnesse. The first of the chapters Ioel. 2. being the first lesson for morning prayer,Mor. prayer. 1 Less. Ioel. 2. containeth, 1 An alarme of the day of iudgement sounded,First, an alarme of the dreadfull day of the Lords com∣ming, strooke vp and sounded: the fearefull maner of whose presence and comming is by the Prophet described, vers. 1. to the end of the 11. 2 The vse and end of this a∣larme.In the secon place the Lord by his Prophet sheweth to what end and purpose this alarme is sounded, and the Lords terrible, and instant kinde of comming presaged, to wit, that his people should also instantly, without delay, euen now (as he saith) turne vnto him: Turne vnto me with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning. The ma∣ner and reasons of which repentance are propounded, vers. 12. to the end of the 17.
God goes to law with his people to bring them to repentance.In the third part of the chapter, the effects and benefits of this repentance3 Of the effects and benefits of repentance, are expressed by Ioel, consisting 1. Either in Gods withholding & keeping backe his fore-denounced  iudgements from them, ve. 18.19.20. 2. Or in his vouchsafing, bestowing, & leauing sundry bles∣sings  behinde him, ve. 21. to the end of the 27. 3. In assuring them of the mercy of mercies, to wit, the  aboundant graces of his holy spirit, in the latter dayes, (the time of the Gospell) to bee powred out vpon all flesh, by the prophecying of their sonnes and daughters, their old mens dreaming of dreames, and their young mens seeing of visions, &c. verse. 28. to the end of the 32. verse, the end of the chapter. The 6. chapter of Micahs prophesie, is the first lesson for Euening prayer,Euen. prayer. 1 Less, Micah, 6. wherein the Prophet First,Parts. brings in the Lord commencing suit against his people1 The Lord cō∣menceth suit a∣gainst his peo∣ple, for the sins they had committed, and the duties they they had omitted, ve. 1. to the end of the 5, In the second part of the chapter, the Prophet taking vpon him the person of the people, confesseth the action,2 The Prophet confesseth the action and pleades guilty, appealing to the plaintises mercy, verse 6.7 8. In the third the Prophet sheweth in particular,3 What Gods declaration is, what it is which God declareth against them, in the seuerall parts and branches of hi declaration: whereupon hee brings his suite, and meanes to haue damages against them.Particulars of the declaration The parti∣culars are, 1. The deceit robbery, and oppression of the poore,1 No charity their lying, stealing, and hoording vp of riches wickedly gotten, ve. 9. to the end of the 15. 2. Their idolatry and irreligiousnesse,,2 No Religion, for which (as for the former iniquities which do grow from these roots) they shall be brought to an exigent and execution: yea they shall pay euery penny of the debt and penalty of Gods iudgements, as vers. 13.14.15.16.
In the third Scripture for this day Ephes. 5.15. to the end of the 20. vers.Epistle Ephes. 5, 15. to the end of the 20. the teacher of vs Gentiles,Paul exhorts to repentance in an Euangellicall phrase, as well as of others, prosecuteth this doctrine of repentance in effect & substance,Scope of the text, with the two Prophets, Ioel and Micah, though in another kinde of phrase, as: Haue no fellowship with the vnfruitfull workes of darknesse: Take heede that yee walke cir∣cumspectly.Parts of this Scripture, These fiue verses affoorde vs the best and most hole∣some counsell for vs to follow in the practise of our whole life, wherein wee must practise repentance. Parts of this text,The counsell is propounded and giuen by Sait Paul. First, in exhortations, Secondly, in dehortations, Thirdly, in his grounds and motiues to both. Exhortation is two fold,The first exhortation is: Take heed therefore that ye walke circumspectly. The second is: Walke as wise men. Both which are oppo∣sed to the Dehortation three-fold,1. Dehortation, walke not as fooles, vers. 15. The reason of both these is, how by good con∣sideration  wee may well performe them both, to wit, by redeeming the time: for the time and dayes bee euill, vers. 16. The second dehortation is: Wherefore bee yee not vnwise, opposed to a third exhortation, or rather to the second a∣gaine repeated: But vnderstand what the will of the Lord is, vers. 17. The third dehortation is: And bee not drunke with wine, wherein is excesse, opposed to a third exhortation: But bee fil∣led with the spirit, vers. 18. Which drinke of the spirituall li∣quor will worke these effects in you. 1. Speaking to your selues in Psalmes, &c. 2. Making melody to the Lord in your hearts, vers. 19. 3. Giuing thankes alwaies to God, euen the Father, in the name of our Lord Iesus Christ, vers. 20.
Christ summons his peo∣ple to repentance,The fourth Scripture Matthew. 22.1. to the end of the 14. vers.Math. 22.1, to the end of the 14, is a second summoning of sinners,Gospell. which our Lord that great Iudge maketh, and is in many things like to the first summons,Coherence of this with the Gospell for the second Sonday after Trinity, Differences be∣tweene them. which the Church did set forth for the Gos∣pell, to bee read and taught vpon the second Sonday after Trinity. Luke. 14.16. to the end of the 24. Herein is the diffe∣rence betweene them. First, the processe, or Quorum nomina heereof is lar∣ger. Secondly, the inferior Apparitors and Summoners of the great Lord his substitutes and officers are mo in number. Thirdly, the punishment of the contumacious & recusants (being either the world, the wicked,Reason for the choyce hereof in this place, or the vnworthy) more intollerable & grieuous. It doth most fitly, & in good order follow the former Gospel, because it sheweth the largesse of Gods bountifulnesse in Christ vnto all, who would that all should bee saued and therefore causeth all to be called and summoned,Parts of the text, or the most part of all. S. Matthew in this text deliuereth 1. His owne prologue, entrance,1 S, Matthewes prologue. or preface into Christs Sermon: Then Iesus answered, and spake vnto them in parables, verse. 1. 2 Christs Sermon2 Christs Ser—mon, it selfe, in all the rest of the verses. The argument,The subiect & argument of the Sermon, or summe of Christs Sermon is in these wordes: The kingdome of heauen is like to a certaine King which made a marriage for his sonne. For heerein both Protasis and Apodosis are briefly deliuered, ve. 2. The particular discussing of the partsThe discussing of the parts thereof, of the parable are in the rest of the verses. The first thing that the King doth, is his inuitation or bid∣ding of guests, which is two-fold.The Kings in∣uitatiō twofold 1. Vneffectuall. 2. Effectuall. The vneffectuall is two-fold.The vneffectu∣all is two-fold, The answer of the first that were called, was negatiue, The former inuitation, The latter inuitation, But both in vaine. For First, the former, which were called by the first seruants,
answered negatiuely by their refusall, Negando, vers. 3.The summoned persecuting Recusants are paid home with iudgements. The answer of the latter that were called, was three-fold,The latter which were warned by other Appartors (and yet made light of it) aliud agendo,1 Aliud agendo, vers. 3. to wit, One busied about his farme, Another about his marchandise, vers. 5. The third part of these latter guests Male agendo,2 Male agendo, she∣wing an absolute and an obstinate, yea, a malicious re∣fusall. 1. Seruos regis probris afficiendo. How the king tooke the an∣swer.2. Seruos regis necando. vers. 6. The effect that the third denyall, (wich is Necando,  a point next the worst) tooke in the King himselfe, is two∣fold. 1 Inward, in his inward affection of anger. 2 Outward, the effect of his anger and displeasure, to wit, his auengement, Retaliatio necando for necando, for his warriers destroyed those murtherers, and burnt vp their cit∣ty,The second & effectuall inui∣tation of guests caused by the ill successe of the first, vers. 7. The second inuitation of Guests is effectuall, though the first preuayled not, as appeareth in these wordes fol∣lowing: Then said hee to his seruants, truly the wedding is pre∣pared: but they which were bidden, were not worthy, verse. 8. as of Christ had said, the first inuiting and summons is inef∣fectuall, and tooke not any good effect, as the second is like to doe. Therefore 1. Another sort of seruants are sent: Go ye therefore out into the high waies, vers. 9. 2. The seruants doe accordingly execute the Kings com∣mand.Among the se∣cond guests there was one very bad guest, & was as badly vsed, ve. 10. 3. The King himselfe comes to the celebration of the marriage, to grace it with his presence, to see the Guests, to approue, or reprooue them: He findes there in his view∣ing of them, an vnfit and an vnworthy guest, (though inui∣ted, and no recusant) vers. 11. whom hee reproueth thus:  Friend, bow camest thou in hither, and hast not on a wedding garment?
Faith, repentance, and charity, com∣mended and commanded together.The manner and effect of the Kings reprouing and puni∣shing his Guest, is either 1. Present, or. 2. Future.The vnmaner∣ly, and vnpre∣pared Guest hath a two-fold punishment. Present, he is speechlesse, vers. 12. Future punishment is three-fold. 1. Is, take him away. 2. Is, binde him hand and foote. 3. Is, cast him into vtter darknesse,His future pu∣nishment is three-fold. where shall bee weeping and gnashing of teeth. vers. 13. A reason of the kings doome and sentence is rendred:The Kings reason for all. For many are called, but few are chosen, vers. 14. The 21. Sonday after Trinity. THe foure portions of holy Scripture that are chosen for this dayes seruice,Reasons for the choice of these 4. Scriptures. do commend vnto vs the gifts and graces of God, and fruits of the spirit heretofore mentioned, as of faith, repentance, vnfained loue, &c. with many o∣ther more, as may be seene in the particular analyfing, and breaking of them vp. For first,Summe of the first lesson for Morn. praier. the Prophet Habacuk in preaching against haughtinesse, and lifting vp of a mans selfe, in preaching a∣gainst auatice, oppression, intemperancy, cruelty, and ido∣latry, commendes the contrary vertues of humility, mer∣cifulnesse, continency, beliefe and faith in God, with all the fruits thereof. Secondly, the wise king Salomon,Sūme of the 1, Lesson for eue∣ning prayer. in the Proeme of his Pro∣uerbs, takes great paines to perswade vnto wisdome, consist∣ing in obedience, and faith, & disswading from folly, which is nothing else but infidelity and vnrighteousnesse. Thirdly, S. Paul, that valiant Marshal of the Lords field,Sūme of the E∣pistle, mustereth all Christian Souldiers, and traineth them vp in the warfare of this life, being furnished with their complete armour of defence and offence. Fourthly,Summe of the Gospell. our Lord will teach by his miraculous healing of the Captaines sonne, that his fauour and grace is stretched
out as well to the Gentiles as Iewes,Wicked men are reproued for sin, & exhorted to repentance, and that his gifts and calling to both, and of both, are, haue beene, and shall bee, without repentance. Mor. Prayer. 1 Les, Habac, 2.The first of the 4. Scriptures being the first lesson for Morning praier, is written, Abacuk. 2. chap. wherein Parts. 1 Abacucks pre∣paration,First, Abacuck prepares himselfe to receiue his directi∣on from the Lord, what he shall speake in his reproofe of the people. vers. 1.2.3. 2 His reproofe of the wicked ones.In the second place he taxeth and reproueth the wicked ones in particular, as 1. The proud1 The proud, and cruell oppressors, vers. 4. ad 8. 2 The couetous2. The greedy couetous Cormorants and deuourers of the poore, the depopulators of townes and countries, ver. 9. ad 14. 3 The drūkards3. The beastly and filthy drunkards, causing all others to bee drunke, as Ieroboam made Israel to sinne, vers. 15. to the end of the 17. 4 The idolaters4. The idle and vaine idolater in the 18.19. and 20. vers. the three last verses of the chapter. Eue. Prayer. 1. Les. Prou. 1.The second holy Scripture Prouerbs. chap. 1. being set out for the first Lesson at Euening prayer, comprehendes these principall points.Parts. 1 The instru∣mentall author and end of the writing of these parables,The first is as touching the author and penne-man of this booke of Parables, who sets downe the end why they were written, and the vse of them, vers. 1. ad 6. The second is Salomons Exordium to moue attention vnto the word of God,2 Salomons Pre∣face or Exordiū, the sonne of God, his wise and heauenly doctrine, which he calleth by diuers names, as the feare of the Lord, the fathers instruction, the mothers teaching, and by sun∣dry other titles▪ vers. 7.8.9. The third is Salomons disswasion and dehortation from hearkening to contrary counsell,3 Salomons de∣hortation from contrary coun∣sell, which will interrupt the course of our right manner of listning to the best wisedome and counsell, ver. 10, to the end of the 19.
Exhortation to put on the Christian armour,The fourth is Salomons description and declaration of wisedomes zealous cry,4 Wisedomes zealous cry, of Christs lowd calling of sinners to repentance: of the seuerall iudgements of God which wise∣dome denounceth to the foolish and obstinate, with the pro∣mises and blessings to the diligent hearkeners, and obedient, vers. 20. to the end of the 33. the end of the chapter. The third Scripture chosen for the Epistle, written,Epistle Eph. 6.16. ad 20. Ephes, 6. vers. 16. to the end of the 20. containing the Oration of that valiant Captaine Sant Paul vnto his Souldiers the Ephesi∣ans,Scope & drift of the text. wherein First,Parts. hee commendes vnto them inward and spirituall strength and courage, whereby they may the better put on,1 Inward & spi∣rituall courage is commended. and vse their spiritual armour, vers. 10. ad 13. Secondly, he nameth and describeth the seuerall peeces of armour,2 The names and description of the seuerall peeces of armor whether defending or offending, and sheweth how to apply and vse each peece verse. 14. to the end of the 20.1 Defensiue, as The first peece of armour defensiue, is the Girdle of Ve∣ritie.1 The Girdle of Verity, The second is the Breast-plate of righteousnesse,2 The breast-plate of righte∣ousnesse, vers. 14. The third is shooes for their feet, of the preparation of the Gos∣pell of peace,3 Shooes of the prepara∣tiō of the Gos∣pell of peace, vers. 15. The fourth is the most necessary Shield of Faith,4 Of the shield of faith, where∣with they may quench all the fiery Darts of the wicked one, vers. 16. The fifth is the Cash or Helmet of saluation.5 The Cash, or Helmet of sal∣uation, The sixth is the Sword of the spirit,6 The sword of the spirit, a weapon offensiue,Offensiue, vers. 17. The seuenth is the weapon of prayer, which is a peece of armour to both vses, as well for our owne defence, as also for the offending of our aduersaries: And pray alwaies, with all manner of supplication and prayer in the spirit,7 The weapon of praier which is both defēsiue and offensiue, verse. 18.19.20. The Euangelist S. Iohn, chapter 4. ve. 46. to the end of the 53.Gospell Ioh. 4.46. ad.
will confirme vnto vs,Scope of this text. Christ is the maker and giuer of all spirituall armour. that our Lord is the giuer of these for∣mer gifts, and out of his Panoplie and all-sufficient ar∣mory,God is the gi∣uer of these and all other gifts, we haue all our armour. That he casts no man in the teeth, no not the people whom hee calles out of the high∣waies: for the inhabitants of the country of Galile were to be partakers of his gtace, so well as the Iewes else where, as did appeare in the precedent Gospel. The vse of this miracle of Christs healing the Rulers son,By this second miracle which our Lord Iesus did (after he was come out of Iudea into Galile) of healing the Rulers son which was ready to dye, Christ himselfe will make it ap∣peare manifestly vnto vs, how easie he is to be intreated of al sorts of men:Parts of the text, yea, though their estate and condition bee ne∣uer so dangerous and desperate.1 Generall. The Rulers pe∣tion occasioned The first generall which the text affoordeth, is the Rulers suite Preces & petitiones Regiae vrged. 1 by the state of his sons sick∣nesse, and 2, Christs pre∣sence,1. By wofull occasion of his sonnes sicknesse. 2. By our Lords gracious coming out of Iudea into Ga∣lile, vers. 46.47. The second generall is our Lords behauiour. 2 Generall Christs beha∣uiour whereof there bee two parts,1. In chiding and reprouing them, vers. 48. Except yee see signes and wonders, ye will not beleeue: whereto is annexed the Rulers soft answer, vers. 49. 2. In our Lords giuing content and satisfaction to the  Ruler, by doing of the miraculous cure vpon his son, where∣in  respect, 2 Considerati∣ons in the mi∣racle,1. The deed and miracle it selfe by Christs word and te∣stimony: Go thy way, thy sonne liueth. 2. The confirmation of the deed. 1. By the Rulers faith: And the man beleeued the word that Iesus had spoken,3 Confirmati∣ons of the deed that is, and hee went away satisfied, vers. 50. 2. The testimony of the seruants which came last from  the childe, and met the father homeward, vers. 51.52. 3. The fathers confirmation of his faith, by his comparing and computation of the time: Then the father knew that it was the same houre, &c.
Perswasions to walke in the spirit.The third generall thing to be respected in the miracle (as hath bene obserued in other miracles) is the effect which it wrought. And the ruler beleeued, and all his houshold,3 Generall ef∣fect of the mi∣racle ver. 53. being the last verse of the chapter but one. The 22. Sonday after Trinity. THere are two holy Scriptures out of the Prouerbes,Summe of the two first Lessōs cho∣sen for the first Lessons of morning and euening pray∣er for this day, alluring and entising Gods people by most heauenly rhetoricke and spirituall perswasions to walke in the spirit, which King Salomon cals the way of good men and the waies of the righteous. Two other of the new Testament do answere the former in a most sweete melodie of the same spirit whereof in the first Saint Paul thankes God heartily that the Phillipians had hitherto continued walking in the fruites of the spirit and fellowship in the Gospell:Sūme of the E∣pistle & Gospel and hee praies that they may continue therein, that they may bee pure and without offence vntill the day of Christ, filled with the fruits of righteousnesse, &c. In the second S. Matthew doth relate our Lords doctrine concerning our forgiuing of scandales committed one a∣gainst another, being an infallible testimony of our vnfained loue one towards an other, and of or walking in the Spirit, & not performing the lusts of the flesh. The first of the selected Scriptures is,Mor. Prayer. 1 Les. Prouerb. 2, Prouerbes chapter 2. wherein King Salomon aimes at the same marke, which he leuelled at in the first,Scope of the chapter. keeping the same methode in hand∣ling the same matter: Which is,Exhortation to the practise of wisedome to exhort the children of the Church, to walke in the knowlede and practise of wise∣dome: neuer giuing ouer this his vaine of spirituall wooing till the latter end of the 9. chapter:Parts of the text. In this text he doth,1 He exhibites a goodly golden chaine for his sonne to weare, First, commend a goodly chaine for his sonne (euery true
beleeuer) to weare,A golden chaine for a godly man. consisting of a good many chiefe parts and principall linkes. ver. 1. to the 9. 2 A double commodity ri∣seth to him that is obedient herein.Secondly, this wise Counsellour propounds the two-fold commodity that ariseth to euery godly soule, which hearke∣neth to this counsell, weares this chaine, & delights his soule  in knowledge and obedience, A perswasion from ill mens company,The 1. good that comes thereof is, it will deliuer vs from the waies of ill men. ver. 10. to the 15. The 2. it will preserue vs from the strange woman, whose  dangerous estate he describes (as hee did the mans before) ver. 16 to the 19.A perswasion from il womens company, Thirdly, vpon these worthy premisses King Salomon in∣ferreth a most particular and speciall conclusion exhorta∣tiue,3 Salomons con∣clusion horta∣tiue vpon the former do∣ctrines, grounding it vpon a most sure foundation, first, Gods mercy to the iust and righteous, secondly, his iudgements and punishments to the wicked, ver. 20.21.22. the end of the chapter. Eue. Prayer. 1 Les. Prouerb. 3In the second selected Scripture, Prouerbes 3 chapter, Sa∣lomon a nursing father of the Church,Scope of the text. goes forward in fee∣ding his sonne with the sincere milke of Gods holy word, taking vpon him the party and person of God himselfe, of Christ,Parts of the text. the fathers wisedome, that hee may teach more profitably and with more authority. 1 A mention of more good a∣rising to the o∣dient, then hee spake of beforeFirst, he shewes that there will more good and commo∣ditiy (then he spake of before) arise vnto the soule and body of him that will remember Gods word, and treasure vp his commandements within his heart. ver. 1. to the end of the 4. 2 Hee shewes Gods children the way how to performe by 3 obseruationsSecondly, that it may be done with more facility, he shews the way and meanes how to performe it, as, 1 By trusting in the Lord and relying vpon him for di∣rection. ver. 5. 2 In taking heed of selfe conceit, pride, and haughtines,  or trusting in a mans riches, ver, 7. to the end of the 10. 3 In being so humble and lowly as to be content and not to murmure at afflictions and crosses. ver. 11.12.
Exhortation to weare this chaine.In the third part of the chapter hee makes an encomion or commendation of wisedome3 A commen∣dation of wise∣dome. and her effects, to cause it to be the better affected of all men. ver. 13. to the 26. In the fourth part he disswades Gods children from ma∣ny workes of the flesh as interupting the course of this heauenly wisedome, and walking in Gods feare,4 A dehortati∣on from perfor∣ming the works of the flesh, as as 1 The withholding of good from ohe owners thereof. v. 27.28. 2 Intending hurt against our neighbour. ver. 29. 3 Striuing with a man causelesse. ver. 30. 4 To bee fretted or grieued for the wicked man. ver. 31.32. In the fifth part of the chapter which is the conclusion he doth (as in the former chapter) propound the fearefull & dangerous estate of the wicked man,5 The dange∣rous and feare∣full estate of wicked men, which is scorneful & a foole (as he termes him) and the happy estate of the righte∣ous man, whom he cals humble and wise. ver. 33.34.35. the end of the chapter. The third selected Scripture is Phillipians chap. 1. ve. 3. to the end of the 11. containing in it.Epistle Phil. 1.3. ad 11, 1 Either the Apostles hearty thanksgiuing.Parts. 1 Thanksgiuing ver. 3. to the end of the 8. 2 Or his zealous prayer.2 Prayer ver. 9. to the 11. First hee doth heartily and ioyfully praise God for the constant perseuerance and continuance of that people of Phillippi in the fellowship of the Gospell,1 What his thanksgiuing is 2 His assurance of their further proceeding and continuance vnto the end by three reasons, from the first day vntill now. ver. 3.4.5. Secondly, he doth assure himselfe and them of their fur∣ther proceeding and continuance therein vnto the end. 1 Because God will finish that worke which he hath be∣gun  in them. ver. 6. 2 He hath had hitherto good experience of them to con∣firme  his iudgement and opinion of them herein.3 His prayer to God for thē out of this heart-rooted loue toward them. 3 His loue is such towards them, that it workes this per∣swasion in him. ver. 8. In the third place out of this longing after them & heart-rooted loue towards them in Christ Iesus, hee conceiueth a
prayer vnto God for their increase,His prayer is for two good ends, A parable propounded to ob∣serue mercy commanded, proceding and aboun∣dance in spirituall graces as knowledge and iudgement, ver. 9. to these ends, 1 That they may discerne things that differ, 2 That they may be pure and without offence vntill the day of Christ. ver. 10. Both which do arise from this originall, their aboundance, and being filled with the fruite of righteousnesse which are by Iesus Christ vnto the glory and praise of God. ve. 11. Gospell.The Lord that knew how hard a thing it is for the fro∣ward and crooked nature of man,Scope & sūme of it, to be constant and per∣seuering in charity, or to purse vp iniuries one after another, doth in this fourth Scripture,A perswasiue commandemēt vnto that diffi∣cult duty of par∣doning one ano∣ther, Math. 18.22. to the end of the 35, among these gifts of the spirit (so often inculcated in these Sondaies after Trinity) perswade the children and Church of Christ vnto this difficult and necessarie duty of pardoning and remitting the scandales and offences one of another,The generall parts, Saint Matthew will shew vs Christs intent herein. first in the question which Peter propoundeth, and is an∣swered by our Lord Iesus, ver. 21.22. secondly, by the con∣firmation, vse and application of that answere in the para∣ble of Creditor and Debitor vttered by Christ from the 23. to the end of the 35. the end the of chapter. Parts speciall of the text,And forasmuch as aboue all other things, for which God doth call man to account, this is a chiefe, the forgiuing and pardoning of offences,1 The parable, 2 The vse of the parable, Christ therefore vtters it, first, in a similitude of a King that would call his seruants to account, ve. 23. secondly,Parts of the pa∣rable, he makes vse of the parable, applying it par∣ticularly. ver. 35. 1 The gentle∣nesse and long suffering of the King the great Creditor,In this simile is to be considered, First, the gentlenesse and long suffering of the King to his seruant that great debtor, from the beginning of the 23. to the end of the. 27. 2 The vnmer∣cifulnesse & in∣humanity of the debtor,Secondly, the vnmercifulnesse and currish dealing of this great bankrupt dettor with his fellow seruant, a small & pety dettor, frō the beginning of the 28. to the end of the 34.
Vnmercifull men shall be paid home in the end,The udite and county day being come, the bankrupt is brought to the great Creditor,The bankrupt is brought to the audite of the great credi∣tor who 1 Requireth his due debt of him, being a thousand ta∣lents, as ver. 23.24. 2 Because the debtor had nothing to pay,1 The debt is acknowledged. the creditor takes order by sale of the debtors goods,2 Good satis∣faction must be made one way or other. that satisfaction should bee made. ver. 25. The vau-rien debtor being at a low ebbe, at a dead lift and in a pittifull case, saw there was no remedy but to haue re∣course in humiliation to his creditor. ver, 26.What course the bankrupt tooke with his Creditor. 1 By falling downe before him, 2 By a reuerent intreating of him, & by desiring of lon∣ger time. The creditor and Maister of this seruant being more rea∣dy to forgiue, then the debtor was able to pay;The mercy and pitty of the Creditor. is 1 Touched with compassion, 2 He loosed the debtors body from his imprisonment, 3 He forgaue him the debt. ver. 27. How soone this ding-thrist and bad husband had forgot∣ten all these courtesies, S. Matthew tels.The forgetful∣nesse and vn∣thankfulnesse of the great debtor towards a petty debtor cōsisting in three things, But when hee was departed, see how he handled a fellow seruant of his which ought a very small summe. 1 In laying hands on him. 2 Offering to strangle him. 3 Vrging present payment. ver. 28. His dettor humbled himselfe, though to his fellow seruant,  with more then cap and knees, as ver. 29. That would not serue, but this inhumane creature, the greedy Lyon must haue the poore mans carcase, and (as the prouerbe goes) make dice of his bones. ver. 30. This hard & vncourteous, not vncurreous & vndogged dealing is related to the Maister of them both. ver. 31. who 1 Cals him coram nobis, and rates him soundly. vir. 32. 2 Tels him his duty. ver. 33. 3 Growes angry with him. 4 Puts him in execution. ver. 34.
The 23. Sonday after Trinity.Fruits of the spirit must be tasted of Reason of the choyce of these Scriptures.IN the former two Scriptures out of the old Testament chosen for this day, the fathers of the Church haue offe∣red vs occasion to continue our meditations as touching our walking in the waies of righteousnesse, our affecting and delighting to tast of the fruits of the spirit, not of the for∣bidden fruite. Summe of the 2 first Lessons.Wherefore they bring in Salomon out of the same booke of the Prouerbes describing to the Church the roote, body, boughes, branches, leaues, blossomes and fruite of this flou∣rishing and fruitfull spirituall tree of holinesse to God and righteousnesse to man. Summe of the Epistle & Gos∣pellIn the two latter, taken out of the new Testament, this new and sanctifyed life is first exhorted vnto, called the coelesti∣all life, our conuersation is in heauen, secondly, our Lord and Sauiour out of a cauilling and captious question mooued by the equiuocating Pharisies and answered by him, teacheth the necessary performance of our true holinesse and re∣ligion to God, and all due reuerence, honour, and dutiful∣nesse to man. Mor. Prayer. 1 Les. Prouer. 11.The first of the Scriptures for morning prayer Prouerbes 11. commends to the Church many sweete instructions of righteousnesse,Parts. as First, concerning the grace and vertue of vpright and true dealing,1 Of vpright & true dealing. and the vice of falsehood and deceit, ver. 1. 2 Mischiefes a∣rising of pride, and the good which comes of umilty,Secondly, what mischeife ariseth of pride, and what fruit springs from humility, ver. 2. Thirdly, what goodly fruits doe spring from righteous∣nesse, and how righteous men flourish, and on the contrary what plagues doe accompany wicked men, whether they be hypocrites, The fruits of righteousnessei enuious, slanderous, or any way foolish. ver. 3. to the end of the 15.
Gods Church is dehorted, from fleshlinesse and vnrighteousnesse,In the fourth pat of te chapter Salomon commends other vertues, as modestie in women, mercifulnesse,3 Of modesty in women, mer∣cifulnesse, truth and vprightnes. truth & vprightnesse▪ peaceablenesse, and kindnesse, liberality, and bountifulnesse vnto all men: and discommends the contrary vices, ver. 16, to the end of the 31. the end of the chapter. The first for euening prayer is the subsequent chapter Prouerbes 12. wherein Gods spirit by Salomons pen,Eue. Prayer. 1. Les. Prou. 12. Scope of the text. holdes on the same course in extolling the fruits of righteousnesse both in men & women, telling all what good they shall reap by them, and threatning wicked ones with punishments for the contrary vices and vngodlinesse, In the first part hee commendeth to the Church the loue of instruction or affliction,Parts. 1 A commen∣dation of the loue of instru∣ction, or Gods chasticements, being as the pa∣rents of heauē∣ly knowledge and experience being as the parents and beget∣ters of knowledge. ver 1.2.3. In the second the industry and painefulnesse of a wo∣man, the wisedome, good speech, and good aduise of a man, and discommends the contraries. verse, fourth to the end of the ninth. In the third hee will teach men to bee mercifull, euen to beasts, to be paineful and frugall, vpright and iust, in deed,2 Of the pain∣fulnesse of a good woman. thought, and word, to be chearefull and not heauy hearted, faithfull, and not deceitfully minded. ver. 10. to the end of the 28. the end of the chapter,3 Of merciful∣nesse to beasts, and frugality. In the first text of Scripture out of the new Testament,Epistle Phil. 3.17. to the end of the 21, because examples do much preuaile with men, & do mooue much, Saint Paul Philip. 3.17. to the end of the 21. ver. the end of the chapter,Scope of the text. wil giue the Church of Philippi two sorts of Examples of good and godly both teachers and hearers, of bad and wicked both Ministers and people, that we may learne to embrace goodnesse by the one, and to eschew euill and naughtinesse by the other.Parts of the text. The text containeth. 1 An exhortation1 Exhortation to imitation. ver. 17. 2 The motiue and ground of the exhortation2 Grounds of exhortation. in the
other foure verses to the end of the chapter.Examples of fleshly and spi∣rituall teachers and hearers, Exhortation to imitate.The exhortation is 1. either to the imitation of a singular example, 2. or a plurality of examples. One exampleThe singular example is himselfe, be yee followers of mee. Many exam∣ples,The plurall is of others, whose conuersation is also like that of the Apostles. ver. 17. Parts and con∣siderations of the motiue,The motiue or reason of this exhortation is drawne â disparatis. A description of such mini∣sters as walke in by parts fiue waies, all which are crooked.The 1 part thereof taken from a description of their feareful estate which are contrary walkers and in by-pathes▪ whom he thus describeth. 1 They are enimies to the crosse of Christ. ver. 18. 2 Their end is damnation, 3 Their belly is their God. 4 Their glory is their shame: 5 They minde earthly things. ve. 19. This is that ill-fauoured, foule, and silthy picture of a  leathsome Minister and professor, of whom the Apostle hath often spoken before,The filthy loathsome pi∣cture of a bad Minister or pro∣fessor. and now tels them weeping The 2 part of the disparate or contrary is taken from a description of the blessed and happy estate of the true Apostles of Christ and vnfained professors of holy religion. But our conuersation is in heauen.2 A description of the blessed & happy estate of of the true A∣postles & pro∣fessors of Christs truth. ver. 20.21. the two last ver∣ses of the chapter. In the second Scripture of the new Testament & last of the 4. written Math. 22.15. to the end of the 21. Forasmuch as all debt is due, and mst be paid one way or other (as appea∣red in the former GospellGospel.) and because all men haue two sorts of debtes and dues to pay,Math. 22.15. to the end of the 21. the one to God, and the o∣ther to man, our Sauiour Christ being God and man, chal∣lenging a double debt,Coherence & harmony of this Gospell with the former Scope of this Gospel. will therefore in this portion of Scripture teach vs our obedience and loue vnto God, as al∣so our reuerence and duty to men and Magistrates, For they are fruits of the spirit, both to giue vnto God that which is his due, and vnto Cesar that which is Cesars.
The two fold loue is the fruits of the spirit.In this text S. Matthew denoteth, 1 The occasion of Christs teaching this doctrine,Occasion of the doctrine, ve. 15.16.17. 2 The doctrine it selfe,The doctrine it selfe, ver. 18.19.20.21. 3 The effect of the doctrine.The effect of the doctrine, ver. 22. The occasion is two-fold,Occasion two-fold, 1 Either the Pharisies consultation to entrappe him in his talke. ver. 15. 2 Or the accomplishing and acting of their plotted de∣signement. 1 By the cunning and smooth insinuating words of their Disciples, and the Herodians, ver. 18. 2 By the plaine propounding of their question,Parts of the doctrine, ve. 17. Is it lawful to giue tribute? A question needlesse, and out of question. The doctrine hath two considerations. First, the preface1 The preface, which S. Mattoeew makes, as 1 Opposing Christs omniscience & knowing their malice, vnto their cunning complotting to trippe him in his talke. 2 Expressing our Lords reproouing them for their dis∣sembling and hypocrisie. ver. 18. The second consideration is the solution of the question containing the doctrines of obedience to Magistrates:The solution of the question cōteining three considerations, and by implication he inferreth more strongly our true obedi∣ence and worshipping of God, as 1 By his commandement: Shew me the tribute money.Of his com∣mandement to shew the mony 2 By his question, Whose is this image? (by which questi∣on our Sauiour caught them & taught them) v. 19.20.2 His question about the mo∣ny, 3 By his consequent & conlusion of a strong argument gathered vpon3 The inferēce and conclusion hereupon, the premisss & former propositions which themselues had framed: Giue therefore to Cesar, the things that are Cesars, and vnto God the things that are Gods. ver. 21. The effect of the doctrine in the Pharisies and their com∣plotters and instruments consisteth in three things.Prts and ob∣seruations in the effect of the doctrine. First, they maruailed: secondly, they left him: thirdly, they went their way. ver. 22.
The 24. Sonday after Trinity.Good Lessons of obedience must haue good attentio Summe of the 2 first Lessons.THe two former selected Scriptures, taken out of the Prouerbes of Salomon doe afford doctrines of instructi∣on concerning the duties of the second Tables and that good which ariseth to such as performe those duties, with exhor∣tations thereunto, not without most gracious Lessons giuen to Gods people, for their loue vnto godlinesse, the feare of God, their dere to be instructed therein, and for their affe∣cting of all good fruites of the spirit, in thought, word, and deed. Summe of the Epistle & Gos∣pellThe two latter, being chosen out of the new Testament, are to the same ends and purposes, though in other manner and phrases deliuered: Whereof in the first Saint Paul doth praise God that the Colossians had practised many good Lessons of holinesse, and spirituall walking in their faith, hope, and loue: praying also for their continuance therein, and in other fruits of righteousnesse. And in the second, our Sauiour Christ himselfe, by his owne example of raysing vp the Rulers daughter, & stopping the womans bloudy issue, will teach vs to performe workes of charity one towards an other, omitting no occasion of doing good at any time. The first Lesson for morning prayer is Pro. 13.Mor. Prayer 1. Les. Prou. 13. Wherein, that the rest of his documents may with more fruite bee re∣ceiued,Parts. he First, giues in his Prologue a Lesson of obedience and of effectuall hearkning to all good instruction.1 A Lesson of obedience and hearkning to al good instructi∣on. A wise son will obey the instruction of his Father, but a scorner will heare no rebuke. ver. 1. Secondly, he giues many good Lessons in particular, as 2 Many parti∣cular instructi∣ons,1 Concerning the well ordering and guiding of a mans tongue with warinesse and discretion. ver. 2.3. 2 Concerning diligence in a mans calling. ver. 4.
Good Lessons for men and women3 Concerning truth and vpright dealing, by poore and rich, ver. 5, to the end of the 9. 4 Concerning humility, diligence, discrete behauiour, & hearkening to good counsell by poore and rich. ver, 10. to the end of the 18. 5 As touching the difference betwixt the obedient and disobedient, whom he calleth wise, and foolish in respect of many things falling out to them both. vr. 19. to the end of the 25. the end of the chapter. The first Lesson for euening prayer is Prouerbes 14.Eue. Prayer. 1 Less. Prou. 14. which in regard of his subiect matter, doth not much differ from the former.Parts. For though in the First part of the chapter his first parable bee of a wise woman.1 Of a wise woman, ver. 1. yet in the rest of the chapter he speaketh as he did before, namely in the Second place of righteous and holy men, of lewd & vn∣godly person,2 Of righte∣ous and holy men, of lewd & vngodly persōs of wise and foolish, of frugality and ill hus∣bandry. ver. 2.3, In the third, of speaking the truth,3 Of speaking the truth. ver. 5. and of the fruit which they do reape that walke holily and seeke wisedome, and so on the contrary. ver. 6. to the end of the 11. Fourthly, of those rules and precepts that are to be obser∣ued in a mans life and conuersation,4 Rules to bee obserued in a mans conuersa∣tion. & with what wisedome a mans waies are to be directed and managed. ve. 12. to the end of the 22. Fiftly, there is a commendation of labour and taking paines,5 A commen∣datiō of labour & paines taking a commendation of wisedome, truth, and the feare of God, ver. 23. to the end of the 27. Sixtly, Salomon discourseth of the honour and chiefe orna∣ments of a King:6 Of the ho∣nour & chiefe ornaments of a king. and what good vertues they are which both inwardly and outwardly doe adorne the people of any nati∣on, and contrary-wise what vices do dishonour and disgrace them, ver. 24 to the end of the 35. the end of the chapter. The Epistle for this day, Colossians chapter 1. ve. 3.Epistle Col. 1, 3. to the end of the 12. to the
end of the 12.Good trees of Colosse bring forth godly fruite. Scope of the text, containes an holy and thankfull rehearsall of the graces and fruits of the spirit, which did grow so plenti∣fully among the fruitfull people, those holy trees of Colosse. The partsParts. of the text are, 1 Saint Pauls thankgiuing,1 Saint Pauls gratulation and thanksgiuing to God. ve. 3. to the end of the 8. 2 His comprecation, that is the ioynt prayer of him, & his fellow-labourers2 The ioint prayer of him and his fellow-labourers. for Gods furtherance, increase and conti∣nuance of his grace in them, ver. 9. to the end of the 12. Parts of his thanksgiuing,1 He giues thankes to God for their faih, their loue, and  their hope. ver. 3.4. and a part of the 5. 2 Secondly, he tels them that these graces came to them by the ordinary instrumentall meanes of the preaching of Gods word: for the fruitfulnesse & good effects whereof he also implyeth a thanksgiuing, as praysing God in like man∣ner for Epaphras the Minister therof, whom God had set ouer them, in the rest of the 5. ve. and in the 6.7. & 8. verses. His comprecation is, Parts of the comprecation or ioynt prayer,1 That they might be fulfilled with knowledge of Gods will, in all wisedome and spirituall vnderstanding. 2 That they might walke worthy of the Lord, 3 And please him in all things. 4 Being fruitfull in all good workes, which are the ends  of knowledge, and increasing in the knowledge of God. ver. 9.10. 5. Their confirmation and strenghning with all might through his glorious power, vnto 1. patience, 2. long-suffe∣ring: and all these with alacrity, willingnesse, cheerefulnes, ioyfulnesse. ver. 11. 6 That they might (hauing attained all) giue thankes vnto the father which hath giuen all, which hath made vs meete to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light. ver. 12. Gospell. Math. 9.18, to the end of the 38,Though the cleargy-men, the Pharisies with their schol∣lers, and the Herodians being in profession spirituall men,
had no purpose so to shew themselues by their spiritual wal∣king,One good beleeuing Ruler, among many bad Pharisies. or by their indeuouring to vnderstand,Dependance of this Gospel wih the for∣mer Scope of this text. much lesse to beleeue and relye vpon Christ, yet in this portion of Scrip∣ture, Math. 9. ve. 18. to the end of the 26. the Euangelist will tell vs of a certaine good ruler among them (whom Saint Marke cals Iairus) who beleeued in the Lord, and therefore came vnto him to haue his daughter raised from death to life. In this Scripture,Parts of this Scripture. for memory and order sake, wee may consider that S. Matthew drawes all vno two principall & maine heads, For in the First place he sets downe▪ what was done abroad, & with∣out, before Christ came into the rulers house,1 What Christ did before hee came into the Rulers house. and that hee doth, in the first 5. verses. Secondly, he relates what fell out after2 What fell out after, Christ camc into the house of the Ruler: in the other 4. verses. In the first generall we may obserue,Parts of the first generall: 1 Either what was done at the Rulers first coming to Christ being abroad. 2 Or what fell out in the way as Christ went, for First, the Ruler came vnto Christ and made his petition. ver. 18. Secondly, we may respect the manner & matter of Christs answere vnto him, as 1 In his rising vp with his Disciples 2 In his following the Ruler to his house, ver. 19. The things to bee obserued falling out in the way as our Lord went to the Rulers house,Parts of the se∣cond generall, are 1 What the woman did which was diseased with an issue  of bloud 12. yeares. ver. 20. 2 What the woman thought and spake out of a true &  sound faith (Who beleeued, and therefore she spake) ver. 21. 3 What she suffered, what Christ did to her (for she was  his patient) who First, turned him about, Secondly, with compassion beheld her.
Thirdly, he spake to her: Daughter be of good comfort,Christs inexplicable kindnes to the beleuing ruler, thy faith hath made thee whole. Fourthly, he healed her the same houre. ver. 22. In the Rulers house whereinto Christ entred, Obseruations of things done in the rulers house.1 Obserue the miracle which was done, 2 Marke the sequele and consequent of the miracle. In the miracle note, 1 Christs preparing of himselfe vnto it. 2 The forme and manner of doing and performing it. Christ prepares himselfe to do this miracle, Part and notes of the miracle1 By perswading the minstrels and multitude of fidlers and dauncers to auoide the house, 2 By thrusting them out by force, though they derided  him. ver. 23.24. Christs prepa∣ration to the miracle.The forme of this miracle consists in two things, 1 Christ tooke her by the hand 2 She arose. ver. 25. The sequele of the miracle, is the same which arose therof, The bruit of it went through all the land.Forme of the miracle consists in. ver. 26, The 25. Sonday after Trinity. Sequele of the miracle,BEcause it is but sildome whē there fals out 26. Lords daies or Sondaies after Trinity,Reason and oc∣casion of the choise of these Scriptures▪ therfore the Leitougie of our Church sets not out any more, for any further Sonday, but foure for this last, being the fiue and twentieth in number & alwaies the last immediatly going before Aduent Sonday. Suumme of the 2. first Lessons. An excellent choyce made of the foure Scrip∣tures for this last Sonday af∣ter Trinity.And albeit they haue continued to appoint two Scrip∣tures for the first two Lessons out of Salomons Prouerbes, as they did before. Yet with those doctrines concerning god∣linesse and holinesse of life, they will also ioyne a confirma∣tion of the Aduent and Incarnation, Life, Death, Passion, Re∣surrection, and Ascension, of our Lord Iesus Christ. And as Ia∣nus is said to haue two faces, one looking backewards and the other forwards: So haue they chosen such Scriptures for
this last Sonday after Trinity,The doctrines of Mortification & viuificati∣on and of Chrsts Aduent connexed & vnited, which partly looke bcke∣wards, and are agreeable to the doctrines going before contained in the last halfe of the yeare, and partly forwards, which are sutable to those comprehended in the first halfe, For which cause they haue selected a most accomodated portion of Scripture out of the prophecy of Ieremy,Suumme of the Epistle and Gospell. in the third place, in stead of the Epistle, being a most Diuine, true plaine and remarkeable prophecy of the Incarnation and coming of Christ in the leh And in the last of the foure which they haue caled out for this day, it may appeare, that the prophesies are fulfilled concerning Christs coming: be∣cause he hath performed & effected (by Diuine & powerfull teaching, by extraordinary and miraculous working, by a glorious and victorious conquest in suffering) the offices of a Sauior, and Redeemer, a King and a Prophet, and shewed himselfe thereby to be of two natures, perfect God, & per∣fect man, of a reasonable soule, and humane flesh subsisting, and combined in one person. The first of these foure Scriptures is Prouerbes 15.Mor. Prayer. 1 Les. Prouer. 15 wherin the spirit of God giueth many gracious lessons by Salomons pen, vnto the children of the Church,Parts. as First, concerning the well guiding and ordering of a mans tongue1 Of the well guiding of the tongue, and words. ve. 1. to the end of the 7. & in other parts of the chapter. Secondy, touching the difference that is put between the godly and the wicked,2 The diffe∣rence between the godly and the wicked. whom hee cals the wise and the foo∣lish (as he did before, and as hee doth oftentimes afterward) ver. 8. to the end of the 15. Thirdly, hee discourseth of that Autarchy,3 Of the con∣tentdnsse & peacelnesse the righteou & the cotrar vi∣ces in wicked men, contented∣nesse, painefulnesse, peaceablenesse, with other sorts of gra∣ces and gifts of God, which are to be found in the righteous and godly, with the effects of those graces, and the contrary vices of the rebellious, wicked, and obstinate: which are not only abhomination to the Lord, but also dangerous & most hurtfull, yea pernicious to the bodies and soules of such as
doe delight therein. ve. 16. to the end of the 33.Difference betweene godly and vngodly men, the end of the chapter. Euen. prayer. 1 Less. Prouer. 16The sixteenth chapter of the Prouerbes of Salomon is the second of the foure, and the first Lesson for euening prayer, making mention Parts. 1 Of Gods praescience and particular pro∣uidence in the disposing of all things.First, of Gods praescience and particular prouidence in the disposing and gouerning of all things, euen in ech & euery mans priuate and particular affaires, ver. 1. to the end of the 7. Secondly, the text makes mention (as in the former chap∣ter) of the happy estate of that man,2 Of his happy estate which is content with a little, which is content with a small portion righteously gotten, and rightously vsed: al∣so it intreateth of Diuine eloquence, of iustice, righteous∣nesse, wisedome, discretion▪ affablenesse, mercy, and grauity, both in Kings and others, & of the vices on the contrary side ver. 8. to the end of the 28. Thirdly, Salomon speaketh of reuerence which is due to the aged,3 Of reuerence due to the aged of the necessary vse and effect of correction and discipline. ver. 29.30, EpistleThe third portion of Scripture is a part of the 23. chap∣ter of Ieremies prophecie. ver. 5.Ier. 23.5. to the end of the 8, to the end of the 8. wherein Almighty God by his Prophet Ieremy, out of that loue which he beareth to his people and sheepe,Parts of the text. maketh promises to them.3 Particular promises, First, to deliuer them out of the hands of spoyling and  destroying sheepeheards: secondly, so to be sheepeheard  himselfe in gathering them: thirdly, to prouide in time a  righteous branch whom he will raise vp vnto Dauid, which (as he speakes by the mouth of the Prophet Micah) shall feede that my people Israel.Parts of the text more spe∣ciall, These foure verses containe in them. First, a prophecy concerning Christ to come,1 A prophecy of Christ to come. verse fifth and sixt.
Promises of redemption by Christ alone.Secondly the vse that Gods people are to make concer∣ning this holy prophesie.2 The vse of the prophesie, The prophesie is2 Parts of the prophesie, 1. Concerning the humanity and incarnation of Christ the sonne of God,1 Humanity of Christ, and true incarnation, of his kingdome and the administration thereof, vers. 5. 2. Of his priesthood in sauing his people,2 His priest∣hood in sauing his people, and of his pro∣phesie in preaching and dooing righteousnesse both before God and man, ve. 6. The vse of the prophesie,Vse of this pro∣phesie what it is in the peoples acknowledging of Gods goodnesse towardes them by a later experience then they had in times past, being a more speciall accessory & appendix of his fauour. And this acknowledging, though in phrase and speech diuers, is diuersly set downe. 1. , negatiuely: They sall no more say,The prophesy is set downe both ngatiuely and affirmatiuely, the Lord liueth which brought vp the children of Israel out of the land of Aegipt, vers. 7. 2.  positiuely and affirmatiuely: But the Lord liueth which brought vs vp, and led the seed of the house of Israel out of the North countrey, and from all countries where I had scattered them, and they shall dwell in their owne land, vers. 8. A most ma∣nifest prophesie of the peoples returne out of captiuity, and of the saluation of Iews and Gentiles which belong to Gods fold and pasture. Though such a portion of scripture as this fourth,Coherence & agreement of this scripture with another appointed for the 7. Sonday after Trinity-Reason of this choyce, Iohn. 6.5. to the end of the 14 vers. was chosen to be read and taught in the Church for the 7. Sonday after Trinity, concerning our Sauiour Christs miracle of the 7. loaues, as this is of the 5. loaues. And though by the Germane Churches another is chosen farre different from both: yet our Church of Eng∣land hath in very Christian policy done this, to put the peo∣ple in minde (which they cannot doe too often) as concer∣ning their duties of beleeuing, trusting,Scope of this text, and putting all their confidence in God, and relying only vpon his fatherly pro∣uidence, who as he raiseth from death to life, & restoreth to health the inueterate diseased, yea the desperate & incurable.
Christ a most careful house∣holder to pro∣uide for the bodies as well as for the soules of his people.So heere hee sheweth himselfe a most carefull housholder in prouiding food for the peoples bodies, that are in health,Christ is the carefull housholder, whereby to preserue their bodies, and maintaine this health. In this text S. Iohn sets downe, First, the introduction or occasion of this miracle,1 Introduction, or occasion of the miracle. in the first 10. verses, and in a part of the 11. Parts of the text,Secondly, he makes relation of the miracle it selfe,2 The miracle it selfe, and the subsequent or effect thereof, in the rest of the 11. verse, and the other three verses following. In the entrance or introduction & preparation which our Lord makes to the miracle, S. Iohn obserueth Parts of the introduction.First, the occasion1 Occasion. which Christ tooke by reason of the distressed estate of the multitude which followed him, ve. 1. vnto a part of the 5. vers. 2 Deliberation.Secondly, he obserues Christs deliberating & conference with Philip & Andrew about the matter: (notwithstanding his resolution in himselfe) in the rest of the 5. vers, to the end of the 9. Thirdly, hee notes the preparation3 Preparation. which our Lord ma∣keth, consisting 1. In his placing the guests. 2. In preparing the bread & the fishes by blessing & distri∣buting them to the people, ve. 10 and a part of the 11. 3 Considerati∣ons of the mi∣racle.The miracle hath these considerations, First, concerning the number of them which were fed, (which as S. Luke also saith) was 5000. Secondly, their eating till they were satisfied. Thirdly, concerning the remainder of the fragments in the rest of the 11. vers. the 12. and 13. Effect of the miracle, what it was, & what vse the people made of it.The effect of the miracle is a testimony testifying and acknowledging of the power & efficacy of Christ by this di∣uine miracle, confirming this heauenly doctrine concerning Gods particular prouidence: and therby also strengthening the weake faith of his chosen people: Then the men, when they had seene the miracle that Iesus did, said: This is of a truth the Prophet that should come into the world. vers. 14,
A GENERALL CONNE∣xion and Harmony of all those holy Scrip∣tures that are appointed to be read throughout all the Congregations and Parishes of England, vpon all the Saboth daies, or Sondaies throughout the whole yeare, as also vpon those great and solemne Feasts of Christs Natiuity, his Circumcision, his Appearing and manife∣sting of himselfe to the Gentiles, his Fasting, and Tentation, his Passion, Death, Resurrection, Ascen∣sion, and his sending down of the holy Ghost, with the graces and gifts thereof, which fell vpon the Church, and shall con∣tinue with them to the end of the World. FIrst of all, for the 4. Sondaies before Christmas, which are called Sondaies of Aduent,Foure Son∣daies in Ad∣uent. holy scriptures are cho∣sen, containing doctrines, exhortations, and their vses, as touching the coming of our Lord Iesus Christ, his first & his secōd coming: that is to say, his coming in the flesh for our saluation, and his second coming at the end of the world to iudge the quicke and the dead. Hereupon followeth immediatly the celebration of the feast of the Natiuity of our Lord Iesus Christ,Christmas day. wherein choyce scriptures are culled out by the Fathers of the Church, con∣cerning Christs true incarnation, his perfect birth, and taking true flesh of the flesh of the virgin Mary. The day of our Lords circumcision,Christs Cir∣cumcision. called New-yeares day is remembred in the next place: wherein the doctrines of Christs performing the sacrament of circūcision in his own person, and the true circumcision of the heart are handled.
Christs Epi∣phany,To these doctrines accordeth the doctrine of the Calling of the Gentiles, handled vpon the day to the Epiphany (that is, Christs Apparition to the Gentiles) commonly called, the Twelfth day: when the wise Gentiles came from the East to Ierusalem to worship Christ the new-borne babe, and Saui∣uiour of the world. The 5. Sondaies after the EpiphanyFiue Sondayes after the Epi∣phany, are next in order, where∣in the doctrines concerning Gods fauour vnto all Nations, in redeeming, calling, and sauing them by Christ his sonne, are discoursed vpon. On the 3 Sondaies following called Septuagesima, Sexage∣sima & Quinquagesima,Septuagesima, Sexagesima, Quinquagesima Sondaies, are chosen texts of holy Scripture, conteining doctrines of Humiliation, that the church may be prepared vnto the celebration of the happy memory of our Lords perfect humiliation, by his fasting and temptation, as also by his passion and death. Vpon the 6. subsequent Sondaies, called the sixe Sondaies in Lent,Sixe Sondayes in Lent, are sit scriptures chosen out, containing doctrines, exhortations & dehortations, as touching the true humbling of our selues in soule and body, by refraining of those sins which do hinder our true and hearty seruice of God: As also by the embracing of those graces and vertues which doe make vs fit vessels for God to be serued in, whereby wee may be the more effectually humbled and cast down in sor∣row against the time of the memoriall of Christs sorrowes, caused by our sinnes: and therewithall meditate the ioyes, which all Christians doe conceiue in that most comfortable doctrine of Christs Resurrection. Easter day,Hereunto is annexed the celebration and commemora∣tion of our Lords Resurrection, vnder the name of the Feast of Easter: wherein the church hath made choice of doctrines accordingly, not onely to proue the truth of Christs power∣full Resurrection, but also there out to argue the necessity of our dying to sin, and rising againe to newnesse of life. Fiue Sondayes after Easter,On the 5. Sondaies following this feast of Easter, they haue picked out such texts of holy scripture as do proue the
truth of the doctrine concerning Christs resurrection: such scriptures also which doe propound exhortations to viuifi∣cation, as well as mortification: that so they may be the bet∣ter fitted to make benefit of Christs Ascension, another great pillar vpholding Gods house. The solemne least of our Lords Ascension,Ascension day, is remembred in the next place: for the which feast holy scriptures are al∣so chosen to proue the truth and the necessity of that most comfortable doctrine of our Sauiours ascending into heauē: both to prepare a place for his elect children, as also to send downeth holy Ghost vnto the Church in most plentifull maner, which he did at the feast of Pentecost, commonly cal∣led Whitsonday, or Witsunday. At the time appointed,Whitsonday, called Pente∣cost. our Lord performed his promise concerning his sending of a comforter vnto his Church, namely vpon this day called Pentecost. For which cause the church hath chosen remarkable scriptures, to the intent that all Gods people dispersed vpon the face of the earth, may with true thanfulnes acknowledge so vnspeakable a benefit. The Vnity in Trinity, and the Trinity in Vnity which,Trinity Sōday The 25. Son∣dayes after Trinity, is to be worshipped, cannot bee remembred: and therefore some scriptures are also appointed for the commemoration and celebration of that most diuine and sacred mystery, not onely vpon that day which is called Trinitie Sonday, but also for fiue and twenty Sondaies after: Wherein, as vpon this day, the doctrines concerning the mystery of this indiuisi∣ble Trinity, are handled: So for the twenty fiue Sondaies af∣ter this feast, (which make vp the other halfe yeare,) they haue selected such texts of holy scripture, as may most fitly stand Gods people in stead for doctrines and exhortations, vnto the bringing forth of the fruites of the spirit, and to the hatred and detestation of the workes of the flesh.
AN INDEX, OR TABLE, of all those two hundred and sixtie holy Scriptures (which are contained in this harmonicall Tessarography, or Combination) whether they be whole chapters, or parts and parcels of chapters, out of the old and new Testament, with the number of the page where euery Com∣bination beginneth. FOr the first Sonday in Aduent these foure concordant holy Scriptures are chosen out, First Sonday in Aduent. Page. 6. Esayes prophesie the first chapter, is for the first Lesson at morning prayer. Esayes prophesie the second chapter, is for the first Lesson at Eue∣ning prayer. Romanes, chapter 13. verse 8. to the end of the chapter, is for the Epistle. Matthew. 21. chapter, verse 1. to the end of the 13. vers. is for the Gospell. Second Son∣day in Aduent, Page. 11. Esay. chap. 5. Morning prayers, first Lesson. Esay. chap. 24. Morning praiers, second Lesson. Romanes 15 chapter, verse 4, to the end of the 14. verse, for the Epistle. Luke 21. chapter, verse 25. to the end of the 33. verse, for the Gospell. Third Sonday in Aduent. Page. 16. Esay. 25. chapter, Morning praier, first Lesson. Esay. 26. chapter, Euening praier, first Lesson. 1. Cor. 4.1. to the end of the 5. vers. Epistle. Matth. 11.2. to the end of the 10. vers. Gospell.
Fourth Son∣day in Aduent. Pag. 19. Esay. 30. chapter. Morning prayer, first Lesson. Esay. 32. chapter. Euening prayer, first Lesson. Philip. 4.4 to the end of the 8. vers. Epistle. Iohn. 1.19. to the end of the 28. vers. Gospell. Natiuity of our Sauiour Iesus Christ. Pag. 23. Proper Psalmes for Morning praier, be the 19.45.85. Proper Psalmes for Euening prayer, be the 89.110.132. Esay. 9. chapter, is Morning praiers first Lesson. Esay. 7. chap. v. 10. to the end of the 15. ver. Eue. pra. 1. Lesson. Luk. 2. chap. ve. 1. to the end of the 14. ver. Morn. prai. 2. Lesson. Titus, 3. chap. ver. 4. to the end of the 8. ver. Euen. pra. 2. Lesson. Hebrews. 1.1. to the end of the 13. verse, Epistle Iohn. 1 ver. 1. to the end of the 14 vers. Gospell. Sonday after the Natiuity of Christ. Page. 31. Esay 37. chapter, Morning praier; first Lesson. Esay. 38. chapter, Euening praier, first Lesson. Galat. 4.1. to the end of the 7. for the Epistle. Matthew, the whole first chapter for the Gospell. Circumcision of Christ. Pag. 35. Genes. 17. chapter, Morning prayer, first Lesson. Deuter. 10.12. to the end of the 15. verse, Euen. pray. first Lesson, Rom. 2.17. to the end of the 29. ver, Morn. prai. 2. Lesson. Colossians. 2. Euening praier, second Lesson. Romanes. 4.8. to the end of the chapter, Epistle. Luke 2.15. to the end of the 21. verse, Gospell. Epiphany Pag. 40. Esay, 40. chapter, Morning praier, first Lesson. Esay, 49. chapter, Euening praier, first Lesson, Luke 1.3. to the end of the 22. vers. Morning praier 2. Lesson. Iohn, 2.1. to the end of the 11. verse, Euening praier 2, Lesson, Ephes. 3.1. to the end of the 11. verse, Epistle. Matthew, 2.1. to the end of the 12. vers. Gospell. 1 Sonday after the Epiphany. Page. 45, Esay 44. chapter, Morning praier, first Lesson. Esay 46. chapter, Euening prayer, first Lesson. Romanes 12.1. to the end of the 5. verse, Epistle, Luke 2.42. to the end of the chapter, Gospell. 2 Sonday after the Epiphany Page, 48, Esay 51. chapter, Morning prayer, first Lesson, Esay, 52. chapter, Euening praier, first Lesson, Romanes 12.6. to the end of the 16. verse, Epistle. Iohn 2.1. to the end of the 12. verse, Gospell.
3 Sonday after the Epiphany, Page, 52, Esay 55. chapter, Morning praier, first Lesson. Esay 56. chapter, Euening praier, first Lesson. Romanes 12.16. to the end of the 21. verse, Epistle. Matth. 8.1. to the end of the 14. verse, Gospell. 4 Sonday after the Epiphany, Pag. 57. Esay. 57. chap. Morn. pra: first Lesson. Esay 58. chap. Euen. prai. first Lesson. Rom. 13.1. to the end of the 7. verse, Epistle. Matth. 8.23. to the end of the chapter. Gospell. 5 Sonday after the Epiphany, Pag. 61. Esay. 59. chap. Morn. prai, 1. Lesson. Esay. 64. chap. Euen prai. 1. Lesson. Colos. 3.12. to the end of the 17. verse, Epistle. Matth. 13.24. to the end of the 30, verse, Gospel, Septuagesima Sonday. Pag. 65. Genesis, 1. chap. Morn. prai. 1. Lesson, Genesis, 2. chap. Euen. prai. 1. Lesson. 1. Cor, 9.24. to the end of the chapter, Epistle. Matth. 20.1. to the end of the 16. ver. Gospell, Sexagesima Sonday. Pag, 70. Genes. 3. chap, Morn. prai. 1. Lesson. Genes. 6. chap. Euen. prai. 1, Lesson. 2. Cor. 11.19. to the end of the 32. verse, Epistle. Luke 8.4. to the end of the 15. verse, Gospel, Quinquagesima Sonday. Pag. 74, Genes. 9. chap. Morn. prai. 1. Lesson. Genes. 12. chap. Euen. prai. 1. Lesson. 1. Cor. 13. verse 1. to the end of the chapter, Epistle, Luke 18.31. to the end of the chapter Gospel, 1 Sonday in Lent, Pag 81. Genes. 19. chap. Mor. Prayer 1. Lesson. Genes. 22. chap. Eue. prayer. 1. Lesson. 2. Cor. 6.1. to the end of the 10. verse, Epistle, Matth, 4.1. to the end of the 11. verse, Gospel. 2 Sonday in Lent, Pag 87. Genes. 27. chap. Morn. prai. 1. Lesson. Genes. 34. chap. Euen. pra. 1. Lesson. 1. Thes. 4.1. to the end of the 8. verse Epistle. Matth. 15.21. to the end of the 28. verse, Gospell. 3 Sonday in Lent. Page. 92. Genes. 39. chap. Morn. prai. 1. Lesson. Genes. 42. chap. Euen. prai. 1. Lesson, Ephes. 5.1. to the end of the 14. verse, Epistle, Luke 11.14. to the end of the 28. verse, Gospell.
4 Sonday in Lent, Page. 99. Genesis 43. chapter, Morning prayer, first Lesson, Genesis 45. chapter, Euening prayer, first Lesson, Galath. 4.21 to the end of the chapter, Epistle, Iohn. 6.1. to the end of the 14. verse, Gospell. 5 Sonday in Lent. Page. 103. Exodus 3. chapter, Morning praier, first Lesson, Exodus 5. chapter, Euening prayer, first Lesson. Hebrewes 9.11. to the end of the 16. verse, Epistle. Iohn. 8.46.. to the end of the 59. verse, Gospell. 6 Sonday in Lent. Pag. 107. Exodus 9. chapter, Morning praier, first Lesson, Exodus 10. chapter, Euening praier, first Lesson, Philip. 2.5. to the end of the 11. verse, Epistle, Matth. 26. & 27. chapters to the ende of the 56. verse of the 27. chapter for the Gospell. Easter day. Page. 124. Proper psalmes for, Morning praier, be the 2.57.111. Proper psalmes for Euening praier, be the 113.114.118. Exodus 12. chapter, Morning praier, first Lesson. Exodus 14. chapter, Euening praier, first Lesson. Rom. 6. chapter, Morning praier, second Lesson, Acts 2. chapter, Euening praier, second Lesson, Colos. 3.1. to the end of the 7. verse, Epistle. Iohn 20.1. to the end of the 10. verse, Gospell. 1 Sonday after Easter. Page. 124. Numbers 16. chap. Morning prayer, first Lesson. Numbers 22. chapter, Euening praier, first Lesson. 1, Iohn. 5.4. to the end of the 12. vers. Epistle. Iohn. 20. chapter, to the end of the 23. verse, Gospell. 2 Sonday after Easter. Pag. 130 Numbers 23. chap. Morning praier, first Lesson, Numbers 25, chapter, Euening praier, first Lesson, 1. Pet. 2.19. to the end of the chapter, Epistle, Iohn 10.11. to the end of the 16, verse, Gospell, 3 Sonday after Easter. Pag. 134. Deut. 4. chapter, morning prayer, first Lesson, Deut. 5. chapter, Euening prayer, first Lesson, 1. Pet. 2.11., to the end of the 18. verse, Epistle, Iohn, 16.16. to the end of the 22: verse: Gospell: 4 Sonday after Easter. Pag. 139 Deut. 6. chapter, Morning prayer, first Lesson, Deut 7. chapter, Euening praier, first Lesson, Iames 1.17 to the end of the 21. verse, Epistle. Iohn. 16.5. to the end of the 15. verse, Gospell.
5 Sonday after Easter. Pag. 144. Deut. 8. chapter. Morning prayer, first Lesson. Deut. 9. chapter. Euening prayer, first Lesson. Iames 1.22. to the end of the 27. vers. Epistle. Iohn. 16.23. to the end of the 30. vers. Gospell. Ascension day. Pag. 149 Proper Psalmes for Morning praier, be the 8.15.21. Proper Psalmes for Euening prayer, be the 23.68.108. Deut. 10. chapter, Morning praier, first Lesson. 2. Kings 2. chap: Euening praier. first Lesson. Acts 1.1. to the end of the 11. verse, Epistle. Marke 16.14. to the end of the chapter, Gospell. Sonday after Ascension day, Pag. 157. Deut. 12. chapter, Morning praier, first Lesson, Deut. 13. chapter, Euening praier, first Lesson. 1. Pet. 4.7. to the end of the 13. verse, Epistle, Ioh. 15.26. to the end of the 27. verse, and 16. chap. verse 1. to the end of the 4. verse. Gospel, Whitsonday, Pag. 161 Proper Psalmes for Morn. prai. be the 45.47. Proper Psalmes for Euen. prai: be the 104, 145. Deut. 16. chap. Morning prai: 1. Lesson, Wisdome 1. chap: Euening prayer, 1. Lesson. Act. 10.34. to the end of the chapter, is morning. prayers 2: Lesson, Act: 19:1: to the end of the 20. ver, is Euening prayers 2. Lesson. Ast. 2.1.. to the end of the 12. verse, Epistle Iohn. 14.25. to the end of the chapter, Gospell. Trinity Sōday, Page. 169. Genes. 18. chap. Morning praier, first Lesson. Ioshua. 1. chapter, Euening praier, first Lesson. Matth. 3. chapter, Morn. prai: 2. Lesson Reuel. 4. chap: ve: 1, to the end: Epistle: Iohn 3:1. to the end of the 15. vers. Gospell. 1 Sonday after Trinity, Page, 175 Ioshua. 10. chap: Morning prayer, first Lesson. Ioshua 22, chapter, Euen. pray. first Lesson: 1. Iohn. 4:7: to the end of the 21, verse Epistle. Luke 16.19, to the end of the chapter, Gospell. 2 Sonday after Trinity, Page 180. Iudges. chapter, 4. Morning praier, first Lesson. Iudges 5. chapter, Euening praier, first Lesson,
1. Iohn. 3.13. to the end of the chapter Epistle. Luke 14.16. to the end of the 24. verse, Gospell. 3 Sonday af∣ter Trinity, Page. 185, 1. Sam. 2. chap. Morn. pra: first Lesson. 1. Sam. 3. chap. Euen. prai. first Lesson. 1. Pet. 5:5, to the end of the 11, verse, Epistle, Luke 15.1. to the end of the 11. verse, Gospell. 4 Sonday af∣ter Trinity. Pag. 188. 1. Sam. 12. chap. Morn. prai, first Lesson. 1. Sam. 13. chap. Euen prai. first Lesson. Rom. 8.18. to the end of the 23. verse, Epistle. Luke 6.36. to the end of the 42. verse, Gospel, 5 Sonday af∣ter Trinity, Page, 193, 1. Sam. 15. chap. Morn. prai. 1. Lesson, 1. Sam. 17. chap. Euen. prai. 1. Lesson. 1, Pet. 3, 8: to the end of the 14: verse Epistle. Luke 5.1. to the end of the 11. ver. Gospell, 6 Sonday af∣ter Trinity. Page. 197. 2. Sam: 12: chap, Morn. prai. 1. Lesson. 2. Sam. 21. chap. Euen. prai. 1, Lesson. Rom. 6.3. to the end of the 12. verse, Epistle. Math. 5.20. to the end of the 26. verse, Gospel, 7 Sonday af∣ter Trinity. Page. 200. 2. Sam. 22. chap. Morn. prai. 1. Lesson. 2. Sam. 24. chap. Euen. prai. 1. Lesson. Rom. 6:19: to the end of the chapter, Epistle, Mark. 8.1, to the end of the 9. verse, Gospel, 8. Sonday af∣ter Trinity. Pag. 204, 1. Kings 13. chap. Morn. Pray. 1. Lesson. 1. Kings 17. chap. Eue. prayer. 1. Lesson. Rom. 8.12. to the end of the 17. verse, Epistle, Math. 7.15. to the end of the 21. verse, Gospell. 9 Sonday af∣ter Trinity. Page. 210, 1. Kings 18. chap. Morn. prai. 1. Lesson. 1. Kings 19. chap. Euen. pra. 1. Lesson. 1. Cor. 10.1. to the end of the 13. verse Epistle. Luke 16.1. to the end of the 9. verse, Gospell. 10 Sonday af∣ter Trinity, Pag. 214. 1. Kings 21. chap. Morn. prai. first Lesson. 1. Kings 22. chap. Euen. prai. 1. Lesson, 1. Cor. 12.1. to the end of the 11. verse, Epistle, Luke 19.41. to the end of the chapter, Gospell, 11 Sonday af∣ter Trinity Pag. 218. 2. Kings 5. chapter, Morning praier, first Lesson. 2. Kings 9. chapter, Euening praier, first Lesson.
1. Cor. 15.1. to the end of the 11. verse, Epistle. Luke 18.10. to the end of the 14. verse, Gospell. 12 Sonday af∣ter Trinity, Page 222, 2. Kings 10. chap. Morn. pra: first Lesson. 2. Kings 18. chap. Euen. prai. first Lesson. 2 Cor. 3.4. to the end of the 9. verse, Epistle, Marke 7.31. to the end of the 37. verse, Gospell. 13 Sonday af∣ter Trinity Pag. 27, 2. King, 19 ap. Morn. praier, first Lesson. 2. King. 23.. chap. Euen prai. first Lesson. Gal. 3.16. to the end of the 22. verse, Epistl. Luke 10.23. to the end of the 37, verse, Gospel, 14 Sonday af∣ter Trinity, Page, 231, Ieremy 5. chap. Morn. prai. 1. Lesson, Ieremy 22 chap. Euen. prai. 1. Lesson. Gal. 5.16. to the end of the 24: verse Epistle. Luke 17.11. to the end of the 19. ver. Gospell, 15 Sonday af∣ter Trinity. Page. 236. Ieremy 35. chap, Morn. prai. 1. Lesson. Ieremy 36. chap. Euen. prai. 1. Lesson. Gal. 6.11. to the end of the 18. verse, Epistle. Matth. 6.24. to the end of the 34. verse, Gospel, 16 Sonday af∣ter Trinity. Page. 240. Ezech. 2. chap. Morn. prai. 1. Lesson. Ezech. 14. chap. Euen. prai. 1. Lesson. Ephes. 3.13. to the end of the chapter, Epistle, Luke 7.11, to the end of the 16. verse, Gospel, 17 Sonday af∣ter Trinity. Pag. 244, Ezech. 16. chap. Morn. Pray. 1. Lesson. Ezech. 18. chap. Eue. prayer, 1. Lesson. Ephes. 4.1. to the end of the 6. verse, Epistle, Luke 14.1. to the end of the 11. verse, Gospell. 18 Sonday af∣ter Trinity. Page, 249, Ezech. 20. chap. Morn. prai. 1. Lesson. Ezech 24. chap. Euen. pra. 1. Lesson. 1. Cor. 1.4. to the end of the 8. verse, Epistle. Matth. 22.35. to the end of the 46. verse, Gospell. 19 Sonday af∣ter Trinity, Pag, 252. Daniel. 3. chap. Morn. prai. first Lesson. Daniel. 6. chap. Euen. prai. 1. Lesson, Ephes. 4.17. to the end of the chapter, Epistle Matth. 9.1. to the end of the 8. verse. Gospell, 20 Sonday af∣ter Trinity Pag. 256. Ioel. 2. chapter, Morning praier, first Lesson. Micah. 6. chapter, Euening praier, first Lesson.
Ephes. 5.15. to the end of the 20. vers. Epistle. Matth. 22.1. to the end of the 14. vers. Gospell. 21 Sonday af∣ter Trinity. Page. 261. Abacuk. 2. chapter, Morning praier, first Lesson. Prouerbs. 1. chapter, Euening praier, first Lesson. Ephes. 6.16. to the end of the 20. verse, Epistle. Iohn 4.46. to the end of the 53. verse, Gospell. 22 Sonday af∣ter Trinity. Page. 265. Prouerbs 2. chap. Morning prayer, first Lesson. Prouerbs 3. chapter, Euening praier, first Lesson. Phil. 1.3. to the end of the 11. vers. Epistle. Matth. 18.23, to the end of the 35, verse, Gospell. 23 Sonday af∣ter Trinity. Pag. 270. Prouerbs 11. chap. Morning praier, first Lesson, Prouerbs 12. chapter, Euening praier, first Lesson, Phil, 3, 17, to the end of the 21. verse, Epistle, Matth. 22, 15, to the end of the 21, verse, Gospel, 24 Sonday af∣ter Trinity. Pag. 274. Prouerbs 13, chapter, morning prayer, first Lesson Prouerbs 14, chapter, Euening prayer, first Lesson, Coloss. 1, 3, to the end of the 12, verse, Epistle, Matth, 9 18, to the end of the 26: verse: Gospell: 25 Sonday af∣ter Trinity, Page. 278. Prouerbs 15. chapter, Morning prayer, first Lesson, Prouerbs 16. chapter, Euening praier, first Lesson, Ieremy 23. verse 5, to the end of the 28, verse, Epistle. Iohn. 6.5. to the end of the 14. verse, Gospell.
Because the chiefe Summary Notes on the top of all, or the most part of the Pages of this Booke, could not well be inserted in euery page, I haue thought good to put them in a Table here fol∣lowing by themselues: and so much the rather, for that they do conteine, in very few words, the chiefe scope and drift of all matters conteined throughout the booke, in euery seuerall page, whether it concerne the substance and summary effect of the Chapters and first Lessons, taken out of the old Testament, or of the Epistles and Gospels out of the new. Foure Sō∣daies in Aduent.1 Christs first coming, Pages 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 2 Christs second coming. pag. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 3 Certainty of Christs coming pages 16. 17. 18. 19. 4 Speciall demonstrations of Christs coming to all people, pag. 20 21. 22. Christmas day.Christs incarnation, page. 23. Christs diuine & humane ge∣neration, page, 24, 25, Christs kingdome, Priesthood, and prophecie, 26, 7, Christs true and immaculate birth, 28: 29: Christs diuinity and humani∣ty demonstrated,Sonday af∣ter Christ∣mas day. 30. 31. Hezekiah a figure of Christ, zealous for Christ, 32. 33. Christs incarnation in the ful∣nesse of time, 34. Christs pedigree, 35 Old circumcision, 36. Internall circumcision requi∣red, 37.Circumci∣sion of Christ. Effectuall circumcision of the Gentiles, 38. Sheepheards true circumcisi∣on of the heart, 39. Calling of the Gentiles, 40. Great Britaine called among other Islands of the Gentiles,Epiphany. 41. Iohn Baptist preached of the calling of the Gentiles, 42. 43. The wise holy Gentiles im∣brace Christ. 44.1 Sonday after the Epiphany, The Iewes are taught the cal∣ling
of the Gentiles, 45. 46. Our Lord Iesus, the true vo∣tary of obedience, 47: 48. 2 Sonday after the EpiphanyComfort to Iewes and Gentiles by Christs apparition to them, pag. 49. Preachers of this saluation, must be well intertained, 50. Christ performes saluation in the largest manner, 51. Christs saluation is of the lar∣gest volume,3 Sonday after the Epiphany, 52. The riches of Christs bounti∣fulnesse, 53. Ʋse of this great fauour of God in Christ 54. Christ performes the prophe∣cied promises,4 Sonday after the Epiphany. 55. 56. God respects fruits of all these fauours, 57. 58. God lokes for grapes of these his graces, 59. Christs power is Almightie, pag, 60, 5 Sonday after the Epiphany.Mans waies very light and vaine, as himselfe cōfesseth, 61. Men must pray for reforma∣tion of their waies, 62. 63. Examples of meeknesse and bountifulnesse in Christs long∣animity and patient expecta∣tion,Septuagesi∣ma Sonday 64. Mans humiliation in cōsidera∣tion of his fall from that exeael∣lent creation, 65. 66. 67. S. Paul an example of humili∣ation, 68. Christ loues whom he wil, and how he will, 69. Proud, enuious,Sexagesima Sonday, & malicious men doe grudge at other mens good, 70. Man did not continue humble nor thankefull, 71. The fall of our first parents, Crying sins of the first age, 72. God fauours Noah & his, 73. God shewes who are rightly humbled, 74. The godly hearers, & faithful practisers, 75. 76.Quinquage∣sima Son∣daie, Noah fructifieth internally, as well as externally, 77. Abraham beleued the pro∣mise, and obeied God, 78. Edification in loue is the end of the multiplicatiō of Gods gra∣ces & benefits vpō the church, 79. Christ is the substance of loue,1 Sonday. in Leut. charity, & edification, 80, 81. Sodomits forget the blessing of crescite, & multiplicamini, & curse of the Deluge, 82, 83 Abraham remembers all, and is obedient to Gods comman∣dement, 84. Exhortations & examples of fruitfulnesse in the graces of God, 85. Christs tentation and trial ex∣ceeds all other trials, 86.
Christs chalenge and combate with the Diuell 87. Our soules and bodies must be tamed,2 Sonday in Lent. if we meane to bee truly hūbled, we must increase in the subduing bf of our lust, 88. 89 Exhortation to cleannesse in soule and body, 90: The womans pure faith in her earnest praier,3 Sonday in Lent. 91. 92 Rare examples of chastity, 92. Incontinency of Putipliars wife, 93. Iosephs constancie in all his businesse, 94. Iosephs dutifulnesse to his fa∣ther, & loue to his brethren, 95. 96. God must bee imitated in loue and righteousnesse, Christ his exceeding loue to the Demoniackes, 97. Christ answers the blasphe∣ming Pharisies,4 Sonday in Lent, 98. God forsakes not his people in distresses, 99. Iosephs brethrē comforted by their brother, & the king, 100 God makes his people true and natural children, 101. Christ prouides for the bodies and soules of his children and people, 102. 103. Israelites oppressed by the Aegiptians,5 Sonday in Lent. 104. Pharaoh and his people op∣presse Gods people, 105. Christ an eternall Redeemer out of all afflictions, 106. Christ was persecuted by the members of his church, 107, Iewes persecution of Christ,6 Sonday in Lent. worse then the Aegiptians ty∣ranny ouer the Isralites, 108. Exhortation to humiliation in afflictions by Christ his ex∣ample, 109. Christs humiliatiō in his pas∣sion, 110. 111. Christs preparation to his death, 112. 113. Christs sufferings immediatly before his death, 114: Subsequents and effects of Christs death, 115. Christ, God and King though so hardly handled,Easter day Christ his resurrectiō affoords matter of reioycing, 116. Gods church hath a time of breathing in their afflictiōs, as they had a time of groning vn∣der their burthens, 117. 118. Passeouer a type of the deliue∣rance of Gods church: 119: Pharaohs persecutiō hindred not Gods saluation of his church, 120. Gods fauors in deliuering vs by Christ must not be forgotē, 121 S. Peter preaches of Christs resurrection, 122.
Blessed effects of Saint Peters Apologeticall Sermon, 123. Testimonies infallible of Christs resurrection, 124. 1 Sonday after Easter.Examples of punishments in∣flicted vpon vnbeleeuers. and rebels, 125. Vnbeleeuers and rebels punish∣ed, 126. King Balaak through vnbe∣leefe persecutes Gods people, 127. Vnbeleefe & rebellion is ouer∣come by faith in Christ Iesus, 128. Christs often appearing to many after his resurrection, 129. 2 Sonday after Easter.Whom God loueth hee finally loueth, 130. 131. Israelites vnthankefulnes and forgetfulnesse punihed, 132. Patience in afflictions necessa∣ry, 133. Christ perseuers in his care∣fulnesse towards vs,3 Sonday after Easter. 134. Exhortations to constancy in o∣bedience and soundnes in reli∣gion, 135. Exhortation to continuance in obedience, 136, Exhortation to the practise of religion, Comforts in affliction by the Author of comfort, 137. Christs comforts in affliction are vnspeakeable 138, Moses exhorts to she propa∣gation of the knowledge of God 139.4 Sonday after Easter, The irreligious must not bee communicated withall, 140. Obedience to the Gospell com∣manded, 141. Gods spirituall comforts are greater then al earthly discou∣ragements, 142. Gods holy spirit comforts mans soule in all distresses, 143. Gods fauours past and present are sufficient motiues to obe∣dience, 144,5 Sonday after Eastet. Particular fauours doe vrge particular obedience, 145. Mans righteousnesse no cause of Gods bountifulnesse, 146. Gods word must be performed and obeyed, not spoken of onely 147. Men must expect till God performe his promises, and not be discouraged. 148. God will heare the prayers of his elect, 148. 149. Scriptures to proue the As∣cension of Christ, 150. Confirmation of Christs As∣cension,Ascension day, & our dwelling in hea∣uen, 151, Moses ascending to the mount with the new Tables, a figure of Christs Ascension. 152.
The assumption of Elias, a fi∣gure of Christs Ascension. 153. The truth & act of our Lords Ascension. 154. Christ ascended vp to send the blessed Comforter downe, 155. Christs charge to his Disci∣ples at his Ascension. 156. Idolatry and idolatrus places must be destroyed.Sonday af∣ter Ascen∣sion day. 157. No dreaming idolatrous wor∣shippers must bee beleeued. 158. Exhortation to Christian so∣briety and continuance in the true worship of God, & loue to man. 159. A pretious double Antdiote a∣gainst sorrowes. 160. The cause why persecutors do breath out threatnings a∣gainst Gods Church, 161. Pentecost or whit∣sonday,Christ keepes his promise as touching the Comforter, 162. Gods Church do and must re∣ioyce for this fauour, 163. This feast with other, was cō∣manded to bee kept in the time of the law, 164. Christ keepes his promise to the Christian primitue Church, 165. Blessed effects of the coming downe of the Comforter, 166 Comfortable confirmations of the Comforters comming downe. Variety of arguments vsed by our Heauenly Logician, to vphold the faith of Gods people. Ʋariety of reasons vsed to cō∣fort mens troubled soules, 167. 168. The holy Mystery of the Tri∣nity, 169.Trinity Sonday. Elohim appeared to Abra∣ham, 170. Elohim. appeared to Ioshua, 171. Inexpugnable proofes of the Trinity, induced by Iohn Baptist, Iohn the Euan∣gelist, & Christ himselfe, 172. Testimonies not to bee contra∣dicted to proue the My∣stery of the Trinity, & po∣wer of the holy Ghost, 173 Infallible testimonies of the efficacy of Gods spirit and power, 174. Theory and Practise must goe together, 175.1 Sonday after Tri∣nity. God by his grace and spirit en∣courageth Ioshua and the ten Tribes to the worship∣ping of him, 176, Loue a chiefe fruite of the spi∣rit,
and practise of Godli∣nesse, 177. The wicked Glutton had no practise of loue to Lazarus 178. The mercilesse Diues was poore in pitty & piety, 179 Diues his pitty in hell came too late, 180. 2 Sonday after Tri∣nity,Gods loue to the Israelits. 181 Gods loue in afflicting his peo∣ple. 182. Exhortations to faith, obedi∣ence and loue 183. Gods loue in calling, Mans waywardnesse in refusing, 184. 3 Sonday after Tri∣nity.Examples of Hannahs pati∣ence and humility, and He∣lies sonnes violence, pride, and villany. 185. God sharply punisheth the sins of the Priest and his sons. 186. 187. Christs vnspeakeable patience in waiting for the returne of wandering sinners, 188. 4 Sonday after Tri∣nity.Examples of plaine and simple dealing in Samuel, 189. Of hypocrisie, pride and ouer∣weening in Saul and the Is∣raelites, 190. Commandements and exhor∣tations to mercy in censu∣ring our bretheren, 191. Hypocrites and censuring phi∣lautists are blind, 192. Saul is commanded to obey God, which he refuseth, 193. The Philistines are Gods whip for Sauls disobedience,5 Sonday after Tri∣nity: 194 Exhortation to obedience, that is to embrace the fruits of the spirit, 195. Christ practizeth true loue in calling his Apostles and conuerting his people. 196. God punisheth sinne in Dauid his beloued, 197.6 Sonday after Tri∣nity. Sauls sin is auenged after his death, 198. Righteousnesse commanded & commended to Gods people, 199. Hypocrites and Pharisies doe alwaies mistake true righ∣teousnesse, 200.7 Sonday after Tri∣nity, Dauid reioyceth for Gods deliuerances, 201: Dauid is humbled in the sight of his sinne, 202. Christs care and prouidence o∣uer the contrite that depend vpon him, 203.8 Sonday after Tri∣nity, Christ feedes the body as well as the soule, 204. Gods plagues vpon Tyrants & false Prophets, 205. God comforts and takes care of true and carefull Prophets 206. Exhortation to walke spiritu∣ally,
207. A perfect looking glasse for all Recusants, Temporizers & Hypocrites, 208. 209. Comination against false Pro∣phets, 209. 9 Sonday after Tri∣niy,Example of the good Prophet Eliah badly handled by a wic∣ked King and his wife. 210. God comforteth Eliah, though he sled from Iezabell. 211. Examples of Gods iustice and mercy to his old people the Iewes applyed to the Corin∣thians, 212. Christ teaches men how to vse graces, gifts, & benefites, 213 10 Sonday after Tri∣nity.Ahab and Iesabell proceed in persecuting, and so doth Eliah in reprouing, 215. Exhortation to the Church to walke worthy of their calling and giftes. 216. Ierusalem a prodigal child pit∣tied before her destructiō. 117. Christ visites Ierusalem with compassion before her desolati∣on, 218. 11 Sonday after Tri∣nity.Examples of Gods iudgements vpon tyrants & couetous per∣sons, 219. Naaman is clensed of his le∣prosie, but Genesi is made le∣prous, for his lying and loue of money. Iesabels pasport is sealed with dogs-teeth. 220. Christ ministers Antidotes, and cures the Leprous in soule, 221. Miserere mei domine, is the best medicine for a sicke soule, 222. Gods word shall not faile till all be fulfilled, 223.12 Sonday after Tri∣nity, Iehu is the executioner of A∣habs children and Baals Priests, 224. Hezekiah is Gods instrument to glorifie him more then did Iehu, 225. Exhortation to trust in God, 226. Christs power and his loue must cause vs to trust in him, 227. The good King Iosiah made a godly reformation, 228.13 Sonday after Tri∣nity. Christ performes his promises to the beleeuers, as iudgements vpon the vngodly, 229. Christ describes true righte∣ousnesse, 230. True faith and true charity makes true righteousnesse, 231. Righteous men and good ru∣lers are hard to find, 232.14 Sonday after Tri∣nity. Ieremy is Gods buily to serue writs vpon King and people, 233. Exhortation to righteous and
spirituall walking, 234. Christ exerciseth perfect cha∣rity and righteousnesse to the miserable leapers, 235. All that are clensed in body bee not clensed in soule, 236. 15 Sonday after Tri∣nity,Examples of the Rechabites continuall and constant obedi∣ence, 237. True Apostles reioyce in af∣flictions, not in popular fame or deceit, 238. Immoderate care after world∣ly necessaries reprehended, 239. Christs kingdome & the righ∣teousnes therof must be sought after 240. 16 Sonday after Tri∣nity.Ezechiel must discharge his duty, euen amongst the rebelli∣ous Iewes, 241. Christs faithful seruants pro∣ceed with comfort in the midst of afflictions, 242. God comforteth & comfirmes his Church in raysing vp the dead, 243. 17 Sonday after Tri∣nity.The child is not punished for the fathers sinnes, 244. God is both iust and mercifull in his iudgements, 245. No wicked man is debarred from saluation, if he can true∣ly repent, 246. Exhortations to sanctimony, 247. Christ finds faults with pride and hypocrisie, 248. God will not heare obstinate wicked men, 249.18 Sonday after Tri∣nity, The Iewes destruction is of themselues, 150. The beleeuers are comforted, & they praise God for it, 251 Memorable examples of faith,19 Sonday after Tri∣nity. 252. A remarkeable example in Daniel, 253. Holy obedience must be ioyned with true faith, 254. Christ is merciful to the faith∣full beleeuers, 255. The doctrine of repentance is vrged, 256.20 Sonday after Tri∣nity. God goes to law with his people to bring them to repentance, 257. Paul exhorts to repentance in an Euangelicall phrase, 258. Christ summons his people to repentance, 259. The sūmoned persecuting re∣cusants are paid home with iudgements, 260. Faith, repentance and charity,21 Sonday after Tri∣nity. commanded and commended together. 261. Wicked men are reproued for sin, and exhorted to repentance 262. Exhortatiō to put on the Chri∣stian armour, 163.
Christ is the giuer of all spiri∣tuall armour, 264. Perswasions to walke in the spirit,22 Sonday after Tri∣nity: 265. A golden chaine for a godly man, 266. Exhortation to weare this chaine, 267. A parable propounded to ob∣serue mercy commanded, 268. Vnmercifull men shall be paid home in the end, 269. 23 Sonday after Tri∣nity.Fruits of the spirit must be ta∣sted of, 270. Gods Church is dehorted from fleshlinesse and vnrighteousnes 271. Examples of fleshly and spiri∣tuall teachers & hearers, 272 The two-fold loue is the fruite of the spirit, 273. Good Lessons of obedience must haue good attentiō, 274.24 Sonday after Tri∣nity, Good Lessons for men and wo∣en, 275. Good trees of Colosse bring forth godly fruite, 276. One good beleeuing Ruler a∣mōg many bad Pharisies, 277 Christs inexplicable kindnesse to the beleeuing Ruler, 278. The doctrines of Mortificati∣on and viuification,25 Sonday after Tri∣nity. and of Christs Aduent, connexed and vnited, 279. Difference betweene godly & vngodly men, 280. Promies of redemption by Christ alone, 281. Christ is the carefull houshol∣der, 282. FINIS.
