14126 S120464 99855661 21163
❀ An in∣uectyue agaynst dron¦kennes. Prouer. 20. A Wyne maketh a man scornfull, and dronken¦nes maketh a man vn¦quiet, he that delyteth therein, shall neuer be wyse.
Iohel. 1. A Awake vp you dron¦kards, wepe & mourn you wyne suppers, be¦cause of youre sweete wyne: for it shal be ta∣kē out of your mouth.
I drede it mu¦che lest that suche as be sobre sholde scornefully deryde me for my discours and in¦uaying agaynst them ye be dronken, The pro¦emy. as lyght and laboure loste and tryfled tyme in vayne for they will saye, that such castigacion / as to sobre mē it nedeth not so vnto dronkerdes it bootethe not: whiche
wallowynge invayne can nother heare anye mannes voyce, vnder¦stande hys fryendlye admonytiō, nor feleth ye poygnant sharpenes of any rebuke. For in lyke case, as a dead corps can wt no vehe∣mente pryckynge, be made to feele: no more can ye mynde of a dron¦kard be stirred vp wt a¦ny admonisshements. And albeit it ware to
be wisshed, yt mens la¦bour shuld not be loste in chastenynge of thē that are so wedded to their vice & wilfullnes that all hope of amen∣dement vtterly is ex∣cluded, yet that not wt standyng, for as moch as some there be whi∣che otherwhiles & be¦twixt times, as it wer awaking out of ye depe slepe of that so great an euy  them
selues and declare thē selues no lesse, but to be in case to be holpen in yt they do acknow∣ledge some time theyr own disease: I wil euē for their sakes, now as briefly as I can, de¦clare what outrage & enormitye is in thys foule vice conteyned: for as ther is nothing moore beautyfull, Contra∣  thē a sobre man est and redy  hyng
in what so euer tyme and place you wyll haue hym: so is there no monster more hug∣lye then a dronkerde whose handes & fete, as Terence sayth, can nother of thē do their dutie And fyrst of al, I can muche prayse the wisedome of the Gre∣kes, The ety mologie of the woord. who in the propri¦etie of theyr language do manyfestly expresse how great a vertewe
and how exellente is sobrietie for to thentēt they myght declare, yt the mynde of man can not contynewe in hys dignytie wt out sobri∣etie, they haue called this vertue by a good ly name, SOPHROSYNE, which signyfyeth no∣thyng els but the pre∣seruation of the mynd that in how muche mā dothe excell all vnrea¦sonable Creatures in
worthynesse of mynde so muche should thys vertu be estemed abo¦ue all other excellent & albeit, that certayne Phylosophers of the secte of zeno holde opi∣nion, that he that hath one vertew, wanteth not the resydew: yet neuerthelesse, it is oftē seene by experyence, yt he hath had fortitude which hathe not kepte the lawes o Almytie.
But without the foū∣datiō of sobrietie, was neuer mā yet, endued wt other vertues. For in like case, as that eye onely can iudge best the diuersytie of co∣lours, lyke. which is cleare without any blemysh of euil humor or other infection: soo can that mynd discerne in eue¦rye thynge, what is to be escd, & what is to be followed, whiche
ye temperancie of meat and drynke, kepe the cleare from any burdē This vnto wise men is mother of all good Counsels. This put∣teth in execution, all wittie deuises. This maketh common wel thes to floryshe. And with out this the chie∣feste thynges decaye. So that euen hereof is it manyfeste, howe great a mischief in a cō¦monne
wealthe, is a dronken citesyn, Declara¦tion. whi∣che as he is cleane wt∣out all vertue and ho¦nestie: so cā he nother in doubtfull matters gyue any counsell him selfe, nor followe that shall be gyuen hym of others, as oone that nother can remembre thynges paste, nother vnderstande yt which is present, nother fore ee thynges to come:
finally, who is nothing else, but as the Poete sayeth of idle persons, Telluris mutile pondus, an vn¦profitable burden of ye earthe. Furthermore, It fey∣ned per∣son. painte in your mynde withe the Pensyll of your thought, suche a mannes life from eue∣nyng till it be far forth nyghtes, There is cry enge, there is dryne∣kyng, there is playeng there is singinge, ther
is talkyng of bawdry, There is hod lynge, ther is Chiding there is fighryng and braw lynge, there is brea∣kynge of pottes there is vieng & vomytyng, ye shame it is to heare. Then are some taken withe slepe so heuy as it ware euen deathe: some ar trubled wt spi∣rites & other thinges most terrible in theyr dremes. Thē ensueth
ye iuste punyshment of dronkēnes, great hed¦ache and debilitatiō of all ye members. On ye morow, ache and wine notte as yet digested, kepeth hym in bed tyl none. But & if he haue any vrgente busynesse to do, he goeth there a¦boute as it were a mā worne and halfe dead. And who shall euer do anye thynge purposly in a matter of weighti
importaunce, where∣vntoo hee commethe with so euyll a wyll, so faynt, and weak in his lymmes? What thing can he dispatche being hym self laden? What thynge strongly can a weake man do? What laboure can he endure which with drynkyng ouer nyghte, was not onelye weakened and weryed: but also clene ouer throwen? Muste
he touche any thinge? His handes haue the paulsy. Must he go a∣nye whyther, his leg∣ges stacker, Compa¦rison. so he ree∣leth, and maketh indē¦tures. Doth the mat∣ter requyre eloquence Hys tonge stamereth, his voyce wyll not let hym speake, and to be shorte, amongeste all kynd of diseses (wher vnto the myserable cō¦dytion of man is sub∣iecte,
there is none at all to be found, that so whollye take the man from all vse of him self and ouerthrowethe both body and mynde as dothe thys vyce of dronkennes. For al o∣ther diseses, what tim they do assayle the bo¦dy or any parte therof yet dare they not at∣tempte, to pearce the mind, ye immortal part of man.
For som haue ye cra and some the goute, some hote diseses and some colde: yet haue they styh the vse of re¦son in her chief perfec∣tion. But ye selfe same thyng which we haue common and all one wyth God, wherbye, both we are, and so be ryghtlye called, men▪ wherin , we differ from brute bestes, drō¦kennes bothe can and
is also accustomablye wonte to confounde & bring to naught. Falling sycknes The fallyng sycknes is vn∣doubtedly a cruel and a dreadefull dysease, wherin many ar wont often times to destroy them selues, whyleste they beate their owne membres, teare theyr heyre, and wallow thē selues in ye myre. But no man is able wythe woordes to expresse,
how much more beast¦ly and detestable, dron¦kennes is: for whom so euer the fallyng sick¦nes taketh, it leaueth hym by and by, and re¦storeth vnto hym the vse of his mind again. But the dronkerd af∣ter that he hath longe & much bene tormoy∣led with dronkenship, and hath both done & suffred many thynges full shamefully (vnles
he ware by and by as often tymes it chaun∣seth vtterly extinguis¦shed therein) and hath leyne two or thre dai∣es lyke a deade man, scarsly then commeth agayn to himself. The other mannes disease is lesse euyll for thys cause, that nothynge is committed through his fault, but through the vehemencie of his disease. He repenteth
that he hath sayd and done: but thys manne hath a double euyll, ye he can laye the blame vpon none other, and that suche thynges do more greue mē which chaunce vnto them wt out deserte. Agayn, a∣mongeste the diseases of the mynde, there is none so hurtfull, Thyn∣ges an∣nexed. nor where vpon groweth and ensueth so muche wickednes to be foūd.
For once, what thyng is so abhomynable yt dronkerdes dare not doo? Conse∣quentes Nothyng ought amongeste men to be more reuerentli obser¦ued, then faythe and counsell keapyng: but thou mayst commytte nothing in creadite to a dronckarde: for he bloweth it abrode and can kepe no counsel, be it neuer so reuerent a thynge, neuer so holy,
neuer so much nede to be kepte secrete, but if he be prouoked vnto such folly by any dron¦ken companion of his, The cause. he bewrayeth and be∣trayeth the high dig∣nitie of his mynde: for what thinge is it that he wyll not dyscloose which is so ready and so greadye at the foo∣lysshe requeste and af∣fection of oothers, to lose that thynge that
he hath in this world deerest. Effec∣tes. And to whom is it vnknowen that dronkennes is an o∣uerflowyng founteyn and welsprynge of all myschiefes, of conten∣tion, strife and debate, woundyng of men, ra¦uysshynge of women, murdre & aduoutry. It is euydently kno∣wen, that the greate fyght of the Lapithes (as Horace makethe
mention) arose onelye vpon wyne, & we now at this dai haue to ma¦ny examples thereof: and dyd not Tharqui¦nius kyng of Romai∣nes, after that he had in his cuppes, goo and rauyshe that good wo¦man Lucrece, and lost therby his kyngdom? Who knoweth not, yt great Alexander king of Macedonia, in al o∣ther thynges a prince
moste excellente and a famous conquerer, in his dronkennes wold sley his moste deare & famyliar frendes, and so loste the loue of hys Lordes therby, that in fyne, he was poy∣soned. A briefe perora∣tion. But men maye impute to me greate folly, which go aboute wythe the shortnesse of speache to comprise anne endlesse matter, whose myschief stret∣cheth
so farre, that in case I had an hūdred wittes with as many tongues, & a mouth of brasse or yron, yet ware I no thynge able to vtter the e∣uyls that arise of dronken¦nes.
Imprin∣ted at Ippiswiche by me Ihon Oswen. Cum priuilegio ad Imprimen∣dum solum.
