15033 99855221 20702
An Epitaph, or rather a short dis∣course made vpon the life & death of D. Boner sometimes vnworthy Bis∣shop of London, whiche dyed the v. of Sep¦tember in the Marshal∣lie. ¶ Imprinted at London at the long Shop adioyning vnto S Mildreds Church in the Pultrie by Iohn Alide An. do. 1569. Sep. 14.
¶ An Epitaph, vpon the life and death of D. Bonner, who died the v. of September. 1569. Quam cito de viuis extirpabuntur iniqui? Fidentum domino pars bonafortis erit: Per breue tēpus adhuc et non erit impi{us} vltra Quaeretur, nec erit quo fuit ante loco. HOw soon are wicked men cut of, from suche as liue in fame? Yet is the Lord the postion good, of those that loue his name. ¶ A little while as yet therfore, and there shall not remain: One wicked man hence foorth to be, of all the wicked train. ¶ The wicked man shall then be sought, but he shall not finde grace: There to be found where he before, was knowne to haue a place. ¶ And therfore ioy all Englishe hart{is} that fear the Lord aright And haue the loue of natiue land, alwayes before your sight. Lift vp your hart{is}, reioyce in him, for woork of his owne hand: For I of happy tidings mean, to let you vnderstand. ¶ Whiche chéerful wilhe sure to all, of faithful Englishe blood:
Whose hart{is} did neuer hate the truthe, nor Gospel yet with stood. ¶ A man there was a quondam great of might, of pomp and praise: Of Englishe blood though Englishe loue, were small in all his wayes. ¶ As did appéer by Roomishe act{is}, procéeding from his hight: Which proou'de him not an Englishman but sure a Romain right. ¶ For neuer faithful Englishe hart, was foe to natiue soil: Yet hée in natiue land did séek, Christ{is} faithful flock to spoil. ¶ And also then he wrought muche , to Englands chéefest stayes: He spilt their blood, and mockt Gods woord wherby his gaue him praise. ¶ Seducing men from sacred truthe, to walke in Roomishe trade: Wherby this land was ransackt so, so spoild and so bare made. ¶ That many yet doo féel the smart, of that vnhappy time: Though God haue clēsed now these part{is} from suche moste vgly crime. ¶ Wherwith this land infected was, by Balams brood throughout: Who sought a mischéef huge and great, as then to bring about.
¶ And more then so, renereace by blood the great and pining lack: Of pastors pure and pillers strōng, whiche then were brought to wrack. ¶ Without remorse his niaces and he, ful sore did them torment: By séeking of their death and losse, whiche lou'd Christ{is} testament. ¶ And more then so, of woorthy wight{is} of whom bereft are wée: Whiche left their welth, their ease & life, that Christe might gayned bée. ¶ And yet not so, thisCir{us} was sonne of Cambises  of ye Medes & Persians, who wat∣ring a∣gainst the Scithians. Tomiris the Queen hauing by pollicy slain Cirus with 100000. Persiians did cut of his hed & cast it in a bole of mās blood saying. Be satisfi∣ed wt blood which thou  thirsted Cyrus left muche humam blood to spil: And so ceace his deuouring rage, and moste blasphemous wil. ¶ But more and more he sought outrage, (as all his mates were bent) By lies and tales and popishe toyes, Gods gospel to preuent. ¶ As one in place by Sathan sent, Gods instrument of ire. To daunt the pride of England then, (whiche did it muche require) And so no dout thisHe spa∣red none yt he eyther durst or could be bolde to put to pain for Gods truthe. Boner did, he spared no degrée: Ne wise, ne graue, ne riche, ne poor, he pitied no man hée. ¶ Ne lame, ne blinde, suche was his thirst ne fooles, ne wise in name:
Yea * nobles blood as  triue, he sought to bring to flame. ¶ When pastors roum & Bishops , of London Sée he had: As beautie then of all his dayes, (a Woolf in Lamb skinne clad) ¶ His rage  the seat with crime, that nations far could say: A drunken man dooth take in hand, to guide the ship her way. Not drunk wt wine tho iudgement might, declare he loou'd it more: Then Christes pasture shéep , he should haue set great store. ¶ But bloody drunk sith hée not one, did spare of Christes shéep: Whiche did desire their conscience pure, by Gospel for to kéep. Yet he did watche, though as a Woolf, Christ{is} lambs for to deuoure: He watched not to féed their soules, nor yet to preache one houre. For sure though he had Bishops rowm, Paul saith he was vnfit.1. Tim. 3. In suche a place of Christes flock, at any time to sit. Whose iudgement was so small & weak in Christes testament: And learning lesse to teache the flock, with that so slowe intent.
¶ Should  obtain of grace , now for to haue a praise?. the sow tea cheth Mi∣ner. what ye sow is by nature nee∣deth no ex∣pressing. Whose retcheles rage and swinishe life, shall  in all mens dayes. ¶ His knoweledge was to base no dout, to sit in Bishops seat: Though he perhaps in Popes decrées, through trauail might be great. ¶ And Ciuile law right prompt he knew,Minerua was daugh. of Iupiter  called of the  Goddes of wisdome  all good , now this  in  one  him of whē he might better be taught. though all for priuate gain: And Cannons to, for therin was his onely studeous pain. ¶ And all but to vpholde the pride, of Rome whiche was to il: Or els to finde away how he, Gods childrens blood might spil. ¶ But who can boste in Gods decrées, of Bonners knoweledge now? In Scriptures force his answers shewd him learned as a Cow. Or as an Asse whiche iudgement lacks, in sence of holy writ: Though he obtaind a bitter space, in Bishops seat to sit. ¶ Sus taught Mineruam there to long, whiche held vsurped place: Til Christe by force of Gospel truthe, thisBufo in a Tode so  to Boner be∣cause of  venemous minde. Bufo did displace. Asinus ¶ And took the Asse from his repast, of playing on the harp:
Whole horned pawes in harmony, taken by those that are apt to no good∣nes or dis∣cipline: made neither flat nor sharp. ¶ But spilt the sound so long a time, when mischéef reignd at wil: TilPallas the greek name of Miner∣ua named before. Pallas came, who took the Asse down fromParnas∣sus a  Thessalia  Aoniae ,  the  Par∣nassides or Aonides did  Parnassus hil. And tied him vp at maunger yet, whiche once did there remain: Though there he felt not his desert{is} nor halfe deserued pain. ¶ To lodge on boords as he had made, some other lodge before: With hands and féet, to starue in stocks, with giues to be ful sore. ¶ No, no, in , his torment{is} were none suche nor half so vile: He  hath béen sure, but yet not tasted all this while. Of  thrall, of hungers bit, in dungeon déep to grone: Yet he of  life ful oft, to many made his mone. Not sure for pain whiche he did féel but for the greatest gréef: That he could not be fed as yet, (in slaughter who was chéef) With blood of Saint{is} and christian fleshe, wherwith his lust was fed: That he could not exalt the Pope, stil héer as supreme hed.
That he could not his holy Lambes, and leaden Bulles bestowe: His Pardons and his obsequies, mens soules to ouer throwe. ¶ That truthe had ouer throwen wt power his brutishe  intent: Whiche thought by fire & fagots force, Gods Gospel to preuent. ¶ This wrought his onely gréef and wo, as wel it did appéer: For other cause sure there was none, that euer I could hear. ¶ He lay ful soft and had inough of Beer, and chaunge of wine: Bothe fleshe and fishe; bothe fruit{is} & foul, moste delicate and fine. His table neuer wanted sutes, at wil it to maintain: He lacked neuer cators he, his ayds took alwayes pain. To kéep their God, their hope, their trust, their staffe of Roomishe stay: Because with him they wisht a chaunge, stil looking for a day. ¶ And not with him but with the rest, of all their hellishe rable: Whiche are in their blinde errors stil, moste hard and wilful . ¶ Who pris'ners are as foes to Christe, to Christian Quéen and land:
But chéef this quondam which made boste if he might haue in hand. ¶ His former poure and time again, to blesse and curse at wil: Where one he burnt, on thousands then he would his lust fulfil. ¶ This was his boste and blooddy thirst, wherin his ayds did trust: That once again the Roomishe whore, might haue her filthy lust. ¶ Although since he by due desert, hath béen in holde for sin: Suche mercy hath béen shew'd him there, as he shew'd none I win. To suche as were his betters far, in knoweledge, birth and : Yea and in life Apostolique, of muche more godly name. For sure his manners were moste , at all times plainly shew'd: Why? wa'st not he that sought the trée, of our increace  hew'd? Who shamelesly hath stand thus long, at royall mercyes grace: Although his déeds and woords ful , did craue another place. But what said those of Balams , there is no law wherby: The swoord of Iustice could him strike, nor cause why he should die.
Although when as the Dragon rulde, right woorthy wight{is} were slain: ButTho. Cranmer. archbishe. of Cant. whō by their Cannons they could not put to death, til ye Pope aray∣ning his I∣mage at Room con∣demned it burnt it, & thē was he burned at Oxford. one when cannon law could not, he was adiudged pain. Without the Cannons councels he, thatCardi∣nall Pool who could not be arch bish. by the Canons til the other were dead. Pool might haue his place: By Popes assent and Roomishe rout, whiche ror'd him to deface. Yf Popes assent when Englishe lawes, nor Cannons cuold preuail: Might giltles make so wise a sage, by fiery flames to quail. Why might not Princes lawful power haue made a iust decrie? That suche, deseruing open shame, might recompensed be. But onely that pure mercy did, kéep back that right did craue: In recompensing him with death, as all the rest might haue. Yet he tryumpht as whole and sound, his purpose whole to make: Right many yet (if time would serue) to bring vnto the stake. And once again if fortune stood, he might haue vp the Masse: (But sée how now the Lord of hostes hath made his foe like grasse) Who bragd and boasted in his greace, to washe the tile anew:
And  an end to his deuise, whiche yet he neuer knew. And so the rest with chéerful sound, at eu'ry newes that came: Sang as the Prouerb olde hath béen Laudes ante victoriam. Sith monst'rous corps with delicates, so monst'rously was blowen: Whose monst'rous minde wt poys'ning woords in graue is ouerthrowen But what? did he repent of all his blooddy sinful race? And learn by Gods woord to amend, his life so voyd of grace? Nay sure, til time of present death he chaunged not his minde: But as he liu'd a foe to Christe, so dyed moste wilful blinde. Oh yet though he had liu'd so il, Gods mercy is not bace: To suche as think that Ihesus Christe, can all their sinnes deface. But as thisEresich. was  of, Thessalia who  Ceres & cut down her woods, at last beig stroken wt a  was compeld to  his  fleshe. Eresichthon liu'd, in spite and rage to spoil: So in his end of mightie Ioue, he took a deadly foil. Not that he died, but that in death his helth he did deniet For sure non mori turpé est, sed turpiter mori.
And yet though Exesichthons end, hapt not vnto this foe: To eat his fleshe sith Boners mates, in stie did fat him so. Yet viler end had he no dout, Then Eresichthons was: Because their times were far vnlike, as it did come to passe. The one a Christian was in name the other Pagan prowd: Yet in there acts of maners like, as may bée wel avowd. Hée, Ceres sought, this Thesus Christe, and his to bring to wrack: He did starue, this with grease died, though grace from him went back. Wherby all suche as blinded were, by fau'ring of his act{is} May sée what iudgement is preparde, to recompence their fact{is}. And therfore houle all Balams séed, and wéep bothe moste and least: Whiche bear the mark (in suche a of that il fau'red beast. But Englishe hart{is} whiche loue Gods our Quéen & Englishe land: Reioyce, sith hope of foes is by force of Gods right hand. Sith filthy fleshe dooth lie in graue, though soule I  be il:
Whiche liu'd and died so stout a foe to Christes death and wil. But what though blooddy corps of his be forste to lie ful lowe: His blooddy fact{is} and déeds moste vile,& Thoosa a great  ster hauing but one eye whiche was in his fore∣hed, he was of the ile of Scicilia in∣to whiche Vlisses be∣ing cast by  of tem pest, & hap,  on yt caue of this Cyclops lost 4. of his men, who would haue deuoured yt  V∣lisses mas hing him  had not with a  bo red out his eye. from hence shall no man knowe? Shall treason so conspir'd: shall pride? shall blasphemy lie dead? No fame from earth to vpper skies, his wickednes shall spread. His brutishe tigrishe toil in time, of his moste high renown: T'extoll the power and pomp of him, that weres the triple crown. His rage and currishe cruel spite, against his cuntrie men: His butcherly deuice to waste, the fleshe of Christians then. His false surmise and murdring spite, whiche shew'd him then to be: APoliphe mus or Cyclops was son of Neptune Poliphemus right, whiche flue, in thrée yéeres hundreds thrée. Not of Vlisses souldiours sure, but Christians truly tride: Whiche were deuoured while he the Ruther for to guide. Shall nowPhilo∣nides was  big  Miletae (now  Malta) al∣together so folishe & vn learned yt  him  a Prouerb. Philonides lie dead? shall Serpentinishe rage So sléep? Nay sure his wickednes, shall liue the worldes age.
His stoutnes shall remain  shewd, in time of his conflict: Who as a subiect did deny, to haue his hart adict. And as a foe to Christe (his woord) and to our gratious Quèen: Wisht with his mates moste trat'rofluy some others raign I wéen.Indoctior  wil say  was wel  ned, I  unt, yet in knowe∣ledge of  ly  Philoni.  ding his . Beside his  life, before and in this cace: Though corps be dead yet death cannot, these horrours quite deface: He suffred was ful ten yéers space, by fauour him to win: (As Gospels nature is) yet he, could neuer once begin. For to repent (though fauour he, deserued had but small: At those, whiche now in his distresse, did shew him moste of all.) ¶ But  and mocked those, as yet whiche gladly would him teache: But chéefly in his death, suche men as Gospel soundly preache. And therfore sith in life of his, no vertue was to praise: In welth newo no spark of grace, whiche liu'd and spent his dayes. So like a Cyclops in his den, deseruing no good fame:
Sith God hath cut of suche a breedeth a∣mōg Bees muche  Bee, & al∣wayes liues in the Hiue neyer com, ming out to gather Hony, but  deuou∣teth that whiche the Bee dooth . & at last the Bee and all. Drone can we but praise his name? And eke beséeche th'almigtie Ioue, the number to fulfil: In cutting of the rest with spéed, that hear the beast good wil. Who sure may shame at his vile race, but more at his  end: And sore lament his fearful state, whiche now did not amend. Though all his life he had béen bent, yet now to stand so stout: Denying Christe at his last breath, Is fearful out of dout. This may  as God hath lent, me grace to rule my pen: In blasing foorth the déeds and fame, (before all Christian men.) Of Romaines greasy God, whose life and death (so woorthy shame:) I haue display'd, and therfore now, suche shalbe muche to blame. Which cary at truthe and stomack this that eury man can tel: Through out this land and others to, exe this, whiche knew it wel. ¶ God saue our Quéen Elizabeth, and bring her ioys to il: And root out those with spéed from vs whiche bear the  good wil. Amen. T. Knell. Iu.
A Comme∣moration or Dirige of Ba∣starde Edmonde Boner, alias Sauage, vsurped Bisshoppe of London. Compiled by Le∣meke Auale. Episcopatum eius accipiet alter. Anno Domini. 1569. ¶ Imprinted by P. O.
¶ The Preface. MAtters beyng yet in doubt, maie with questions and reasons, bee brought out of doubt: but thinges beyng without doubt, ought not with the subteltie of wordes, bee broughte into doubte. As without all doubte Edmonde Boner late vsurped bishop of Lon∣don, was a bastarde, and also the soonne of a Bastarde: that is a Bastarde in grosse, and a Bastarde can not, neither maie not bee a bis∣shop. Boner was a Bastarde, ergo no bishop; and this is a true conclusion. This is not true said an old Dunsticall felowe, sittyng at the ta∣ble with a graue learned Lawier of the com∣mon Lawe, and an eloquente Ciuilian, that were all three together: the one frouned, the seconde did bite his lippe, the third in a greate rage saied: men maie saie what thei will now a daies, & belye the truthe as you haue doen, he was a blessed confessor, although a bastard, and a true bishop, bothe by Gods Lawes, the Canonicall lawes & the lawes of this realme of Englande. To this thei saied all Amen. Proue you the cōtrary saied thei, and we wil yelde vnto you: will you: he, then will I proue hym no bishop, when he liued, whiche you graunt to  bastarde by these thrée La∣wes.
Make proffe saied these three, I will by Gods grace quod he, proue that neither Tun∣stall, nor Boner, were any bishoppes of Lon∣don, but vsurped, bicause thei twoo were ba∣stardes: and all bastardes bee vnder the same predicament. For the booke of Wisedome in the. iiij. Chapit. makyng a difference betwene twoo generations of the lawfull, and vnlaw∣full. Of the lawfull it is saied: O quam pulcra, & casta generatio. &c. O how faire is a chaste generation with vertue: the memoriall ther∣of is immortall, for it is knowen with God, and with men: when it is presente, men take example thereat, and if it goe awaie, yet thei desire it: it is alwaies crouned, and holden in honor, and winneth the rewarde of the vnde∣filed . But the other generation, that is vnknowen emong men, that are called the children of the people: thus muche is spoken of in the same booke. Multigena autem impiorū multitudo non erit vtilis, & spuria vitulamina non dabunt radices altas, nec stabile fundamentum con∣stituit. That is. The multitude of the vngod∣ly children, are vnprofitable children, and the thynges that are planted with whoredome, shall take no depe roote, nor laie any fast foun∣dation, though grene for a tyme in the braun∣ches, yet thei shalbe shaken with the winde,
for thei stande not fast, and through the vehe∣mencie of the windes, that is Gods vengance thei shalbe rooted out, for the vnperfite braū∣ches shalbe broken, the fruicte shalbe vnprofi∣table and sower, mete for nothyng. For why beyng demaunded of their parentes, that is, who were their fathers, or mothers, doe wit∣nesse against them, and declare their abhomi∣nation, and dooe disclose their synnes, as did that wicked Cham, the sonne of Noe, whiche  his fathers secretes, for whiche cause, Noe asked vengeaunce vpon the offen∣ders sonne, that therby the offender might bee more greued, then with his owne mishappe. Therfore the lawe that punisheth thoffēders issue, dooeth more prohibite synne, then that whiche plageth the offender : by this it maie be cōsidered, with what zeale the law of Englande abhorreth vnlawfull coniunctions, depriuyng them not onely of lawfull paren∣tes, but also of Ecclesiasticall dignitie, and tē∣porall inheritaunce. The Ciuill Lawe, spea∣kyng of the birth of children, saieth: Quod non potest arbor mala fructus bonos facere. &c. An euil tree, saie thei, can not bring forth good fruite: nor a good free beare euill fruites, and by the consente of the lawes it is agreed, that euery plante yeldeth to the nature of the grounde,
wherein it is planted. The childe also hathLeges  dicūt  tuū  filium . muche more certaine, and sure knowledge of the mother, then of the father. Therfore saith the Ciuill Lawe, your naturall or bastarde soonne, is the soonne of the people: and when suche a bastarde is, hauing no certain, or kno∣wen assured father at the birthe,  it is daily seen, and so iudged by lawe. Now can he come by a father after: as example. If one woman should beare twoo children, of twoo fornica∣tours, and one of these fornicatours, after doe marie with this woman, whiche of these chil∣dren should this mariage make legitimate: This would partly help  by the Ci∣uil a Ba∣starde. lawe, bicause his father reconsiled his mo∣ther into mariage but lōg after his birth: this is not Boners case (whose father was neuer maried to his mother) fātasy would som what perswade: but reason can not finde, seyng the tyme was ones, when bothe these children were bastardes, and the  of the people, and did not knowe their fathers: it wer ther∣fore against all reason, that a child after wardGenes. 16. borne in the same Matrimonie, being lawful∣ly. 4. borne, should lose the inheritaūce, and place the bastardie in the same, as lawfull heire. The lawes of Englande agreeth with the scriptures. Ismael did not inherit with :
So no bastardes doe inherite lawfully, by the lawes of Englande, neither is equall to the lawfull begotten in the inheritaunce, whiche by the Ciuill lawes can be deuided, but onely emong the male children. Saincte Augustine in lib. xvi. de Ciuitate dei, saieth, Abraham gaue all his substaunce vnto Isaac his soonne; but vnto the soonnes of the Concubines, he gaue giftes, and sente them awaie from Isaac his soonne. Wherevpon he ment that to bastar∣des, there is no inheritaunce due, but onely necessary liuyng, and vnder the name of a ba∣starde. Sainct Augustine vnderstande all vn∣lawfull issues, and so doeth holie scripture al∣so, and  no small difference betweneEt eccle  sacris re∣pellit ordi nibus. &c Et si tale  rit non  tum per∣mittit  bere in  dei the succession of the lawfull begotten, and the bastarde in tēporall thynges, or worldly inhe∣ritance, muche lesse in the churche of Christ, in that, that it admitteth them not into holie Orders: and that is proued in the Popes La∣wes, againste  bastardly Papistes: and if the Pope  with suche a one, yet he per∣mitted not hym to haue a dignitie, or prehe∣minence in the Churche, as to bee a bishoppe. Therefore it is conuenient, that mannes la∣wes should cutte them shorte, in the benefite of worldly succession. When the Churche doe iudge thē vnworthy of orders, of ministerie,
of  dignitie: , whom the holie scripture do thrust doune, and greatly embace for though some, that is, one, emong a thou∣sande is good, yet most are not onely giuen to wickednesse, and persecution. &c. Example of Ismael, some to murder. Example of Abime∣lech,. ix. the bastarde soonne of Gedion, whiche Gedion had lawfull begotten sonnes. lxx. and but one bastarde, whiche bastarde Abimelech with one stone, traiterously killed al his bre∣thren, one excepted. So there is more abomi∣natiō in one bastard, then in. lxix. lawfull son∣nes. Many examples I can bryng for the of hi∣stories, repugnant to bastards, of their filthi∣nesse of life, whoredome, idolatrie, extortion, treasō, murder, glottonie. &c. For it is thought. that theidoe drawe a certain staine from the volupteous lust, mutuall of bothe their filthie parētes, whiche in lawfull chaste mariage ta∣keth no place: and then knowing them selues to be bastardes, hateth all them that are law∣fully borne, inuentyng mischief against them as traitors would haue all men traitors: this  borne Bocher Boner, like Abimeleche, hath  a great nōber of the legitimate chil  of God: whose blood asketh the same cre∣well vengeaunce, that holie Abels doe still in the  of God, against his brother Cain.
So you shall not doubte, but by Gods lawes, the lawes of Englande, and also the Canoni∣call lawes, that bastardes are all depriued of lawfull parentes, therefore of inheritaunce Temporall: also not lawfull to take Orders, therefore no ministers of Spiritnall dignitie,Ergo. therfore no bishops. Iudge of this your selues,Ergo. and then make answere, when it shall please you. Sir, we will depart, quod thei, referryng this matter till an other tyme. Here is one, quod he, with plaine Musicke Dirge like, in the next chamber, singeth to a dull base Lute I praie you let vs heare him, it will not hurt , my thinke he singeth of D. Boner, some merie vanitie, of that vain man, whiche spēt his daies in vain Papistrie: we are cōtent said thei, to heare this matter, and then to depart hence, when he hath doen: we praie God it be mery, for we haue talked of sad matters, peace a little, silence my maisters, quod he, agreed saied thei. Then the fellowe on the other side of the walle, reade in the Bible to hymself a∣lone, and that beyng dooen, he songe in rude rime, against rude Boner, the Papist bastard. The fellowe doe read. I will sende a curse vpon you, and I willMalach.  curse your blessynges, yea curse them will I, if ye doe not take hede: beholde I shall corruptDente. 26
your seede, and cast dunge in your faces, euenMarkere∣hell, marke Papiste. the donge of your solemne feastes, and it shall cleaue fast vpon you. You are cleane gone out of the waie, and haue caused the multitude to be offended at the lawe of the lorde. You haue broken the couenaunt of Leui, saith the lorde of the hoste, therefore also I will make you toEzech. 13. be despised, and to be of no reputation emongJerem. 8. the people, bicause that you haue not kept my waies. My handes shall come vpon the false Prophetes, that looke out vaine thinges, and preache lyes: thei shall not be in the counsaill of my people, nor written in the boke, bicauseEzech, 34. thei haue deceiued my people. The beste (that is the martyres) haue ye slain, the flocke haue you not nourished: but churlishely and cruel∣ly haue you ruled them. Therefore woe and vengeaunce be vnto you, saith the lorde God. All these places of holie writynges, crieth out against Boner asmuch as to any false pastor, that euer hath made spoile like a Wolfe in Christes flocke: & the soules of the slain, whōApoca. 6. he burned for the woorde of God, and for the testimonie whiche thei had: doe still crie with a loude voice, saiyng: Howe long tariest thou lorde, holie and true, to iudge and auenge our blood on thē, that dwell on the yearth? Well ones it will fall out thus: That the righteous
shall stande in greate stedfastnes, again suche. 5. as haue dealt extremely with them, and takē awaie their labours, when Boner with his wicked companions shall se it (as thei shall in deede) thei shalbee  with horrible feare, and shall wonder at the hastines of the sodain health, gronyng for verie distresse of mynde, and shall saie within them selues, hauyng in∣warde sorowe, and mournyng for verie an∣guishe of mynde. These are thei, whom wee  had in derision, and  vpon, we fooles thought their liues verie madnes, and their ende to be without honor. But loe, how thei are compted emong the children of God, and their portion emong the ? There∣fore we haue erred from the waie of truthe, and the light of righteousnes haue not shined vnto vs. Tedious waies haue wee gone, the waie of the lorde we haue not knowen: what profit haue our pompe brought vs: suche wor∣des shall suche as haue  their bre∣thren speake in helle. Lette the  marke this well. Well, well. ¶ Boner speaketh. My soule haue cleaued fast to the grounde, pauimen∣to  mea. I haue fed like a swine, and liued like a hoūde My thought it did me muche good, In broilyng the christians, and shedyng blood
I haue shewed my waies, I haue shewed my waies How well I loued the Romishe kaies The reliques of Rome were my delight, I was a maiden priest, and our ladies knight. Iustification I could not abide, Specially if it came on Christes side: I will clime heauen walles with Scala coeli, And followe Alkoc, quondam bishop of Elie. My soule now slepe, in dreames and Dormitat aîa mea. My corps is buried emong false theues: For my bodie and soule, th'apointed place, Abusyng mercie, and refusyng grace. The waie of wickednes, I loued well,Viam ini∣quitatis. In missyng of Purgatorie, perhaps to hell: I beshrowe Dorbell, and Dunses harte, Would I had béen  bishop, but gon to carte. The waie of truthe, I did once take,Viam . Whiche of malice, I did for sake: And neuer since I did repente, In despisyng the eternall testamente. I did sticke ones vnto Goddes lawes,Adhefit te stimoniis . But to forsake it, I had no cause: And hardned my harte, & stopped mine
And could not wepe repentant teares. The waie of thy cōmaundmēt I might not bideViam  tuorum. After that I was drunke with ye cup of pride, But wared lothly, foule, and fatte, Like to cardinall Wolsey, with his red hatte. Boner ende. Deus stetit in Synagoga deorum. His lordship would plaie the Iustice of In the place of iudgement, it did hym good, To accuse the martyres, and shed their blood. O Clemens. There is no man within the citie, Professyng Christes Gospell, that he would pitie Muche mischief this verlet, did begin Therefore his praier is tourned to synne. O Pia. He had a cancred proude looke, With bell and candell, and Popishe booke: In cursyng Gods people with hellishe grace, A waie graundpanche, with thy greasie face. O Crux. Now a peece of your Dirige I will begin, I care not whether, I lose or winne: You were no greate state of honor, A bastarde, no bishop, but bloudie Boner.
MOurnyng in blacke, wailyng with care and woo, Wryngyng of their handes, thei be∣gan with Placebo. Dilexi{que} master Papist, I loued well Boner, That was boshoppe of London, and liued in greate honor. Quia inclinauit aurem suam, to our good father the Pope, I am iacit ille cinis, alas gone is our hope. Circumdederunt eum dolores mortis, now rotten in graue, Well, well, said the protestāt, well rid of a. k. Perhaps cū pericula inferni with Chymerus fell, Or Cerborus the triple hedded dogge of hell. Tribulationem & dolorem inuenit, that bastarde theefe. That haue spoiled Christes flocke, with  and greefe. O domine libera animam meam, from this Ba∣san Bull, That the innocent lambes did teare and pull. Custodiens paruulos dominus, the Lorde hath hel∣ped Sion: And taken awaie this mad dogge, this wolfe, and this Lion. Qui erupit animam de morte, and my hart from sorowe,
Now gentle maister Boner, God giue you  morowe. surely, thou  giuē thē eternall rest,Et lux . Whom Boner in prison, moste sore . Placebo. Bo. Bo. Bo. Bo. Bo. Heu me, beware the bugge, out quod Boner alas, De profundis , how is this matter come to passe. Laeuauioculos meos, from a darke depe place. Now Lazarus helpe Diues, with one droppe of grace. Ne quando rapiat vt ,  garde, druggarde, To defende this matter, came Ihon Auaile, and Miles Huggarde. From the gates of hell, quod the rebelles, de∣defende B. Boner, That with S. Fissher and Becket, he  haue honor. Amen quod R. C. B. H. and L. Deliuer hym from this paines of hell. R. Doe beginne the first lesson. Parce michi domine. SPare vs oh swete lord, our daies are all gone, Our holie father deare Boner, hath left vs alone. Now enclosed in tombe, wrapte
in yearth and clate, Ecce nunc in pulucre dormit, doo  &  awaie We hoped that he should haue doen, as he did before, Come for the of prison ones againe, and bur∣ned more and more. Who shall trust temporall powers, in whom isNolite con fidere in principi. no healthe, Fare well our spirituall father deare, our  and wealthe. Now helpe, Dominicke, Becket, Dunston, and sainct Line, Gregorie with thy , Antonye with thy swine. This father was heauenly mynded, and ne∣uer carnall, Therefore defende hym from the flames in∣fernall. Responde. Praie for Boner Band D. soules, You that walke in the Popishe ilde of Ye praie for them, and thinke no skorne, The like of Boner was neuer borne. Boner. Et in carne mea videbo, the bones that I haue burned. And also Jesus Christe, against whom I haue sporned.
I haue not one dogge  of legarde maine, Posuisti me tibi contrarium, heu me, greate paine. I crie to man, childe, and wife, I abhorred muche the booke of life: And loued moste the Popes lawes, And regarded not Christ twoo strawes. Ue miserum michi therefore, Sainct Peter haue locked the dore, And bidde me go the wrong waie, Bicause I had not the right waie. I will make an other shifte, Seyng I am driuen to this drifte, Now helpe holy father the Pope, With skalyng ladder and rope: Chaunce what chaunce maie fall, Now will I scale heauen wall. ¶ L. Doe rede the seconde lesson. Tedetanimam meam. OH his soule was wearie here, in the life that he had, His foode was breade and water, his lodgyng was to badde. Clothed in heere, slepyng againste the harde stones, That through fastyng, his skinne claue to the bones. Watchyng in praier, lamentyng bothe daie
and night: Subduyng fleshlie affection, and walked in the spirite, Meeke in mynde as a Wolfe, and simple as a Fore: As chaste as the he Goate, as slender as the . As liberall as the she Beare, as swete as the Brocke, Of all kinde of linnen clothe, he loued well a smocke. As wholesome as a madde Dogge, as clean∣ly as a Bore, He loued well a fatte Pigge, so he did a h. Paale as the Turkie Cocke, as gentle as a Snake. The like is not in all helle, if you seeke hyn with a rake. Responde. Speake you of Boner? God saue his honor, Some saied thei heard hym saie, In bedde as he laie, Noli me condemnare, Dum veneris , Ante te erubesco, Comissa mea .
Qui Lazarum resuscitasti, frō stinking Farewell, farewell, you Popishe k. Te decet deus hymuus in Syon, Boner was as cruell as a Lion: For if he had liued, and the worlde tourned, Many a good man, he would haue burned. Per ignem with fire, That was his desire. ¶ T. The thirde lesson. Manus tue dn̄e fecerunt me. THe hande of God framed hym ones in goodlie shape, Then transformed like a Boore, and conditioned like an Ape: From a Bishoppe to a Butcher, moste blou∣die of kinde. Whiche often in Bastardes, the like you maie finde: There is a greate decree made by C. the pope That no Bastarde should weare staffe, miter or Cope: Neither hath any dignitie, vnder a Cathe∣drall steple, Bicause he is fatherlesse, and the sonne of the people:Genesi. . Abraham left inheritance, to Isaac his sonne by right:
To his bastardes he gaue giftes, and put  from his sight. So if bastardes bee vnworthie of Temporall inheritaunce, Muche lesse in Christes Churche, to haue any preheminence: This Boner was a bastarde, of bloudde and condition, And departed frō this life, without contritiō. Responde. Lorde how he would pullam, When he was at Fullam, With fire, rodds, and chaines He put them to paines, And that was well seen, By M. and Bartlet green. abscō∣datfaciam suam. O Lorde I praie thee in what place Shall bloudie E. Boner, past al grace Hide his greasie blocke hedde, Whē he shall iudge the quick & dedde. Quid hoc rei est? Mary he shall rise like a beast, Emong the Romishe pied coates, On the lefte hande emong the goates He would not praie, Nor saie Mattens that daie, But swell and pante,
If  were scante. But redde wine and a Pigge, Would make him lepe & frig And saie diligo vxores vestras, Ab ortu solis ad vesperas. ¶ The fowerth lesson. Quantis habuit iniquitas. sore was this bloudie beaste, fraught with synne, So fatte was his fleshe,  would the skinne. Incrassatus, impiguatus, dilatatus, Symoniacus, Grosse, fat, and puffed vp with a great patus, Sacrificium deo nostro, cor contritum Tu autem argenteos lebetes, was thy delitum, Cur faciā tuā abscōdisti like an oule in the night Refusing the blessed Gospel the word of light Thy cursed actes, in parchmēt shalbe inrolde, Against God & thy prince, thou wert to bolde Thy bloudie crimes shall bee in mynde, now thou art gone and paste, Thou shalte make a dreadfull compt to God, for them at the laste. Responde. I am fetet, quia putrifactus est,
Which made the Papistes many a feast But in his cole house, he gaue no But in Smithfield moste cruell heate, Now death his power doe inuade, Like rotten donge, his fleshe doe fade, I doe not quarell, His guttes filled a barrell. Alas quod the Papistes and well awaie, He was buried in the night, not in the daie, Where were the Papistes that hower? Some in the Flete, some in the Lower, And many paste all grace, Be in euery Popishe place, God sende them suche honor, As hath their dadde Boner, Qui vomuit nigrum, post fata cruorem. ¶ The fifte lesson. Homo natus. HOmo natus, Came to heauen gatus: Sir you doe come to latus, With your shorne patus. Frequentia falsa Euangelij, For the loue of your bealie, Cum auro & argento, You loued the rules of Lento, Whiche the Pope did inuento
You are spurius de muliere, Not legittimate nor lawful here O quam venenosa pestis, Fur, periurus, latro mechus, Homicidus tantum decus, De salute animarum, Of Christes flocke thou hadest small . Thou art filius populi, Go, go, to Constantinopoli, To your maister the Turke, There shall you lurke: Emong the Heathen soules, Somtyme your shorne brethren of Poules, Were as blacke as Moules, With their cappes fower forked, Their shoes warme corked, Nosed like redde Grapes, Constant as she Apes, In nature like blacke Monkes, And shoote  trunkes And boule when thei haue dinde, And kepe them from the winde, And thei whiche are not able, Doe sitte still at the table, With colour Scarlet pale So small is their good ale, Thus from God thei did tourne, Lōg before their church did burne
Then when riche men wer sicke, Either dedde or quicke, Valde diligenter notant, Vbi diuites egrotant, Ibi currunt, nec cessabunt, Donec ipsos tumilabunt, Oues alienas tondunt, Et perochias confundunt. These felowes pilde as Ganders, Muche like the friers of Flāders, Whiche serue Sathan about the cloisters, Thei loue red wine and Disters, Qui vult Satanae seruire Claustrum debet introire, And euer haue suche an hedde, As bastarde Boner that is dedde: He would for the Pope take pain, Therfore help you friers of spain: You enquisiters take paine, It is a greate maine. Unto the Pope your hedde, That Boner is thus dedde, And buried in a misers graue, Like a common k. Lo, lo, now is he dedde, That was so well fedde, And had a softe bedde. Estote fortis in bello.
Good Hardyng and thy fellowe: If you be Papistes right, Come steale hym awaie by night And put hym in a shrine, He was the Popes deuine, Why, shall he be forgotten, And lye still and rotten: Come on and doe not fainte, Translate with spede your . And put hym in a tombe, His harte is now at Rome. Come forth you loughtes of Louē And steale awaie this , You are so fuil of Ire, And Popishe desire: And Romishe derision, And hellishe deuision. Therefore I am sure, Your kyngdome will not dure. Crescit rancor, crescit ira, Crescit & inuidia, Totus Louen in errorem, Voluiter in caligine, Nullus curat obidire, Verbis Iesu Christi, Fides ī Roma nō apparet, Totus Louen fide carit. Thus he must tourne to duste,
In Louen there is none to truste. As slipperie as Eles, The worlde doe run on wheles, Now helpe old frendes of Poules And praie for our soules: This is our desire, From these flames of fire. I am in Purgatorij, Oh. L. K. G. and F. be sorie, Breuis eius dies sunt, He breathed ouer Poules Funte Ridiant me inimici, But all you that bée wisie, Beware of Papistrie all, The Chequer, & westminster hall And all the Innes of Courte, I doe not scoffe nor sporte. And all this greate citie, It is greate pitie: That I Edmonde Boner, Against Goddes greate honor, Haue drawen you from truthe, Oh this is greate ruthe. Comissa mea pauesco, Et ante te tremesco, Dum veneris iudicare, Quarc, quare, quare, quare. Fremuerunt Gentes.
I beshrowe the Popes dentes In cathedra Moysiimpij sedent, Therefore repent, repent, repent Tempus est vos reuertendi, Tempus est nobis non penidendi, Tempus est vos rediundi, Ab errore falsi mundi False Papistes, and false theeues Shall euer haue paines & greues, Thus did Boner sore lamente, Mouyng Christes to repente. Responde. Ne recorderis , He was full of hata Regardyng non estata, Et quasi flos, with his greate nose, Fugit velut vmbra, Thei morne for hym in northūbria ¶ The sixte lesson. Quis michi hoc tribuat. ONe alas in dreadfull dreame, poore Boner did beholde: In wofull weede attired foule, sometyme was braue in golde.
With fierie stroke sore beaten was, that sometyme had smitten other: He was as sore turmented there, as Cain that slewe his brother. His salte teares ran doune apace, with bloudie hande he strake his breast: A worme about his harte bewrapte, that reaued hym of his reste. About this gooste flocked a rablement, of Friers fatte and foule: Then cried out a little spirite, like a shrikyng Oule. Ve, ve, and out alas, thy vengeaunce doe now begin: These flames and floudes, & dungeons déepe, are wages all for synne. Come drinke thy fill in Lethae flod and then to Styx retourne: Forget thy self, denaye thy God, lo, this is a place to burne.Syllius lib. 13. Cal this the floudes of hell, that spue for the bloud, poy∣sō, fire. &c The wicked ones, whiche ordeined were, as chaffe caste from the corne: So in this bloudie Cocytus, thou shalt be rent and torne. Quis michi tribuat quod Boner tho shall I in this place dwell: Let me be clensed in Purgatorie, awaie you fiendes of hell.
Donec, donec, my trentals are doen in the Churche of Rome: Tary here said the Mōkes blacke vntill the daie of dome. With that he swelde with lothly looke, criyng, now haue I nede: Where are become my Romishe frendes, where is good Henry Crede? Miseremini mei, miseremini mei, if merites maie me saue: Suche measure as you haue measured other men,Sathan. suche measure shall you haue. Quis potest facere mundum, a bastarde wert thou borne: De immundo conseptum semine, now art thou rente and torne. Burnt and dround and neuer dede we haue none other place: Spes impiorum peribit, we are exclude all from grace. Non remittitur ei in hoc seculo, neque in alio. You are condempned by the Iudge, to dwell still in our gailio. Et sicut dies marcennarij, thy daies are made an ende: An enemie to the Lorde thy God, but to the Pope a frende.
Then cast thei hym in Melas flood moste darcke and blacke in sight Iú dreadfull slepe a man did se, this vision in the night. Responde. Ne recorderis peccata, But open heauen gata Sainct Peter with your kaies, Shewe my lorde the right waies He dwelt ones at Poules, And had cure of our soules: I wisse he was not a baste, But holie, meke, and chaste: It is a greate pitie, That he is gone from our citie: A man of greate honor, Oh holy sainct Boner, You blessed Friers, That neuer wer liers: And you holy Nunnes That neuer had sōnes Set this child of grace, In some Angelles place. Dum veneris , Helpe, helpe S. Marie Noli eum condemnare,
He burned many in the daies of Quene Marie. Sicut Leo querens praedam, animas deuorauit. If this was not a blessed deede, Aske L. K. S. P. and H. Crede. ¶ The seuenth lesson. Spiritus meus. MY spirit God wotte, is feble,  and sore: and so shall wee Papistes, daiely more and more. Our tyme of Papistrie shalbe shorte, foolishe and vaine. Ab aquilone panditur omne malum, the Papistes tooke paine. Nowe Mars our bloudie Boner is laied in yearth full colde: Whose life and libertie, would haue made vs bolde. With bloudie handes, and cruell hartes was our desire: To haue burned the Protestantes, with hote flamyng fire. Set vp shorne crounes (the stewes) and Mon kes in bootes: And destroied Christes doctrine cleane by the
rootes Brought in Idols, Latin seruice, and ryng∣yng of belles. Chauntries, Masses, Abbaies, and Celles. Thus we would haue dooen, in Tindall, and Comberlande. And brought Romishe seruice, againe into Northumberlande. There are a remnaunt left, I maie them The children of Antichrist, and of God Ball. Rumor super rumorem, while the storme do last, Antichrist and his, are now at the laste caste. And Boner is rotten, and stinketh in graue: Well rid is Christes flocke, of so Woluishe . Si veritatem dico, quare non creditis michi? ¶ The Responde. Dies eius breuiabuntur, Boner was a greate hunter: Per ignem with fire hotte, N unc in putredine God wotte Ubi est ergo nunc Either Frier, Nonne, or Monke, That can for a little space, Put hym a purgyng place: Now good man sir Pope,
What doe your worship hope? In inferno nulla est redemptio. ¶ The eight lesson.  it. Pelle mei consumptus. MY fleshe is consumed, there is  skinne and bone: In sainct Georges Churche yarde, my graue and I alone. My tongue that vsed lewde woordes, and lip∣pes awaie are rotten: Take pitie vpon me. R. L. and H. let me not be forgotten. Regester me in with a  penne,  the Romishe roules, And make some Obsequi for my sake, I  it were in Poules. Saie Dirige for me gentle T. H. U. R. L. and B. Saie you the Masse, mourne you in blacke, W. F. and C. Ryng you the belles, holde you the lightes A. P. S. and N. A. B. the Crosrowe of Papistes, shewe  selues like men. For if your merites doe not helpe, then come I verie late: Like the foolishe virgines fiue, whiche knoc∣ked
at the gate. To whom he saied, I knowe you not, depart from my sight: You wanted faithe, and watched not, when I came in the night. Let liuyng wightes, watche therfore, though it be paine and griefe: For sodainly the Lorde dooe come,  like to a . O Boner, Boner, ones againe, in thy skynne thou shalt be clad: And haue suche members in degree, as in this life thou had. Then shalt thou see the  all, in iud∣gement stande vpright: Whom in this worlde thou didest abuse with murder, and with spight. And called them vnlearned all, and nowe in greate honor: Suche was the blindnes of Papistes hartes, and specially of thee Boner. ¶ The Responde. Uaine, vaine, vaine, vaine, All bloudie Papistes doe liue in vaine. There is no meane, but heauen and hell In doyng euill, and workyng well. Eche soule shall go vnto his place:
The brande of hell, and childe of grace. Scimus quia transit hora, Redeamus sine mora, Uitam nostram emendamus, The  of death, drawyng on a Praie for mercie, ioye, and grace: V ade & non amplius peccare. ¶ The nineth lesson. Quarede vulua. S. rede it. ALas from my mothers wombe, why hast thou brought me out: I haue liued like a Butchers  and died like a . I stopped myne eares against the truthe, Gods worde I would not heare: And hardened my harte against the Prince, in persone many a yere. There ledde my life in hartes delite, my soule did feele no care: In softe bedde, and choise of wine, wantyng no daintie fare. False hope I had to come forthe, as ones I did before; But still dispaire, said I should die and persecute no more. One morne betime I loked forth,
as ofte as I did before: And did  a pulpit, in churches wise, made by my prison dore. A Preacher there was, that Crowlye hight, whiche preached in that place, A meane if God had loued me, to call me then to grace. Hodie si vocem, was his theme, and harden not thyne harte: As did the fathers the rebelles old that perished in desarte, Thus protestantes, haue me flain with the power of the worde: But if the worlde had serued me, with fire, and with sworde. I would haue killed and burned al more then I did before: But now farewel you papistes al from hensforthe euermore. Would no wight had me knowen nor eyes me neuer seen: Then should I haue been in suche forte, as I had neuer been. The Responde. In die illa tremenda, Who shall my lorde defenda: Neither Pe. Wes. Nor. Mar. Traitors Tempest that blowe vp warre,
Slinge. Hil. nor Swineburne, Or any traitor, that gape for a tourne. Thei shall haue horror inhabitans, God sende them mischaunce. Omne regnum diuisum. &c. Against the Quene thei risum, Per aliam viam reuersi sunt. Papistes are traitours, as thei are . Rumor super rumorem erit. Betwene Doncaster and Perith, Be many Popishe hartes, Would their heddes wer in carts. And their bodies in graues: Rebelles are theues and knaues. Ardiet pugnas vicio parentum, The rebelles beyonde Trentham Shall quickly repentham. Sepuichrum paten: est venter eorum. Thei abhorre doctrina Apostolorum Sepe expugnauerūt you know it wel Northren stormes are sharp & fell Snowe, Haile, Ise, and Froste, All their hope is but loste. Dies magnae & amara. Thei are now in sorow and Thei will neuer haue suche honor As had this bastarde E. Boner. Although he were a Po. k.
Yet buried he was in a graue, Pluet super proditores laquios. ¶ The'nde of Boners Dirige. Per ironiam Erat vir ille simplex & rectus, ac ti∣mens deum, & recaedens amalo. ¶ Here after dooe followe a liniall Pedegres of Boners kinred, by the minde and iud∣gemente of many Doc. a man of a greate house, long before the captiuitie of Babilon. ¶ Bastarde Edmonde Sauage, beyng a  lubberly scholer, was supposed to be the the soonne of one Boner. Which was the sōne of a Iugler or wild roge Whiche was the sonne of a villaine ingrosse. Whiche was the sonne of a Cutpurse. Whiche was the sonne of a Tom of Bedlam Whiche was the sonne of a  of a spitle Whiche was the sonne of a theffe or a Whiche was the sonne of a wilde Irishe. whiche was the sōne of a Stoick Philosopher whiche was the sonne of Agarion. whiche was tho sonne of a . whiche was the sonne of a Sectuarie. whiche was the sonne of Appelles. whiche was the sonne of .
whiche was the sonne of Alogy. whiche was the sonne of Almerichus. whiche was the sonne of Aetius. whiche was the sonne of Adamiani. whiche was the sonne of Alepheli. whiche was the sonne of Appolinaris. whiche was the sonne of Ammonus. whiche was the sonne of Aquarij. whiche was the sonne of Arrius. whiche was the sonne of Barbara Sigismundi. whiche was the sonne of Angelici. whiche was the sonne of Anthropomorphius. whiche was the sonne of Belzebub. whiche was the sonne of Bisylides. whiche was the sonne of Berillus. whiche was the sonne of Carpocratis. whiche was the sonne of Cataphrigius. whiche was the sonne of Caluthus. whiche was the sonne of Cazinzarius. whiche was the sonne of Catharides. whiche was the sonne of Caparnaitis. whiche was the sonne of Cherinthus. whiche was the sonne of Donatus. whiche was the sonne of Ebion. whiche was the sonne of Elindius. whiche was the sonne of Ennopus. whiche was the sonne of Ennomius. whiche was the sonne of Euthices.
Whiche was the sonne of Ecrastines. Whiche was the sonne of Gnotiques. Whiche was the sonne of Iesebel. Whiche was the sonne of Faustuti. Whiche was the sonne of Helchesate. Whiche was the sonne of Hymerobasta. Whiche was the sonne of Iouinianus. Whiche was the sonne of Manacheus. Whiche was the sonne of Mahomet. Whiche was the sonne of Martion. Whiche was the sonne of Messalianis. Whiche was the sonne of Montanus. Whiche was the sonne of Monothelete. Whiche was the sonne of Nouatis. Whiche was the sonne of Nestorius. Whiche was the sonne of Nicolaus. Whiche was the sonne of Nectages, Whiche was the sonne of Paulus Samosatenus Whiche was the sonne of Praitas. Whiche was the sonne of Pelagus. Whiche was the sonne of Petrus . Whiche was the sonne of Photius. Whiche was the sonne of Pollo. Whiche was the sonne of Sabinus. Whiche was the sonne of Roganus. Whiche was the sonne of Sabellicus. Whiche was the sonne of Sarahatis. Whiche was the sonne of Simachcus.
Whiche was the sonne of the . Whiche was the sonne of a . Whiche was the sonne of Theodorus Whiche was the sonne of Tatian. Whiche was the sonne of Sargius. Whiche was the sonne of a Benedicte monke. Whiche was the sonne of a Carthusian. Whiche was the sonne of a Cistertian. Whiche was the sonne of a Canon Reguler. Whiche was the sonne of a Barnardine. Whiche was the sonne of Cluniacke Whiche was the sonne of Dominicke. Whiche was the sonne of a Celestin. Whiche was the sonne of Iesuit. Whiche was the sonne of an Heremite. Whiche was the sonne of a Minoret. Whiche was the sonne of a Charmilet. Whiche was the sonne of a Bomson. Whiche was the sonne of an Anker. Whiche was the sonne of a Buggerer. Whiche was the sonne of a Limiter. Whiche was the sonne of a Balamite. whiche was the sonne of a Coniurer. whiche was the sonne of a Dispensator. whiche was the sonne of a . whiche was the sonne of a Romish comissary whiche was the sonne of a Doctor Canon. which was the sōne of a master of .
whiche was the sonne of a Suffragham. whiche was the sonne of a Romishe bishop. whiche was the sonne of a Courtisan. whiche was the daughter of a Cardinall. whiche was the mother of the Pope. whiche also in the captiuitie of Babilon, did beare three brethren. Simon Magus, , and Mahomette, by Antichriste the sonne of the Deuil, of iniquitie, and perdicion the cause of al ignoraunce, infidelitie, Si∣monie, Treason, Idolatrie, perse∣cution, Rebellion, Tumulte, wicked assemble, and finally euerlasting damnation.
¶ A praier to the holy Trinitie, against ignoraunce of Goddss worde, and Wolues. ALmightie and eternall god the father, the soonne, and the holie spirite one God in trinitie, and the trinitie in vnitie, whiche art alwaies more readier to heare, then wee are apte to praie: and  giue vnto vs, more then we can desire, or deserue. We moste humbly praie thee, to haue mercie vpon vs, accordyng to thy great mercie, and perdon vs good Lorde for our sin∣nes: that we haue rebelled against thy diuine Maiestie, in thought, woorde, and deede,  thee to cast vpon vs sondrie plagues for  offences: As pestilence, dearthe, rebellion with other greuous calamities, vnto our  bodies. But oh my good Lorde God, hou haste taken greater  vpon , the whiche with mortall eyen cā not well  seen, but felt: that is, the ignoraunce of thy  will and commaundemente.  oh Lorde GOD, the guide and pathe  to all deadly synnes, death, and finallie , banishement from thy glorious , worlde without ende. Haue mercie
aue mercie and pitie, oh Iesus Gods onely  vpon thy flocke, thou greate Shepherd of the Shepe. Regarde thy folde, defende thy flocke, whom thou hast redemed in thy moste precious bloud. Deliuer thy Uineyard of En∣glande, from the Bore of Roome, and thy Lambes, from the mouthe of Wolues, as bloudie Boner was Oh lette God a rise, and let his enemies be scattered, lette them also that hate hym flie before him: so that we that are the Shepe of his pasture, maie in the  of his worde, be fedde in the pleasaunt fieldes of his holy scriptures, to life euerlastyng: Through Ie∣sus Christ our lorde. Amen.
