16779.10 S102943 99838702 3090
The briefe of the Ministers bill for London tithe. THe Citizens and inhabitants of the Citie of London and the Liberties thereof, are to pay their tithe by the Decree,The Statute mae the 37. Hen. 8. of euery xs rent xvj ob. per annum, and of eury xxs rent ijs ix d. of all houses, shops, ware-houses, cellars, stable, &c. without fraud or cnin for uer. Contrary to the true meaning of the said Decree, some defeat the Mnisters of their tithe, by reseruing their yearely rent or paiments,The gie∣uances. by secret bonds, double leases (one with small rent for the Parson to demand his tithe; another for the Landlord, whereby he demandeth more rent:) others call their quarterly paiments by the name of Fines, Pensions, Incomes, New-yeares-gift, and many other secret contracts, reseruations, and agreements, for auoi∣ding of further charges to the Parson. For reformation of these deuices and other grieuances, they most humbly intreate that commissions may be granted by the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper for the time being,What the Minites dere. to the Lo: Bishop of London & his Chancellor, to the Lo: Maior of London & the Recor∣der and some others, to assesse by valuation or otherwise, that some reasonable tithe be paid of such houses aforenamed, as in their consciences they shall thinke fit. Or that the hono∣rable Court of Parliament will be pleased to appoint any other order which in their wise∣dome they shall thinke meete. 1. For many hundred yeares before the Decree,Motiues. houses paid iij  v d. out of euery xxs rent, as they were or could be let, or after a common valew; and houses inhabited by the owners were to be valewed by the Church-wardens, by a composition betweene the Citizens and Ministers. 17. Decemb. 1457. 2. The prices of all things are tripled since the Decree, and the Benefices within the walls not halfe so good, in respect of the losse of personall or priuie tithes, offerings to Saints, Church-lands, Obits, Mortuaries, and many other things, beside the abatement of viij d. of euery xxs rent of houses, shops, &c. 3. There be not so many poore Benefices of the like taxe in the Kings bookes in any shire of England, as are within the walls of London, some of them being taxed at 20. l. 30. l. 40. l. 60. l. 100 marks and more; by which their paiments are very great, for Subsidies, first fruites, continuall tenths, and other paiments. 4. Many Citizens, and some whole Parishes for the most part of the inhabitants therein, haue lately raised themselues to a competent tithe. 5. They desire no house to be raised to more tithe then some Knights, country Gentle∣men, and Citizens do already pay for houses of the like worth in the Citie. 6. By this improuement, no one Benefice within the walls, shall come neare to that which hath bin lately raised in some one impropriation within the citie. 7. If there may be a reformation of some great houses inhabited by the richer sort, that pay by the forenamed deuices farre lesse tithe then the meaner sort of handicrafts men, the Ministers may forbeare the poorer sort of citizens, as hitherto they haue done, and still desire to do. 8. To auoide the suspition of excessiue raising of the liuings in London, a prouiso may passe, that if any Benefice shall be raised in tithe by valuing to 50 lib per annum, more then now it is at the making of this Act, then no Parson or Vicar shall haue any more benefit by vertue of this Act. Whereas the Parsons and Vicars of London in time of superstition before the Decree, had reliefe from time to time by Constitutions, Compositions, Acts of Common councell, and Acts of Parliament. They most humbly intreat, that this most honorable Court would take to heart the di∣stressed estate of many poore and painfull Ministers, that these variances being taken away, they may enioy peace with their people; in which happie successe they shall euer acknow∣ledge your honorable & religious care, and not ceasse to pray that this Act, with many other such like, may tend to your eternall comfort in Christ Iesus.
