22397 99837553 1880
THE MOTIVES of Richard Sheldon Pr. for his iust, voluntary, and free renoun∣cing of Communion with the Bi∣shop of Rome, PAVL the 5. and his Church. I saw the woman drunke, with the blood of Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Iesus; and I admired when I saw her, with great admiration. Apocal. cap. 17. 6. Goe out of her my people, that you be not partakers of her Sinnes; nor receiue of her punishments. Apocal. 18. 4. Published by Authority. London printed for NATHANIEL BVTTER, and are to be sold at his shop neere S. Austines gate. 1612.
To Mr. George Birker, the Arch-Priest, and all other Priests, with the rest, profes∣sing in England communion, with PAVL the 5. Bishop of Rome, that now is. THese my inducements passing ouer with si∣lence many others, by which I haue re∣solued to relinquish & renounce the com∣munion of the pre∣sent Bishop of Rome, and to adioyne my selfe to the Catho∣like, and truly Apostolike Church of England; I doe not therefore addresse vnto you, thereby to craue your patronages, but to require your seue∣rest censures: expecting only, and humbly beg∣ging
and doe daily multiply obloquies against me; yea and libell also against me, in respect of my booke written in defence of my Prince and Countrie: doe presume to Dedicate these my Motiues, (which will proue nothing acceptable to Rome, or to some of your tastes) to your worthy per∣sons and names: the truth is, the cause of this, is my considence in truth, which I deliuer: the which being gratefull to her veriest enemies, cannot but be grateful to many of you, to whom I know the verie sound of truth is pleasant, though through the seducements of your lea∣drs, and your little reading of Gods Word, and bookes of controuersie, you are now mis∣led mgnrance: but (veritas filta temporis truth is the daughter of time, shee doth not alwaies appeare at the first, as God wot shee hath very latelie (would God sooner) to me; yet now shee is come and appeareth, (I professe without ly∣ing God is my witnesse) I senbile feele (in such sort as the soule can feele) my vnderstanding and soue, as it were a new inlightned, illustrated, con∣sorted, and encouraged by a new change and translation out of the  1. shadow of darkenesse, into the Ad Colss 1. Kingdome of Gods beloued sonne Iesus: for whose testimonie, Oh how hap∣pie should I bee to suffer euen death it selfe. But because I am growne of late so con∣temptible with you (wherein I reioice) haue, and doe vndergoe the same fortune which my  6. deare Sauiour, and onelie Master Iesus did su∣staine,
being conuersant vpon earth; in respect of the honor of the cause which I haue vndertaken (sufferte modicum quid insipientiae meae) suffer a lit∣tle of my folly (to vse the words of the2 Ad Cor. 11. Apostle in like sort, beginning to commend himself) in com∣mending of my self to you; in such things where∣of, for some circumstances, I take now no com∣fort, but rather am ashamed of them, and with my very soule doe lament them. When I liued in the Romane English Colledge (I begin there, if any one can say any great ill of me, before that time or since, let him not spare to speake, hee hath good leaue) it is well knowne, how I was re∣puted to haue profited, being there better estee∣med, (then I euer thought of my selfe) and for learning compared with your Doctor Norrice, (a man of farre worthier partes then my selfe,) with whom also, (had not his oppositions against the gouernours of the English Colledge; and the generall commotion of the same Colledge let∣ted it) at that very time I had defended publike Theses and Conclusions out of the whole corps and body of Diuinity; the same being with their Epistle Dedicatorie allowed and readie printed for that purpose: but because Doctor Norrice might not haue that honor (in respect he was thē in opposition against the Superiours): I was desired not to expect (lest also the Bishop of Cassa∣no, Doctour Norrices Patron, and fauourer then, should bee discontented thereat) the same at Rome; but I was promised to performe it in
Spaine, whether I was sent with letters of as fauourable commendations, both from the su∣periours of the Colledge, and their Generall Claudius Aquauiua, as euer anie English Priest had: and also with as ample faculties into Eng∣land (yea in some things as it is well known con∣cerningThe Rect r of the English Col∣ledge, ihed me to set downe in writing, what faculties I desi∣red, and that hee would procute from the Cardi∣nall protector confirmation, & allowance of the same, which was accordingly done so largely, as none had so large before, whereof I haue a Copy to shew. dispensations in all degrees of marriages contracted, or to be contracted touching all Ec∣clesiasticall positiue impediments, letting or dis∣soluing marriage, more ample then any other euer had before mee) as any Priest or Ignatian then in England had. And if I was not in good esteeme then and there? why did the Superiors of the English Colledge request me onely alone aboue others to write a short letter, rather then a Petition to the Pope, who then was Clement the 8. by the same to giue testimonie to that Pope, of their vpright gouernment in the Colledge, which then was so eagerly called in question by most of the English there? I could vse more fol∣ly (courteous Reader) in adding many more very fauourable particulars, as of my free accesse to Cardinall Catetane Protector; to their General Aquauiua, &c. but I haue been too foolish alrea∣dy, being constrained thereunto. Since my com∣ming into this Kingdome, it is well knowne, I haue been too too industrious in exhorting, prea∣ching, &c. And it is as well knowne that my con∣uersation and entertainement hath beene with the best (Honourable not excepted) let those, who haue knowne me last and longest, (who are
very Worshipfull, very true hearted English, and vnacquainted with the Equiuocating Spirit) Speake what my carriage and conuersation hath beene. But good Iesus, why doe I thus trouble my selfe, thus to waste paper and inke? calumni∣ated I am, and most disgracefully calumniated I shall be (as the Right Honourable my Lord of Canterbury his Grace presaged to me when I first told his Grace of my resolution) but I will reioyce therein, and shall esteeme all as dungge, so that I may gloryAd Galat. 6. in the Crosse of Iesus Christ the onely comfort and ioy of my soule, theAct. 4. on∣lie hope of my saluation. Let hell it selfe spew out against mee all most disgracefull taunts and calumniations: I will to God commend my cause, hee will bring the truth of my innocen∣cy in the end to light: I will in the meane vse pa∣tience, the anker of all Christian soules in times of any tribulations and distresses. Thus most humbly beeeching, with heart prostrate, and in all your behalfes the mercies of the 1 Ad Tim. 2. onely Ad∣uocate and Sauiour of Mankind, that you may returne to the Isai. 51. & ad Corinth. 1. cap. 10. Rock (vnde exctsiestis) from which you are cut, and here after build onely vpon the Ad Corin. 3. rock & foundation Iesus Christ (commending you all to his mercies and protection) I take my leaue of you all, this present Sunday, being, the 26. of Ianuary. Anno Salutis, 1612. Yours in Iesus Christ, RICHARD SHELDON Priest.
TO THE CHRISTIAN, AND CHARITABLE READER, THE God of mercies, in his most gracious prouidence, concer∣ning such, as hee hath segrega∣ted to himselfe, from all eter∣nities; doth often, contrarie to their intended purposes, and designes; dispose, and designe of them: then working their conuersions to him, when they least dreame thereof: yea, when they are purposely, and obstinatelie striuing against it. So hee dealt with Saul, who brought vp at theActs 22 & 26. feet of Gamaliell, profited so much in Iuda∣isme, that by profession hee became a Pharisey, and so zealousGalat. 1. an Emulatour of his forefathers traditi∣ens, that at the mercifull appearance of the Saviour of mankind Iesus Christ, hee was so repleat with Igno∣rant zeale, and soActs 9. breathing out of threatnings a∣gainst Christ, that hee obteined letters of commission; from theActs 12. Chiefe Priest in Hierusalem, to goe into Samaria, and to bring vp bound, all those who should professe his name. But prosecuting this designe, be∣cause hee did it in1. Ad Timoth. 11. ignorance, hee obtained mercie,
and therefore by the most gracious voice, and shining light of him, whom hee persecuted, hee was most hap∣pilie prostrated to the ground, in his way to Damas∣cus; and beeing led to Samaria (the Place, where hee intended most to oppose against Christ) hee was there not onely conuerted, by the ministerie of Ananias, but hee was further, so conforted and strengthned by the Spirit of God; that of an instrument of wrath, hee became a most Holy vessell of Election,Ibidem. confounding the Iewes, in their Synagogues (the Iewes I say, in their Synagogues; who were erst, the elect People of GodAd Rom. 9. whose were the Promises, and the Lawgiuing, who iustlie gloried in that they were theIoh. 8. Children of Abraham, to whom the2 Rg. 3 & Ierem. 33. Eternall Couenant with him and his posterity was made by God; of whose tem∣ple God had promised to makePsal, 13 his dwelling place for ener.) But, these Jewes, first so peculiarlie elected by God: yea and euen then, in some sort his true Church; (though afterwards wholly reiected, and abandoned) this most excellent witnesse of Christ, didAct 9. confound euery where, throughout their Synagogues; teaching that Iesus the Iust one, whom they had denied and be∣traied, was the MessiasGenes. 22. promised to Abraham and his seede for euer. Myselfe, who a farre of can onely admire the vertues of this admirable witnesse, doe most humblie intreat of God, that I may in the lest modell imitate his zeale, in the professing and testifying of Christs truth. Hauing beene brought vp in Papisme, and much profited therein, I became so zealous an Imitatour, and defender of all Romysh humane tradi∣tions, and doctrines; that I would most willinglie,
haue spent my bloud for the profession of the same: earnestlie labouring, by preaching, exhorting, writing, early and late, to draw all to a zealous profession of all doctrines of that Church, (for so much as meerlie con∣cerned matter of Religion) as diuers both may, can, and will witnesse: which course I also prosecuted most zealouslie beeing grounded, as I then thought, vpon an inuincible Rocke, to wit, the Authority of the present Romane Church. And although (I call the heauens to witnesse) euer since I entred into the studie of Diui∣nitie, and serious perusing, and discussing of diuers controuersies; as (to wit) of the worshipping and ado∣ration of Images, of Indulgences, of Purgatory, of Merits, and inuocations of Saints (as necessarie to sal∣uation,) of the Popes transcendent Supremacy; of the imagined transubstantiation; of the Canon of the Masse; of the Publike seruic in vnknown tongues; and most speciallie of the maine, principall, and funda∣mentall controuersie of Iustification: I oftentimes re∣mained much vnsatisfied in my vnderstanding; not∣withstanding all I could read, in Bellarmine, Staple∣ton, Sanders, Vasques, &c. against all such doubts, as eiher out of Scriptures, ancient Fathers, or Coun∣cels, were produced against the doctrines of these con∣trouersies as they are now most stiflie maintained, by the Romane Church: yet in respect of the misconcei∣ued dignitie, and inerrabilitie of that See, and her Bi∣shops (supposing that shee would decree nothing, nor had decreed nothing as matter of faith, but by gene∣rall consent of the whole Church.) I did so captiuate my vnderstanding, in obedience to her, and so firmelie
receiue all that shee taught as faith; that I would haue accounted my selfe most happie, to haue suffered death for any point of her doctrine, deliuered as a point of faith by her. Thus walking in the way from Hieru∣salem, into Samaria: it pleased him, who (as I most confidently trust) hath assumed mee to his mercies; to knocke at my conscience, and to prostrate my soule, to a humiliation in her selfe, to open my eies and eares, to the hearkning of his voice; bidding mee beware of the way, in which I walked, and looke whiherunto the corruptions of that Church, which I followed did lead mee; the which hee vouchsafed, so sweetlie to worke with his gracious illustrating, and freeing of my vnderstanding, that I could not much doubt; at first, but that it was (Psal. 117. dextra Domini) the right hand of the Lord which did touch my vnderstanding: and as hee thus wrought in my vnderstanding, so hee did also internally, and immanentlie (as me thought) moue my will, to a most sweet, sincere, and burning 1. Iohn 4. Prou. 8. & Iohn 14. loue of his Maiestie; to a most resolute detestation of all my former sinnes, greater or smaller; euen to lament them (Isai. 38. in amaritudine animae) in bitternesse of soule; purely for his loue onely, moouing mee also to a longing desire, to bee out of this wretched world; and to bee Ad Philip. 1. dissolued, and to bee with him: and withall, so long as I should breath, to beare a resolute resignation to a∣uoid all occasions of sinnes whatsoeuer, (which also since my illustration, hath so accompanied mee, that looke, as when I resolue, to follow the truth offered, so I in∣crease in detestation of sinne; looke, as I haue temptati∣ons and suggestions, moouing mee to wauer from the
same either in respect of credite, loue of my old ac∣quaintance, and of the world, or of former meanes, and maintenance; so also, I had inclinations, to yeeld to o∣ther sinnes, and a weakenesse also, to withstand temp∣tations as before.) It pleased also his infinite good∣nesse, at these times iointly to inspire, and suggest vnto my soule, that in his mercies, and by his death and pas∣sion only, I was redeemed, and to be saued: not as with a wretchlesse presumption, beleeuing Iacob. 2.. this out of a dead faith, but withall, that by his holy assistance I was necessarily to liue and perseuere, in his holy loue and feare; and in the Math. 7 obseruation of all his most holy com∣mandements, so farre as humane infirmity, or igno∣rance would permit mee. Thus beeing touched (pardon mee Christian Rea∣der for this disclosing the secrets of my soule) I did often prostrate my soule, and my heart, beseeching that Ad Titum. 3. humanitie, and benignitie of Iesus, my onely Ad∣uocate, that hee would not, for my Psal. 78. former sinnes, and ignorances of my youth abandon me, but that he wouldPsal. 24. vouchsafe to Psal. 5▪ confirme mee with his principall spirit: and to remooue from my soule all shadowes and deceits of Satan, and to bring mee to his iotes: for in him on∣lie, with him onely, and for him onely, I desired to liue or die; yea so resolued therein, that whatsoeuer should betide mee, either in this life or the next; yet I estee∣med it all happinesse that his name should be glorified in me, either by iustice or mercy. As my Soule, was thus communing with herselfe, and my Sauiour; ioint∣lie, did present themselues to my memory, many my former thoughts, against the Romane humaine tradi∣tions
and doctrines (especially the pernicious Breefes, of Paul the fift, against the Oath of allegiance) yea and euen thn, by happie occasion, chanced into my hands, a Remes  estament, where happily I light vpon Annotat. in 22 Luc vpon those words, Simon, Simon, and Ann¦tat. vpon the first of the Acts, and vpon the 1. 10 the Corinth. 14. some of their corruptions, and abuses: yea and one pernicious errour, or rather heresie, the which as I had often obserued before, but had passed it ouer, in respect of my blind obedience to their doctrines: so then I re∣considered more seriouslie; and withall proposed it to some in this place (who are worthily esteemed learned) but they gaue mee little satisfaction, because as the cor∣ruptions were wilfull, and inexcusable▪ so the errour was pernicious, and indefensible. But aboue all other; two considerations, then did offer themselues, to my serious, and pensiue vnderstanding; first, how not on∣lie the Bishop of Roe himselfe, but also all his Cano∣nists (some verie few onely excepted) all those of the societie of Ignatius, and all other the greatest firma∣ments of the present Roman religion; doe obstinately maintaine, that the Popes iudgement alone, teaching the whole hurch, was to bee beleeued (beleeued I say) as the infalible Oracle of God; which to my vnder∣standing and faith, was so cleare an heresie, and blas∣phemy against God; contrarie to all Scriptures, all an∣cient Councels, Fathers, yea all Ancients (some few Popes only excepted, whose testimonies are either coun∣terfeited, or else giuing testimony for themselues, their testimonies are not true, and worth-receiuing) that I fully resolued, not to giue, an obedient and obsequious eare to the present Romane Church therein; because shee did so perniciously erre in the verie rule of faith it
selfe. For if the square, and rule bee crooked, or vn∣euen, how can any thing, that is to bee leuelled there∣with, bee right and streight? the blinde, leading the blind, both fall into the ditch Luc. 6. saith Christ. Second∣lie I obserued, by what preposterous meanes, contrary to all Antiquity, and Christs most expresse instituti∣on, in Mat. 22. Mar. 12. S. Matthew; the Popes doe now challeng, and assume power to depose Princes, dispose of Kingdoms, dissolue fidelity (though with oath confirmed) not on∣lie in case of heresie, in the Prince, by him so termed (although this his mysticall power, was at first onely pretended by the learnedst Ignatians, against notori∣ous Heretikes, and manifest Apostates) but in case also, of any enormous delict, or insufficiencie, in any Princes whatsoeuer: yea and to speake plaine English; in what case soeuer, it shall please his holinesse iudicial∣ly to proceed. For who of the Pontificians, dare See pag. 43. following. re∣tract his sentence? who euer resisted him and had peace? or was not thundred against; with excommu∣nication, deposition, or depriuation? which when I seriouslie pondered; as in the sight of God, I could not but thinke, that it was soueraigntie, not religion; in∣crease of possession, not saluation of soules, which the later Popes aimed at; as also I shall, most clearely deli∣uer in my motiues following. Further, I obserued, that for the fortifying of this mysticall power of the Image of the Romane Empire, they endeauoured to make heereof a newe article of Faith: for indirect furthering whereof; most impu∣dently without all forehead, Vpon the feast of the inuention of the Crosse, P. W. in a pub∣like assembly, & at a publike pane∣gericall oration made for the Martyrs honour at Loaine, pray∣ed thus vnto him S. Henrice inter∣cede pro nois. Holy Henry pray for vs, I doe not heare that hee made R. Hould∣corne a Saint, which may wel be admired. diuers of the Ignatians doe labour tooth and naie, to make the late Arch∣traitour
Garnet, a martyr (a fit martyr indeede with his Consorts, for this their new article of faith) and by a pseudoprodigious, and mendacious straw (the imaginary face of which, was first obserued and found, by a notorious dicing and carding priest, &c) to make the Authour of all goodnesse, as a witnesse of the in∣nocencie, and integrity of that man; who with other his Complices, was not onely acquainted, but also (as the publike records of this Realme published accordingly to his triall, made in the face of the whole Kingdome doe witnesse) was a Concealer, an Abettour, and princi∣pall Furtherer of the same. I must needs confesse Christian Reader, that these two considerations, did produce in my soule a kind of horrour, and dread, to bee partaker of that Church; which was to bee supported by so weake and fallible a rule of faith, as the Popes variable iudgement is; and to bee ampliated, and enlarged, by such meanes, as none but the verie smoakie Apocal. 9. Locusts, arising from out of the bottomlesse pit, would offer to attempt. Thus my soule wauering and being tossed; I, with all humi∣lity knocked often at the gates of his mercie, who Math. 7. pro∣miseth to open, to all such, as confidentlie knocke there∣at: I entred into a more serious search of these mat∣ters; I read with great diligence; I conferred also with such as are reputed learned, and Chiesetaines in this place; so long as I saw One of these, M. G. B. Archp. being very lately dead is falsely by some reported to haue changed his opinion for the Oath of Alle∣giance. them willing to giue me any sa∣tisfaction; but when I clearelie obserued, that their answers to the sacred Scriptures, and ancient Autho∣rities produced by mee, were meere tergiuersations; and that they resolutely rested vpon the authority of
the present Roman Church, and her practise, disestee∣ming whatsoeuer, was clearely brought against her (a∣gainst whose authoritie, command, and Breefes, not∣withstanding some of them doe practise) I could not but resolue, to leaue off conference with them; remem∣bring that of the Isai, 6. Act. 28. Prophet Esay, vnto the Iewes, and vsed also by the Apostle S. Paul in like case: Incras∣satum est cor populihuius, &c. The heart of this people is become grosse, and with their eares, they haue heard heauily, and they haue closed their eies, lest per∣chance they should see with their eies, and heare with their eares, and vnderstand with their hearts, and bee conuerted, and I heale them. This their estate, as I did and do, from the very bottome of my heart lament, so it did greatly increase my doubts, mustring them∣selues to my Conscience, against the nouell traditions, and vncatholike doctrines of the Church of Rome; whereof (Christian Reader, with thy patience and good acceptance) I will communicate part, to thy courteous view: not because, I esteeme my selfe so learned, as though I were able, to produce any new learning neuer thought on before, (for in very deed, I doe ranke my selfe, amongst the meanest of Gods seruants, and Priests) nor, because, I doe seeke in matters of Religi∣on, to bee applauded by the worlds iudgement, or to please humaine censures; but alonely, that thou maist consider, vpon how waightie inducements, I haue re∣linquished the intollerable, and pernicious burthen of humaine traditions; reared vp, against Gods instituti∣on, that if thou bee wauering from the Firmament of Truth, of Gods word, and holy ancient Church; thou
maist with mee bee staied; if thou art alreadie sedued, (as I haue been) thou maist be reclaimed, to the sweet yoke of Iesus Christ. My heart bleeds, to thinke how many in this King∣dome (and some of them my speciall acquaintance, ver∣tuously and zealously disposed) are caried away with most dangerous errors; obtruded vnto them, only vp∣on the Roman Bishops prerogatiue, of not erring: (and yet heauen and earth proclaimes that Popes may erre and be Heretikes:) God of his infinite mercy, vouchsafe to open their eies, that they may receiue the charity of Truth; that they may see that defection, and apostasie accomplished in them, and their defendants; which the 2 ad Thess. 2 vessell of election, so long agoe fortold; and whereof the Prophet and Apoc. 17. Apostle in his Reuelation so clearelie discourseth; shewing that Kings and Na∣tions should be drunke, and be bewitched with the Cup of Romes Fornications: Fornications hee saith, there∣by most clearely demonstrating; that some Romane Church, or Congregation, (for most cleare it is, and best Pontificians deny it not, that of Rome hee prophe∣cieth) earst a Spouse, but after a Strmpet, (in respect of her spirituall aduoutries) first pure, but after most im∣pure; first Christian, but after Antichristian: (for her doctrines and practises, against the most pure doct∣rine, and humble conuersation of Christ) first with a cup of Christian simplicity in her hands, deuoid of hu∣mane dregs; but after, with a Ibidem. cup, full of abomi∣nations, and corruptions; with which, shee should de∣lude all Nations, and Kingdomes of the earth: making merchandize & negotiating with the souls of men: the
which, if it should not be already fulfilled in the Roman Church, it must bee heereafter at least, if the Prophet truly haue forespoken: The later of which, especiallie touching the merchandizing of soules in auarice, how clearlie it is already compleated, in the Roman Church; diuers earnest professors agreeing in all points of faith with the Romane Church in their times, will plainelyb In ementitam Constantini do∣nationem. testifie: Saepissime. as Baptista, Mantuanus In Henr. 3. Valla, Rober∣tus Lincolriensis in c Matthew of Paris, In Epist. 1. ad Titum. Clau∣dius Espencaeus, S. ab Cons. ad Eugenium. Bernard, Constitut. Im∣perial pag. 39 Frederike the Emperour in his Epistle to all Prelates, Baronius 992. Arnulphus in a Synod at Rhemes in Baronius; and read Baro∣nius also in the yeere 912. where you shall find him affirming; how at the lust of whores, diuers Popes most wicked, luxurious, and auaricious, were thrust into Peters chaire; and how that custome lasted not for a short while only. Claudius Espen∣caeus as hee is now set forth, is vvholly cor∣rupted, you must read his first E∣dition. All these, with infinite others, do demonstrate the corruptions of the Roman Church, would God, effectually for the conuersion of seduced soules. Wherein, I can conceiue, no great hope; first, of all such popish seruants, as reape profitte, or liuing by that profession; nor of such children, as are vnder the command of some obstinate recusants: nor of any such bankrupts, and malecontents, as expect altera∣tions, and long for troubled waters to fish in: nor of such scrupulous good soules, as will not dare to peruse, or read any part of holy Scripture (though of the Rhe∣mists Testament it selfe, falsified with their Annotati∣ons) lest they should proue Heretikes (as some of them haue told me) or else, remaine perplexed in their Cons∣ciences: nor of some of their Priests, who are resolued
for the maintenance of their credit, conseruing of their meanes, and some such other respects, with their fauo∣ritesses (I meane, such like fauours as will mooue men to trauell vp to Rome, to procure dispensations for mariages; and yet in their absences and long pilgri∣mages, such painfull pilgrimes, notwithstanding strip∣ped of their fauouritesses, by some of their own brother∣hood, which haue come betwixt them and home) are ready without examination of Scriptures, or Fathers, to receiue whatsoeuer the Roman Church shal obtrude vnto them. Neither may I conceiue hope of any such yonger persons who expect preferment, by One of the most speciall practises of the Pontifici∣ans in England, to enlarge their re∣ligion, is to pro∣cure matches in mariages: doe thou make the inferences, Chri∣stian Reader. There is a myste∣rie in it, if the na∣tures of young spirits be consi∣dered, who com∣monly at such seasons are ra∣ther full of the heate of carnall loue, then of that fire which Christ came to send in∣to this world, Luk. 12. matching into some stocke and family, the which as it abhorreth the reading of the Scriptures, so also is inueterated in Papistrie. My chiefest hope, may be of those, who as they are iudicious, so embrace that faith meerely out of conscience, and are nothing dependant of others; who either, through the peremptory, auaricious, facti∣ous, and vnchast liues of their Priests; or generally, for the hatefull opposings and vncharitablenesse amongst them all; (by which they demonstrate themselues to be no disciples of Christ, whose proper badge and stemme is Ioh. 13. dilection and loue of each other:) or else, through the vaine multiplicity of deuised fables and miracles, out of their old Legends: and withall through the in∣excusable ignorance of their Priests, in Gods sacred Scriptures (which I dare boldly affirme, is so great, that there are, scarse, a hundred amongst diuers hun∣dreths of them, in this Kingdome, who can tell, either how many bookes there are of Gods Scripture, or how many Chapters there are in any of the bookes.) Or else,
through the inuallid successes, or euents of their vows, beeing either not heard, or not regarded by them, to whom they are made: or else, through the contiuuall disquietnesse, and torment of their consciences, in the I disproue not' but highly com∣mend the vse of Auricular Con∣fession, when it is voluntary, with∣out sacrilege vsed, & for com∣fort; not abused as the very means and cause by which sinners are iustified in the sight of God: much like as the Mexicans vsed Auricular Con∣fession. Botero Relationi vniuer∣sali. Part. 4. lib. 2. nel fine. vse of their Sacrament of confession (as it is now by them most peruersly abused to the iniurie of Christ, & subuersion of diuers soules) receiuing no It is not imagi∣nable what in∣consolable liues some (that are frequente in the vse of Confession, as necessary to saluation) doe lead, there is no stony heart, which would not pitie them, knowing their torments. rest day nor night, Ierem. 16 as seruing Gods who cannot giue it them, are growne into some distrust of the Romane Church. Of these might bee conceiued some iust hope of their con∣uersions, if they would vouchsafe either to read holie Scriptures, or else to read some learned bookes, written by some learned Priest or Preacher of the reformed and Catholike Churches, of Christendom: but I great∣ly doubt they wil not dare, without leaue of their Priests so to doc: and I am most assured, that by them they shal neuer be permitted. A certaine Bishoppe of Italy, was not ashamed to tell Claud Espene. Comeut in cap. 1 ad titum. Claudius Espencaeus, a famous Pontifician, that the learned men in Italy it self, were afraid to study the holy Scriptures, (lest thereby they should become Heretikes) and that therefore they im∣ployed themselues in commenting vpon the Popes law∣bookes, deerees, and the Decretals; (the which Booke, thoughfull of lies, contradictions, impertinen∣cies; yet because it is the Popes Booke it must be re∣spected, whilest the holie Scripture lyeth as it were in the streetes neglected. But to these may not that of Christ be iustly obiected; (Serui nequam) wicked seruants, out of your owne mouthes I condemn you? Assuredly, these and like Italianized Prelates, (ofm Luk. 19. which, for greatest number consisted the Tridentine
Councell) are none of those, who are reputed blessed by the Prophet Psalm. 2 Dauid, for meditating in the law of God day and night. But to shorten this my letter, addressed vnto thee, Christian and Catholike Reader; I humblie request thee to accept with charitable interpretation these my Motiues, and to pray for my constancy in profession of Gods truth: I must needes confesse that I did find great difficulties in this my conuersi∣on: First some suggestions (by Sathan suborned) how greatly this my conuersion would turne to my disesti∣mation, with all of the present Roman faith, and those my deare and old acquaintance, of whom I affirme, that they are vertuously disposed for whose saluations vtinam vt Anathema superimpenderer: Would God, to speake with the Ad Rom. 9. & 2. ad Corint. 12 Apostle, I might as an A∣natheme be sacrificed, yea offered and offered againe, so that they might be saued. Some other lesser difficul∣ties I found; all were humane, terrene: but when I considered that of the Ad Galat. 1 Apostle, if I should seeke to pleasemen, I should not bee the seruant of Christ; and that of Luk. 12 Christ; Seeke first the Kingdome of God, and the iustice thereof, and then all these things will bee added vnto you: I fully resolued for the charity, and Ad Philip. 3 supereminent knowledge of Christ, to esteeme all that is in the world as verie dung, and rather to dwell poore Psal. 83 in the house of God, then to dwell in the rich Taber∣nacles of sinners: And in this my resolution I was somewhat the more confirmed, in respect, that from my verie youth; euen then, when I was too too zealous an Emulator of all Romane superstitions: I haue euer had often suggestions, and inspirations in my mind,
that a time would come, when I should be calumniated, and greatly abused by the Papists, and persecuted by the Pope himselfe, whom I then admired as an hea∣uenly Oracle vpon earth: but most of all I was filled with such foreapprehensions, and presages (being in Rome) vpon Anno Dom. 1594 the 20. of June. the same day and houre, when that glorious and renowned Christian Marsh suffered the cutting off, of his right hand; the gagging of his mouth (by the Counsel of the Ignatian Cowlin, who boasteth himself thereof in England) after that, the pulling, tea∣ring, and burning of his flesh with hote glowing pin∣cers for many howres together, thorow many streetes, of the City of Rome; and lastly death it selfe by fire; with such admirable patience and constancy, that the Romanes themselues did greatly admire him therfore. His act, for which hee was so tormented, was, because hee had throwne downe their Sacrament, as it was publikely carried thorow the streetes of Rome in pub∣like Procession, to be adored, worshipped and inuoca∣ted as God himselfe (an idolatrous superstition latelie crept into that Church, contrary to the custom and pra∣ctise of all auncient Churches whatsoeuer.) And yet notwitstanding all such suggestions, and inspirati∣ons at that time (which I constantly reiected as temp∣tations) I did, beeing earnestly intreated and vrged thereunto by the Superiours of the English Colledge, make an Oration, and a most vehement This Oration was ready pen∣ned to me, be∣cause I had little aboue a day to prouide my selfe for the prpnoun∣cing thereof, before, so pub∣like an Audience. inuectiue a∣gainst that fact of his, in the presence of diuers Cardi∣nals and Prelates; assembled together, in the English Church, to keepe a solemne Masse of the Sacrament, some moneth after the death of that glorious Christian.
But what may I now (vpon this euent) interpret those presages, inspirations, and forewarnings, else to haue been, then sweet motions, and inducements from him; who as I trust hath segregated mee, to preach the Go∣spell of his beloued Sonne Iesus? the which then I passed ouer with a deafe eare, but his goodnesse vouch∣safing now, to open my eare; I may not contradict, but blesse him eternally, for that he hath made me a child of Ad Rom. 8. & . Pt. 2 adoption, of acquisition, and election: beleeuing with Ad Rom 10. heart, and confessing with mouth, for my iustification and saluation onely, and alonely in Iesus Christ. But before I conclude, I intreat the Courteous Reader, that Ad Galat. 5. Iacob. 2. both by faith and conuersation; by godly Act. 2 frequent∣ing of the most venerable Sacrament, of Christs body and bloud; by deuout Ad Col. 3. & Jacob. 1 attendance, and hearkning to Gods word, so daily, so clearely, so liuely preached in this Kingdome; by daily Psal. 1. meditating in Gods holy Scrip∣tures; and aboue all by conseruing his soule Jacob. 1. & 2. Pet. 3. Luk. 8 Matth. 3 impolluted from alliniquity of sinne, and the contagion of al world∣ly desires, and solicitudes; by exercising 2. Ad Corint. 9 chearefully, plentifullie, all charitable offices, to all such as are in af∣fliction and necessity; by keeping his bodie 1. Ad Thess. 4 a cleare vessell from all impurity, and impudicity; and his tongue from all scurrill Ad Ephes. 5 Ad Rom. 13 and vnseemely speeches; seri∣ously to endeauour to make 2. Pet. 2 sure his vocation; and to 1. Pet. 2. stop the mouthes of such, who in respect that some of the reformed Churches (especially of the Clergy) liue not conformably to their doctrine, do blaspheme the sacred Truth of Christs immaculate Gospell. I haue seene much into the liues of the Aduerse part; the which al∣though, I find to bee more impure, auaricious, proud,
vncharitable, then euer I could haue imagined; yet that is not the cause, why I left them, but the impuri∣ties, abominations, and superstitious impertinencies of their doctrines, worships, laws, and customes; which my soule hateth: assuring it selfe, that if I should still continue, in communion with them, I could haue no part with Christ my Sauiour: to whom, for hauing most mercifully 2. Ad Corint. 5. reconciled mee, to his Father in him∣selfe, bee onely, and alonely, with his Father and the holie Ghost, Honour and Glorie, for euer, Amen. Yours in Christ Iesus, R. S.
The Contents of this booke of MOTIVES. THe Preface, shewing the first occasions, induce∣ments, and maner, of the Authors conuersion. The diuision of the Motiues. 1. Into Motiues out of the Pontificious Erroneous Doctrines. 2. Out of their dangerous and wicked Lawes. 3. Out of certaine obseruations touching the dangerous Spirits of sundrie Chiefe English Romanists. Page. 1. Motiues of Doctrine. FIrst Motiue touching Doctrine, is out of the Pontifician vnsound rule of Faith, to wit, the Popes sole Iudgement, defining (ex Cathedra) out of the Chaire, as Pastor of the Church. Pag. 2. Second Motiue is, out of another rule of their faith, to wit, Apocriphall Scriptures. Pag. 27. Third Motiue is, out of their most Idle rule of Faith traditions; as they doe pretend them. Pag. 31. Fourth Motiue is, out of the vsurped transcendent power of Popes in Temporals, and Spirituals. Pag. 41. Fifth Motiue is, out of the most Superstitious Ro∣mane Doctrine, for the Adoration and worshipping of Images. Pag. 69. Sixth Motiue is, out of diuers obseruations, touching sundry superstitious fooleries, contradictions and imper∣tinences of the Romane Masse. Pag. 86. Seuenth Motiue is, out of their most vaine and intol∣lerable Doctrines, and abuses touching Indulgences. Pag. 119.
Eight Motiue is, out of their irreligious Doctrine, a∣gainst the vse of the publike Liturgies, and Church ser∣uices in knowen tongues. pag. 128. Ninth Motiue, briefly toucheth their most vnchristi∣an Doctrine of Aequiuocation. pag. 137. Tenth Motiue, briefly taxeth their tyrannicall de∣nying of Indifferent Reading of holy Scriptures in the vulgar tongues. pag. 140. Concerning their wicked Customes, and Lawes: the Author toucheth one∣lie a few. FIrst, the wicked custome and Law by which their Popes strictly forbid, that there be any publike com∣memoration in their Masses for the conuersion of any In∣fidels, Heretikes, or excommunicated persons, &c. or for the temporall prosperity and safety of Soueraignes, be∣ing by them reputed Heretikes. pag. 144. Second, hypocriticall law, and custome, touching their fastings, and daies of fasting. pag. 148. Third, most impure permissiue law, for their houses of prostitution; euen in Rome it selfe: not without great gaine to the Popes Coffers. pag. 151. Fourth, most vnchristian law, that in case of no extre∣mity the venerable Sacrament may bee celebrated with∣out their Massing vestiments, altarstones, &c. and such like humane deuises and institutions. pag. 152. Fifth, most iniurious law, by the which, the Laity contrary to the Institution of Christ, and practise of all antiquity; is debarred of the cup, in the most holy and dreadfull Sacrament. pag. 153. Sixth, vnchristian law, is the necessary annexing of the vow of Chastity, to all their greater holy orders; by occasion of which law, the vile impurities of the Romane
Cougregation are growne innumerable and inexpressible. pag. 154. Touching certaine obseruations out of the Pontifician Spirits. FIrst, the Author discouereth by diuers notable parti∣culars, the disloiall and vnnaturall Spirits of the Ig∣natian Cheefetaines of the English: in the maner of their preaching, and their propagation of the Romane Gospell in England. pag. 1. alpha. 2. Secondly, he sheweth in diuers particulars, how they doe most shamefully calumniate the Church of England, for her Doctrines and her publike Liturgie. pag. 13. alpha. 2. Thirdly hee sheweth how generally all Pontificians, denie consent of Ancient Fathers; being produced, a∣gainst diuers points of their nouell Doctrines. pag. 20. Fourthly, he sheweth how the younger Ignatians, doe imitate the vnnaturall and disloiall Spirits of the old. pag. 24. In the Conclusion he sheweth more largely, both out of Scriptures, and Fathers, that the Church of Rome, notwithstanding her visibility and Conspicuity, may Iustly, and (in respect of her corruptions) necessarily, ought to be forsaken. pag. 32.
THE NOVELL AND HERETICALL Rule of the Romane FAITH. Diuision of the Motiues. THE Sauiour of mankind who hath vouchsafed to illustrate the eyes of him, who sate in darkenesse and in the shadowe of death, to know his truth: will also, I hope, vouch∣safe so to confort him, that hee may rather con∣uert some then confound any; of those, who call themselues true Iewes, and Catholikes, which they are not, but are indeede only the Synagogues and Congregations of the Bishops of Rome: who in Dictatus Greg. 7. apud Baron. anno 1175. As Bell. admit∣teth Papa, pro∣perly signifieth a Father, that begetteth chil∣dren, and ther∣fore all begot∣ten of him and to him, are de∣nominated of him, Papists. Gregorie the V 11. did first of all by de∣cree
assume vnto themselues (excluding all other Priests and Bishops from that name Papa) the name of Fathers of the whole Church, to wit, to be only called Papae, from which name all their children by denomination are called Papists; rather, then from Christ, Christians: which (Papae) Fathers also, somewhat before that time, at that time, and now also, doe peremptorily challenge to bee the only Vni∣uersall, Catholike, and immediate Pastours and Fathers of all, who do Ad Rom. 10.  a greek preposition, si∣gnifieth pro¦perly as much as the Latine preposition pro for: so taken. Math. 17. : and Math. 20. , and in compo∣sition it signi∣fieth properly for insteed: as  In some words of com∣position, it signifieth also opposition as . Yea and in  it is also in such a signification to be indifferētly vsed according to the naturall signification of the word. inuocate the name of Iesus, be they Patriarks, Primates, Bishops, Priests, or who elsesouer: so that they only and alonely must bee the immediate Vicars of Christ, for Christ, and in Christs steede; and if it please you to vse the Greeke wordes in their owne sense, they are sole Vi∣cars, *  Vicars for Christ: so that agreeingly to Bellar. lib. de Rom. Pont. sae∣pissimè. Bellarmines doctrine, and almost all of his Societie (di∣rectly against the prerogatiue of Christ) the Church is to be called Ioh. 20. one fold, and one visible flocke, because it hath one Pastour and one Sheepe-heard the Pope; and so accor∣dingly he must, forsooth, only be the dore, and dorekeeper of the Church, only to let in and to shut out. And would God, they would also proue to be at least of the good shep∣heards to giue their liues for their sheepe, would God they would at leasly vouchsafe 1. Tim. 1. to preach to their flocke, and not place all the gouerning of their flocke, in idle decreeing faith, and ambitious enacting of lawes: such lawes as tend so greatly to Christs dishonour, to the scandall of the whole world, and setting vp of their owne Papacies, and the aug∣menting of their temporall Dominions. But alas these courses of them being the very shipwracke of good con∣sciences, are also euident signes of shipwracke in faith, and where the Psal. 35. foote of pride hath moued them, there the foot of infidelitie also hath followed, by the working of wic∣kednesse, and the malignant enemie. The motiues which haue moued me to leaue their communion, so farre as they haue abandoned and left the puritie of the Roman Primi∣tiue Church, which was no sooner planted, but it was sli∣ding,
if you will beleeue Onuphrius an∣notat, in Plati∣nam in vitam Petri. Of the Roman Church also is meant that which Genebr. ad ann. 898. out of Platin. Neg∣ligentia Episco∣porum, &c. by then negligence of Bishops ma∣nyabuses crept into the church Which in re∣spect of the warres could not bee repressed. Thus they. Onuphrius, I wil diuide into three principall heads: The first shall containe Motiues, out of their pernicious and hereticall doctrines. The second, Mo∣tiues out of their most dangerous and wicked lawes. The third, Motiues out of the obseruations which I haue made of the Spirits of the English Chieftaines of the Roman pro∣fession. I thought to haue had adioyned, fourthly, some generall obseruations touching the corrupt liues; especial∣ly of some principall ones of their Clergie, wherein I could produce many particulars, and such as could not be gain∣said: but Eccles. 3. omnia tempus habent, if occasion require and they desire it, they shall well vnderstand that they haue lit∣tle cause to bragge of the innocencie and integrity of many of their English Apostles and Martyrs. Motiues touching doctrine. The first Motiue. FIrst, I suppose for truth, as cleare as any demonstration, that what Church soeuer doth perniciously erre in the rule of Faith, must or may perniciously erre in all conclu∣sions and propositions of faith, deducted out of that erroneous Rule. Now that the Roman Church doth perniciously erre in the very rule of faith, I make it thus manifest. The rule of faith with the perfect Romanes, is the Popes sole iudgement, when he de∣fineth ex Cathedra, that is (to expound their phrase in theirWhat the Ro∣manes meane by their Popes defining, Ex Cathedra. owne sense) vvhen he so defineth, that he intendeth there∣by to teach the vvhole Christian Church, (for some of them not vvholly Romanes vvill not obstinately, and in expresse termes say, that he, cannot erre vvhen he defineth and pro∣nounceth for a particular Church) to beleeue and practise
as he decreeth, and defineth, and that this is the only iner∣rable rule of faith, vvith the Romanes; and that in the Pope alone resideth infallibilitie of defining, and that all o∣ther meanes, as consent of Fathers, without him, either in Counsell, or out of Counsell, may bee subiect to errours, deceiue, and be deceiued, it is the most expresse sentence and doctrine of 2. 2. q. 11. art. 2. ad 3. & refer. caus. 24. q. 1. cap. Quoties∣cun{que}. Aquinas, Bellar. lib. 2. de Christo, c. 28. lib. de Concis saepe. Bellarmine, Ʋalentia in his Analysis of faith, where he hath this con∣clusion, lib. 8. c. 1. 2. & 3. Quo, tiescun{que}, &c. As often as the Pope in desi¦ning questions of faith, vseth that authoritie wherewith hee is indued, that doctrine must by diuine pre∣cepts be recei∣ued of al chri∣stians as a sen∣tence of faith, and wee must beleeue, that so often he v∣seth that au∣thority, as of∣ten as in con∣trouersies of faith, either by himselfe, or with his Councell of Bishops, hee shall so determine one part of the question, that he will binde the whole Church to receiue the same. Valenti, Coq. in his Treatise against our Kinges Premon. very often. Coquaeus, Endaemon in his Parralell. Endaemon, Par. in his Philopater, Parsons, Baldwin. lun. lib. de Rom. Pont. cap. 9. prop. 1. & 2. ex Bellarm. operibus in sua solida si dei demonstr. Baldwinus Iunius, Siluester in summ. verbo Fides. Coquae. pag. 27. The purpured Fathers are Senatours and Counselers of the Pope, and with them he iudgeth the whole world. Thus he. Siluester, all Canonists, very few excepted, two only (to wit, Panormit. Zabarel:) vvhich I now remember: of all of the Societie of Ignatius; of Baronius most often in his Annals, and in his Parenisis▪ to the Venetians, and in his Voto to Paul the fifth: of Suares, Vasques, Azor, Coccius in his voluminous aggregat most often. Sanders, Allen, Genebrard, Gretser, Becan, Carerius, the two Bozius, Mancinus, Boter: vvith infinite others, all whom it is both impossible and needlesse to relate. Let the decrees of Leo 10. in the Councell of Laterane, Boniface the 8. Vnam Sanctam, and the two de∣cretall Epistles of Sixtus the 5. and d Clement the 8. set before the late vulgar editions of those two Popes, (pre∣tended by some to be the whole, by others only the amen∣ded translation of S. Hierome (for yet they are not agreed) stand for all: now vvhat Pontifician can vvithout note of impietie, or infidelitie, call in question this their doctrinall and dogmaticall position, vvhich is so clearly and resolute∣ly maintained by them, practised and defined by their Popes? yea, and by Leo the tenth in his Laterane Councel, and Eugenius in his. And although some moderate Roma∣nists to smoothe this vneuen rule, vvill seeme to say, that the Pope ought to take aduise of his Brethren the Cardi∣nals,
or of Bishops (his deputies) when hee vvill define: notwithstanding, such politike excusers of their shame, and all other defenders of this their position, doe, and must maintaine, that the infallibilitie of any definition is from the Pope alone. Here-hence it is, that all English Ignatians, and most English Priests at this present in England, and else where, are such violent enemies against the Oath of al∣legeance, and esteeme all such as take or allow of it, as He∣retikes, as lapsed from the Catholike Romane faith; be∣cause (say they) the Pope in his Briefes hath defined, and decreed, that there are diuers points in it against the Ca∣tholike faith (Romane he should say) and yet I suppose as very cleare, that none of the English Secular Priests did expresly know, against what speciall points of faith the Oath was, till now of late a certaine A Briefe de∣claration, &c. together with a recapitulati∣on, &c. by H. I. Ignatian recapitula∣ter, vnder a double title promising a double book, but brin∣ging forth only a short pamphlet, and that a namelesse one, (and therefore a Libell) hath shewed in his namelesse de∣fence of the Romane faith, that Pope Paul the 5. in his Breues hath Pag. 32. Ibidem pag. 56. defined the same Oath to bee hereticall, and vnlawfull, because it denyeth the Popes power to depose Princes, and dispose of Kingdomes (an article of faith with him in his libell, although not naming himselfe, I may iustly say, Rom 1. My eares haue heard many I∣gnatian Priests constantly af∣firme, that Paul the 5. had defi∣ned in his late Breues that the oath could not be taken, and that his Briefe was a definitiō of faith: so R. B. G. B. I. F. R. L. M. W. T. T T. F. I. K. with diuers others of that profes∣sion. erubescit cuangelium, he is ashamed of his Ghospell.) But no meruaile that the Ignatians, are so well acquainted with the mysteries of the Popes faith, for since their Father Ignatius his beatifying, vvho had so many Apud Ribadin in vita Ignat. idle reuelations, I doubt not, but that they haue receiued newe illustrations from that Code and Deske of all law, faith and right (the Popes brest) which the ancient Church neuer knew. But when The Reca∣pitulater in the Title of his vnlearned and seditious pam¦phet: and for his traiterous doctrine, see him page 43. Promised Leo∣nard Lessius commeth forth with his demonstrations (for he would seeme to demonstrate in all his bookes) as this pamphletter of Louaine (not H. I. but P. W.) hath couert∣ly promised; doubtlesse, he will reueale the hidden mysterie which was▪ not knowne in the Primitiue Church, though
then darkly working, but was to be 2. Thess. 2. reuealed in these times, with which the world is likely to end. But to returne to what I haue to proue. It being mani∣fest, that Popes, and the Romane particular Church, with all those of the societie of Ignatius (not excepting any one) doe dogmatically maintaine, that the Pope defining, ex Cathedra, is the infallible, vncontrollable, vnappellable, and onely necessarie Iudge in all controuersies of faith, it should be lost labour in me to stand to proue that this their position is beleeued by them, as a point and article of their faith; nay, I should say as a principle, and very maxime of their faith. For, can any the simplest idiote doubt, but that the infallible rule of faith, which declareth faith, squareth faith, must be beleeued as faith, and by faith; But by this their nouell article of faith, by ineuitable consequence it followeth, that they differ in the most fundamentall point of beleefe, from all such Fathers, Councels, and Doctors, as did maintaine, or as yet doe, that the most infallible rule of faith is the doctrine of the Scriptures, especially when it is publikely declared out of the same Scriptures, by the authoritie of free Generall Councels, and the publike voice of the vniuersall Christian Church, the which rule of faith, as I am most assured all Conc. Hierosol. Act. 15. Greg. in ep 1. ad Co∣rinh. apud pate∣riū. Vinc Lirin. contra hereses cap. 4. S. Austen most clearely. contra Donat. lib. 2. contra e¦pist. funda. tract. vltimo in Ioh. contra Crescon. & alibi sepissime Cyprian. lib. de vnitate Ecclesiae. in epist. ad Pomp. Patres conc. chal cedo. Sinod. 6. 7. 8. conc. Constan. Basil. Constātinus apud Euseb. in eius vita. Con. Constantinopol. in epist. ad epsc. Rom. congregatos arissime, apud Zozom. l. 5. c. 9. l At this pre∣ent now in aris it is re∣quired of the Ignatians a∣mongst other articles, to wit, that the Pope cannot depose Princes &c. to subscribe also to the superio∣rity of the ge∣neral Councel boue the Pope ancient Fathers did teach and be∣leeue, so it cannot be doubted, but that many learned, both in Germanie, England, and q France, doe still professe and maintaine: to all whom, as to the ancient Fathers, and Councels, the later Popes, with their Pontificians, who obstinately maintaine and beleeue this nouell rule of faith, must in truth be reputed heretikes, yea obstinate heretikes, because pertinaciously erring in the very fundamentall rule of all faith: And if any learned Priest retort against me, and say, that (as I heere confesse) all Papists concurre not to maintaine this pontifician rule of faith: and that many Sor∣bonist Doctors teach it not, neither do beleeue it: This is true indeed, but let him take this inference with him, that notwithstanding all their bragges, for the certainty of their
faith, they are yet most vncertaine, as being not as yet a∣greed vpon the rule of faith: yea they are so opposite, that one side beleeueth (as the Pope with his) what the other disbeleeueth and condemneth as erroneous; yea, and this in Councels, as in those Conc. Constan. & Basil. op∣posite to the Lateran vnder Leo the 10. and the Florent. vnder Eugenius the 4. deposed by the Fathers at Basil. of Laterane, Florence, Constance, Basill, Frankeford Colen, &c. which being so, that them∣selues are not agreed vpon the rule of faith, why will they not giue leaue, and allow to true Christians the word of God, as it is expounded, clearely, constantly, and vniuer∣sally by the ancient Fathers, to be the inerrable rule of faith, as his most excellent Maiestie in his learned premonition to Christian Princes iustly requireth and exacteth, according to ancient and learned Vincent. con∣tra heres. cap. 4. Ʋincentius his rule. It followeth, that I demonstrate this rule of faith deui∣sed by the Popes, and Pontificians, to support the Romane soueraignties to be meere noueltie, and so to prescribe a∣gainst it by antiquitie. This I must now doe contractly: not doubting, but that I shall haue occasion more to enlarge my authorities and reasons, when these my motiues shall be impugned; as doubtlesse they will be, vnlesse it seeme good to the wise men of Saint Omers (as their owne libel termes them) to answere them by some libelling ballade, as they of late haue thought meete to answere An answere made vpon Sheldons booke to a priuate friend begin∣ning, laugh, laugh, &c. which libell hath oftē mo∣ued the persons against whom it is to very much laugh∣ing at the Ig∣natians follies and wisdomes. with a libell a cer∣taine Priests booke for the oath of allegeance, for Quic∣quid illis libitum, licitum. Whatsoeuer liketh them is lawull with them, if it be to hoyse vp the Popes soue∣raigntie. First, this rule is against the practise of all the Hierosolimit. sub Iacobo. cen. Constantin. Eph. Calced. Sinod. 5. 6. 7. 8. saepe. Ancient, and Primitiue Church, which euer in occasion of contro∣uersies recurred to the doctrine of the Scriptures declared by the generall voice, and testimonie of the whole Church by her Bishops, Priests, and other learned men, pronoun∣cing & defining out of Gods holy word, which was alwaies laid before them being assembled in the general Councels: so the eight first generall which the Popes themselues with oath professe to receiue, (although few of them keepe their,
oath) yea the Apostles themselues, who all had infallibility by vertue of their Apostleship of not erring in matters of faith, to giue an example to succeeding ages, would by common consent, and authoritie of the Christian Church (not otherwise by Peters sole authority) decree, and define out of the word of God, (for out of itAct. 15 Peter himselfe brin∣geth allegations for his doctrine) touching the controuer∣sie then risen at Antioch, about the obseruation of the le∣gall lawes and ceremonies of the old Testament: which their example was euer followed as necessary, till of lat∣ter times, when Popes haue presumed to define by them∣selues alone; hauing before made some small Consistorian consultation; with which, this their prodigious position is in some sort by someSome of the Ignatians doe idly bring the heresies of Pelagius, and the Priscillia∣nists to haue beene onely condemned by the Popes of Rome, but this against all hi∣stories which mention the condemning of the same heresies, by sundrie Coun∣cels, through∣out the whole Church. Baron. in his Annals, Genebrard. in Chrono. few of themselues colored. For scarce any hold it absolutely necessarie. And here I aske the aduer∣sarie whether that Axiome receiued by al, reiected by none, God and Nature doe nothing in vaine: and that other; In vaine are many things required to doe that, which as well, or better may be done by fewer, may not take place in this question touching the infallible power of defining and de∣creeing: I thinke none so impudent an idiote, as to denie it. Againe I demaund whether those most reuerend Fathers, of the first foure generall Councels which Saint Gregorie e∣qualleth with the Gospell (although the manner of his speech be not herein to be imitated) and of other later Councels did know these principles, and Axiomes, and did withall beleeue this Romane rule of faith, to wit, That the Pope alone had infallible authoritie to define and declare faith, and that Christ prayed onely, and was heard onely for Peter and his successors, that they might neuer erre in faith (as theRhemist. an∣nota. in Luc. 22. Rhemists do most heretically teach) if they did so, why did they not send al their doubts (which did so shake the whole Christian world with such horrible commotions and contentions) to the Popes of those times, Siluester, Da∣masus, Lco, &c. and receiue from themas from Iudges of faith & the Oracles of Gods mouths, (so termed byCoquae. contra. Premonit. Reg. Coquaeus and
Lessius his equiuocating Recapitulater. pa. 13. 32. & 56. recapitulater, and as the vnappel∣lable determinations of all their doubts? In so doing infi∣nite charges, many contentions would haue bene auoided; and as for scandall, none could haue followed, because both all those Fathers, and the whole Christian Church with them (if it please you to beleeue the Pontificians, who would so perswade vs,) did then beleeue, and teach that the Popes were the infallible Oracles of God, the onely inerrable Iudges in controuersies of Faith, and al-though ancient Priests and Bishops perhaps reputed them∣selues his Senators and Counsellers, yet they thought also, that they could adde nothing to his infallibilitie. But alas good Constantine, Theodosius, Martian, and other Em∣perors knew not this faith, who were at such great charges to summon and assemble those ancient and thrice reue∣rend Councels: Nay Pope Leo himselfe (who taketh inough to the Sea of Rome, and ioyneth Epist. 89. Peter into the societie of the indiuiduall vnitie, to wit, of the bles∣sed Trinitie) held generall Councels, necessary for deter∣mining of faith, and setling of the peace of the Chti∣stian Church: Read Leo. epist. 24. 23. & 26. him Christian Reader in diuers of of his Epistles written to the Emperour, Empresse, and Cleargie of Constantinople: and as thou shalt sinde, so iudge. Secondly, thus I argue. Three Sinod. 6. Act. 12. 13. 16. 17. 18 Sinod. 7. Act. 7. Sinod. 8. Act. 7. generall Councels, with diuers Popes as Agatho, Leo. 2. in epist. ad Constant. Leo, Adrian. in Sinad. Romae congregata, and Theod. Patriar. with his coun∣cell at Hieru-salem. Adrian, did con∣demne, (yea the Councels accursed and execrated) Ho∣norius Pope, for a dogmaticall and hereticall Epistle, by which he laboured to infect the two Patriarkes of Con∣stantinople, and Alexandria, with the heresie of Monothelites. Can any one then be so frontlesse, as to thinke that those Fathers, and Popes did beleeue, that the Bishoppes of Rome might not bee, (as they were Bishoppes of that See) heretikes, or teach hereticall doctrines in their decretall Epistles? And the holy Ghost, to be so infallibly chained to them, that they could
not endeuour to infect the whole Church? who rather will not thus argue, and thus inferre? Three generall Councels, (the which, with the fiue other ancienter, all Popes at their entrances into the Papacie, doe, or ought to sweare inuio∣lably to keepe, according to their owne Canons) with di∣uers Popes, all antiquitie, all later & best Pontifician Hsto∣rians, till Pigh. lib. 4. cap. 8. Hier. Pighius led Bellarmine and Baronius the way to call the matter in queston, for which Canus. lib. 6. Canus and Bannes in 2.2. Bannes scornefully reproue him) did accurse or condemne Hono∣rius for a Monothelite heretike: Ergo Paule the fifth, who is not fuller of Gods Spirit, then his predecessor Honorius was, in his late Breue. Paul. 5. interpreted by the Recapitu. later. pag. 32. breefe ex Cathedra, out of the chaire defi∣ning himselfe, to haue power to depose Princes, and to dis∣pose of Kingdomes, may erre, and be an heretike as with∣out all doubt he is, because contrary to Christs Matth. 22. institution he assumeth power to forbid Caesars due to be giuen vnto him. For what is more due to a Caesar, then fidelity and al∣legeance of subiects? but the doctrine of Christ forsooth is expounded, and the heresie cleared: for he forbiddeth not obedience to Caesars so long as they are Caesars, but because he can vncaesar them, and vnking them: therefore no lon∣ger Caesars, no longer kings, no longer obedience. So answe∣red C. 8. & 22. Bellarmine against Doctor Barkly: so blundering Coquaeus against his Maiesties Apologie. Thirdly, was there euer any ancient true Christian Catholike, who affirmed not, that the See Austen. epist 112. & epist 1. 9. & de Vnit. Eccles. ca. 16. clarissime sacred word of God contained in the old and new Testament, was an in∣fallible and fundamentall rule of faith? but concerning this rule of faith, two of the Romane rules of faith, to wit, Sixtus the fifth, and Clement the eight haue beene egregi∣ously ouerruled with the spirit of error and heresie: for they haue by their Epist. decret. Sixti. 5. & Cle∣ment. 8 ante editiones. suas. two decretall and definitiue Epistles, defi∣ned two opposite, contrary and contradictorious editions by themselues and their deputies being discussed, and re∣discussed, to be the very sayings, letter, and sentences of the holy Ghost: charging and decreeing the same to all
Christians, vnder the curse of separation from the Church, and Gods beauiest displeasure. So that Sixtus hath accur∣sed Clement and all approuers of his Bible; Clement, Sixtus, and all the followers and defenders of his edition: and al∣though it hath pleased the Authors of the Praefatio in Biblia Clementis 8. ibidem. Preface to Clements edition, to auouch in a few lines many thousands of vntruthes, and that against their owne knowledge and con∣sciences: to wit, that Clement did onely amend certaine scapes of the print in Sixtus his edition, the which Sixtus himselfe intended to haue corrected, as there most lyingly they affirme; when as it is as cleare as the Sunne, that their two editions haue in them innumerable substantiall diffe∣rences of whole lines and sentences. The which being so, can any man but of ordinary iudgement beleeue in good earnest, that Romane Bishops, with their Cardinals defi∣ning ex Cathedra, cannot erre? For what can be an errour, or heresie ex Cathedra, if to define hereticall editions of the Bible, commaunding the whole Church vnder paine of greatest curse to receiue them, be not errour and he∣resie ex Cathedra? This matter tormenteth the aduersarie greatly, and by diuers it is diuersly repulsed. Some there were in Clements time, who excused Clement with the Ro∣mane Church, which hath receiued his edition, but con∣demned Sixtus. (The dead indeed bite not, and it most concerned the liuing Romanes that their liuing rule erred not.) This opinion was most strong in Clement his time, when I was in Rome, and it was greatly fauoured by the Ignatians: Others forsooth (consider how wilfully they are wedded to the Popes infallibilitie) eyther impudently, or most ignorantly denie, that Sixtus euer made any such decretall Epistle. A manifest vntruth to be confuted by a world of witnesses. Others grant the Epistle, but say it was neuer published. This is so manifolde an vntruth, as there were editions of Sixtus Quintus Bible before Clements edition, all which had his decretal. Epistle before them. I my selfe haue seene, and read of them in Rome, but lea∣uing
those who make (Isai. 28. spem suam mendacium) a lie their hope, others as Doctor B. and P. W. &c. doe affirme, that Sixtus indeede did write and publish such an Epistle, but he did it as a priuate This is their cmon refuge, that whē Popes in their decre tall Epistles or their prouinci∣all Synodes as Celestine. Ste∣phen the sixth, Honorius, Greg. the second, de∣cre any here∣ticall doctrins, they doe it all as priuate per∣sons, not as Popes, althogh it be most eui∣dent, that they intend to com∣mand all, and to teach all to doe according to their de∣crees which by them are con∣cluded in their Synodes. person; not as Pope, and so he might erre (O immortall God) haue these men eyes, and yet see not? or will not see? are not Sixtus his wordes most ex∣presse, that he defineth, he decreeth, and that out of the fulnesse of his Apostolicall power? and doth he not annexe the sentences of excommunication, and Gods heauiest dis∣pleasure against all such, as should refuse or reiect his editi∣on? Iesus Christ vouchsafe to open the eies of the misled, that they may see the ambitious, and erroneous proceedings of those Bishops, and renounce their communion, and re∣turne to the rocke of thy sacred word, which is so by them in part neglected, or rather wholly abandoned. But I may not thus leaue Clement and Sixtus, for I must needs tell their followers, that against their owne know∣ledge, (and therefore more inexcusably) they haue decreed that to be the very sentence of the holy Ghost, which with∣out al doubt, they could not but more then probably & wit∣tingly thinke to be otherwise: I will at this present (to dis∣couer the ignominie of their fallible Spirits) insist only vp∣on two or three examples, and dare herein challenge (as in many like) all the Pontificians, sworne to the Popes infal∣libilitie, to cleare the heads of their Church, from most ma∣nifest and wilfull errour herein. Their first corruption is in Genesis, where In vulgat. edi∣tio. lussu Clem. 8. Genes. 3. they reade (ipsa conteret caput tuum) she shall bruise thy head: putting the feminine article for the masculine, appropriating that to the Virgin Mary (who most worthily is Luc. 1. blessed, and to bee blessed amongst all women) which the holy Ghost prophetically intended, precisely of him, who was to cast Satan Ioh. 12. out of his Kingdome, and by whose only name and power, both his Mother, and we, doe daily Rom. 16. treade Satan vnder our feete. They publish St. Hieromes either whole, or amended translation; for they agree not yet, whether:
but the Vulgar Rhemist. Pref. vpon the Testament. they confidently call it; and because some few manuscripts and readings had the feminine (ipsa, shee) although some of them had otherwise, as the Theolog. Lo∣uani. in notat. Fransc. luc. Louanists confesse, and Hieron. tra∣dit. Hebrai. in Genes. cap. 3. St, Hierome also accounteth the other the better reading, and doth also so expound it: and diuers al∣so of their owne learned Canus de lo∣cis. lib. 2. & alij. Authours suspect, that the letter (a) which maketh of the masculine a feminine, crept in by the negligence of the manuscribers, yet these Papall corre∣ctors, contrary to all the Hebrew originals, and Chaldaick Paraphrases, contrary to all translations of the Septuaginta, contrary to the best learned of the Roman Church, will needs reade, (Genes. 3. ipsa, shee) for the Virgin; not (ipse, he) for Christ: thereby giuing vs to thinke, that they had rather vnderstand this prophecie, that the Virgin Mary, rather then Christ, should bruise the Serpents head: out of which doctrine goodly inferences may bee inferred against them. I doe in good earnest aske of these Interpreters; wherein Satans power ouer mankinde did consist? if they answere in sinne, as they needes must; then according to their owne reading, not a hee but a shee bruised the Serpents head, and deliuered mankinde from the guilt of sinne. Alas, into what errours would these ouer-ruling Popes leade vs? All the faith of the ancient Churches in the Hebrew Originals, Chaldaick Paraphrases, and Greeke editions of the Septua∣ginta, reading otherwise then these Popes do, must be cor∣rupt: all the ancient Fathers, Greeke and Latine (two or three only excepted) misexpound and misinterpret (rather then Sixtus and Clemēt in their editions. Sixtus and Clement, who haue some 1000. of other irreconciliable arres, although they agree in this) must be thought to haue done amisse. And I demaund of the Ro∣manists,* Genes. 3. why might not the Manuscribers, in some of the copies change (e) into (a) and thereby make shee of hee, as well as some late Romanists, either wilfully, or through the fault of Manuscribers, haue changed in Li. 4. Epist. 38. S. Gregorie (exerci∣tus Sacerdotum) an armie of Priests, into (exitus Sacerdo∣tum) the destructions or ends of Priests: a manifest corrup∣tion
it is, and I hope Saint Boromeus would not with his co∣adiutours wilfully doe it, because it most clearly sheweth that an armie of Priests was to serue and set vp the King of Pride, some Bishop, a great step indeede to shew that Bi∣shop, who now is serued with the whole armie of all the Priests of the Romane Church, and who calleth himselfe the only vniuersall Bishop (which is the ambitious and An∣tichristian title of the King of Pride, against whom that Fa∣ther inueigheth) to be the very King of Pride, prophetical∣ly delineated, by that ancient Father, and Pope. Reade the Epistle, courteous reader, and passe thy iudgement as thou shalt see cause. The second place of their corruption, is in the 2. Mach. 12. Ma∣chabees, where to establish the Chymera of their Purgato∣rie fire, both in their Biblia & Missalia edita Iussa. Clement. 8. Bibles and Missals, they reade (pro peccatis mortuorum) for sinnes of the dead, whereas they should reade thus only (pro peccato) for sinne: and yet this in their owne knowledge, is against Edition. Grec. Venet. German. Complut. all the Editions in the Greeke, yea and against an ancient Latin Vatican edition, set out by Sixtus; and also against some other ancient La∣tine Manuscripts: and yet forsooth, for Purgatory sake, al those readings must be corrupt, and Iudas Machabeus with the whole true Church of God with him, be made so igno∣rant and superstitious, as to make sinne-offerings for the dead; whereas they full well knew, that there was no such sacrifice appointed by God, neither in the law of Nature, nor in the law of Moses, not no ceremonies, nor rites or∣dained for the same: neither doe the Iewes at this day pra∣ctise, or beleeue any such sinne sacrifice for the dead. This their corruption in the wordes of sacred Scripture is by addition: but by the patience of the courteous reader, I will in this place (somewhat fit for the purpose) mention one of their corruptions by the figure of Subtraction. In their Breuiar. edit. Iussu. Clement. 8. last Editions of their Breuiries, they haue pared out of the Praier of the Feast of St. Peters chaire at Antioch, (at Antioch, I say, for the feast of Peters chaire at Rome, is a
deuise of later Popes, deuised by Paul the 4. as Angelus Rocca Schol. in Sacra∣mēt. Greg. prim. Rocca af∣firmeth, the word (animas) Soules, least the same word should, according to the faith of the ancient Church, re∣straine the Popes omnipotency (so called in late Neapoli∣tane Theses) to the spirituall bands and chaines of the soule only: but that word and doctrine cannot agree with the Spirits of those men, who challenge power to com∣mand and dispose of Kings and Kingdomes, Bellarm. a∣gainst a cer∣taine Venet. Doct. Bellarmine busily endeuoureth to defend this change, the worke of his owne fingers. But Rocca. annot. in Sacrament. Greg. 1. Rocca will tell him, that the most principall and ancientest Manuscript in the Vatican had the word (animas) Soules; and I must tell him, that all the best readings haue it so, and with iust cause I aske him, why they haue not rather substracted the fabulous tale of Silue∣ster, consecrating Altar stones; and the fabulous Legende of S. Catherine the Martyrs dispuing with 50. Philosophers and conuerting of the Empresse? His brother Baron. in an∣not. in Martyr. Baronius turnes and windes himselfe, not knowing how to defend the Historie: Brouiar. re∣formata edita Iussu. Pij Quint. some of their Breuiaries haue this Title o∣uer the Legend of Catherine, Ex historia Ecclesiastica, out of the Ecclesiasticall historie: others haue Ex Eusebio, lib. 7. cap. 26. out of Eusebius, the 7. Booke and 26. Chapter, and yet I suppose hee that shall finde this fable in any authenti∣call historie, or in Eusebius himselfe, shall bee a greater Hi∣storian then Baronius himselfe. Fourthly, against the infallibility of this their rule, thus I argue: That which maketh the Pope, and all his follow∣ers therein, heretikes, cannot be the rule of Christian faith. But the Popes proper and peculiar iudgement doth this: Therefore▪ The first Proposition, I suppose; the second, or the assumption, thus I proue. Proper, and peculiar choise, and election, to define in matter of faith, in whomsoeuer it be, is forbidden, and Ad Titum. 3. & 2. Pet. 1. ( haeresis) heresie, and apparent it is, that choise, and election to define, and be∣leeue, is alwaies taken for heresie, when it is singular, and alone, in any one person: vnlesse it be grounded vpon some
speciall and immediate reuelation; now, that it is single,Obis vera, ni∣ex nostro ar∣bitrio, licet indu∣cere, sed nec e∣ligere, quod ali∣quis de arbitrio suo induxerit. It is not lawfull for vs (in mat∣ter of faith) to bring in any thing out of our own choise neither to choose any thing which another by his choise shall bring, in Tertul. lib. de Praeser. and alone in the Pope, I suppose it, as the very proper and speciall position of the Aduersarie, maintained by all Pon∣tificians, but impugned by all true Catholikes; That the Pope ordinarily hath no new immediate reuelations from God, I suppose as truth, till any one shall be so impudent, as to affirme the contrary. The Pope then being an here∣tike, because the rule of his faith (to wit, priuate choise and election) in matters of faith is heresie Ad Tit. 3. & 2. Pet. 2. Here∣sies are called , ele∣ctiones, choises which taketh place in Popes also. What mer∣uaile, if the I∣gnatians giue infallibility of not erring in faith, to the Pope, when they chalenge the same to e∣uery one of their owne Order. as learned Caussabon proueth in his booke to Fronto∣duc, pag 52. citing out of the Apologist for the Ignatians, these wordes. It night and day may be ioyned together in one, and darknesse with light, heat with cold, health with sicknesse, life with death then there may be some hope, that heresie can fall in∣to the head of a Iesuit: thus he. According to this, if Clement with the two or three hundred Ignatians assembled in Rome, had ioyned in Councell, there had beene an infallible assembly. it selfe, it must ne∣cessarily follow, that all those who pertinaciously follow him heerein are to bee accounted pertinacious Here∣tikes. Heretofore Christians were taught that holy Scriptures expounded by the Vniuersall and Generall voice of the Church, were the rule of faith, and accordingly all agree∣ing in this rule, they were called Catholikes: but this rule being left by Popes, and the infallibility being giuen to them by their followers; thereupon worthily of Popes, the heads of their faith, they haue beene, and are called Ponti∣ficians and Papists. I may iustly thinke, that vpon beleefe of this rule, some late Pontificians haue plainely graunted to me, that the Christians of these times are bound to be∣leeue explicitly, and expresly, somewhat which the Apo∣stles themselues, and the Primitiue Christians did not ex∣presly, and in explicit termes beleeue. An example at first, was graunted in transubstantiation it selfe, but vpon better consideration, denyed againe; but when I roundly vrged them, to shew me, where, or how, in explicit or equiua∣lent termes, transubstantiation was beleeued in the Apo∣stles times; because they faltered in their answeres and de∣fences,
our conference ended; to no small comfort of my soule, so lately deliuered out of the Aegyptian seruitude. The Aduersaries seeme to produce diuers authorities to proue infallibility of iudgement in the Pope, but in truth they force not. Ouerthrow two, and the rest fall of them∣selues. I will take a little paines with these two; The first of them is taken out ofMath. 16. St. Mathew, where the Euange∣list bringeth in Christ thus, speaking of St. Peter, vpon his confessing of Christs diuinitie: Tues Petrus. & super hanc petram, &c. Thou art a Rocke, and vpon this Rocke will I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not preuaile against it. There the aduersarie triumpheth, saying: it is cleare, that Christ builded his Church vpon Peter, for by those wordes (this Rocke) Peter is most expresly designed. I will not now stand to confute this exposition, by the authori∣ties of Scriptures, and testimonies of some ancient Fathers, who with St. Austen expound those wordes (this Rocke) for Christ the Rocke whom Peter had confessed: and from whom Peter had his name, asIn sacro elo∣quio &c. In ho∣ly Writ when the word Rock is put in the singular num∣ber, who else is signified but Christ? Paul witnessing, but the Rocke was Christ: but when rocks are so called in the plurall number then holy men are signified, which are cō∣firmed by his strength, Greg. apud Pater. in 1. ad Cor. Aug. tract. vltim. in Ioh & in Retra∣ctationib', Chry∣soft. homil. 55. in Math. Greg. in Psal Paenit. super illud initio tu Domine. Isidor. lib. 7. Etym c. 9. St. Gregorie and St. Austen expound it; or else of Peters confession and faith. Thou art Christ the sonne of the liuing God, asTheophil. in Math. 16. Hilar∣do Trin. lib. 2. The Papists will not by any meanes in the words of consecration of the Sacrament, (this is my body) admit, the demonstratiue article (this) to demonstrate the bread, which Christ taking into his handes, giuing thankes broke and deliuered, saying, take eate, this is my body: the cause is, because if the article (this) doe demonstrate Bread, (which cannot possibly be Christs true body, no more then his body can bee true bread) then they should be constrained to admit of a sacramentall presence only of Christs body, in the Sacrament: which they cannot abide, but here the ar∣ticle (this) must needes demonstrate the person of Peter, because it maketh for their Popes supremacies. Theophilactus expoun∣deth it; but I will only demand at this present, how they can violently against the nature of the demonstratiue arti∣cle (this) draw it vnto Peters person? who in the same pro∣position of Christ to him, was designed by the article de∣monstratiue (thou) as though (thou and this) in one propo∣sition, when one person is spoken vnto, must needes both of them demonstrate the very same one person, to whom
the speech is made, and not rather, according to the nature of the pronounes demonstratiue, one of them, to wit (thou) demonstrate the person, to whom the speech is made; and the pronounce (this) to demonstrate the thing, or person, of whom the speech was made before: I put a familiar exam∣ple. Iohn hath two sonnes, Thomas and William, he calleth his eldest sonne Thomas with his brother vnto him, de∣manding a question or two of him, and withall discourseth of his yonger brothers wit, and capacitie for learning. To which his eldest Sonne accordingly answereth, that his brother is indeede witty, and fit for the Vniuersitie; To which his Father replying, saith: Thomas thou art my eldest sonne, and shalt inherite my liuing; and this sonne I will send to the Vniuersitie; there to make profit in learning: what might Thomas conceaue vpon this speech, that hee should bee sent to the Vniuersitie, and not rather his bro∣ther William? many like comparisons might bee made, by which it would appeare, that the demonstratiue article this being vnderstood personally, doth not demonstrate the person to whom, but rather the person of whom the speech was made. Againe, manifest it is, that Christ built his Church vpon that Rocke, against which the gates of hell should neuer preuaile. But if the wordes (this Rocke) bee applyed, not only to Peter, but also to his Successours; themselues cannot denie, but that the gates of hell haue of∣ten preuailed against many of those stones, or rockes, to the ruine and perdition of innumerable soules. As against Boniface the 8. Siluester the 2. Iohn the 12. Stephen the 6. I am assuredPlatina in vitis. Platina will not sticke to auouch so much in effect of two Bonifaces the 7. and 8. and of Siluester the 2. andGenebrard. in Chronol. lib 4. saeculo 10. ad ann. 107. & a∣lias saepe. Genebrard a most furious enemy against the reformed Churches, doth boldly pronounce, that diuers Popes were rather Apostaticall, then Apostolicall, and that they came not in the right way by election, but through the backe∣dore by intrusion. WhatBaron. ann. Baronius himselfe recounteth of the Monster Stephen 6. one of their Popes, how he abu∣sed
the body of his Predecessour Formosus, arraining it, con∣demning it, cutting off his fingers, and casting the body in∣to Tiber; and in a Synode gathered euen in Rome, (that See and Rocke which cannot erre, as it pleaseth our Aduer∣saries) he decreed, all such as had beene ordained by For∣mosus to be reordained againe. Of Iohn the 12. this Car∣dinall cannot write bitterly enough: and yet he inueigheth against Otho the first renowned and worthy Emperour, and the whole Clergie of Rome, who in a Synode gathered in Rome (the infallible Sea) deposed that monster Iohn, and placed in his steede Leo a worthy man. But to make hast, (for of like examples of Apostaticall Popes, much might be said) I doe in good earnest aske of any of Baronius his pro∣fession, whether the gates of hell preuailed not against that Iohn (call him the 10. or 11. whether you will, for since the Papacie of the Papisse Ioane, called by some Iohn the 7. by others Iohn the 8. the numbring of Pope Iohns hath beene different) I say, I aske, whether the gates of hell preualled not against this Iohn? who asBaron. anno 925. and 928. Baronius himselfe acknow∣ledgeth, was exalted into the Apostolicall chaire, by the meanes of the impudent strumpet Theodora; with whom al∣so he liued most impurely in the time of his Papacie (or shall I say rather her Papacie, shee ruling the roast) for which cause by theIbidem. Cardinall himselfe this Iohn is worthi∣ly reputed for a false high Bishop, an Apostata, an Intruder, and a most iniust possessour of the Apostolicall See. There∣fore, it being most cleare that the gates of hell haue preuai∣led against these instable and impure stones (being them∣selues with innumerable others, who embraced their de∣crees and wicked customes cast downe into hell) who can say, that the most wise and powerfull Architect Christ Ie∣sus, did build his Church vpon them? what? will they bee so impudent, as to affirme Christ kept not his promise, or prophecied not truly, rather then their rockes and stones must be found defectible? Therefore to conclude, it is cleare that vpon that Rocke ChristHilar. lib. 8. de Trin. built his Church, which is
(Psal. 118. verbum Domini quod manet in aeternum) the word of God remaining for all eternitie: or else vpon that confession (which exposition concurreth with the other) Math. 16. thou art Christ the sonne of the liuing God; which as yet soundeth throughout the world; and shall, vntill the sonne himselfe come to iudge both quicke and dead. The second place is taken out of the 22. of St. Luke, EgoCardinall Ali∣aco lib. de Au∣thorit. Eccles. Directly deni∣eth this place to bee vnder∣stood of the personall faith of Peter, but of the faith of the whole Church, as diuers of the Sorbone Do∣ctors now also doc. rogaui pro te Petre, &c. I haue praied for thee Peter, that thy faith faile not, and thou being conuerted, confirme thy brethren. Here they triumph, here they insult; but God wot, without cause: for what coherence? Peter, thy faith shall not faile, ergo Popes cannot erre? Peter, thou being conuerted confirme thy brethren? ergo Popes being con∣uerted must confirme, instruct, and teach all Patriarks, Pri∣mates, Bishops, Priests, whatsoeuer. Therefore his faith, and his voice must bee receiued as the very oracle of God, and be as such obeyed? but let vs consider the holy text it selfe, the which doth manifestly teach vs, that Christ consi∣dering, how Peter assaulted by Satan, in the time of his ta∣king, would be drawne, out of feare, both to denie and for∣sweare him; lest he by such a deniall should by Satans guiles be also swallowed vp into dispaire; Christ comforting him, foretelleth, that he hath praied for him, and that his faith should not faile, that is, according to the exposition of St. Chrysost. bom. 83. in Math. Beda in Lucam. Chrysostome, should not vtterly perish, and be extinguish∣ed (as the Greeke and Latine words signifie) but remaine firme in heart, although it should faile in his mouth: as if Christ should say, Peter, I know thou wilt through feare be drawen to denie and forsweare me with thy mouth, yet thy heart shall be still firme to me; yea, and after thy fall, thou shalt be so conuerted and so erected, that thou shalt be enabled to encourage thy brethren, that they may What doubt is to be made? for Peter Christ prayed, & did he nt pray for Iames and Iohn not to menti∣on the rest? it is manifest all are contained in Peter. Aug. q. 75. Quest. Ex nouo Testam. stand firme in confession of my name, the which I admonish thee accordingly to do: Christ, not thereby meaning to pray for Peter alone, or that the rest of the Apostles should so neede his instruction in faith, & confirmation in faith, that without
him, they might either erre in faith, or fal to deny their faith For after the Act. 1. descension of the holy Ghost, all the Apostles which were to be the Ad Ephe. ca. 2. & Apoc. cap. 21. foundation stones of the new Ieru∣salē, were by vertue of their Apostleships, as firmly roborated & confirmed in faith as Peter himself, & therfore the Apo∣stles Creed was made by them all Leo. epist. 13. ad Pulcer. Aug. serm. 115. Ruf∣fin. in explic. Simbol. iointly, which cōtaineth 12. articles, because euery Apostle put to his article (where∣in Peter had onely the priuiledge to make the first) if their owne, i Cathechismes speake truth. Further I aske, where those words, (Cathechis. Vaux & Bellarm. and thou being conuerted, confirme thy brethren) did not containe a promise that Peter after conuersion should not faile againe? and whether was the priuiledge to accompany all Bishops of Rome? who so shameless as to affirme it? doubltlesse, it failed, in Baron. in Anna∣libus Platina in vitis. Marcelline, offering incense to Idols: in Iohn the 22. who Gerso. serm. 4. de Pasch. Adrian Pap. in 4 de sa∣crament. confir∣mat. aly. taught, and that very peremptorily, that the Saints see not God till the generall iudgement: in Iohn the 23. who in a Platina in vita. Ioh. Conc. Consta. in sess. 11. Councell of Constance had so many horrible accusations of blasphemie, heresie, impietie proued against him that he was the erefore iudicially deposed. Many such examples might be produced: but it greeueth my heart to discouer the ignominies of that See, which was earst the spouse of Christ, and where the tiumphs of the Apostles do seeme still to remaine, but thus much I haue done onely for truth sake, wishing with my whole heart, there were no iust cause for any to write thus of the Popes, but so it must and will be; for God will doubtless vouchsafe euer still to raise some euen from the dust to oppose against them, till they be fully reformed, the which God mercifully grant, it may be speedily accomplished. I cannot heere omit to set down a peruicious error, nay rather heresie of the Rhemists writing vpon this Rhemists writing vpon this place of S. Luke; The which although I had often read, heretofore, and much misliked the same, yet it wrought not effectually with me, till by good chance I light vpon it at that time when God vouchsafed to begin to open my eyes: Thus then they write, vpon those words,
Simon, Simon, &c. Annotat. in Luc. 22. annot. 31. Lastly, to put them out of doubt, he calleth Peter twice by name, and telling him the diuels desire to sift and trie them all to the vttermost, (as he did that night) saith, that he had specially prayed for him, to this end, that his faith should neuer faile, and that he beingNote their words, vphold, establish the rest, and consi∣der their good¦ly inferences thereupon. once conuerted should after that for euer confirme, esta∣blish, or vphold the rest in their faith; which is to say, Peter is that man whom he would make Superiour ouer them, and the whole Church: whereby we may learne that it was fit in the prouidence of God, that he who should be the head of the Church, should haue a speciall priuiledge by Christs prayer, and promise, neuer to faile in faith, that none other, eyther Apostle, Bishop, or Priest may challenge any such singular and speciall prerogatiue, eyther of his of∣fice or person, otherwise then in ioyning in faith with Pe∣ter, and by holding of him. Thus they: with much more to like purpose, wherein the Christian Reader, cannot but obserue, how eagerly (for the Popes sake) they pursue Peters priuiledge, and would most perniciously against the verie foundation of our Chri∣stian religion, shew that Christ prayed onely for Peter, and that neither the Apostles nor Euangelists, by vertue of their Apostleship, Offices, or any other meanes, had infallibility of not erring in faith, but by ioyning with Peter, and hol∣ding of Peter. So that Saint Paul writing his fourteene Epistles, (whereof one was to the Romanes, the onely in∣fallible Sea, the onely Catholike Apostolike, one and holy Church, if you beleeue the Pontificians, espccially Valentia in aualis. lib. 6. in titulis. cap. 9. 10 11. 12. 13. 14. Va∣lentia) Saint Iames, Saint Iohn, and Iude their Epistles, Saint Iohn his Reuelation, Saint Mathew, Marke, Luke and Iohn their Gospels, had therein instruction from Peter: and holding from him, thereby they had infallibility, that they could not erre: otherwise they might haue erred in faith, had not Peter, (to vse their owne phrases) confir∣med, established, and vpheld them in their faith. If this be not pernicious doctrine, subuerting the very bulwarks
of Christian Religion, what can be such? for tell me I pray you all yee the Dowists their successors in often reprinting those corrupt annotations, where did eyther the Apostles or Euangelists confesse this dependancie from Peter? what record of Scripture or other authenticall Author doth de∣liuer vnto vs, that Peter assisted the Euangelists, when they wrote their Gospels? Doth not Saint Paul Galat. 2. expresly pro∣test that he neither receiued the Gospell which he preached (neque per hominem, neque ab hominibus) neither by man, nor from men, but from Iesus Christ his immediate reue∣lations? doth not the same Apostle expresly say of Peter, (nihil mihi contulit) he gaue me, he furthered me nothing? meaning of the Gospell of Christ: nay rather did not the same Apostle giue somwhat to Peter, Ibidem. Quia non am∣bulante sequn∣dum veritatem Euangelij epist. ad Galat. 2. Peter walked not according to the truth of the Gospell, and after he was conuerted was heere once strengthened by his brother Paul. when indewed with the holy Ghost, he reprehended his humane spirit; with which moued and misled, he walked p not according to the truth of the Gospell? What Christian did not euer, as reue∣uerently and religiously embrace any part of Saint Lukes Actes of the Apostles, because it was Saint Lukes, as the whole Epistle of Saint Peter, because it was Saint Peters? But these men regard not how they weaken the very foundations of Christian religion, (so Ad Ephcs. cap. 2. & Apo∣cal. cap. 21. termed in holy Scripture) so that they may enhanse the Popes monarchi∣call supremacie, which is the very life and soule of their re∣ligion; whom they pretend to be Saint Peters successor in place and Sea, and we grant it (as the Bishops of Alexan∣dria, Antioch, Hierusalem, Ephesus at this day succeed S. Marke, S. Peter, S. Iames, and Saint Iohn) but heauen and earth will proclaime that in conuersation they doe nothing at all succeed Peter, and as for doctrine and faith, the sa∣cred Scriptures, and ancientest Churches prescribe against them. Would God, imitating Saint Peter, they would (1. Pet. 5. Pascere gregem verbo) Feed their flocke with preaching of the word, and holy example of life: but alas by temporall possessions giuen by Constantine (as it is writtē in the life of ancient Siluester Pope) an Angell pronounced that poyson
was cast into the church, which more or lesse euer since hathSanctitatem in pontificibus, &c. Sanctitie in Popes, no man requireth in these times, they are reputed best, if they be but a little good, or not so euill as other mortall men vse to be Papirius Masson in his booke of the Bishops of the Citie in u∣lius the third, which booke he writeth notwithstan∣ding to set forth the wor∣thy actes of Popes. infected the Bishops of Rome, hauing put on for Peters po∣uertic (tiphum seculi) wordly pride and pompe, not kee∣ping themselues within their owne precincts and limites, but thrusting their Sythes into the haruests of other, domi∣nering, but not ruling the Cleargie, and dominering ouer the Princes of the earth, to whom they were first sub∣iect both in fact, and of right Bellar. li. 2. de Rom. Pont. c. 29 as Bellarmine himselfe once confessed before his red hat: and into what proud, a∣uaritious, ambitious, secular and worldly conuersa∣tion, and vsurpations, the Bishops of Rome haue degene∣rated, the Contaren. Sa∣dolet. Poole. alij. Concil. delect. Cardin. & alior. Praelat. tomo vl∣timo Conc. Cor∣nelius Mus. or at. in Conc. Triden. Espen. in Titū. Bernard. li. 1. de considerat. best of their Prelates and learned cannot denie? and what maruaile then if they be found to degenerate in faith? for the shipwracke of faith, either sooner or later, euer followeth the shipwracke of good consciences and life. The See of the Popes, to wit the Romane Particular Church was a branch inserted into the tree of the Iewes, & Iewish Church, (for so he is described by the Apostle, in his C. 11. ad Rom. Epistle to the Romanes, and therefore, she was care∣fully to looke to her selfe that she fell not: for if she should grow proud, she should (saith the Apostle) be shaked off as well, as the tree it selfe was reiected: and that her onely way to remaine stedfast and firme, was to be Ibidem. permanent in goodnesse. I wish with my whole heart, that the Popes were so good, and so religious, that they might still deserue to haue the honour due vnto the chiefe Partriark of the West, according as his most excellent Maiestie In his kingly premonition to Christiā Prin∣ces. professeth, he would be willing to acknowledge them, if they would re∣turne to that faith, and Apostolike beleefe of the Christian Church, from which they are horribly degenerated. Hauing thus traced the Rhemists, with thy patience (courteous Reader) let me giue thee a taste of Bellarmines dealing for the same proiect to enhance the Popes supre∣macie. In his Dictates at Rome, not in his printed worke, (for they doe not alwaies print what they dictate) he most egregiously depraued the sense of that sentence of the holy
Ghost: Isai. 28. Ecce ego pono in Sion lapidem &c. Behold I put in Sion an approued, a corner stone, and a precious one laid in the foundation. This prophecy, although S. Peter 1. Pe. 2. most expresly expoundeth it of Christ himselfe, yet Bellarmine in his dictates would needs haue it to be vnderstood of Pe∣ter, not of Christ. His profound reason is, forsooth, because the Isai. 28. Prophet addeth of this stone, that it must be (in fun∣damento fundatus) founded in the foundation, that is, laid in the foundation: which may not be vnderstood of Christ, but fitly of Peter, founded vpon Christ: So Bellarmine: but in his Bellar in prae∣sat. in lib. de pont. Rom. printed Preface, he hath somewhat mended the matter for he is content to vnderstand principally, this prophecie of Christ; secondarily of Peter: so that Christ and Peter must still ranke together, Christ principally, but Peter se∣condarily. Baronius in his Ʋoto against the Venetians to Paul the 5. in Consistory publikely applied to him to be the stone, vpon which Matth. 21. whosoeuer falleth (saith the holy Ghost) shall be bruised, and vpon whomsoeuer it falleth, it shall breake them in peeces: but alas the Cardinall failed the Pope in his Prophecie, for by his sentences of excom∣communications, interdicts, &c. he did so little bruise the Venetians, who so constantly opposed against him, thatThe manner of the Vene∣tians recon∣cilement with the Pope, for which the Ig¦natians euery∣where exclaim against that state, onely they are warie before whom. they could not by any meanes be brought to make any sub∣mission, for any offence imputed to them, or to acknow∣ledge any fault: so that at the last, the Pope was contented, to accept of a shew of submission made to him by some third persons (and as it is reported, suborned also by the court of Rome thereunto) and so with his honour, to be re∣conciled vnto them againe: a notable example for posterity against the vsurpations of Popes. I could here more enlarge my discourse, to shew how Bellarmine, Sanders, Baronius, Stapleton, do all they can, and labour earnestly (though most vnsoūdly) to bring all Christiās to that pernicious perswasiō & faith, to wit, that it is not inough (according to Decretal. Bo∣nifa. 8. vnam sanctam. Bonifaces decree) for their saluations, to be in communion with the Catholike Church, dispersed through the world, and with
the head thereof Christ Iesus, vnlesse they be in actual com∣munion, and blind obedience to the Bishop of Rome, as the onely one, and supreme head of the visible Church. It is a sufficient assecurance for my conscience, that according to the sense of ancient Church it is against S. 1. Cor. cap. 1. Pauls expresse doctrine, who in his Epistle to the Corinthiās doth most grie∣uously reproue all such as went about to make a speciall ioyning either with Peter, Paul, or Apollo, nothing here∣in differencing S. Peter from Apollo, or himselfe: doubt∣lesse he was nothing acquainted with the present necessary subiection and vnion to the Bishops of Rome, the preten∣ded onely successors of Saint Peter. But rather he instru∣cted, and most earnestly Jhidem. commaunded all Christians to acknowledge Chrst Iesus for their onely head, of whom they were named, in whose name they were baptised, and who onely was for them crucified, dead and buried; & risen againe to life. Surely, if Saint Paul did beleeue such a ne∣cessary headship in the Bishops of Rome, doubtlesse his faith therein was onely implicit, for his expresse doctrine is against it: but I dare heere boldly saie, that if (per impos∣sibile) by an impossibilitie such a headship in the Popes had beene respected in the Primitiue Churches, yet later Popes are now so degenerate from what their predecessors were into all, most abhominable, and tirannicall conuersations to the corruption of faith, against the temporalty and spi∣ritualty, that Gods infinite mercy would excuse such, who (to giue them most iust cause, and motiues to ranke them∣selues in their owne degrees) should leaue their commu∣nion with them, and adhere onely to Iesus Christ, to whom (vpon him onely resting with King Psal. 118. Dauid, I humbly complaine (tempus faciendi domine, dissipauerunt legem tu∣am.) It is high time O Lord to doe, for they haue dissipated and and broken thy law.
The second Motiue. THus they hauing most egregiously erred in cōstituting a false rule of their faith, to support the present Roman profession; to the same end they haue perniciously de∣praued the true rule of faith, by adding to the sacred word of God, such bookes as antiquity worthily reiected for Apocriphall, that is of doubtfull & vncertaine authority, not fit to confirme and proue the dogmaticall doctrines and articles of Christi∣an faith, thereby distinguishing them from the Canonicall Scriptures, Gods infallible word. Such are Hieron. in Pro∣log. Galeat Epiph. lib. de mensur. August. de ciuit. dei. lib. 18. cap. 36. Athanas. in Sinop. Epipha. haere. 8. & 76. esteemed & ac∣counted the books of Iudith, Wisdome, Ecclesiasticus, Toby, the Machabies, & all such like doubtfull parts of Chapters of the old Testament, (as by neither the Iews before) nor in Christs time, nor in the Nicene & Laodicenc Councels, nor ancient Fathers, (purposely setting down, and defining the Canons of holy Scripture) were euer receiued into the Ca∣non1 Con. Nice. & Laodic. in Cano. de Canonicis scrip∣turis. Hieron epist. 10. & 115. Joseph. contra Appto lib. 1 Russin. de Simbol. Apost. and rule of Christian Faith. Against this their deui∣sed rule, it is most easily and manifestly shewed, that con∣sidering the Iewish Synagogue, (when it was the true Church of God) receiued not these bookes into their Canon, wee ought not to receiue them, hauing no new reuelations for them; nor no better warrant then they had: especially considering, that the Septuaginta interpreters (who tooke vpon them to interpret all the bookes of Gods word, to Ptolomeus) neglected them Christ and his Apostles neuer cited any thing out of any of them, as they did out of the other Scriptures. And further the thrice reuerēd Fathers of the Nicene Councell, and those worthies of the Councell of Laodicea, (both which Councells, were celebrated in the East, nearer the place and time, where and when Christs Church, might
best informe her selfe, which were the bookes of Sacred Scripture) reiected and cashired them out of sacred Ca∣non of holy Scripture. Neither is there any new reuela∣tion for them now, nor any iust cause why the Pope and Pontificians, should be so eager to put them into Canon of Scripture, but for that they seeme in some places (contrary to the vndoubted Scriptures) to fauor some of their vaine and corrupt doctrines, as of Purgatorie, Praier, for the Dead, Merits of good workes, &c. As for The contra dictiō betwixt the 5. chpter of Iudith, and the 10. irre∣concilable & so manest that the same euinceth the author of the same booke, not to bee the holy Ghost who cānot lie. See courteous Reader how Bellarmine tra uaileth to de∣fend this booke from contradiction Bellar de verb. Dei. lib 1. c. 12. Iudiths booke in particular, I cannot but meruaile, how any one can thinke, that the holy Ghost would euer approue that dec∣king and trimming vp of her selfe, for such an impure and luxurious proiect, thereby to draw Iud. 10. & 12 Holofernes into an vnlawfull burning lust, and concupiscence of her. (if so they will teach and affirme, may I not heere charge their doctrine with affirming God to bee the approuer and Au∣thour of sinne, more iustlie then they charge Caluin there∣with?) Was not that of the holy Ghost in Rom 3. St. Paul, law and right, in Iudiths daies? (Non sunt facienda mala vt eueniant bona.) Things that are euill, are not to bee done that good may come thereby. Besides, it is too too appa∣rent, that in the story there are some vntruths, and vn∣reconcilable contradictions, which are clearelie a∣gainst the other sacred Scriptures. And therefore by eui∣dent consequence it is to bee affirmed, that the booke is Apocriphall, and not of that vndoubted and certaine au∣thority, which holy Canonicall Scriptures haue: by which onely (Dogmata fidei) articles of Faith are to bee decreed and tried; as the ancient Church euer beleft: from whose faith (because faith must euer be the same) no Christian can without hazard of Saluation depart. Against the books of Machabees, many particular and vnanswerable doubts might be produced: I will content my selfe with two or three. Doth not the Author of them, (I should say, the abbreuiatour of Iasons larger history, as
himselfe 2. Mach. 2. professeth to be) against the faith and doctrine of vndoubted Scriptures, approue and admire the fact of 2. Mach. 14. Razias murthering himselfe? doth he not craue pardon of the Reader, if he haue not answerably to the condition of a good 2. Mach. vlt. Historian, behaued himselfe? belike the holy Ghost who is not accustomed, nor cannot acknowledge himselfe nor his Scribes, to bee subiect to any humane er∣rour, in writing thus, here left him; but not aboue, in the 12. Chapter of this 2. Mach. 12 booke, where he mentioneth prayers and sacrifices for the dead, (and yet this by the helpe of false fingers also) and therefore he here, not there, craued pardon, if he had not arightly performed his office. Doubt∣lesse hee who will thinke the holy Ghost can craue pardon of man, as though he might be subiect to errour, hath little of the holy Ghosts grace in him. Which things conside∣red with diuers other impossibilities against the truth of historie, I cannot be perswaded that Lib. de Ciuit. Dei. 18. c. 36. St. Austin and the Fathers of the Councell of Carthage, did otherwise ap∣proue them to be read then as a probable historie, contay∣ning some good morall matter, if reade with Cont. Gaudēt. sobriety (to vse St. Austens owne phrase) but not as to receiue them in∣to the Canon of sacred Scripture of Gods word. And if St. Austen may not bee thought to contradict himselfe, within the compasse of halfe a dozen of lines; some Manu∣scriber hath egregiously corrupted him: for Aug. lib. 18. de Ciuit. Dei. cap. 36. first, hee see∣meth clearly and absolutely to affirme that they are not Ca∣nonicall, and proueth thereupon a truth, vpon which hee there discourseth, and presently he is made to say thus, that although the Iewes receiue not the Machabees into Ca∣non, yet the Church of Christ receiueth them: but who smelleth not false fingers here? especially, if infinite like forgeries of Manuscribers be obserued. Further, I am more confirmed in my iudgement against these bookes, because Dist. 15. cap. Sancta Romana. Gelasius a Pope of Rome, before any greater corruptions had deeply tainted that Church, did with a whole Synode in Rome (recounting a Canon of the Apostles for the same
purpose) exclude the Machabees out of the Canon of holy Scriptures: and although the Canon beginning Sancta Romana &c. in which this exclusion was, be now so may∣med and mangled that no man can iustly say, this part or line of it is sound: yet Anton. 3. part. summ. l. 18. c. 6. Antonine Archbishop of Florence, and a Saint in their Church, confesseth that he himselfe had read the exclusion of these bookes out of Canon of Scrip∣ture, in that decree of Gelasius, and according to the Ca∣non of the Apostles there mentioned. All these things con∣curring out of Antiquitie, and the vndoubted Churches of Christ, with the authority also of some learned Pontificians their later Doctors, (and that of Tertull. lib. de praescript. Tertullian euer taking place in Christs Church: Quod antiquissimum verissimum, that which is most ancient is most true.) What may bee thought of that Conc. Trident. Sess. 4. congregation at Trent, who hath giuen equal authority to them with the vndoubted word of God? and haue accursed with their idle Anatheme, all those who shall with the ancient Church of the Iewes, the Nicene Councell (which St. Gregorie esteemed as the Gospell) with the I aodicene reuerend Fathers, and almost all other an∣cient Fathers reiect them as Apocriphal? Doubtlesse, the curse of God, against the idle curses of men, may be iustly giuen vnto them; who Apocal. vlt. haue added the word of man to his word, and haue made the word of man equall with his most infallible and inuiolable word. (Iud. Epist. Imperet illis Domi∣nus) The Lord God reproue them. It is not possible, if these men had esteemed of the vndoubted Scriptures, as all the Aug Epist. 71 ad Marcell. in prolog. lib 3. de Trin. Epist. 11. & Ep 166. ad Dnatist  Epist 62 Basil  de si▪ de  me. Chrysost. in opere imrfect. ho∣mlia. 49. ancient Fathers did, who euer required the writings of all men, to be examined and tryed by the certaine word of God, they would neuer haue coupled humane authority with diuine, and haue equalized them in one degree of truth: but they may bee excused in dealing so warily and politikely herein: for their desperate cause of Porgatorie fire, praier for the dead, &c. otherwise would to the ground with many like of their superstitious trumperies.
The third Motiue. BEsides the corrupting of the true rule of faith by adding the Apocriphall bookes, they haue also depraued the same Conc. Trident. Sess. 4. rule by their vnwritten Traditions, Anathemati∣zing all, who shall refuse or disesteeme the same Traditions, and not hold them in e∣quall reputation with Gods most vndoubted word. This rule of Traditions they hold to bee an vnwritten Deposit; left in the Romane Church, and kept inuiolably by her vn∣till these times; which if they can shew, what good Chri∣stian is there who wil not with reuerenced esteeme, receiue, or commend, whatsoeuer those most irreprehensible Foun∣ders of the Church haue deliuered, either concerning faith or Church discipline. But I must tell them (being there∣vnto vrged by manifest truth and reason) that it is not e∣nough for them vpon their bare wordes, to affirme this or that is a tradition Apostolicall, or this, or that, is a doctrine Apostolicall; because it is now generally obserued through out all those Churches, which communicate with the Bi∣shop of Rome, (no, though at such times when there was no notorious or famous Church on earth to oppose against her) and whereof no expresse beginning can bee shewed: vnlesse they can withall for such their Traditions, ascending vpwards euen vnto the Apostles times, or the dayes of their immediate Successors and Schollers, clearly and soundly deduct by graue testimonies of Ancient and Catholike au∣thours, that such thinges were euer more or lesse obserued, and receiued as from the Apostles themselues, throughout the Church of Christ, if they will refuse this honorable triall of their Traditions, and stand only vpon this idle an∣swere and defence, that the Church Romane now general∣ly hath them, and there is no beginning of them to bee shewed; ergo they are Apostolicall: they shall shew them∣selues
to be meere wranglers, wilfully wedded to most cor∣rupt errours, as I will most clearly demonstrate. And here∣in I dare boldly challenge (being most confident of this truth) any Pontifician whatsoeuer, be he Benedictine, Fran∣sciscan, or Ignatian, to shew me some ancient sufficient au∣thority out of Councels or ancient Fathers, that whatsoe∣uer might be obserued, or should bee obserued in the later times of the Romane Church, whereof no expresse begin∣ning could be shewed, should be therfore accounted Apo∣stolicall, because generally obserued in her. Epist. 118. ad Ianuar. St. Austen in∣deede is vrged by the Aduersaries, to affirme so much of some vnwritten Traditions in his time, generally obserued throughout the whole Church; but St. Austen is misvnder∣stood, and his rule commonly cited not without corrupti∣on: misvnderstood, because his rule is of such Traditions, whereof although nothing is written in holy Scripture, yet they are mentioned in approued Authours, and Historians, more or lesse from the Apostles daies till his times: besides, great is the difference of 1200. yeares, (for so long is the time from St. Austens daies to vs) for carrying downe of Traditions from the Apostles; and in so many ages, many thinges vnapostolicall See Onuphr. Genebrard, and Platina. supra pag. 3. might creepe into particular Churches, and consequently into the whole, whereof no certaine beginning might be shewed. Againe, St. Austens rule is commonly mis-cited. For whereas that Father writeth thus in effect in his Epistle to Epist. 118. Ianuarius: If the authority of diuine Scripture prescribe in any of these rites and ceremonies, what is to bee done: II cite not the expresse words of the Father because editi∣ons are so dif∣ferent, but all haue thus in effect. answere, there is no doubt to be made, but that wee must doe as we reade; the like I say, if any of these rites which we obserue, and the whole Church throughout the world at this present time obserueth: for to dispure that we should doe otherwise, were insolent madnesse: but the Aduersa∣ries commonly when they cite this place, leaue out first what he writeth in the beginning of the sentence, touching the authority of Scriptures. Againe, they leaue out com∣monly
those words which restraine his meaning to his daies. And in Saint Austens time, it is manifest, that the Christian Churches were not so diuided, as since his times they haue beene, and withall, that a little before his time, the generall Councels of Nice, and Sardica had ordered most things, and brought many things to light, and yet not∣withstanding this rule, it is well knowne, how SaintS. Aust. in the same Epistle pronounceth, that Christ in∣stituted very few ceremo∣nies. Epist. 118. Austen complained against multiplicitie of rites, and ce∣remonies, brought into diuers particular Churches in his daies; wherewith the Christians were more heauily clog∣ged then the ancient Iewes had beene vnder Moses: which if it were euer true, then it is now amongst the Pontifici∣ans most true, who haue from their Popes, some 1000 of rites, and haue also innuerable lawes, binding vnder the censure of their curses, and heauiest excommunications, and so frequently that a man may iustly suppose that there are few of that profession, who are not more or lesse tou∣chedIt is not credi∣ble to what number their Excommuni∣cations are growne since their tyranical vse of them. See Nauar. Man. cap. 27. num. 50. by their lesser or greater excommunications, his holi∣nesse onely excepted, who will be bound to no lawes, no not to those which he sweareth inuiolably to keepe▪ e being indeed, that , exlex iniqnus, outlaw, which Saint 2. Thes. 2. Paul hath prophecied should sit in the Temple of God, as I will more fully declare hereafter. But I will de∣monstrate, that there are diuers practises and customes ob∣serued throughout their Roman Church vniuersally, wher∣of no beinning can be shewed, & which themselues wil not dare to affirme to be Apostolicall, and so their rule by their owne confessions shall to the ground. First, is it not an v∣niuersall (though impious) practise throughout the Pon∣tifician Church to paint God the Father in the forme of an old man, and God the holy Ghost in the forme of a Doue? by the same, not onely to represent two persons of the most inenarrable and inexpressible Trinitie, but also by the same, and in the same, to adore and worship those two in∣finite Persons; what will they, or can they shew me, when this custome prcisely began? No I wis: what? must it
therefore, be a tradition Apostolicall? it were impudencie, or meere ignorance so to affirme: and I thinke there is none of them as yet so shamelesse, as to affirme it. Nouell I am assured it is, vtterly forbidden by the ancient Fathers of the sixt Sinod. 6. Cano. 82. generall Councell, reputed an impudent thing by worthy Iohn Damas. Or∣thodox. sid. lib. 4. ap 17. Sinod. Nicen. 2. act. 4. 5. 6. 7. Damascene, (reputed a renowned Saint in their Church and a famous Patrone for the vse of other Images) and by their Italian Polid. lib. de inuentor. Polidore Virgil accounted meere folly: and which of their own men Abulens. Lira Alij. commenting v∣pon the fourth of Exodus, do not more or lesse condemne it? and yet, now the present Romane Church is so ge∣nerally infected thereby with the leprosie of superstitious Idolatry, that no man whose heart is zealous of Gods ho∣nour, cannot, seeing it, but lament therefore. Of this kinde also is the prostrate adoring of the Cruci∣fixe it selfe vpon good Friday, generally obserued through∣out the Romane Church. Can their best antiquarie amongst them shew me a beginning hereof? no God wot: what is it therefore a tradition Apostolicall? shame will not suffer them to affirme it. To this I adioyne their most Ca∣tholike and vaine custome of adorning their Images (like as the old Paynims adorned Ʋenus, Iuno, Ceres their vaine Gods Images) with rich attire, imbrodered gar∣ments, and robes vpon their massie bodies, crownes of gold vpon their stony heads, rings vpon their marble or wodden singers, bracelets of Amber or Pearle vpon their wristes, rich Iewels of Pearle and precious stones hanging about their neckes, downe euen to their shining and lasci∣iouslike breasts; drawen by the painters rather to giue oc∣casion of impudike thoughts then religious cogitations: Of this their prophane and heathenish custome, in their most religious places, can they precisely shew me a beginning? no I warrant you: belike therefore it is an Apostolicall tra∣dition? so to affirme, I could account it no lesse then blas∣phemie. At least (if it will please the Ladies amongst the Pontificians to heare with patience) it is no tradition Apo∣stolicall,
that their sacred Images are often trimmed with the rayments of strompets, a thing very frequent in other countries (like as in England, where very often their Priests This is a cu∣stome so fre∣quent and so common in England that no Priest who hath either shame or ho∣nestie can de∣nie it. Massing vestiments are framed of the petticotes, kirtles, or gownes of such persons: whereof some are not of the best fame) so loathsome a thing, that doubtlesse if their i∣mages which they adore, had sense, they would exclaime against the abuse thereof, and cry fie. These Romane cu∣stomes so vniuersally obserued doth any man once imagine to be Apostolicall? Reade two of Saint Grèg. Epist. ad Secundin. & Epist ad Seren. Gregories epistles read Epipha Epist. ad Johan. Hiero. Epiphanius, read Thrasius the Patriarks discourse in the seuenth synode, at Nice, Saint Augu. in Psal. 113. & de fid. & Symbol. Austen vpon the Psalms and you will vnderstand, what manner of Tradition, the vse of God the fathers image and the adoration of images is. But here of more anone. Againe, touching their vniuersall and generall custome of receiuing of the Sacrament vnder one kind, as so onely necessary, so onely sufficient, so onely commaunded for a mans whole life; can they shew me an expresse beginning thereof? no God wot: what? must it be therefore a tradi∣tion Apostolicall? I will not deny, but that perhaps, some ancient particular Churches, might sometimes practise in one kind, and yet most of their examples, which they bring for that purpose, are either of counterfeit bookes; or else little to the purpose: but I denye, (and challenge the Ad∣uersary to prooue the contrary) that euer any Ancient Apostolicall Church held it sufficient, as onely necessary, onely commanded to receiue the Sacrament in one kind for a mans whole life: They bring some places of Luc. 24. Act. 2. & 20. Scrip∣ture for this purpose. But first, if the places proue their vse, then it is not onely a tradition, but a written truth. Againe it is as manifest as the sunne, that those places they bring, doe proue as well against them, that their Masse may bee vsed in one kind, & the Sacrament consecrated in one kind, which they detest as the greatest impiety and sacriledge, making the sacrifice to consist most intrinsecally and essen∣tially
in both kindes that no Pope can dispense against it. Again, Rhemist. in ca. 1. act. Baron. an∣nalib. anno 48. Christ num. 17. Zuares Isingr. Catherinus a. their beleefe touching the assumption of the bles∣sed Virgin Maries body, (at whose due honours I greatly reioyce, and beseech Iesus her sonne, and Sauiour, euer to indue me with a reuerent respect of her greatnesse, and her blessings aboue all Women) is it not generally receiued, and the feast thereof vniuersally practised, throughout the Romane Church? And is there any one who can shew the time, when this beleefe began? no God wot: What? must it bee therefore a Tradition Apostolicall? nothing lesse. Baron. anno Christ. 48. num. 9 12. & 13. Baronius his Doctrine will ouerthrow that Tradition. The Annotati∣ons vpon the first of the Acts verse 14. Rhemists in their annotations vppon the Acts of the Apostles, endeuor to proue it out of a counterfeit book of Dionise of Areopage, Saint Pauls scholler, and they are not there with content vnlesse they may abuse egregiously the same booke also, by their manifest and wilfull corrupti∣on: for they dare assirme that St. Dionyse in that Dionis. lib. de Diuin. nomin. the Rhemists cite it Epist. ad Timoth. booke, reporteth that he himselfe heard the melodious singing of Angels, at the Virgins monument, which lasted for three daies together, a thing no where to bee found in that book▪ Again, they affirm that Dionyse of Areopage was pre∣sent at the Virgins departure, which hapned as themselues Their Ta∣ble of S. Paul and Baro. affir∣meth anno Christ 52. deliuer, the 48. of Christ. And yet withal they auouch that S. Paul came not to Athens til the 52. of Christ; where and when S. Dionyse was with Damaris Acts 17. conuerted: so that by their contradictorious account, Saint Dionyse was conuer∣ted, and made a Christian, and presently also at the blessed Virgins death; before his conuersion. Thus the Rhemish lights of the English Pontificians, are caught in their folly, when of late I obiected this wilfull corruption, and mayne contradiction of the Rhemists to a certain graund I. C. cheefe∣taine in this place where I now am; I had onely a kind of ush for an answere, with this graue epiphoneme, it is an ill bird that beraieth his owne neast, might not I more iust∣ly inueigh against such seducers of youth, who by such de∣prauations, seduce their young Fye, and beray their young
birds in the neasts of their seminaries; where they must take all vpon trust euen as their masters shall please to dictate vnto them: and be you most assured, they shall heare no∣thing that shall iarre from the Popes behests, and Romane Churches practise, whose Souldiers they are, trained to fight his battell or holy quarrel as Sanders in his Letters to an Irish Gentle∣man. Saunders calleth it. Againe, concerning the vniuersall practise, of ating of bloud, and strangled meates, throughout the Pontifician Church: can they precisely tell mee, when the same began? no in sooth: what is it therefore a Tradition Apostolicall? aske the Apostles, and whole Church of Hierusalem con∣cerning this Tradition, who decreed by expresse Acts 15. Canon, that Christians should absteine from things immolated to idols, from bloud, from strangled meate, and fornication: Loe here is a custome generally obserued, no beginning thereof be ound, and yet no tradition Apostolicall. Further it is manifest, that the vow or promise of Chasti∣ty, is Thom Aquin. 2. 2. q 88. Du∣rand. lib. 4 Dist. 35 & 37. aly Scholastc. com∣muniter ibidem. Sots de iure & iustitia. lib. 7. & Petrus de Soto in institut. sa∣cerd. lect. 5. Va∣lentia. de Celi∣batu. lib. 2. Scotus 4. dist. 37. Cait. quod 1. q. 2. See S. Athanasius Epist. ad dracont Sincsius Epist. ad Euoptium. Polid. lib. de in∣uento. 5. Alphon∣sus a Castro. verbo. sacerdot. heres 4. Euseb. li. 4. ca 23. Niceph. lib. 4. cap. 55. not by Gods institution either in the olde, or newe Testament, annexed to priesthood or Episcopacy, and yet as euident it is, that now it is generally obserued throughout the pontifician Church, (to promise chastity but not to keepe it) and, can any pontifician shewe mee, when the cu∣stome of adioining of the promise of chast life to priest∣hood, and other holy orders, begun? no I wis: (some attri∣buting it to Siricius Pope, others to Gregory the first: others to Gregory the second, others to Gregory the seuenth,) and what? must it be therefore an Apostolicall tradition? The Apostles will tell you, in one of their Canons, where they haue thus decreed. Can. 6. Let not a Bishop or Priest by any meanes vnder pretence of Religion, cast off his owne wife, but if he shal cast her off, let him be excommunicated, and if he perseuere, let him bee deposed: thus they. This their tradition, they learned not of Ignati. Epist. ad Philadlp. Ignatius nor Io Epist. 85. Leo the first Pope, nor out of the sixth Generall Synode, nor the Coun∣cell of Gangres, nor out of the first Councell of Toledo: out of which Gratian Dist. 34. Can. is qui no habet. relateth a Canon the seuenteenth in
number that he who hath not a wife, must or may haue a concubine, vnlesse those fathers thought a wife or a Con∣cubine necessary for the laickes only in that hot climate, but were perswaded sufficiently, of the Continency of their Clergy (if so, out alasse, how is Spaine now become so re∣retrograde?) and therefore the permission for concubines in steed of wiues excuseth not them: yet by their leaue (cur∣teous Reader) I cannot but thinke that the like merry cu∣stome with that which Lib. de praesu∣lib. simiacis. Clemangis recordeth, is some occasion out of this Canon: to wit, that the people were so perswaded of their Clergies incontinency, that in many parishes they would not otherwise accept of their Priests, vnlesse they had their concubines, thereby as they thought prouiding for the chastity of their wiues. And truly if they would but seriously consider, what turpitudes, impuni∣ties, nefarious and abhominable lusts, haue repleated the Romane Clergy, both religious and secular, they would haue little cause to bragge of this their Tradition Aposto∣licall: but this surely is as much Apostolicall as that their other, most friuolous, and irreligious vse, of their hallowed graynes, meddals, &c. the which as they are generally ob∣serued; receiued and beleeued throughout the whole Pon∣tifician Church, so it is as manifest, that they are meere no∣uelties, without any seeming shew of Antiquity at all. And yet, as nouell as they are, to find out the precise beginning of them, it would trouble their best Antiquary. Let any one of them do it, and he shall weare the Lawrell bough for his paines. Their vniuersall vse, of their round Wafercakes, (which they vse, in their most religious seruice at Masse, and for their consecrations) will they call them Apostolicall? who would not laugh thereat? and yet very nouell they are, al∣though no expresse beginning of them can be shewed by any aduersary. What said I? no expresse beginning of them? yes, the Author of the Roman order, (as Cassander in his Li∣urgick reporteth) at the beginning & bringing in of them
into the Church, greatly complaineth against them, be∣cause insteed of great loaues which were offered before byIt is very pro∣bable that Round wafers and eleuation came into ge∣ther, but it can not by any Pontifician whatsoeuer be specified when they precisely were brought in, although Gmma. animae seemeth to bring them in aboue a thou∣sand & a hun∣dred yeeres af∣ter Christ. Gem. an. cap. 29. some cite idly a sen∣tence out of E∣piphan. in An∣corat. for this purpose. the people, now such scraps (to vse his words) were brought, and offered. Doubtlesse, when Idolatry grew ripest, and the eleuation most frequent, then came in the round wafers, for in all antiquitie there is no other mention made of other bread of the Eucharist, then such as good Christian wo∣men made at home, & brought with them to the Churches to be offered and distributed: Whereof themselues also tooke part at the holy communion, and carried also part away home in cleane linnen cloathes to receiue at conue∣nient times as Tertulian Tertul. lib. 2. ad vxorem. reporteth, whose saying the Papists abuse. Such is also their obseruations of Lent, as it precisely consisteth of fortie sixe daies of fast and abstinence, contai∣ning Sundaies and Feries, and I challenge any aduersary to shew me a beginning of such a precise Lent of sixe and for∣tie daies. They cannot doe it. What? must it be therefore in this precise fashion a tradition Apostolicall? who would not smile thereat to heare of such a tradition? who haue read Euseb. lib. 5. hist. cap. 24 So∣crat. lib. 5. ca▪ 21 Zozamen. lib. 7. cap. 19. See Ni∣ceph lib. 11. cap. 34. & 35. Eusebius, Socrates, Zozomenus three ancient Histo∣rians well acquainted wih the Lents of the Primitiue Churches, who doe so differently distinguish the different obseruation of Lent, in diuers Apostolicall Churches of the East, and West, that whereas Saint Hierome and Saint Ignatius, affirme that the fast o Lent or Quadragesme is a tradition Apostolicall; they must not be vnderstood of the precise fast of forty daies, or sixe and fortie daies abstinence vsed by the Romanes, but of some certaine set fast, before the holy feast of Easter, which was diuersly obserued ac∣cording to the diuers acceptances, of the Catholike and A∣postolicall Churches of those times: Heare Saint Austen much for this purpose clearly pronoūcing. If you August. Epis▪ 8. ad Cass▪ aske my opinion concerning this matter of fasting, I finde in the writings of the Euangelists, and the Apostles, and all the new Testament, that we are commaunded to fast: but what
daies must we fast, and what daies we must not fast, I finde it not determined by any commaundement of Christ or his Apostles. Thus he. I haue beene very large, (courteous Rea∣der) in producing many instances, to shew that rule of theirs to be vaine, vpon which their traditions are built, to wit, that whatsoeuer the Romane Church generally obscrueth, whereof no beginning can be shewed, that must needs be a tradition Apostolical, infinite like instances might be made, yea and most iustly and soundly in all such rites, lawes, cu∣stomes, and articles of faith, which they teach contrary to the true reformed Churches. But I haue heere produced so ma∣ny, that I thinke my selfe to haue beene too carefull in pro∣uing that which otherwise of it selfe is most cleare, but see∣ing, the life of the Romane religion, resteth vpon traditions (which they pretend to be Apostolicall) ouerthrow them, and downe must all that same religion, as a learned Priest lately in this house acknowledged to my selfe, being vrged thereunto by force of argument, and euidence of truth. And so to conclude these my Motiues about their idle rules of faith, the Christian Reader, who is carefull of his owne saluation, and giueth obedient eare to that propheticall light of Gods sacred Scriptures, (expounded by the anci∣ent Church) which Scriptures Saint Peter2. Pet. 1. preferreth a∣boue that vision, which he and his brethren had of Christ in mount Thabor: he cannot but easily obserue, what consequences are likely to follow out of three such corrupt Rules of faith as are in request amongst the Pon∣tificians, to wit, infallibility solely, and onely in the Popes definitiue iudgement, authority of Apophricall Scriptures, and the vaine authority of their traditions, pretended to be Apostolicall, where as they are nothing lesse. The aduer∣sary will for the validitie of these rules, stand vpon the authority of their present Romane Church, which hath receiued them, of which their defence conformably to all antiquitie, and ancient Fathers, (who taught otherwise,) we must also conformably to their proceedings, search out
of Gods word, whether the Church of which they bragge so much, be the true Church. Succession in Sees onely will not suffice, as by their owne confession is manifest in the Chur∣ches of Antioch, Alexandria, Constantinople &c. but there is required also successiō in doctrine according to Gods word, by which triall must be made of all Churches, and of all do∣ctrines, and all after-traditions, to which if they be not a∣greeable, without perill of damnation they must not be receiued, and this is the most expresse doctrine and faith of Saint Austen inAugust. lib. 1. de doctrina Chri∣stiana. cap. 37. lib. de unitate Ecclesi cap. 2. but cap. 16. so clearly that I do suppose no Pontifician Priest dare scarce read, that Chapter to his family. sundrie places, yea of BellarmineBellarm. lib. 2. de verbo doi. cap. 2. Basil. serm. de fide. him∣selfe, (though as it may be thought) he not very willingly confesseth this truth. Other means, saith he, may deceiue, but nothing is more certaine then the Scripture, and there∣fore by confession of all, both ancient and moderne writers, the triall by Gods word is most firme and as∣sured. The fourth Motiue. THe fourth Motiue, and that very effectuallThe fourth. Motiue. with me, is, that transcendent power, both in all temporals and spirituals, which later Popes contrary to Christs institution and practise of holy Primitiue Popes, chal∣lenge, and which the Romane Canonists, and Cardinals ouer-liberal of that wherwith they haue no∣thing to doe, doe flatteringly thrust vpon their Romane Monarches. In spirituals he challengeth, and they grant vnto him, to be the onely supreme; and immediate Pastor ouer Christs flocke, so that looke how ample, and immedi∣ate Christs iurisdiction for saluation of soules was, so is his; he glorieth in that title, and they giue it him, whichGreg lib. 4. epist. 38. S. Gre∣gory so much detested as the very badge of Antichrist, he will in the gouernment of Christs flocke haue no Peere nor Colleage. He is content to be honoured with that title,
yea, and aboue that ambitious title, the which Constantius the Arian required, for he was content with (numen nostrum.) our power or diuinitie, but the Pope can willing∣ly acept of (supremum in terris numen,) the supreme and highest diuinitie or power vpon earth. O ye heauens be a∣stonished, and euerlasting gates be desolated, the pretended only Vicar of Christ, the successor in some sort of that poore fisher, whoAct 3. gloried, in that he had neither gold nor siluer: must heare, and that from renownedProesat. ad Grego. 13. in principia doctri. Stapletons mouth, the Spanish kings professor in Louane, & the English Pon∣tificians chiefe champion, thus: thy supreme diuinity vpon earth; iust God, how more iustly may we lament, with those words (of Saint Gregory against Iohn of Constantinople for his extraordinary fasting surnamed (Ieiunator) the faster,)Grego. lib. 4. p. 38. O alasse, all things that haue beene forespoken, are come to passe; the King of pride is at hand, and that which is a wickednesse to be spoken, a whole Army of priests is pre∣pared for him; because those serue the proud necke of e∣lation, and pride, who haue beene set to giue example of meekenesse and humility. Thus that Father in those times, when the mysterie of iniquity began to worke most appa∣rantly in the Patriarke of Constantinople; but appeared more clearly in one of his next Successors, to wit, Boniface 3 who emulating the Constantinopolitan Patriarks for their pride, obteined of Phocas that hatefull and traiterous vsur∣per rather then Emperour, to decree by constitution, that the title of Vniuersall Bishop, should for euer after belong and be giuen only to the Bishops of Rome: this is a matter vndoubted of by auncientSabel. Aenead. . lib. 6. Platin. in Bonifac. 3. Otho. lib. 5. Paulus. de gostis Longobard. Ma∣rianus anno. Dom. 608. Duerenus. de sacris Ecclesioe ministris. lib. 1. cap 10 Abbas in Phoca & poene emnis aly Sige∣bert. Regino Lu∣itpran. Anasta. Baron. annal. ad annum. 606. Historians, and yet perchance, this Boniface did not assume by that title, so much vnto him as these latter Popes doe, (to wit) to be immediate pastors of all the whole Church, comprehending all Partriarkes, Bi∣shops, &c, or that, there is no power nor iurisdiction in any Prelate, or Pastor of the Church whatsoeuer; which is not dependantly from them and of them; so that they can and may peremptorily call to their court all causes greater or
smaller, and according to course of law, or otherwise, final∣ly, andIudicare &c. to iudge and decree whe∣ther it be ne∣cessary to de∣pose a Prince belongeth to the Pope, of whose iudge∣ment, whether it be right or not, no man may iudge. Bellar. contra. Barck. ca. 12. vnappellably ende, and determine them: and if any either Emperour, Prince, Prelate, or Vniuersity, would of∣fer to appeale from any of their sentences, (though most exorbitant and tirannicall) they should thereby deserue to bee cursed with Bell, Booke, and Candle. I cannot thinke that in Bonifaces time the Romane Bishops were growne to that height of Antichristian pride that was left for later times, when the Diuell was to be let loose after the thou∣sand yeeres of his binding. Notwithstanding he challen∣ged by Phocas his constitution to be only called, vniuersall Bishop of the Church, against which title Saint Gregory so vehemently and Christianly exclaimeth inGreg lib 4. ep 32. 34. 38. 39. diuers Epi∣stles: testifying and demonstrating most plainly, that that Antichristian title robbeth all Bishops of their honour, and maketh that the Assumer thereof should bee reputed Anti∣christ. This being so in this Auncient Father, how durst D. StapletonStaple prin∣cipi. doctr. lib. 6. cap. 7. that renowned Professour of diuinity ende∣uour to make Saint Gregory speake against himselfe in this very epistle; and out of him labour to proue the present Romane supremacy, and Monarchy, which that Father so much detested? WhereasLib. 4. epist. 38. S. Gregory in a learned discourse writing against the Patriarke of Constantinople Iohn, who claimed to bee vniuersall Bishop of the Church, and had procured Maurice the Emperour to write to Saint Gre∣gory for the same purpose: sheweth that Christ is onely head of his Church, and that there is no other head but hee, adding much to that purpose, he adioyneth thus: Certe Po∣trus Apostolus primum membrum sanctoe, &c. Certainly, Peter the Apostle, the first member of the holy Vniuersall Church, Paul, Andrew, Iohn; what else are they but heads of particular people? and yet notwithstanding, they are all members of the Church, vnder one head, and that I may bind vp all within a short compasse of speech, the Saints be∣fore the Law, Saints vnder Law, Saints vnder Grace, all these perfiting one body of our Lord, are all placed in the
members of the Church, and no one would euer haue him∣selfe called vniuersall. Thus farre hee, with much more in that Epistle, the which whosoeuer shall reade, if hee res∣pect Saint Gregories authority, confirming his doctrine also out of Scriptures; it is not possible, hee should beleeue the present Romane Monarchy. How then (thou wilt demand) can Doctour Stapleton find any thing in this very Epistle, for the Popes exorbitant supremacy? he hath found som∣what, yea & in this very sentence by me cyted; but he hath vsed a certaine figure called of addition, by thrusting into the text, (as he citeth it) the word (Petro) Peter. And ma∣keth Saint Gregory speake thus. Truly, Peter is the first member of the Vniuersall Church, Paul, Andrew, and Iohn what are they else, but of singular flocks, heads, and yet all vnder one head Peter are members of the Vniuersall Church. Thus hee. Some Dowists and precise Pontificians will perhaps say it is not possible, that learned Stapleton should so corrupt this auncient Father, let such take paines to examine Grego. lib 4. epist. 38. Staple. principia do∣ctrina. lib 6. c. 8. and then iudge as they find. I could shew al∣so how he corrupteth by subtracting, but that vpon some other occasion. I must needs confesse, when I reade this e∣gregious corruption in him, that I resolued neuer to trust Pontifician doctour againe without triall, citing any sen∣tence for the Popes monarchie. It is not imaginable, what suppositious books haue bene obtruded vpon the world to support this declining Monarchy; but (ruet, ruet) it will fall, it will fall: and God graunt it may rather be ruinated (Lino) as an auncient Sibile prophecyed, that is, with paper (to wit) learned books, rather then with fire, sword, famine cold, as the Sibill Delphicke prophecied vnder Romulus raigning and Rome triumphing, and according as Saint IohnApoc. cap. 18. hath fore-prophecied in his Reuelation. I cannot now stand prolixly to ouerthrow See for this purpose Cusa∣nus concod. Ca∣thol. lib. 2. & ca. 20. and Euseb. lib. 5. hist. cap. 25 & 26. especi∣ally consider how the Coun∣cell of Chalce∣don in the 16. action did most resolute∣ly oppose a∣gainst the Pope, & their decree hath preuailed. this am∣bitious Monarchy of the Popes by the decrees and consti∣tutions of auncient and later Councels of Nice, of Constan∣tinople, the first and eight of Chalcedon, of Sardica, Car∣thage,
Constance, Basile, and by vniforme consent & pra∣ctise of the Greeke Church, I will therefore heere onely adioyne somwhat concerning the other branch of this my motiue, to wit, the Popes arrogant, and persumptuous claime Bulla. Pij. 5. in Elizabet. Cle∣men 7. in Hen∣ri. 8. Clement. 8. in Henric. 4. Franc. Sixti Quinti. &c. ouer Princes, and kingdomes, wherin he assumeth that honour and power which was neuer giuen him by Christ, the mysterie of which iniquity hath wrought so powerfully in these latter Popes, to fulfill the prediction of 2. Thess. 2. Saint Paul, that the Romane Empire according to the exposition of the ancient August. 20. de ciuit. 19. Ter∣tul. lib. de re∣surrect. carnis. Hieron. epist. ad Algasiā. q. 11. & in Danielem. Aeneas Sluius, lib. de ortu Ro∣man. Imperij. Irenae. Theod. Bellarminus lib. 3. de Roma. Pont. Ribera. viegas in Apoc. Chrisost. Amb. Theoph. Primas. in 2. ad Thes∣sal. 2. fathers was not to be taken a∣way vntill a certaine Antichrist should come (I said a cer∣taine Antichrist, not because, there shall bee onely onely one in number or person; but to distinguish him from some other kinds of Antichrists described in some places of the Reue∣lation and other parts of holy Scripture) but then at his comming the empire must (De medio fieri) be done or ta∣ken out of the way, but whether it shall be taken out of the waie, by the direct meanes of Antichrist or not, the Scrip∣tures do not expresly affirme it: some of the Fathers, yea the Rhemists, doe incline to thinke so; and doubtlesse it is most probable that the holy Ghost meant so, because he maketh the standing of the Romane Empire, to be a let, and hin∣drance against the comming of that man of sin Antichrist which 2. Thess. 2. is here prophecied by the Apostle: the which thing if it be true, it cannot possibly be auoided, but that the later Popes be that Antichrist, of which the Apostle heere fore∣telleth, who mounted not to their perfect height of iniqui∣ty vntill the Romane Empire was made out of the way; which was done by them, as I will anone shewe. For my part I doe very resolutely affirme that whosoeuer shall haue taken the Romane Empire out of the way, and shall haue made himselfe the direct or indirect supreame Mo∣narch of the world, and withall, shall sit in the temple of God, that is, shall challenge onely to sitte without peere, and equall in the vniuersall Church of Christ to Teach all, Gouerne all, Censure all, Command all, and necessarily
not to be taught censured or corrected by any what∣soeuer,The Popes ex∣toll thēselues, neither the tri∣ple crown, nor adoration was first freely giuē but exacted by themselues. that this must needs be the man of sinne, the sonne of perdition, the outlaw or man without law, who extolleth himselfe, aboue all that is called God (marke ex∣tolleth himselfe) or that is worshipped. Now whereas it is manifest that the Popes by their practise and decrees doe challenge the later, to wit the spirituall Monarchy, and v∣niuersall supremacy in the chaire of Gods temple; yet they haue not perhaps professedly by decrees challenged, to be the supreme direct monarchs of the whole World in tem∣porals. I said perhaps, for the decrees Alexander the 6. his decree of diuiding the East and West Indies which he pretendeth to doe ex pleni∣tudine potestatis, and gratuito out of the fulnesse of his power & frankly. Bonif. 8. his decree v∣nam sanctā, and his Epistle to Kng Philp the faire, a king of France Leo 10. as Petrarh re∣porteth him, lib. de rebus me▪ mrands, gaue the kingdome of Saracens to Sanctius, who re∣quired him wih the Caliphship of Baldach. of certaine Popes, make mee thinke there wanteth no good will but onely meanes, and possssion; which their Canonists and Ignati∣ans labour a pace in euery place where they can finde foo∣ting, by their preachings, secret conferences, and bookes to procure vnto him. And consider this, what bookes are with more fauour receiued, printed, and published at Rome, then those of this stampe, and kinde? For this res∣pect, Pesantius, Bozius and such like shal be cherished there Bellrmine in the time of Sixtus the Monarch of the world (who had deuoured England in his vaie Psendoprophe∣ticall hope) Bellrmine (I say,) because hee applauded not the Papall Monarchy of Sixtus but wrote against it, found no fauour but was glad to auoid Rome, for feare of frying but Bllar. against Barkley. and his anwer to a Ve netiā Doctor. saepssime▪ & de Rom Pon. . 5. c. 6 now, by end euouring to bing the Monarchy of chri∣stendome vnder the Popes command, with the distinction of indirect & direct, he hath profited so much that hee hath purchased a Cardinals hat, the next steppe to the Romane Monarchy it selfe, the which if he euer obtaine, doubtlesse he will speake as Sixtus did; for as his doctrine is much changed from that it was in Sixtus time, so doubtlesse if he proue Pope it will Hanores mu∣tant mos. come to greater perfection. Baron. in annalibus saepissime▪ Steuch. lib. de donat. Constant. Bozius, alij. Car∣dinall Baronius good God, how he trauaileth as though he were wich child, to bring forth this Monarchy throughout his Annals! and Augustinus Steuch. more earnest then
he, (if it may be) how carelfully doth he record Diplomes and Charters, by which the Popes challenge the direct and supreame Soueraignties ouer most kingdomes of the West! as of Spaine, France, England, Ireland, Hungary, Norway, Sicily, and of which not? but such baubles I passe ouer & the trying of those Charters I put off to those whome it concerneth, I will onely a little examine, how this man of sinne, that sitteth in the Temple of God, is saide to sit in Gods Temple, doubtlesse it cannot otherwise bee well vn∣derstood, then of some principall part of the externe and visible Church of Christ: there beeing no other temple of God, of which it may with any probability bee expounded. To expound it of the Temple in Hierusalem, were very in∣congruous, yea impossible; cōsidering, the same is destroied and that the desolation thereof shall continue til the end as Dan. 9. Hieron. ibidem. Daniel the Prophet hath foretold; yea and Christ him∣selfe seemeth also to haue Math. 24. In the time of Iulian the A∣postata when the Iewes at∣tēpted to haue reedified their temple in Hie∣rusalem, they were miracu∣lously letted by God, a tokē that the same shal neuer bee reedified. Baro∣nius his Annals in Iuliano. Theod Socrates. lib. 3. foretold so much: to say, that Antichrist when he commeth, shall reedifie the Temple of Hierusalem in the same place where that of Salomon stood, and it therefore to be called the Temple of God, by the A∣postle, is too too improbably and idlely said: with as much congruity, as to say that the turkish moskyes in Constanti∣nople are the Church of God because standing in the same places and within the same materiall walls in which once the True and onely God Iesus Christ was worshipped. The Pontificians would be offended to heare their Church of the blessed Virgin Mary and all the Martyrs in Rome, to be now called the Temple of all false Gods, because it was so once called by the name of Pantheon. Besides; if wee will beleeue the Rhemists, & The substāce of Lessius de∣monstrating book, cōsisteth in that h con∣foundeth di∣uers predictiōs concerning the states of diuers enemies of Christ and diuers calami∣ties of the Church to the imagined 3. yeeres and a halfes raigne of one singular mā Antichrist. Leonard Lessius in his laborious and demonstratiue booke of Antichrist, we must think that Antichrist when he commeth shall worship no God: a toy: for if so, how then shall he be thought, to build a temple to the true God? what? Worship no God, and yet build a Temple to the true God? a Paradoxe. But most cleare it is and to me it hath beene often confessed by diuers learned
Papists that Antichrist is said to sit in the Temple of God because he shall vse a tirannical, proud, vsurped imperious gouernment in the visible Church, excluding the society & paritie of any other in that vsurped office of his, changing that forme of gouernment, which Christ left in his Church, and by tiranny seeking to draw all to himself,Annotation. in 2. ad. thes. 2. an. 5 as the Rhe∣mists themselues affirme. But that this Antichrist of which Saint Paul speaketh shall sitte in the visible Church of Christ (visible I said, for so they are to be expounded) di∣uers auncientAug lib. 20. de ciuita. cap. 19. Hieron. ad Alga∣siā. q. 11. Greg. l. 4. epist. 34. 38. 39 et in 2. ad Thes. cap. 2. apud Pa∣terium clarissime Robertus linco∣lniens. apud Math. Paris. in Henrico 3. anno. 1162. Coruelius muss∣orat. habita in con. Trid. domi∣nica 3. aduētus. Athanas. in epist. ad solitar. vitam agentes Hilar. li. cont. Constan. Lucifer. in lib. moriendum pro filio dei. Bernar. ser. in conc. Rem. et serm. 33. in cantica. Hieron. in Dan. 11. Hila. cont. Auxent. This greeke word , Antichrist, in properlinar gie & significa∣tiō according to the differēt vse of the preposition  in Greeke, signifieth one, that is, for insteed or against another, all which three significations are vnited in the man of sinne called Antichrist, beeing annointed insteed and against the true annointed Lord Iesus Christ. Fathers eyther expresly affirme, or by most euident consequence, it is deduced out of them. S. Au∣stin, S. Ierome, S. Gregory and others expresly, Cornelius Mus. seemeth to affirme so much, although hee dare not speake it expresly; Athanasius also agreeingly with Hila∣ry, and Lucifer Calaritane, make therefore Constantius the Arian Emperour Antichrist, because he assumed to himselfe all rule tiranically in the Church, and against Church-men. Saint Bernard not farre from this conceit, where hee char∣geth the Church-men for seruing Antichrist. Saint Grego∣ry is most cleare, for otherwise how vnworthy an argument were it in that Father, to call Iohn of Constantinople Anti∣christ, and the Title of Vniuersall Bishop Antichristian, if Antichrist when hee should come, was not to bee either a Bishop, or not to challenge any such vsurped power, or any such name. Along while King Henry the eight, & Queene Elizabeth both of renowned memory were certaine Anti∣christs with the Pontificians, in respect they challenged the titles of cheefe Gouernours, in the Church of England, the sense whereof being now sufficiently explaned, and by the same made euident, that they require no more, then what their predecessors had, and vsed, though not with the name of Heads, or cheefe Gouernors: yea made so plaine, that
Parsons in his Catholike let∣ter against our Kings Apology Iobn Hart also acknowledged the same to Doctor Reinolds Conference. cap. 10. in the end. Parsons himselfe acknowledgeth that as ourOur King in his Apology. Soueraign doth declare and explane, his Title of headship, and Supre∣macy, it is sound and in some sort allowable: they haue left that saying: but yet thereby it is cleare, that Antichrist in their owne estimation, when he shall come, shall be a kind of tyrannicall and vsurping Churchman. The prouerbiall prophecy of of Saint Hildegard, spoken of by many, hath the same meaning, vnum vos monco, Cauete Antichristum, &c. One thing I admonish you, beware of Antichrist, you are ill carryed away, with the loue of walls; naughtily doe you worship the Church as if it were within couers and e∣difices: badly, vnder these doe you offer the name of peace; what? can it be doubted, that Antichrist shall sit in these? Mountaines, Woods, Lakes, Prisons, Whirlepooles shall bee more secure to me, for Prophets either staying in these, or thrown into these, haue prophecied, with the spirit of God, thus she. who hath not heard of the Prophecy of Ioakim Abbot? which ought to bee of credit, with the Pontificians, considering how eager StapletonStapleton in promptu. is against the very haire, to make him prophecie of the Order of the Ignatians, as of a speciall Order, to be raised vp by God, for defence and propagation of the Romane Church. But for prophecies, the like might bee produced out ofLib. reuelat. 4. Ciril lib. reuelat. related by Ay∣tmger in Me∣thod. Briget and Ciril; and others: these may suffice. But heare a more forcible testimony, out of our English Pontificians theAnnotat. in 2. ad thessalo. 2. annot. 5. Rhemists themselues, who graunt that both Saint Austin and Saint Hierome doe interpret the sitting of An∣tichrist in the Temple of God, for his sitting in Christs Church, but not (say they) as though hee should be cheefe member of the Church of Christ, or a speciall part of his mysticall body; if they meane that in truth and verity An∣tichrist should not so be; they neuer wrote truer Doctrine: but if they meane that in the sense of the Fathers, he should not as a pretended ruler, and cheefe of the Church, or as a pretended mysticall head of his body, sit in the same, it is most vaine, and against the very haire, for what? doe they
or can they else vnderstand, by sitting in the Church; but to rule and gouerne in the Church? and therefore he alone is said to sitte in the Temple; because he alone challengeth independently, monarchically, and Soueraignely, (accor∣ding to the doctrin of Bellarmine,Bellar. lib. 1. de conci. cap. 17. Ba∣ron. in Annal. se∣pissime Allen. his defēce of eng∣lish Catholicks cap. 5. Baron Sanders, Allen, and all other, who make the Church-Gouernment a Mo∣narchy) to Gouerne the whole Temple. All other Bishops and prelates whatsoeuer being but his substitutes, (accor∣dingBellar. lib. 1. de Romano pontific. cap. 9. paragr. proinde Turre∣cremat. in sama lib. 3. cap. 44. to Bellarmines Doctrine) as Viceroyes are substi∣tutes vnder absolute Monarchs. Yea these Rhemists, for∣getfull of what they said some few lines before, (by force of truth constrained) thus they adde: that Antichrist, if hee e∣uer were of, or in the Church, hee should bee an Apostata, and a runnagate out of the Church, and shall vsurpe vppon it by tyranny, and by challenging worship, religion, and gouernement thereof, so that himselfe shall bee adored in all Churches of the World; which he list to leaue standing for his honour, and this is to sit in the Temple, orObserue Christian rea∣der these gra∣marians they would make the prepositiō in, with an ab∣latiue case to stand for a∣gainst. against the Temple of God, as some (what some are these?) in∣terpret: if any Pope, did euer this, or shall doe, then let the aduersaries call him Antichrist. Thus they; Obserue Christiā Reader by their owne confession; they acknowledge, that the Bishop of Rome may be iustly called Antichrist, if these things can be proued of him: These Doctours neuer wrote truer line. That hee is adored in all the Churches and con∣gregations which he would haue to stand, or hath reared vpon the ruines of such Churches, as hee hath destroyed, who can deny it? it is as manifest as the sunne: he is not na∣med in the Masse or Letanies but with reuerence, and as for the outward externall adoration, and worship, which is giuen him, wheresoeuer hee personally sitteth, it doth not onely surpasse all adoration and Honour giuen to any earthly Prince or Potentate; but it farre passeth that which is giuen to their Sacrament it selfe (which to them is not onely called as God, or worshipped as a God, but is beleeued to be very Christ himselfe, yea and that the most
blessed Trinity is to be worshipped as specially present in that Sacrament) for to this Sacrament, and God in it, one adoration, and genuflexion will serue, when you come to pray, but come to sue or supplicate to him, that sitteth in the Temple, one wil not serue, but you must haue two or three adorations, and genuflexions, and as many at your departing whether you obteine your suite or not: and al∣most prostrate also, you must kisse his feete, before you de∣part, if you may be admitted to that Fauour. (For I assure you in Rome it is esteemed a fauour, to kisse the Popes foote greater, then in Aethiopia to see the great Presby∣ters great toe) for which Purpose, he hath caused the signe of our redemption to be drawne vpon his slippers, where doubtlesse sometimes it hath homely droppes fall vpon it, but it little mattereth for Christians mouthes, saue the Popes groomes of their labour, which adoration & sweete licking if you please, to beleeue the CretianEudaemon pa∣ralell. cap. 8. pag. 403. Ignatian Eu∣daemon, was prophecied by King Dauid, Pii, Principes &c. Let Godly Princes knowing what they owe to God in his Members and in his Ministers adore them with demisse countenance, and lick the dust of their feet: thus that lying parazite; pardon me Christian reader, for calling him so,He that shall reade his calū∣nious booke written aga nst the temperate and iudlcious book of the L. Bishop of Elye will easily per∣ceiue how des∣perate that cause of the Pope is which hath such des∣perate Raylers set a worke to maintaine it. what haue the Ignatians no better Eudaemō then this Caco∣daemon? Pardon me courteous Reader the foule mourhed Daemon who in euery page al∣most giueth ei∣ther the lye or exprobrateth auaice to that worthy & lear∣ned Prelate deserueth no lesse. he is doubtlesse the most impudent lyer, and most shamelesse calumniator and vainest parazite that euer put pen to pa∣per, and for his comfort some may tell him, hee is so estee∣med by almost all indifferent and iudicious Pontifician Priests within this Kingdome. To go on, let vs consider the adorations, and acclamations, which are giuen him be∣ing mounted vpon mens shoulders, with a triple crowne vpon his head, which he weareth as some affirme to signifie his absolute Soueraignty, in all matters, temporall and Spi∣rituall; others to represent that hee is vpon Earth insteede and Vicary of the most infinite Maiesty of the Father Son and holy Ghost: (but alasse heere is a difference, they three haue but one crowne, the Pope hath three, but that is an∣swered thus: as there, is a vnity in Trinity, so heer is a vnity
of a crowne in a Trinity of Crowns) others say, it represen∣teth the three Crowns which the now pretended Romane Emperour, receaueth at three speciall cities of the Empire; one of Iron in Apuisgrane, one of Siluer at Milane, ano∣ther of Gold at Rome: if so, may I not, iustly call it an image of the last beast? an Image, because it representeth what he aymeth at, and hath not yet fully gotten in his possession; an image, because it representeth what the glory of the Ro∣mane Empire was, as beeing the last Empire, and most glo∣rious, concluding as it were the three former of the Assi∣rians, Persians, Grecians in one. I said of the beast, because as the other auncient Monarchyes of the Assirians, Persians, Grecians, were Dan. cap. 7. & 8. described by the holy Prophets in the formes of beasts (not in respect of their temporall Soue∣raignety and power, which was sacred and holy) but for that they should set vp Idolatry and should wickedly or impurely gouerne their Monarchies; so also was the Ro∣mane Empire for the same respect described by the fourth beast, as in like sort vnder diuers formes of beasts shee is described in the reuclation of S. Iohn: and if the Roman bi∣shop, may be caled an Image of the beast. I leaue the reader to make the consequences out of many places of the Reue∣lation of S. Iohn, One thing I note how, that in the dredfull Apocalip. 13. persecutions, & afflictions of Christs Church, none shall bee permitted either to buy, or to sell, who haue not either the image or Character or the number of the name of the beast, (what is the Image? but the Popes supreme Romane monarchy? what the Character but the oath or promise of obedience to him? what the number of his name, but in Latine & ling∣lish signifieth Roman, & hath the number 666. So the learned affirme also that the worde in Hebrew sig∣nifying Romā hath the same number. Ro∣mane? which is now the only mark of the saithfull among the Pontificians more esteemed then Christian) and it is so prouided, by the most vigilant industry of the Bishop of Rome; whersoeuer he ruleth, what by his excomunications, interdicts suspensions &c. That no man can either buy or sell, or haue temporal or spiritual commerce, who adoreth not the image, or hath not the character, or the number of the name of the beast.
But to returne to the Pope, mounted vpon mens shoulders with a triple crowne vpon his head, and with those acclamations from all adoring him vpon their knees (liue holy Father, liue holy Father) expecting also remissi∣ons and indulgences of their sinnes in Purgatorie for the same meeting, and honorable attending vpon him: can a∣ny man say, be is not adored? yea he is adored sitting, yea and sitting in the temple, yea the temple of God: if Saint Peters Church in Rome be Gods, or if the Romane Sea and Church be Gods. Yea, and if Saint Markes Church in Ve∣nice be Gods; he was adored there, when he sitting, the fa∣mous Fredericke, and one of the most renowned Emperors came prostrate vnto him, kissed his foot; which submissiue action when he was doing, ambitious Alexander, not the great, but the third, set his foote vpon his necke in a most contemptuous manner: this Historie although both Baro∣nius, Bellarmine, and Parsons, for very shame would denie it, yet it is most certaine: for besides, approuedNauclerus ge∣nerat. 40. anno. 1177. Iustinia. lib. 2. rerum ve∣net. Massonius in Alexandro. 3. Hieron. Bardus. la lib. de hac historia edito. where he citeth many Pontisi∣cian historians for the same. Historians which mention it, the same is also painted in tho Popes pul∣lace at Rome, in the very next roome to the old chappell, it is also, to be seene painted in Venice in one of their Councell roomes, and if any of them be now lately defaced, they haue but the fortunes of Papisse Ioanes pictures, wher of one was remoued lately out of the Church of Sienna, by Clement the eight his commaundement; asBaron. epist, ad Florimond apud eundem. Baronius ioy∣fully writeth to Florimond, the other by Pius the fifth in Rome, and cast into Tiber to remoue the memory of the feminine Pope: although some shamefully doe affirme that Sixtus the fifth remoued it, because it was a let to his building. But to proceed, as he was adored in Gods Church in Venice, so wheresoruer he sitteth he is adored by all, either suppliants to him or his attendants. Further∣more, out of theirLib. 1. cere∣monial. ceremoniall booke heare a little more, for his adoration, whether you be Princes or people, that you may know how to behaue your selues, when you shall meete the Pope: Soueraigne Kings, and absolute Princes
themselues, if they chance to be with the Pope, must haue their seats so placed, that they may sit, not equally by the Popes side, but as it were towards his feete: he must not rise vp to Princes when they come to him, to the Emperor onely, after reuerence (if so much) done vnto him, he must rise a little to honour thereby the Emperour, and must also giue him his hand to kisse, and further, if he be to be carried vpon mens shoulders, if any Princes be present, they must make offer, and a seeming to beare him vpon their shoulders. O yee heauens be desolated, what? is not this man adored sitting, and sitting in the temple? The Late∣raneSess. 3. & 10. Councell vnder Leo, saith, that the Pope is to be a∣dored of all people, because he is most like God, called therefore byPrefat. ad Gregor. 13. in princip. do∣ctrinal. Stapleton, (supremum in terris numen) the supreame Godhead, or diuinitie vpon earth: and by a cer∣taine Neapolitane in his Theses, (vice-deus) a Vice-God, and his power called the Pontifician omnipotency, and by theExtrauagant. Ioh. 22. cum inter. See lib. ceremoni. Sect. 7. lib. 1. August. Steuchus-sepis∣sime. de donat. constantini. Our most holy Lord, our most blessed Father, his holinesse. See the Ca∣non of Pope Nicholas. cap. omnes dist. 22. glosse vpon the extrauagant (Dominus Deus noster) our Lord God the Pope: which glosse Parsons did igno∣rantly often denie to be found vpon the extrauagants. Hi∣stories are full fraught with such relations of adorations, and most adulatorious Epithites giuen to his Holinesse, the proper name and calling now of the Pope, amongst his adorers and followers: and doe you think the Pope know∣eth not, or affecteth not this his greatnes: obserue his pride (excuse me Pontifician reader) when he saith not priuate Masse himselfe, but is in his publike Chappel,When I saw these things, I was astoni∣shed, especially to obserue, the oscitancie of the purpured Fathers at that time, and their talking one with another, and you shall scarce euer see one Cardinall amongst them who heareth Masse deuout∣ly much like the Nuncio at Brussels, al∣though an Archbishop he must not kneele when he receiueth vpon any solemne feast the Sa∣crament his very God, he commeth from his Chaire of State downe to the Altar, and standeth close cheeke by cheeke to the Priest that celebrateth, (who also must then reuerence him) and when he receiueth of the Chalice, he must forsooth standing, haue a quill of siluer, and drinke as much as pleaseth him, out of the consecrated Chalice. O most foolish and apish foppery, what? must Popes needs shew their maiesties, in that place of the dreadfull
misteries? Not long since, when our Soueraigne came to the Crowne of England,Relation of a reuerēd Priest then in Rome. there was a deliberation had in Rome amongst the Cardinals, whether it were not meete to salute and congratulate his Maiestie with some humane and kind letters: it was resolued vpon, both by Pope, and most Cardinals, that it did not becomeSuch was the spirit of the Roman Clear∣gie in S. Ber∣nards time a∣gainst which he most vehe∣mently declai∣meth. lib. 4. c. 2. de consid. the Maiestie and greatnesse of the court of Rome, (for in the name of court the Romanes take more delight then in the name of Church, and in Rome it selfe few call it the Church, but the court of Rome and the Popes Pallacc, &c.) to condes∣cend so farre as to write first to his Maiestie. O inexpli∣cable pride! tell me Oye Romane Bishops, whose Vicars doe you challenge to be? not his, who suffered death, and all ignominie to saue soules? tell me, by what meanes haue you got your supremacies & dominions? not from Christian Kings, the most fruitfull sheepe of the Church? what? you care not belike for the sheepe hauing got the fleece? tel me, did not your selues often pretend, vainely to haue had conceits and hopefull expectations of his comming to your Church, and doubtlesse most hopefull your expecta∣tions might haue beene, and most effectuall for the refor∣mation of the Church, if you would haue had accepted, or woul yet accept of his most royall offer to haue had a free generall and vniuersall Councell, but God permitted it not, the sins of Rome and our sins crie vengeance. The abominations within the walles of your Temples, and the impurities within the walles of your Pallaces crie for the iust iudgement of God vpon yourEzech. 8. backes set against the Temple, and doubtlesse although Rome haue beene as aIeremie. 22. ring vpon the finger of God, yet for her impurities, ido∣latries, and abominations, she will be cast off as Iechonias was. Read 2. 3. 6. 7. 10. 22. 23. 44. of Ieremie, and then tell me, whether God will be so infallibly tyed to any Church, though of his owne appointing and establishing, so that if the same fall to wickednesse, and impietie, that he will not forsake the same, and cast her off.Ierem. 7. 11. Read also the
Epistle to the Romanes. These things considered, will the Rhemists denie, but that the Popes are adored in the Church? which is one of their owne markes of the man of sinne: neither can they denie, but that he hath vniuersall and immediate gouernment, in & ouer the whole Church, for so to affirme and beleeue, is the very essence, and soule of their profession, but by this onely they will excuse it and say, he hath it not tyrannically, and that he is not an Apo∣stata, nor a Renegate, out of the Church. Truly, if they should confesse so much, they might be well bought for fooles: and for them to say he is no Apostata, nor Re∣negate out of their Church it is a toy or a paradoxe, for he is their very Church and life thereof, therefore to say he should be an Apostata or a Renegate out of the Church were all one with this, to affirme that he is an Apostata from himselfe, but I must tell them that it is enough to make him a certaine Antichrist, the man of sinne, euen in their owne iudgements, to shew that he hath subuerted the gouernment instituted by Christ, applying by singular tiranny, and vsurpation all to himselfe; and I would in good earnest demaund of any friend of the Rhemists, what excellēt power or iurisdictiō is there, or can be in the church which the Pope hath not applied to himselfe? and so vni∣uersally, that whosoeuer in the Church hath any power or iurisdiction (both in the Popes, and in the Ignatians beleefe, and the purpled Fathers beleefe also, as Papa, &c. the Pope and the purpured Fathers Iudge the world. oquae. in respons▪ ad praemon. Regis. Coquaeus calleth them) it all commeth from the Pope, and is so de∣pendent from him, that at his pleasure without cause, va∣lidly and effectually, (although as some of them say not without sinne) he may take it from them: but at this pre∣sent sufficiently of this. I will heere adde somewhat how the Popes by taking away wholy, or else helping to take away the Romane Empire, doe shew themselues to be the men of sinne, and children of perdition, which were to come, at the taking away, and destruction of the said Empire according to the
prediction of 2. Thess 2. Saint Paul. To begin, that of the Apostle, (onely that which now holdeth hold, vntill it be taken out of the way) the Annotation vpon the se∣cond to the Thessal. 2. cap. Rhemists themselues, admit that some an∣cient Fathers expound of the Romane Empire (they might haue said, most of the August. 20 de ciuitate cap. 9. Hieron epist. ad Algas. q. 11. in Dan. & ad Ger∣onti▪ de mono¦gamia. Tertul. de resurrectione carnis. Ciril. Hieros. catech. 15 Chrysost. Amoro. Theoph. Primas. in 2. ad Thess. Bellar. lib. 3. de Pont. cap. 13. ancient Fathers, and haue called it the true exposition also) during the continuance of which in full state, God shall not permit Antichrist to come. Ob∣serue Christian reader, how with their owne weapons they pierce their owne sides. God shall not permit Antichrst to come, so long as the Romane Empire, or Emperour stan∣deth in his full state, thus they most truly, but to their own confusion: for in good earnest I demaund of any Rhemist, or of any Dowist in their behalfes, whether the Romane Emperour, or Empire is now, or hath beene a long time in former state or not? and if it be not, as most ma∣nifestly it is not (the named Emperour, being now one∣ly Soueraigne ouer Bohemia, and certaine small states and prouinces in Germany) then I demand again, who hath re∣moued him? doubtlesse Antichrist the man of sin, or the man of sinnes great precursor, and the outlawes forerun∣ner. Answer me in good earnest, is not soueraigntie, and an vnappellable supremacie in temporals, so essentiall, intrin∣secall, and substantiall to Imperiall state and dignitie, that the same being taken away, imperiall state and dignitie. is also taken away, who can denie it? agreeingly, who, that hath read any thing can denie, but the Romane Bishops haue taken this supremucie, and soueraigntie from the Ro∣mane Emperours? what doe not the Romane Emperours homage to the Popes at their Inaugurations? are they not then made by their oathes of fealty and liege seruice, ho∣mines Papae, the Popes men, as they are called? do they not at their inaugurations, Radeuike de gestis Frederi. renounce the royalties of Rome, and resigne them to the image of the beast, and promise neither to come to Rome, nor stay in Rome, without the Popes free allowance? Read the ceremoniall Booke in their inaugurations, and you will finde it so. Trust not the
Dowists, some of them (perhaps out of ignorance) will denie it: they that doubt of this truth, of which all histories make menttion, and the very obseruing of Romes gouern∣ment will shew it (where the Emperout hath as much so∣ueraigntie, and as many royalties and imperialties as the great Turke, or the French King hath) let them read Clement. 5. in cap de iureiy∣rando. Clement Popes decree, and Gratian. dist. 63. in his two papall Canons for this pur∣pose concer∣ning Empe∣rours fealties to Popes, and so expounded by their glo∣sers. Gratian, but for all others, most clearely their late zealous and religious historian, Onuphrius in vita Grego. 7. Auentihe. lib. 5. Annal. Boior. Hildebrandus, &c. subuerted the Ecclesia∣sticall state, & disturbed the kingdome of the Christian Empire as a whole Sinode of Bishops af∣firmed. apud Abbat. Vrs∣perg. ad annum. 1080. Onuphrius writing and pronouncing thus. Gregorij 7. decreto &c. by the decree of Gregory the 7, not onely the Emperour Henry the 4. but all the Latine and westerne Kings, to haue beene attempted, and violated, and after them also the Bishops, and the whole Cleargie of France, of Italy, and Germanie; the Maiestie also and dignitie of the Romane Empire, by the same ouerturned and euerted, and that (which was farre worse, such foundations were laid; by which, all the power of the said Empire was wea∣kened and beaten downe: thus he. Hearken Christian rea∣der to a truth manifest in it self, & ingenuously acknowled∣ged by Onuphrius here, the maiesty and dignitie of the Ro∣mane Empire euerted, by whom? by decree of Gregory the seuenth. Heare the euersion of all the Bishops of France Italy, and Germanie? by whom? by Gregory the seuenths decree: heare such foundations laid, by which all power of the Romane Empire was beaten downe; by what means? by the decree of Gregory the seuenth: what? was hee a Pope? yea a Pope who came presently after the thousand years when the Apoc. 20. deuil was to be let loose. This man there∣fore did take the Romane Emperours dignitie out of the way he did withall many prodigious wonders, and lying miracles as the Pontificians affirme of him, thereby making him a Saint: forgetting that according to Saint 2. Thess. 2. Pauls re∣uelation, the destroyer of the Empire, should in himselfe, and by his ministers worke many prodigies and wonders: for the Apostle writeth thus of him, that his comming should be in all power, and in all lying signes and wonders
(note the words, marke the mysteries) to the seduction of those who had not receiued the charity of truth, his mi∣racles and prodigies shall be See Saint Grego. in 2. ad Thess. 2 apud Paterus, where you shall finde that Father discoursing that the mira∣cles of the true Church in re∣spect of those of the man of sinne, and his seruants should be very few, for then the grace of doing miracles shold be taken from the Church. many mightie and great, to the seduction of the greatest part of the world, (for the greatest part receiue not the charitie of truth) yet lying, because appearing as true miracles: but are not: lying al∣so, because wrought for the supporting of errours and lies; lying, because wrought by the power of Satan parent of lies. Truly, the holy Ghost (see the concordancie of Scrip∣tures) most liuely describeth these manner of men in the reuelation vnder the horsemen that sate vpon the red, black and pale horses, to whom power was giuen to take peace from the earth: and by their hypocriticall lyes to deceiue the world: for since and when these Popes attempted the taking of the Romane Empire out of the way, to∣gether with their prodigious lies, and fabulous legends, they haue filled the whole world, with such rebellions, ciuill commotions, most dreadfull warres, and horrible impurities, suppositions, hipocrisies, that no man (whose eyes are not wilfully shut) can be ignorant, but that they were I doubt not to interprete thus, that as by the white horse Apoc. 6. Christ and all holy Church-Gouernours were signified, so also by the red, pale, and blacke horses, other wicked gouernours in the vsible state of the Church were designed. ibidem. the red, blacke, and pale horsemen, who were to take peace from the earth; and to set Christians together by the eares; vnder colour of preaching the Gospell of Christ: but in truth to preach the Papall Gospell of tem∣porall Monarchy and idolatrie. But such as haue the cha∣ritie of truth (that is, of Iesus Christ z) who is the onely way to life and truth) and doe wholy confide in his mer∣cies, and rest vpon the redemption and iustification in him, walking in good works; in which he hath ordained, com∣manded, and appointed them to walke in, shall not be se∣duced by these men; but will rather suffer many deaths for the testimony of Iesus, as a S. Iohn in his Reuelations hath foreprophecied of the last It is most eui∣dent that such as of later times haue beene put to death by the Pope and his, for that they would rest only for their saluation vpon the merits of Iesus, & would not a∣dore the Roman Images & Sacramētal God haue bene put to death for the testimo∣ny of Iesus, as of late  very credibly reported o a worthy Christian & English man M. Mold whom the Pope hath caused to be put to death for the testimony of Iesus. Martyrs of the Church.
But a little more of the taking away of the Romane Empire by the Popes: for I demaund, how can the pre∣sent pretended Romane Emperor, be stiled by the title, Ro∣manus Augustus, Imperator Augustus, and Emperour of Rome? who hath nothing at all to doe in Rome, not so much in sooth as the Ottamans of the East, who haue gotten the Empire of the East, and sit in the throne of Constantine, who was sometimes the Emperour Augustus of Rome: And doubtlesse, if the Alman Emperour, or King of Boheme, ought to haue Soueraignty and impe∣rialty in Rome, the Popes who keepe them from enioying of their rights, must needs be reputed tirants and vsurpers. Time was, when Dist. 10. cap. de capitibus. Leo the fourth Pope, acknowledged himselfe subiect to Lotharius Emperour (long after the time of Gregory the first, (who was also a faithfull subiect to Maurice not the best Emperour) and himselfe subiect to his lawes; and this subiection of Popes to the Romane Emperours continued a long while after Charles the Greats daies, Sigon. dereg∣no Italiae. lib. 4. Sigonius a Pontifician historian reporteth truly, that although Charles gaue the possession of Rome it selfe, and large territories thereabouts, to the Bishops of Rome, with the profits belonging to the same, notwith∣standing he kept the soueraigntie to himselfe and his suc∣cessors the Romane Emperours: but the Popes not content with the profits onely of such Seignories, by little and little haue encoached vpon their Seigniours, and what by their threatning letters, and excommunications, they, though at first were only Tenants haue driuen their Leige Lords from their rights. And it is worth obseruing, how the quarrell beganne betwixt Frederike the Emperour, and A∣drian Pope, The grie∣uous offences of Frederike the Emperour against the Pope, and the beginning of the holy quar∣rel of the Pope against the Emperour. Read the Epi∣stles of Frede∣rike the Empe∣rour, and A∣drian Pope to each other. for sooth Adrian taketh exception against the Emperour, for that in his letters to his sanctitie, he na∣meth himselfe first: againe, because the Emperour requi∣red that such Bishops as had any estates or Seignories of the Empire, should therefore sweare fealtie to him: for the signories the Pope agreed the Bishops should take, but
fealty they should not promise) thirdly because the Empe∣rour would not permit the Popes Legates freely to range vp & downe the Empire, to the spoiling of the Clergy, and the great scandal, generally of al the Churches of the same. Vpon these occasions the quarrell began; and good God, with what detestable, and dreadfull commotions was the whole Christian world ouerwhelmed, when Frederike came into Italy to challenge his Soueraignty ouer Rome, and other Cities of that countrey, who had rebelled against him? Some acknowledging the Popes for their Lords; o∣thers breathing after liberty; some neutrals; others adhe∣ring to their true Lord and Prince: by which occasion, the dreadful factions of Guelphes and Gibellines arose; GuelphesPlatin. in Bonif. 9. for the Popes, Gibellines for the Emperor: names fatall, to the Countrey of Italy, threatning the dreadfull & vtter ru∣ine thereof. But obserue, Courteous Reader, how iustly in the iudgement of God, the Roman Emperors were serued. First, Charles Martell, then Pipine: after, Charles the great, concurring to the rooting out of the Longobards frō Italy: (which Charles fully accomplished) whereas they should either haue compounded with the Emperour of the East, & haue restored to him those dominions which they took from the Longabards: (to him I say, to whom in right they belonged) contrariwise reseruing the regalty and soue∣raignty to themselues, they bestowed the possessions and profits vpon the Bishops of Rome, who kept them a while as good Tenants, but in Sigoniu lb. 12 . de  Fre∣deric Primi lib. 1. epst. Freer & A∣driani Pap. Adrians time they changing tenor, would hold them as Lords: whereupon that Pope sent word expresly to Frederike the Emperor, that he shold not after that time send any more messengers to Rome, without his consent: considering (said the Pope) that al the regalities and Magistracies in the City of Rome are S. Pe∣ters: so you see, by the profession, & a whole consent of the Cardinals, and the Pope, the Romane Empire begin∣ning to be done out of the way. Oh how true is that off Hieron. in 2. Daniel. Saint Hierome vpon Daniel? as nothing was stronger, then
the Roman Empire in the beginning, so nothing shall be weaker then it to wards the end thereof. It is here worthy obseruing, to consider the time when the Romane Bishops, more apparently began to vsurpe o∣uer, and powerfully to suppresse the Romane Emperour, to wit about the time, when the Diuell was to be let Apocal. 20. loose, which was bound for a thousand yeeres: for cleare it is, in all ancient records, and Sgn. lb. 7. de regno Italiae. See dist 10. can. de Capitibus. Sigonius hath it expresly, that the Popes had not the Soueraignty of Rome, till some time after the 973. yeere of Christ, for of that yeere and time thus he writeth. Illo tempore, Pontifex Romam, Rauennam &c. At that time, the Pope held Rome, Rauenna, and other dominions, by authority rather then Empire, or cōmand; for that the Cities, did acknowledge, the Pope as Prince of the comon wealth, but the King as their Soueraigne Lord, to whom they paid tributes, & yeelded their seruice. Thus he, in that yeere: but not long after the case was altered, and the Emperours stripped of their Soueraignty, This was fully compleated in Gregorie the 7. his time. since which time, it were a meer mockery, and Chymera, to call him Romane Emperour, who hath neither Soueraignty o∣uer Rome, nor any tributes, or seruices paid him and done him by any Romanes, or any acknowledgement of fealtie from the Pope, the Absolute Prince of the Romane state. and if Popes, when they tooke the Roman soueraignty out of the way, had also taken the names of Roman Emperors vpon them, the same their fact might haue beene inter∣preted, a change only of the state of the Empire, from one linage, or stocke to another, not the subuersion thereof: but it was Gods blessed will and holy pleasure, hee should compleatly at last destroy, the Emperours dignity and re∣gality, ouer Rome, & not assume the name of Romane Em∣perours, that so the man of sinne, might bee reuealed, (re∣uealed saith the Apostle, for his presence in the world, and the misticall working was long before hee was reuealed.) And so by those, who were indued with the 2 Thess. . Charity of truth might happily be auoided. And I doubt not, but that
since his regall dignity, hee hath stuck faster to his triple crowne he hath taken, then to his pastorall staffe: a Crowne he hath taken (taken I say) for it was neuer giuen him: as for a pastorall and Episcopall staffe, he hath none (preten∣ding by a fabulou tale, that Saint Peter sent it into Ger∣many) and this not vnmeetly; for what should he do with a spirituall shepheards staffe, who hath shaken off all shep∣heardly care, and hath plunged himselfe into all worldly solicitudes and cares for the enlarging of his Empire? This being so, and seeing it is euident, that the Romane Empire is taken out of the way, and onely a shadow or image ther∣of remaining in the Pope: I will aske of the Rhemists, or Dowists for them, whether that Antichrist the man of sin be as yet come or not? if he bee come, then I desire them to point me out some illustrious person, some Arrogant Bi∣shoppe, who sitting in the Church challengeth all rule, and Empire to himselfe, to iudge all, to bee iudged by none: who challengeth to bee honoured and worshipped as an earthly God, extolling himselfe aboue all things, that are called God, (marke what the 2. ad Thes. 2. Apostle saith, which is called God, not thus, which is God) again, shewing himself, as if he were a God, but not the true and onely God: for it is a meere imagination, that the Antichrist here described, shal make himselfe to be the very true God indeed: for he shall only by his tyrannicall, outlawish & Godlike behauiour, in vsurping, in commanding, doing & vndoing, in dispensing, & binding, against al lawes diuine and humane, heare him∣selfe, as if he were a God. Reade to this purpose Greg. in 2. ad Thes. 2. apud Paterium Ba∣ron. ad anno. 992. Saint Gre∣gory, and withall, the resolute verdict of Arnulphus, a French Prelate, cited by Barontus in his Annals. But, if the expositions of some learned Pontificians bee true, that Antiochus Epiphanes, (who adored the God Mazim, and despised the Gods of his Fathers) Antichrist was prefigured; then doubtlesse he shall worship some God.
And if the exposition of some other Pontificians take place that Dan. 11. Daniel in that Chapter prophecied of Anti∣christ himselfe, and that hee should worship the God Mao∣zim, who will gainsay it, and affirme that Antichrist shall worshipe no God? but here I desire the Reader, by the way to remember that of the word Maozim there is a treble interpretatio: by some it is interpreted (summi roboris or for∣titudinis) of greatest strength or fortitude: so that the God Maozim is the God of greatest power. I finde also that Ma∣ozim is interpreted (inhabitatio tabernaculi) in-dwelling of a Tabernacle (so the interpreter of the Hebrew wordes in the old Bibles of Saint Hieromes edition) it is interpre∣ted also (turris fortitudinis) a tower of fortitude or strength &c. by all which interpretations, fitly agreeing to the na∣ture of the word I leaue it to the Christian Reader, to iudge whether the God of the Tabernalces or Sacramentall tow∣ers, amongst the pontificians bee the God Maozam, God of Fortitude of which the Prophet foretold, that Antichrist should worship. One thinge I meruaile at, why the interpre∣ter of the Hebrew wordes, in the last editions of the bibles, interpret not this word (Maozim) which is so greatly to the purpose for one side or other: as for my parte, I will ab∣solutely iudge nothinge of these interpretations: Iesus Chrisi vouchsafe to open our eyes that we may both, see his truth and imbrace it, and beware that wee worshippe not falselie and idolatrouslie any false God in Turrets or Ta∣bernacles. The Romane Empire, thus dissipated and ouerthrowne and dissolued into diuers Kingdomes; accordinge as it was prophecied by Daniel 2. Daniel. The Popes still by their vndermining indirect power, and by the earnest defenders of the same the Ignatians and other fauourites doe strongly endeauor to bringe all Kingdomes of the world vnder their command; wherin hee vseth the spirituall power, as hee
would seeme, of the lambe, pretending to proceed onely a∣gainst Kings and Kingdoms in holy Churches necessity, and for the temporall quietnesse, and necessary safety of com∣mon weales, but not, for that he aymeth at any profit ther∣by, but onely to reduce them to holy Churches obedience; Wherein, for my part, I giue no more credit, vnto such a saying, then I did to the great Admiral of Spaine some 16. yeares agoe, who (in my hearing) affirmed, that his Philip the 2. King of Spain. Ma∣ster the King of Spaine, sent not the great Armado in 88. so much to make a conquest of England, as to conuert it to the Church, and to make it a friend; for my Master the King, (said he) hath already, so many Kingdomes, that hee is scarce able to gouern them with peace and content; and surely, the proceedings of Pandulph Legat, with King Iohn do liuely demonstrate, what the Popes ayme at, when they presume to correct Princes, and dispose of Kingdomes, our Historians will tell vs, that it was not inough to haue the kingdome to be (idlye) made feudatary by that King to the Pope but also there must be yeerely summes, sent vp to Rome in token of this subiection. Doubtlesse, Platina in vi∣ta Paschalis. 2. Paschal the second; was well acquainted, what Popes aymed at by their direct and indirect powers, when at his installing a mysticall girdle with seuen keyes & seuen seales hanging at it was put about him. I haue spoken sufficiently against this indirect power in my booke vpon the oath of Allegeance; which as yet I see no otherwise answered, then, by a libell; from some of the wise mens punies of Saint Omers, (as is reported) who esteeme the same, a sufficient answere to it: doubtlesse (des∣perata causa) theire cause is desperate, beeing growne to libelling. But alasse, that is too too common with them: for what booke almost commeth from them with any nameq Iohn 3. or any more insinuation of the Author; then with N. D. H. I. or some two like letters? the truth is they are asha∣med or afraid of their Gospell, and therefore as children of darknesse they deale so couertly, and will not come to the
light because they feare reproouing, yet before I leaue this matter, I will set downe, a sentence or two, out of two of the Pontificians bookes, by the which the Curteous Rea∣der may gather, to what their indirect power of Popes ten∣deth. Heare their Coquae. pa. 170. Coquaeus, in his most seitious booke, against his Maiesties Premonition to Christian Princes, thundering rather against our Soueraignes Person (whom he reputeth a notorious Heretike) and his Kingdome, ra∣ther then against his Doctrine, Si autem crimen haeresees sit notorium et publicum &c. But if the crime of heresie (saith he) be notorious or publike, in a Prince; Was not this Catsbyes athei∣stical position, on which, the powdermine of the Ignatiās and the Igna∣tianed was grounded? the subiects may lawfullie before any declaratiue sentence of the crime, if they haue strength, withdraw themselues from the obedi∣ence of such a Prince: for euident notice of such a fact, is insteed of a sentence. Whereas therefore, the crime of Here∣sie is notorious in the King of England, so that by no ter∣giuersation it can be auoided, it is certaine, that neither, for the forme of the Oathe, nor for any respect of the person, to whom the Oath is made, that his subiects are bound there∣with. Thus the most seditious Coquaeus: but if I should heereto adioyne, how in his 48. or 49. page, hee in the like case of notorious crime of heresie: approueth the murthe∣ring of Princes, (non expectata sententia Iudicis) no sen∣tence of any Iudge expected, and endeuoureth also most prophanely to proue the same out of Deut. cap. 13. holy Scripture, I should make the moderate Pontificians admire, to thinke what manner of seditious ministers the Pope hath & vseth to set vp his indirect monarchy, but I protest that such doctrine is in him, which I dare not, for my duty, to Prince and Country, once mention, otherwise then by way of de∣testation: yet this Coquaeus is a great man and a holy con∣fessor in Florence; and his vnlearned (though most seditious booke) must for sooth be both printed and published for the producing (God auert it) of new Catsbyes, and Piercies. God inspire into the hearts of the Magistrates of this king∣dome that as they be vigilant, so they may euer continue
against such bookes; which tend only to the subuersion of this state, and all other of like condition. Alasse the Ignati∣ans, and Ignatianed, will haue them though vtter ruines of whole families should insue thereupon. There was one Philopater, Robert Parsons by name, who if in that booke which he so named had loued his Country as wel as the Pope his holy Father (or else the fathers of his order) would haue Titulo libri. called himselfe by  (or such like name a louer of his Country) not  a louer of his Father or Fathers: for Philopater signifieth, so much, but (pardon the good old man he was no Grecian but on∣ly desned a Greeke, and a strange name, as hauing abando∣ned the natiue affection of his Country,) This man in his Philopater Sect. 2. Philopater, deliuereth not welnye, as strange doctrine as Coquaeus, but in some respect far worse; because he maketh his Doctrine an article of faith: and by consequence, al the Pontificians of England; that beleeue him (ipso facto) are traitors, and such as beleeue not, heretikes. Hinc etiam in∣fert, vniuersa theologorum &c. Heereupon saith hee, the whole schoole of Diuines and Ecclesiasticall lawyers (to wit Canonists) inferre, and it is certaine, and of Faith, any Christian Prince, whatsoeuer, if he shall manifestly declinePosscuine in his biblioth: wold faine cast this booke from Parsons and lay it vpon. D. Sta∣pleton doubtles tis the brood of a paire of Fathers. from the Catholike (that is in his sense the Romane) reli∣gion, and shall draw and call others from the same, pre∣sently thereupon, by the very force of law both diuine and humane; to loose all power and dignity, and this, before a∣ny sentence, of the supreme pastour, and Iudge giuen, or pronounced against him; and all, subiects, whatsoeuer, to be free from all obligation of oath, which they had made to him of obedience, as to their lawfull Prince, and that they may and ought (if they haue strength) to cast out such a manner of man, as an Apostata, and Heretike, and a forsa∣ker of Christ our Lord, and as an Enemy of the Common∣wealth, out from all rule of Christian men. Thus farre that Pseudophilopater in his Ignatian saith. What true English heart, is not awaked with such a seditious sound? and doe
you thinke O yee loyall Britaines and faithfull of Iesus: that his brethren the Ignatians, haue not the same Doctrine, they haue it, they haue it, beleeue me, and they teach it also, where they sind ground conuenient and fit for such sediti∣ous seede. In Rome it was taught in effect as very proba∣ble aboue 16. yeeres since, when I my selfe refused, in open schoole to receiue & write any such doctrine. But I leaue to stirre this filthy sinke any longer. I humbly beseech Iesus Christ to vouchsafe to illustrate the eies of such, who haue often told me, that if they thought, the Ignatians did teach such Doctrine, as I haue heere, expresly and truly deliuered out of Pbilopater, they would little regard them in other things. So it is (Christian Reader) that these most egregious Equiuocaters doe not deliuer This doctrin is not the milk but the solid meate of the Ignatians easi∣ly swallowed by those, as are inclining to the impious doctrine of the damned crew; of which was Catsby &c. Another Priest was in like sort denyed abso∣lution for the same cause of the Oath by an Ignatianed Priest; who not withstanding easily absolued and admitted to the dredfull Sacramēt one who often fell into the sin of Bestiality: and to deny abso∣lution for al∣lowing or ta∣king the Oath of Allegiance, is the ordinary practise of all Ignatiā Priests in this land, & almost of all o∣her' excepting some few ho∣nest loyall & lerned Priests, who are therefore extreamly hated and auoided as Spyes by the Ignatians. this doctrine, but to their Priuates, and old acquaintance; which maketh many mo∣derate recusants to suspect that they are vniustly charged with such seditious & hereticall doctrine as this: is but such as my selfe who haue conuersed too long with them, know assuredly, that they teach both this doctrine, yea some of them as badde as the very worst of Coquaeus which I onely glanced at aboue in this Motiue. And that they are in this matter egregiously equiuocaters, vnderstād by this, within these 3. yeers & lesse, * A principall Ignatian amongst them denied, me absolution, and to take my confession. (I protest before the heauens I lye not, neither do Iagrauate against them) because forsooth I onely held this generall position that the Pope could not cause & authorize subiects to de∣pose their lawfull Princes: and yet this man, who dealt thus with me, and who (as I know) taught this doctrine both at his residence, and in other places, that the Pope might de∣pose princes, and depriue them of their kingdomes: yet in some other places and before some persons, would speake very coldly therof, yea and he seemed to deny it in that ve∣ry house where he so dealt with me, where also hee refused not, to admit a notorious cōcubiner to both the sacramēts.
The fifth Motiue. THe fifth motiue, is theire most pernicious, impious doctrine concerning the adoration and worshipping of Images with the same worship, and adoration, wherewith the Persons themselues, wherof they are Images are adored, saue only, that the per∣sons are adored and worshipped without any extrinsecall respect, (and onely for the intrinsecall dignitie which is in them) but the Images are adored and worshipped for the dignitie and excellency of the persons, which they represent, This doctrine is deliuered, by the English Priests, and Ignatians very Bell. l. 2. de imag. 22. fearefully, nicely and min∣cingly, and therefore I finde that many deuout people of this kingdome, haue not yet perfectly drunke of the impu∣ritie of this cup; but it is the most expresse, & selfe doctrine taught by the most Pontificians and learnedest Ignatians in their schooles, and bookes (they are onely wary in re∣spect of scandal, how they preach it in their pulpits) taught 3. q. 25. art. 3. Councell of Trent as it is expounded by Vasq. lib. de ado∣rat. 2. Suares. Tom. 1. disput. 54 Nauar. in ma∣nual. cap. 31. Num. 32. yea Vasq. apud Eu∣daem. in parralel pag. 292. tea∣cheth that a man may wor∣ship God with a sincere faith in a stonc, or by a stone. He teacheth also that a mā may worship God by the deuils sub∣stance (as he is cited by Eudaemon) l. 3. numer 31. Caieta. in 3. q. 25. art. 3. Azor institut. lib. 9. cap. 6. Ʋalentia. lib. 2 de idololat. cap. 7. Bananent. Albertus. Richar in. 3. dist. 9. ali poene omnes. by Thomas Aquinas their Angelicall Doctor: by the ve∣ry Councell of Trent as Suares and Ʋasquez expound it, of diuine adoration of Images, and other Ignatian Rea∣ders of diuinitie at Rome, as I haue often heard. It is the most expresse doctrine of rheir famous Casuist Nauarre, and almost all their Summists, of Valentia, wherein he is most vehement, of Ʋasquez who as Eudaemon citeth him, teacheth that a man may worship God with a sincere faith, (per lapidem vel in lapide) by a stone, or in a stone, and if I forget not, he affirmeth that a man may sincerely worship God in and by the Diuels substance. u Bellarmine would seeme to haue an opinion and explication by himselfe, but wherein he would seeme to differ, he affirmeth as badly, if not farre worse, then others doe, he would haue for∣sooth, the prototipon, or person to be worshiped directly,
and (per se) for it selfe, or by it selfe: but the Image, (per accidens) accidentally and indirectly, as it is considered and vsed as an actuall representation of the Prototipon: by which doctrine hee composeth in truth a certaine Idol of Christs Images, and the Images of Saints with their persons making of them and their Images one obiect of adoration: Valentia. lib. 2. de Iodol. cap. 7. Valentia seemeth in this doctrine to be impudent, persons for the good Ignatian will not sticke to affirme, that diuine worship & honour, may and must be giuen directly, & per se to the Images, so it be not giuen to thē as to Gods thēselues and so (saith he) it is not Idolatrie, (O curuam animam:) O earthly and crooked soule: It were impertinēt to cite. Au∣thors for this purpose, it is generally by them all most ex∣presly affirmed: by famous Cardinall Palliotto; and Azo∣rius the Ignatian (my master in Rome) deliuereth Azorius. lib. 9. institut. cap. 6. that it is generally the doctrine of all their doctors, that Images are to be adored and worshipped with the very worship of the Persons which they represent, for the Persōs sake. But I here protest before God, that as often as I haue read this do∣ctrine in the Pontifician doctours, yet I neuer receiued it, and euer I haue perswaded my acquaintance neither to be∣leeue it, nor to practise it (and therefore as I hope I haue the sooner found mercy:) but yet I am blame-worthy, that I would so long continue in communion with such impious and most abominable Idolaters, yea, and also sometimes do some externall worship before Images, but my inten∣tion was euer caried from the Images to God and his Saints. I call this doctrine of adoration of Images, most impious and abominable, because most expresly, against the sacred Deut. 4. Exod. 20. Sapi. 14. ad Rom. 1. Epist. Ioh. 1. cap. 4. Isai, Ierem. Ba∣ruch. Psalm. saepissime. word of God, and his second eternall com∣maundement of the decalogue which they curtalled and mamed, doe deliuer in their Catechismes, because they would not haue ther ignominie discouered: it is also a∣against the authoritie of all ancient Fathers whatsoeuer (and I challenge all the adorers and worshippers of Ima∣ges, to produce but one authenticall sentence ont of some
ancient Doctor of the Church for their adoration and wor∣ship.) They that will vnderstand what the ancient Church did beleeue concerning the adoration of Images, may read Saint August. in Psal. 113. epist. 119. & 59 Ter∣tul. lib. de idolo∣latria soepe. Amb deebitu Theodosij in epist. ad Va∣lentinian. 31. non ult. se deus in lapidibus coli, God will not be worshipped in stones. Et in epist. D. Pau. ad Eph. And in his comment vpon the Epistle to to the Romans by what rea∣son, or by what authority may the Ima∣ges of Saints or Angels be adored, when as the Angels and Saints would not suf∣fer themselues to be adored? Lactant sapissi∣me. Hieron. m 2. Dani Minutius Felix. in Octauio alii omnes. Austen with other Fathers, fully and cleare∣ly pronouncing against the adoring of such creatures. The Councel of Frankford consisting of all the Bishops of the West, assembled in the time of Charles the Great, against the Nicene Speudosinode vnder Constantine and Iraenes, where the adoration, and worshipping of Images (al∣though not so abhominably as is now taught by the Pon∣tificians & Ignatians) was decreed, vtterly condemned, and detested the adoration of Images. But it is a world to see, how Bellar lib. 2 de imag. cap. 14. Bellarmine endeuours to shift of the authoritie of this Councell of Frankford, which sometimes hee would gladly haue o be counterfaite, sometimes he endeuoreth to say, that the Fathers at Frankford did not condemne the second Nicence Councell, which commanded the ado∣ration of Images, but another Councel of Constantinople, which consisting of almost al the Bishops of the East, did command the abolishing of all Images, in respect of the horrible abuses committed in the worshipping of them (the which Councell ought to take place, as being both before, and as frequent an assembly of Easterne Prelates, as that of Nice was) but it is too too apparant in the Councell of Liber Caroli magni prafat. See Roger Houe den continuat. Bedae. anno. 792. & Regino adann. 594. Hinma. Archbishop of Rhemes in his Epistle against Hinmar. of Laoun affirmeth as much. clonas Episc. Aurelan. lib de cultu Imag. Abbas Vrsper. Also testifieth as much, although the word Constanti∣nople be foisted into his Historic Chron. 793. Frankford, that they condemned that Ea∣sterne Councell of Nice in expresse termes, which had commanded the adoration of Images, and therefore the Fathers, with ioynt voyce concurring, pronounced that al∣though sacred Images, were to be kept, yet notwithstan∣ding they would not adore or worship them, least by so doing they should make c Idols of them. Obserue Chri∣stian reader, the cunning impietie of the Pontificians: God hauing proclaimed in the institution of his law by
Moses in the second commaundement against the ado∣ration and worshipping of any Images of any thing in heauen aboue, or in the earth beneath, yea and of him∣selfe, as is there most perspicuously deliuered according to the exposition of the ancientOrigen. contra Celsum. lib. 4. Damasc. de or∣thod. fide. lib. 4. cap. 17. Theod. in Deuteron. q. 1 Sinod. Nicen. 2. Act. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. August. de fide & Simbol. c. 7. Nicet. lib. de imaginibus. A∣bulensis in 4. Deutron. Lira. Arnobius contra gentes. lib. 8. Omnes antiqui & ex recentio∣ribus quamplu. res. Fathers, and their owne best later doctours they haue to blinde the eyes of the simple, depriued them in their Catechismes, of the second com∣maundement, yet because they must deliuer a decalogue of Gods commaundements, ten in number, they haue diui∣ded the last (as hauing most words in it) into two, in which diuision, although they pretend Saint Austen for them, yet the whole streame of orher Fathers (some doubt is onely made of Dionise of Alexandria) is against them, therein who all otherwise deliuer and expound the same: I vrge them not so much for their diuision, as for that they being so continually reproued, for this their abuse, yet they will not Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any grauen thing, nor the like∣nesse of any thing that is in heauen aboue, or the earth beneath, thou shalt not bow downe to thē, nor worship them, for I thy Lord God am a iealous God, &c. set these words downe in their Catechismes, at least as a part of the first commaundement, that such simple per∣sons as by them are forbidden to read the Scriptures, might at least be instructed, the law of God in their Catechismes: who conceiueth not, what is the cause of this? truly their horrible and Paganish abuse of making and worshipping Gods pictures, which they would not haue discouered to the simple and ingenuous Papist. But, how doe these prophane Pagane Philosophers, (Diuines and Christians I dare not herein cal them) defend themselues from the sinne of Idolatrie? Iustly asDio. Chrisost. or at. 12. de pri∣ma dei cognit. maxi. Tir. serm. 38. Lamprid. in Alexand. see Austen. in Fsal. 113. Dio, Chrisostomus, Maximus, Ty∣rius, Mercurius, Trismegistus, Lampridius, and other hea∣thenish Philosophers did defend themselues against the ancient Christians, obiecting vnto them idolatrie, in their Image and Idoll-worshipping, (an Idoll and an Image adored is all one.) For as they said, summum primum maxi∣mum &c. We worship and adore the chiefest, first, grea∣test God, creator of all things, and conseruer of all things, in and by the Images of gold, siluer, and ebonie: not as though they did beleeue those Images to be God himselfe,
but the representations onely of him: euen so, do our Pon∣tificians excuse themselues. The Tridentine Fathers in their Catechis. Tri∣dent. in expos. primi praecepti. See Ferus in 17 Act. Apost. Caie∣tan. in 3. q. 25. art 3. Catechisme, doe seeme to acknowledge, that the wisest Ethniks did set diuers of their Images to represent the true God, and that the Iewes also did by their golden Calfe, which they worshipped, represent the true God of Israel: which also most clearly agreeth with holy Scripture, where Aaron saith, that theExod. 32. feast which he appointed (hauing dedicated an Altar for the golden Calfe) was a feast institu∣ted to Iehona: the same also was done, and professed to be done, by Micheas his mother,Iudg. 17. who protested of the siluer, whereof she had made her Idoll, she had sanctified it to Iehonah. And truly it is a matter so cleare in the old Panims that there is scarce any ancientEusebius in l. b. de praeparat. Euang. soepe, Var ro apud August. de ciuit. lib. 7. & Sceuola apud eundem ibidem. lib. 4. Plato in Phoedon. Iudaei. in Egypto apud Ierem. cap. 44. Historian with Eusebius, who deliuereth not their Pontificianlike excuses for their adorations of Images, when the anciēt Christians obiected Idolatry to them. So these men, Vasques, Cajetane, Paliot, Nauar, Zuares, Valentia acknowledge, that they giue diuine honour to the Images of Christ, but they commit not idolatrie, forsooth, because they do not giue their wor∣ship to Images as to Gods; or for that they beleeue any diuinitie to be in them: but this their excuse maketh them more inexcusable, asIonas Aurel. lib. de cultu imagin. Ionas, Aurelianēsis worthily sheweth, because, not esteeming them as Gods, nor beleeuing any diuinitie to be in them, yet notwithstanding they yeeld vn∣to them the same worship, as to God himselfe, for Gods sake and respect. (O ye heauens be astonished) they bow, they adore prostrate, groueling vpon the ground, to dead Images, senselesse papers, blockes; they burne incense, lights, and candles to the same; and yet forsooth they must not be called Idolaters, because they worship God, with the Images, and all the worship they giue to the Images is for his sake. (O most crooked, metaphisicall conceits,) Heathenish Philosophie is the parent of most blasphemous idolatrie, which is so generally obserued amongst you that there is no Church, no Chappell, nor priuate Ora∣torie,
where you commit not these idolatrous fornications. I remember how conformely to this their idolatrous di∣uinitie, the famous IgnatianValent. lib. 2. de Idolatria. cap. 7. Valentia writeth, whose say∣ing I could neuer read without astonishment: thus it is: Neque absurde profecto putaueres, B. Petrum, &c. Neither shalt thou absurdly thinke, blessed1. Pet. 4. Peter, to haue insi∣nuated some worship of (simulachrorum) grauen things, (to wit, sacred Images) to be lawfull, when as he would by name dehort the faithfull from the vnlawfull worships (Idolorum) of Idols: for whatSee how this doctrine of Va∣lentia agreeth with sacred Scripture. 1. ad Corinth. 12. Act. 7. & 15. 1. Ioh. 5 where the La∣tine word fimu∣lachrum is vsed for Images worshipped, that is, for I∣dols. needed he, so deter∣minately to note vnlawfull worshippes (simulachrorum) of grauen things, Images, or Idols; if he had altogether iudged, no worships (fimulachrorum) of Images, or gra∣uen things lawfull? Thus farre most absurdly their Morish and Pagane Valentia: alas Christian Reader, into what extremicie are these men driuen, when they will thus de∣praue Scripture, to maintaine their superstitious kinde of image- atrie or Idolatrie to be lawfull? Their owne con∣sciences tell them, that traditions they haue none, (if they haue, I challenge them to produce them)Grego. epist 111. lib. 7. & ep. 9. lib. 9. Saint Grego∣rie the first hath Traditions for them. I wish them to read him; and when they shall haue read him, I giue them leaue to adore Images if they regard his authoritie: I aske them also what tradition SaintAugust. in Psal. 113. epist. 119. alias soepe in lib. de ciuitate dei. Austen deliuereth, com∣menting vpon the Psalmes, and writing to Ianuarius, who in the later place hath this saying: Precepto primo pro∣hiberi, ne quis colat vllam imaginem Dei, nisi vnam candem, cum ipso, videlicet Christum: It is forbidden (saith he) by the first commaundement, that any man worship any I∣mage of God himselfe, but one and the same with himselfe, to wit Christ: and heere you see by the way, Saint Austens diuision of the tenne commaundements, maketh nothing for them, whose doctrine is so expresse against all adoration of the Images of God himselfe, as nothing can be clearer, but belike they will expound him with all the aunci∣ent Farhers, forbidding the worshipping of Images; to
wit, that they must not be worshipped as Gods themselnes, but may be worshipped for Gods sake, with diuine honour. So most vainly, the vaine Ignatian Valentia answereth, and Cardinall Bellarmine the RomaneCardin. Bellar. lib. 2. de Ecclesia triumph: wri∣teth thus, Si imagi, &c. If the same wor∣ship be giuen to an Image which is giuen to God, the creature is worshipped a∣like with God, which certain∣ly is Idolatrie: for idolatrie is not onely whē an Idol is wor∣shipped, & God is forsaken, but also when an Idol is wor∣shipped toge∣ther with God: thus Bellarmin: by which it is cleare, that by his own iudge∣ment he is an Idolater gi∣uing the same worship to the Image of God for Gods sake as to God himselfe. pillar for Idolatrie. But I demaund in good earnest of these Pontificians, whether Carpocrates, who worshipped the Images of Christ, with incense and adoration; and Alexander Seuerus the wise and learned Emperour, who also worshipped the Images of Christ and Abraham, with those of some Philoso∣phers, whether they reputed those pictures of Christ, to be Christ himselfe? can they be so shamelesse, as to say it, of such intelligent persons? and yet was not Alexander, repu∣ted an Idolater? and Carpocrates by SaintAugust. de haeres. cap. 7. Epiphan. haeres. 27. Irene. lib. 1. cap. 24. Austen ac∣counted an heretike, for maintaining such worshippes of Images, for the holy persons sake, which they represen∣ted; and what may, and must we esteeme of such, who are obstinate and pertinacious approuers of their doctrine herein? what else, but account them idolatrous heretikes, and auoid them as Carpocratians. And surely whenso∣euer the ancient Fathers and Scriptures do seeme to attri∣bute to the heathens, that they esteemed their statues, and Images for Gods, they are to be vnderstood (interpretatiue) by interpretation, (to wit) because by their honours of a∣dorations, incenses, sacrificing and such like, done at and before the presence of their statues, and to them for the Gods sakes which they did represent; they were by the same adorations interpreted to make the very statues and Images their Gods (like as now the Pontifician Images are called by many, the Papists Gods) for otherwise it is most cleare in allSee Eusebius lib. 2. 3. & 4. de preparat; Euang. August. in Psal. 113. de ciuit. lib. 8. cap. 26. & alibi soepe Diodor. Sicul. lib. 16. Pausan. in Aread. & alij, agree∣ingly to sacred Scripture. Sap. 13. & 14. ad Rom. 1. ancient records, that the wiser heathens, did not beleeue the very massie statues, and other pictures of their Gods, to be the very Gods themselues; for al∣though they did thinke that in some of their principall sta∣tues,
where the deuill gaue Oracles sometimes, that there dwelt some spiritual powers, in them, yet most commonly, and for most part they protested of all other their Images, and statues, that they were but representations of the Gods which they worshipped; as of the Sunne and Moone, which the Egyptians worshipped, and as the Iewes in Taphnis in Egypt, sacrificed to the Queene of heauen, for which Ie∣remie so grieuously reproued thē. Iere. 44. And truly, this their diuinitie for adoration of Images, in respect of their representing, doth quite ouerthrow all such Such argu∣ments are vsed by Bellarmine, Heskins Harding Coccius, out of S. Austen. Epist. 118. & in Psal. Areopag. de Hie rarch. lib 3. Op. tatus. lib. 6. Chri∣sost. Homil. 24. in 1. ad Corinth. Ciril. Catech▪ mistag. arguments as are brought by their diuines, for transubstantiation and reall presence of Christ in the Sacrament out of those Fa∣thers who (as they pretend) say, that the Sacrament, it selfe is to be adored with diuine worship and adoration: for if diuine adoration and worship may be giuen to the pictures of Christ, and God the Father, because they doe represent their most excellent & diuine persons: why may not those dreadfull misteries of bread and wine, instituted by Christ, to put vs in mind by reuerend and religious vse of the same, of his death and passion, and of himselfe hanging vpon the Crosse, (by which also the worthie receiuers haue a true and reall communion and participation of Christs bodie and bloud, and a reall communication of the infinite me∣rits of Christs death and passion) be, for such their effe∣ctuall representation, remembrance, and liuely signifi∣cation of Christ himselfe, agreeingly to their diuinitie, adored and worshipped with diuine worshippe? not because they are by consubstantiation as the Lutherans, or impanation as Rupertus and some others, or transubstan∣tiation as the Lateranistes, really and carnally, the very bodie and bloud of Christ, or Christ himselfe: but be∣cause they were by Christ himselfe instituted, as most liuely Images of himselfe, crucified and dead for man∣kinde? a farre more holy dedication, than the de∣dications of the Images of Sichem, Mount Serratto, Loretto, &c.
A diuersity and difference heerein I demand; the which, because it cannot be shewed, downe to the ground, fall, all their pretended Authorities, for Adoration of the Sacra∣ment it selfe, to proue their pretended reall carnall pre∣sence, and nouell transubstantiation; to their no small losse. For the mystery of the Masse, is one of the gainefullest traf∣ficks, they doe vse: as in like sort, not a little profitable is the adoration, and worshipping of images, which causeth such a confluence of gifts at Loretto, nostre Dame de Hall, and at Sichem &c. A great inducement, doubtlesse, to ma∣ny, to vphold with their vtmost power such like worships, both there and in many other places. When I my selfe was last at Sichem, some yeere since, I was with my admiration informed by a Reuerend Priest of that place, that there was very small credit to be giuen to the wonders, that were re∣ported of that Image; before which I saw such adorations, prostrations, inuocations, that as in some I suspected super∣stition, so in others I lamented their indiscreetly zealous ignorance, and many their vnprofitable offerings. At Flo∣rence, in a field, hard without the City, some sixteene yeers since, I my selfe, saw before another like Image, of the bles∣sed Virgin, such inuocations, Implorations, Oblations, of all sorts, not without my astonishment, that I was in consci∣ence affrighted, to be present at such their superstitious de∣uotions (and yet I my selfe, at that time was in heart, most strongly addicted to the present Romane Church & Faith) but when I consider the superstitious confidence, that was then and is still put in that image, I doe not meruaile that neas siluius. lib. 2. Comment. editorum a Io∣hāne Gobello. Aeneas Siluius (afterwards called Pius the second Pope) deliuereth in his Commentaries, how the Florentines, with other People there abouts doe (mira religione venerari eam imaginem) with wonderfull religion, worship that Image, esteeming the same, (beneficam pluuiae donatricem) the libe∣rall and bountifull giuer of raine; and therefore many re∣ligious pilgrimages, are made vnto it, by those superstitious people, to the great profite of the Priests of that place. If
I had not seene these things I should haue hardly beleeued this Pope reporting them. Not many yeeres since, there was a certaine peece of wood, of the tree, where the Image of Sichem stood, which being framed into a picture, and representing the image of Sichem, was at Saint Omers by the Bishop of that City, superstitiously dedicated and set vp to bee adored in the French Ignatians Church, with such often incensings, ado∣rings, bowings, prostratings, lifting vp of hands, that truly it might iustly be meruailed, how Gods vengeance, did not fall vpon such impudent Idolaters, or the earth not open & swallow them vp: but great was the commodity and pro∣fit which thereby redounded to the Ignatians: and there∣fore the rather such contemptible creatures may and ought to bee honoured with diuine worship, though they haue neither tradition, Scripture, nor Ancient Father to iustifie their proceeding herein. The Clerke of a poore Church,A pretty prank of a Saint O∣meristiā Clark. in that City obseruing, what immense profite, came to the Ignatians there by, to bring some commodity to his poore neglected Church, deuiseth a prety pranke for that purpose. He cunningly and secretly remoueth a picture of the bles∣sed Virgin, from an obscure place, in which it stood, into a more eminent, and principall place of the same Church, making and giuing out, as though the blessed Virgins pi∣cture, discontented with her former standing, had remoued it selfe, to a place, fitter for adoration, and worship. This picture was by some superstitious people presently admi∣red, and frequented, and the miracle by the Bishop and the Ignatians also defended as probable; considering, said the wise men of S. Omers, the dayly wondrous operations of the Images at Sichem, and Loretto: but the Estcheuines, and Magistrates of the Citie, suspecting some legerdemaine, very shortly by great diligence found the knauery, and ac∣cording to his deserts, caused the vilanous Clerke to be pu∣nished. But heere I obserue how easily the superstitious Bi∣shop and Ignatians, might haue beene seduced, and how
credulous they are in such things. Like credulity, was ob∣serued certain yeers since, in the learned and Peerelesse V∣niuersitie of Doway, where in a certaine small and poore Chappell, was the picture of the blessed Virgin Ma∣ry, as lying in Childebedde after trauaile (such foppe∣ries were permitted in that famous Vniuersity) the which also, was with a linnen veile couered, as the fashion is for women lying in Childbed: this image, vpon a certain time to some deuout and simple women which came to suppli∣cate for happy deliuerance, seemed to moue, and stirre it selfe: the report whereof, flew vp and downe the City, as if the Virgin her selfe had beene come downe to lye in child∣bed againe. This report caused admiration, amongst the Dowists: admiration, caused great deuotion; deuotion, fre∣quentation to the picture: frequentation a necessary pur∣pose to remoue the picture, and to place it in some more capable Church or Chappell: the remoouall wherof, being attempted; those Masons who went about it, insteed of the Mother of Clemency, and Virgin Mary, felt the wrathfull vengeance of the iust Iudge; for one of them was with stones that fell downe vpon him, presently slaine, the se∣cond wounded, and the third very hardly escaped. Tormen∣t a paucorum, exempla sunt omnium, the Torments of a few are examples for many. But 2. ad Corin. 2. the God of this world hath so blinded the eies of these men, that seeing these things, they see them not, but still most eagerly, giue themselues to beleeue lies; doubtlesse these are the times of which Greg. apud Pa∣terium. expos. in 2. ad Thessal. 2. S. Gregory so liuely discourseth, shewing that Antichrist, and his Ministers, shall work so many lying prodigies and won∣ders, that all which the true Church shall doe, in compari∣son of them shall seeme nothing at all. But to proceed, although this Adoration, and worship∣ping of creatures in this sort, be most inexcusable, yet more inexcuseable is their inuocation of the pictures, & crosse it selfe. I doe not heere impute this error, to the learned, who are acquainted, with the figure of Prosopopeia, taking one
person for another, and inuocating one, in steed of another but in respect of the simple, and ignorant; for how can they without manifest danger of idolatry, vnderstand that inuo∣cation of the Crosse it selfe, (O crux Aue, &c.) All haile O Crosse, theIn passion weeke the crosse or cruci∣fixe is the only hope, but at o∣ther times whē Salue regina is song the bles∣sed Virgin is their hope and life also. It is not imagi∣nable what like abuses of prayers were vsed in the old time deuised by the super∣stitious monks. onely hope in this time of Passion, increase iu∣stice to the pious, giue pardon to the guilty? And how can they vnderstand, that the Crosse should increase Iustice, giue pardon? But there is a praier to be made to the face it selfe of Veronica, to the deuout rehearsing of which Iohn the 22. Pope gaue Indulgences of a thousand yeares as it is expressed in a booke intituled Antidotary of the soule. This praier cannot be excused by the figure of Pro∣sopopey by one person being taken for another: for the prai∣er is directly made to the corruptible figure; that it would bring the suppliant to the incorruptible face. Thus it is in meeter. Salue nostrum gaudium, in hac vita dura, Labili et fragili, cito peritura; Nos deduc ad propria, O foelix figura Ad videndam faciem, quae est Christi pura. All haile our ioy, in this hard life, Both slippery, frail, and swift in her decay, O happy figure, bring us all to our true life. To see Christ, his pure face, for euer, and for aye. In which prayer I cannot but wonder, what excellency Iohn the 22. could find, to grant to the deuout rehearsing therof a 1000. yeers pardon, it may be, because he held that the blessed Saints should not see Gods face, vntill the ge∣neral resurrection; the same perswasion moued him, to giue such a liberall pardon to those, who would deuoutly be∣hold, and inuocat e a materiall, and corruptible shadow, and figure, of that infinitely resplendant, and shining maie∣sty. Surely this kind of inuocating figures, and pictures, was in some sort practised by those three (of tenne wic∣ked
Diuels, cast out of one Catharine Bus as Roberts Cham∣bers in his booke of the miracles of Si∣chem page. 214. that the Diuels words were these in french Uine nostre Da∣me de mounta∣gu qui nous sait sortir. Which he englisheth thus. Honour be to our La∣dy of Mounta∣gu who ma∣keth vs to de∣part. Chambers re∣porteth, who at their going out, cried out thus, Viue, nostre dame, du Sichem. Uiue, nostre dame du Sichem. Liue our La∣dy of Sichem, Liue our Lady of Sichem, who constraineth vs to go out. What? may it bee thought, these wicked Fiends did call vppon the most blessed Virgin Mary of Heauen with the name of our Lady of Sichem? what meant they? tell me O Chambers when they called the Image of Sichem our Lady of Sichem? was it; because the same is there wor∣shipped, and adored too too diuinely? yea with more ho∣nour, then the most blessed Virgin her selfe would accept of, if shee were conuersant amongst vs vpon earth: doubt∣lesse, for no other respect, did they call that image (nostre Dame) Our Lady, but because therein, God is most pro∣phanely dispoiled, of a great part of his honour, which is giuen to the Image, and taken from God. I should be blas∣phemous, to call any image, which may represent that im∣maculate Virgin, and sacred Mother of my Sauiour Iesus, in that respect only that it doth represent her, or put vs in minde, of the greatLuke 1. things which God hath done vnto her and for which she shall be called blessed, for al generations I repeat and say againe, blessed for all Generations: But I dare pronounce, with the Fathers of the Councel of Franc∣ford and Constantinople, and withall the Ancient Church, that not onely any of that blessed Virgins pictures, but e∣uen the Pictures of God himselfe, are to bee accounted as very Idols; if they bee adored and worshipped, with reli∣gious worship, such as is due to the persons, whome they represent: and that indeed, such Images beeing so adored, and worshipped, with religious worship, such as is due to the persons, may bee deseruingly so called by Belze∣bub, and all his crue (our Lords, our Ladies) O im∣mortall God, what meruaile, that they thus superstitiously abuse, and adore thy images, when they giue such religious worship, to their holy water to their Agnus Deis? beeing
small peeces of waxe with a little Balsamum and Oyle min∣gled together? What iniury do they to thy pretious bloud,Missalia. in forma benedict. aquae. when safety both of body, and soule is both prayed for, and hoped for by sprinkling of a little holy water, (salui facti sunt omnes, ad quos peruenit aquaista) they are all saued (say they) to whom this water commeth, or vpon whom this water commeth, saith their Priest, sprinkling holy wa∣ter. What blasphemy against the Merits of your sacred pas∣sion, that they should Laber ceremo∣nial. cap. de con∣secra. Agnus dei. Their late S. Boromey. did in his Councel at Millaine pro∣uide diuers su∣perstitious or∣dets for the worshipping of these Vanities. teach thus of their Agnus Deis, lit∣tle peeces of waxe, with the forme of a lambe vpon them (omne malignum frangit ficut Christi sanguis et angit) they driue away all that is malignant and breake sinne, as the blood of Christ. O intollerable blasphemy: no meruaile that our Pontificians, will keepe them with the hazard of a premunire, if they bee of like force, with the bloud of the lambe, that they think no plague, no pestilence, no A prodigious huffing out of a Candle, by an Agnus Dei, is reported by a certain Igna∣tiā doctor Nor. my old school∣fellow. It is thus: two or 3. Gallants put to a burning candle an Ag∣nus Dei, to make triall whether (as it is reported) it had force a∣gainst fire or not. Heare the miracle; the candle was twice huffed out, the behol∣ders left in darknesse and at sight of the prodigy 2. or 3. of the beholders were conuerted to the Popish Church as the said D. glorieth. fire no Diuell can annoy them, if they haue one of these Iewels. But I protest heere before the heauens, that I haue known diuers, much addicted to them, and to the wearing of them and yet inconsolably tempted, and afflicted, yea and it is most assured, the Diuell hath not so much power ouer any as ouer such, that leaue to put their whole asfiance in the in∣uincible name and power of Iesus; and do flee, to such base elements, and contemptible Creatures, deuised by their Popes rather for wares of Marchandize, to their Courtiers, then otherwise. But as pretious Iewels, as they are, you shall scarce know any Priests to vse them: I haue interpre∣ted, the neglect of them in Priests to their knowledge of the weakenesse of them; and the veneration of them in the laity, to meere ignorance, as likewise of their grains, which are so eagerly sought for by the most ignorant, but little re∣garded by the iudicious, and intelligent: yet the Marchan∣dise of graynes, is so profitable, that many of their Priests, inculcate, and commende the vse of them; to their Families amongst whom, you shall find some few, of that superstiti∣ous,
Noble, Iaponians disposition and iudgement, who be∣ing newly conuerted to the Popes Faith, and baptized by one of the Ignatians, presently Literae Iaponi∣cae in which I haue read this often. was enterteined, with the losse of al that euer he had by fire: but he found forsooth a ful recompense and happy exchange: for one of the Ignati∣ans bestowed a blessed graine vpon him; by which hee should assuredly get a plenary indulgence and escape the fire of purgatory. Although he had here lost all his worldly substance by fire: and he was so glad of hat graine, that (if it please you to beleeue the Ignatian relater) hee esteemed the losse of all his wealth as nothing hauing gotten such a An Agnus dei after losse by fire would haue come too late: therfore a grayne against purgatory fire. Iewell. O vanity of vanities, how forcibly doth the spi∣rit of errour, worke with such, who haue not receiued the Charity of truth: but, if the graine of the Iaponian stood him, in no more steed for a plenary, then the plenary abso∣lution, which a certaine Pope, appointed his Ghostly Fa∣ther, to giue himselfe at his death, he might perhaps escape purgatory fire and light vpon a worse fire notwithstanding his graine. The History, of that Pope is thus written, by one Iaco. de parad. Carthusi. in spe∣culo magno Ex∣empl. verbo in∣dulgentia p. 424. Iacobus a Pontifician. The Pope beeing neer his end, cal∣led a Priest, and gaue him authority to giue to himselfe a plenary pardon, the which hee deuoutly receiuing so dyed with his plenary: not long after, he appeared to the Priest, like a man damned; to whom saith the Priest, what? are you damned? why? did not you receiue a plenary indulgence? I did so, saith the Pope; but the Supreme Iudge, did not ap∣proue that absolution: doubtlesse the supreme Iudge, ap∣proueth none of their vain indulgences, by grains, by which they draw Christians from their onely affiance in the blood of his sonne in whose name Acts 4. only is saluation; and to put hope of Sanctification and saluation where none is, nor can be. Dreadfull are their abuses, in many of their confe∣crations: how horrible, thatFor mae Orati∣onum ad benedi∣cendum in ma∣nual. secundum vsum sarum in vsu apud nostros Anglor. when they require & beseech the diuine grace, should come downe into their Patents, the holy Ghost should come downe into such bookes as they blesse; the holy Ghost, should come downe into their belles, which they most superstitiously, and vainely blesse
and consecrate, with an apish kind of Baptisme. Yea they annoint the bels, with their most sacred oyles, into which oyles the very Holy Ghost by meanes of their inuocations Pontificall. in forma conserat. Chrism. doth specially reside and dwell as they openly professe & pronounce in their Pontificalls. Many of these things are found, In their rituall according to the vse of Sarum and now vsed in England with Master Maihews the Monkes and my old Romane Schoolefellows annotations vpon it, and they haue for conclusion of many of their fopperies this Note of what omnipotency ouer the grace of the holy Ghost the Po∣pish Church maketh her Priests to be. sanctifying prayer by which any Priest may blesse, or consecrate any creature, he shall please, so effectually that (to vse Benedictio ad omnia quaecun{que} volueris. A form of bles∣sing vpon what things soeuer thou wilt. Ma∣nual▪ vsed by English Priests page. 168. their owne words) by the comming downe of the holy Ghost, vppon it, by the religious vses thereof, any one, may obteine, both safety of soule, and health of body. Infinitely, are their corruptions and vanities, All which, when I now obserue with my selfe not onely as abuses and practises of priuate men, through corrupt affections, but as lawes, and ceremonies, generally obserued throughout the Romane Church, I do not without greate confusion, and shame, lament and bewail my bewitching, to think with my selfe, that either I, or any one but of ordinary know∣ledge of Christs doctrine, should haue liued in the idle ser∣uitude, of such comtemptible creatures, and to haue giuen any iot of that honor and confidence, which is due and pe∣culiar to the immortall and euerliuing God, by ioyning or partaking with such, who haue ioined the adoration of di∣uine Maiesty, with the adoration of earthly corruptible cre∣tures, his Images: surely, as the Saint omeristian Libell, which is out against mee, calleth mee for my writing the booke for the Oath of Allegeance lunatike, I was so then, when I beleeued such trumperies, bewitched with Romes cup. (Of what force, good God is education in any religion & present possession and profession of any faith) but now with hart prostrate, I adore that Clemency of Iesus the man & God orient, who Luke. 1. through the bowels of mercy, hath il∣luminated me who sate in darknes, & directed my feet into the way of his peace.
I could neuer whilst I was in Rome, and a trauailer through other hot countries, heare of the ouerflowing and inundation of those most nefarious, abhominable, and not to be named sinnes amongst them: nor neuer read the first Chapter of Saint Pauls Epistle to the Romanes, where the exectable crimes of Idolatrie, and the other nefarious, and not to be named crimes are by the Apostle coupled and associated together, as indiuiduall companions follow∣ing each from other, either by corruption of nature, like∣nesse of spirits, or Gods secret iudgement: but I euer had withall some secret suggestions, lest as the old Paynims, and heathenish Philosophers, were deliuered ouer into re∣probate senses, to change naturall vse into abhomination, for that they had changed Gods glorie, and giuen the same to corruptible creatures, and corruptible Images: so also the Romanists in respect of like changing of Gods glorie, and communicating part thereof, to corruptible Images, were giuen ouer, to such reprobate sense, as to change naturall vse, into almost nefarious abhominations: Pardon me, O ye Pontifician Prelates, Laikes, &c. God knoweth, I write not this to calumniate you, or to ag∣grauate against you: what was the sinne of Ezech. 16. Sodome? heare the holy Ghost telling you, pride of life, saturitie of bread, and idlenesse of life O most mercifull Sauiour of mankinde, open their eyes, that they may see and lament all the abhominations which be committed within thy house within thy wals: and inspire into their harts, to keepe their vessels in sanctification: and rather to vse, that re∣medie by thee and nature prouided, then to commit one of those nefarious sinnes, for which onely, thy most iust wrath might be iustly moued, to desolate the whole world, and to destroy not only the actors, but their associates and partakers in their idolatries, although otherwise them∣selues not to be touched with those enormious crimes, for which thy iust wrath with fire consumed those fiue Cities of old, as in like sort within this thy kingdome, thou did∣dest
with fire consume, for like abhomination, a Monaste∣rieGen. 19. of certaine religious as lib. 4. hist. ca. 25 Beda relateth: and as at Valen∣cine in the Low countries it is fearefully and horribly re∣ported by a M. R. P. reuerend Priest there, that it is doubted in that Citie by religious persons, that thy wrath did consume with fire, the Church and house of the Capuchine friers, for some like abhomination committed in their Church: although by some others it is giuen out, that the heretikes (so they call those of the reformed Church) did for malice cast fire vpon their Church, which was first of all with that reuenge∣full flame consumed. The sixth Motiue. THE sixth Motiue I deduct out of certaine obseruations touching the Masse. TheseThe sixt mo∣tiue. sixteene yeares and vpward, hauing practi∣sed the same, I haue oftentimes had cleare suggestions against the authoritie of it, as not to be Apostolicall, and of Christ and his Apostles institution: as they most eagerly (not without cause it being the very foundation of their religion) pre∣tend, but any substantiall reason for their pretended Apo∣stolicall tradition herein I could neuer read, I rather found in Platina, Gulielmus Durandus, Stephanus Durantus, Al∣marius, Sigibertus, Gabriel Biel, Polidore Ʋrgil, and diuers other their Pontifician Doctors, who either haue commen∣ted vpon their rites, or mentioned the institutions, and be∣ginnings of the substantiall parts of their Masse, that they did attribute, all the parts of the Masse to the institution and ordaining of such Popes as liued, after the Apostles times, yea many of them diuers hundreds of yeares; yea they related these things so weakely, and with so small shew of proofe out of antiquitie (iust none at all) that some∣times I greatly suspected the Masse, to be like a garment,
of ragges patched together, and gathered from diuers pla∣ces vnknowne, so the Masse to be patched vp, with diuers prayers and parts, the Authors whereof could not possibly by any meanes certainly be produced: but that which most of all troubled me, was to read in Saint Grego. lib. 7. Epist. 64. Gregory himselfe confessing that the Apostles did cōsecrate with the Lords prayer onely: and withall acknowledging that one called Scholasticus, had composed the office and Canon of the Masse: not withstanding, all these doubts I reiected then as temptations, not doubting but that the Canon of the Masse was of the Apostles instituting: although I saw euident de∣monstrations to the contrary, so powerfull with me, was the authoritie of the present visible Romane Church: but (quia ignorans feci misericordiam consecutus sum,) because I did it with most zealous ignorance I haue obtained mer∣cie. I now plainly see, that it is a thing morally impossible that the Apostles should be the authors of the Romane Canon of the Masse, and yet should neuer vse the same, (being so much Acts. cap. 6. & 13. giuen to prayers, and preaching) but celebrate the diuine misteries, with our Lords prayer onely: as not onely Greg. lib. 7. Epist. 64 Cardin Cusan. ep. 7. Ama larius de Eccle. officys lid. 3. Rupert. de diui∣nis off. lib. 2. Hieron lib. 3. contra Pelag. Naucler▪ Plati∣na Cassander alii. Saint Gregorie, but diuers others doe deliuer, vsing a Lyturgie, as it is described, by Saint Iu∣stine, doubtlesse, more like the English Lyturgie then the Romane Masse: I obserued also, that downe must the au∣thoritie of all those Historians, Platina, Almarius, Poli∣dore, Durandus, Durantus, and very many others, who attribute the institution and ordaining of all parts of the Masse to diuers Popes liuing long after the Apostles: down also must that notable miracle, written by Iacobus in vita Grego. primi. Iacobus à Vora∣gine an Archbishop amongst them in Italy at Genoa: the miracle was thus, and shewed in the time of Adrian Pope, when there was great contention in the Church, about the Canon of the Masse. Thus it was, the missall of Gregorie was laid, with that of Saint Ambrose together vpon the Altar, in Saint Peters Church, and left thereupon all night: that God would vouchsafe by miracle to demonstrate,
which of those two he would approue for the vse of the whole westerne Church: God did so, accordingly, saith the wise Archbishop. For the missall of Saint Gregorie wasThe Roman Canon hath euer worst suc∣cesse at such trials, for as it was heere rent so Don Rodrigo Archbishop of Toledo, aboue 300. and 40. yeares ago re∣porteth, lib 6. cap. 25. of his historie, that when trial was made betwixt the Gothian and Toletan Canon, and the Romane, first by priuate combate of two Knights, after by fire et both trials the Toletan Ca∣non preuailed, the Knight for the Romane Canon was o∣uercome, and at the second triall the fire consumed the Popes Canon, that of Toledo being vntou∣ched. rent into leaues, and cast vp and downe the bodie of the Church: but that of Saint Ambrose laid open vpon the Altar readie to be read: and so those ancient sages, with Adrian their head, gathered, that the renting of Saint Gregories missall, and scattering of the leaues of the same about the Church did shew, that it was Gods will, that the same should be vsed throughout the whole westerne Church, but Saint Ambroses missall (because it was laid open in Saint Peters Church vpon an Altar, as readie to be there vsed:) therefore the same forsooth must be vsed onely in Saint Ambroses Church of Millane. What wise coniecturer would not rather haue gathered the con∣trarie, that the missall of Ambrose should be vsed, but that of Gregorie despised, but had you gone O ye Ponti∣ficians (ad legem & ad testimonium) to the law and testi∣monie, to the diuine Scriptures (as youIsai. 8. are commaun∣ded) and not tempt God with expecting of testimonies from the dead, which is, dangerous, superstitious, damnable you would neuer haue so shamefully forgotten your selues. And how is it imaginable, that if the Apostles instituted a Canon of Masse deliuered to the Romane Church (which also Saint Ambrose being made of a Catechumen a Bishop could not but find vsed, and practised in his Church of Mil∣lane) (how durst that Bishop afterwards, attempt to frame a new Canon for his Church, omitting to vse that of the Apostles?) but perhaps he vsed theirs in the fore∣noone, & his own in the afternoone or else the two Canons had their turnes one after another. Alas how are the sages of Pharaoh, caught in their coniecturing. And consider Christian Reader, how can this miracle stand, if the Ca∣non of Masse had beene instituted by the Apostles, and ac∣cordingly had beene practised both in France and Italy, and other Churches (for I hope Masse was said throughout
Italie and France before the miracle) what needed then Charles the Great to haue assisted with his Imperiall au∣thoritie, Adrian the Pope for the bringing in to vse the missall ofIt is meere vanity to think that the Ca∣non as it is now, was so in Saint Grego∣ries daies. Saint Gregorie? and the exclusion of that of Saint Ambrose (Millane onely excepted where it is now vsed) from all other Churches? away, away with these va∣nities: Againe, I demaund how could Scholasticus a pri∣uate person of the Church or Citie of Rome, or some oter Church (althoughBellarm. lib. 2. de missa. cap. 12. Bellarmine the profound Cardinall, would to the laughter of all, faineBellarmine called great pillar of the Church, and the Auflen of our time by Eu∣daemon in his confutation of Anticott. pa. 48. haue Saint Peter sig∣nified vnder the name of Scholasticus) compose the Canon of the Masse, if the Apostles had made it, and the whole Christian westerne Church, had practised it before? Did Saint Gregorie know that the Apostle made the Canon, and that Scholasticus was onely gatherer, or setter together in some better methode of that which the Apostles had com∣posed, and the Church of Rome in some sort perhaps neg∣lected till Scholasticus his time, and so to need his ordering and amending? (doubtlesse S. Gregorie namethM. Thomas Iames worthily obserueth out of S. Gregorie that Scholasti∣ans was a vsual name, and of∣ten mentioned in S. Greg. lib. 2. epist. missa scho∣lastico duci. & lib. 9. epist. 14. epist. missa. scho∣lastic. defensori. & lib. 7. ep. 32. lib. 6. ep. 26. lib. 3. ep. 38. lib. 6. cp. 45. & alias. Scholasticus as a man wel known to Iohn of Siracuse, to whom he wrote that Epistle: and I thinke it would proue the wits of Bellar∣mine and all the Ignatians to find where S. Peter, or any of the twelue Apostles were surnamed by the name Scholasti∣cus) if S. Gregorie knew this, why doth he not expresse it? nay why doth he most expresly insinuate the contrary affir∣ming expresly that the Apostles celebrated the dreadful mi∣steries, only with the Lords praier? In his 64 Epistle of his 7. booke these are his words! Orationem vero dominicam, &c. the Lords praier, we therefore said presently after the praiers, because it was the custome of the Apostles, that they did consecrate the host of oblation at our Lords pray∣or onely: and it seemed to me verie inconuenient, that wee should say the prayer, which Scholastious had composed, ouer the oblation, and should not vse the tradition, which our Lord had composed, ouer his bodie and bloud. Thus most expresly Saint Gregorie,
the which authoritie must downe to the ground, or else S. Gregorie be appeached of equiuocating or of ignorance, that he knew not the tradition, vpon which the Canon of Masse was founded; as our present Romanists would now perswade the world: But nothing, be it neuer so ma∣nifest, must ouerthrow the Canon of their Masse (which indeed is the verie life of the present Pontifician Church, and the liuelihood of their Priests, Monkes, and Prelates) and yet through the many impertinences, contradictions, contrarieties which are in it, downe it will. For, ifIntroit. ad altare. the ve∣ry first prayer almost, which is this, (Oramus te Domi∣ne, &c. We beseech thee O Lord, by the merits of those Saintes, whose reliques are heere, that thou vouchsafe to giue vs pardon of all our sinnes) may take place, and that by the merits of Saints sins are forgiuen, and pardoned; what neede to expect a further propitia∣torie sacrifice in the Masse? I proposed not long since, to theM. G. Bl. chiefe in this house, how, a certaine prayer in the portesse which hath thus, (vt merit is sanctorum ae∣ternitatis gloriam consequamur, that, by the merites of Saints, we may obtaine the glorie of eternitie) was to be vnderstoode? Considering and pausing a while, he yeal∣ded this answere; by their intercessions; to which I replied, out of their owne doctrine, thus; that inter∣cessions of Saints in Heauen are not merits; andRom. 8. that glorie being first due vnto vs, by vertue of iustification in Christ Iesus, throughGalat. 5. faith working by chatitie, it was not in any sense, to be giuen to vs, for the me∣rits of Saints: some replies passed betwixt vs, and in the end he came, to affirme this proposition, to be Catholike, to wit, (Saluamur meritis sanctorum) we are saued by the merits of Saints, of which proposition, demaunding the opinion of aM. A. H. learned Priest sitting by, his answere was, that it was a sound proposition, (sa∣no intellectu) being well vnderstoode. Thus they. O Iesus onely Redeemer, what vile wrong is done to thy
infinite merits, when thus they associate with thy merits, the merits of Saintes, to haue a reall and meritorious concurrence, for remission of our sinnes? And when ioyntly of thy merites, and the merites of thy seruants, is by them composed the treasure of the Pontisician Church: by which they pretend to deliuer soules from Purgatorie? But alas, rather they delude many simple fooles, and dispoyle them of their treasure and wealth. To proceede, whereas in theOffertorium. Prayer, when the bread is offered vp to God vpon the Patten, it is expresly cal∣led, (Haec immaculata hostia,) this immaculate host, and is said to be offered, (pro innumerabilibus peccatis) for innumerable sinnes (pro viuis & defunctis,) for the li∣uing and the dead: (vt illis proficiat ad salutem, & vitam aeternam) that it may profite them to eternall life and sal∣uation: and likewise, when the Chalice is offered vp with wine onely in it, in their owne confession, as being long before the time of their imagined transubstantiation it is thus said of the same Chalice of wine (pro totius mun∣di salute in conspectu, &c.) that it may ascend as a sweet smell before the sight of the diuine Maiestie, for the sal∣uation of the whole world, by the two which oftertories it is euident, what manner of sacrifice, the Authors of them two beleeued to be in the masse: truly the very same, thatFinitis ab eo, qui prefectus est, saith Iustine Apolog. 2. Thankesgi∣uings & prai∣ers being en∣ded by him, who is the chiefe as pre∣fect, and ac∣clamations be∣ing made, by the whole people, the Deatons, whom we so call giue to e∣uerie one pre∣sent, a part of the bread, and of the water and wine, consecrated, and doe carie to those, who are not pre∣sent. Origen in Leuit. hom. 7. Irenae lib. 4. cap. 32. & 34. Chryost. in Psalm. 22. Am∣hros. de sacra∣mentis lib. 4. cap. 5. August. de doctrin. Christian. lib. 3. cap. 16. & in Psalm. 98 & tract. 59. in Iob. Hieron. 26 in Math. Author. operis imperfect. in Matth. Homel 11. clarissime. Ber∣tram. lib. de corp. & sangu. Domin. Theodoret. in cap. 8. ad Hebre. Fulgen. de fid. ad Pe∣trum. cap. 19. Lyturgiae Ambros. Basil! Saint Iustine, Irenaeus, and other ancient Fathers, deliuer, to wit, of thanksgiuing, commemoratiue, and of Gods creatures, not of the verie bodie and bloud of Christ, transubstantiated. But obserue, now commeth Clement the eight, and he in his missals (what misterie is in it, God knoweth) in that short prayer of offering, which the people make, being thereunto inuited by the Priests, and in which, they pray thus, (suscipiat Dominus hoc sa∣crificium,
de manibus tuis, &c.) Our Lord, receiue this sacrifice from thy hands to the glorie of his name, for our profit, and of all this holy Church: he hath com∣maunded the article (hoc) this, to be left out: the miste∣rie of which subtraction, who may not coniecture? be∣cause the demonstratiue article (hoc) this, in this place, doth most specially and peculiarly demonstrate, the sacri∣fice offered vp to God for the honor of his name, & benefit of his holy Church: therefore lest the people, who pronoūce that prayer, should by the same be brought to vnderstand, what manner of sacrifice the ancient authors thereof de∣liuered, the word (hoc) this, must be rased, and they left to expect another sacrifice, truly propitiatorie for∣sooth in the Masse. Such a Sacrifice as the Autours of this prayer, and of many others that goe, both before conse∣cration, and after, neuer knew nor taught: so that if a man will vnderstand them ingeniously, and with an vnpartiall eye, read them, it will be morally impossible, for him to thinke that they beleeued the Laterane transubstantia∣tion, as it is desended by the Pontificians: I will herein onely except the authours of the rubrickes in the Masses, which are almost contioually more or lesse, changed as now of late in the last edition, Missa. Clemēt 8. in. rubric. Clement forsooth (marke a pretie tricke) wil haue, the Priest not loudly to the people and eleuating of the Chalice, (as the former Clement also hath lately in∣stituted that the Laicks must receiue at their Lotiōs wine mixed with water per haps to imitate that of S. Chri∣sostomes Lytur∣gy where it is appointed that after consecra∣tion sodden water is to be mixed with the wine consecra∣ted that the people were to receiue Missa Chrisost. edita â Plantino & translata a leone Tusco. custome was) but secretly, and at the setting downe of the Chalice, to say those words of Christ: (hac quotie scunque, &c.) as often as you shall doe these things, you shall doe them in remembrance of me: wherefore, is this chaunge now made? Doubtlesse, for no other end, (if there be any other misterie let it be shewed) but lest now in these times, when the onely and infinitely inestimable, sacrifice of Christs Crosse, is so daily, by the true Catholike Church, and her Ministers extolled, and set forth, and the Ly∣turgie of our Lords Supper, deliuered to be a liuely,
holy, and expresse Bellar. lib. re∣cog. pag. 85. To shew that in his first booke of the Masse & last Chapter hee had iustly denied any true sacrifice of Christs bo∣dy to bee offe∣red vpon good Friday in their Church, answereth thus an obiection that is made against him out of their seruice of good Friday. whereas that daies oblation of Christs bo∣dy (as it is by them belee∣ued and there adored) is cal∣led a sacrifice; he saith, that is to bee vnder∣stood, impro∣perly; & there, to prue that, he compareth their offering of Christ vpon good Friday with the Sacri∣fice of incense and paschall candle, which is offered by them the next day, and in this his assertion he is so eager, that he heapeth authority vpon authority, out of his brethren Pontificians, to proue it. Bellar. lib. recog page 85. 86. commemoration, and remembrance, and commemoratiue sacrifice, of that which Christ did and suffered for vs;) the sincere, and religious hearer should perceiue, by those words, (as often as you shall doe these things you shall doe them in remembrance of me) appoin∣ted in all former Missals, to bee loudly and distinctly pro∣nounced, by the Priest, at the time of the shewing of the Sacrament, that the auncient authors of that part of the Canon (which is the principallest) did vnderstand, that all which was there done, was onely a commemoration of that, which Christ suffered vpon the Crosse, but not to bee Christ himselfe, truly, verily, carnally, really, there in body, by a commucation, or transubtantiation of Elements pre∣sent. But what meruaile that they haue corrupted the Ru∣bricks of their Masse? when some of their Popes, if not Scholasticus, haue most shamefully corrupted the words themselues of consecration: for in the consecration of the Chalice, they do put to Christs words, all these, (noui et e∣ternitestamenti, misterium fidei) of the new and euerlasting Testament, the mystery of Faith: the which words, although they doe yeeld a very godly sense, and doe directly im∣pugne their transubstantiation, yet to bring in Christ, as speaking those words, which not one of the Math. 26. mar. 14. Luc. 22. 1. Corinth. 11. Euangelists, or Saint Paul, describing the manner of blessing, and the very words which Christ vsed at his last supper haue set down: it is too to improbable. To say that either the Euan∣gelists, or S. Paul, should omit to set down any of the ne∣cessary words, or integral parts of the form of consecration & that Scholasticus, or some other illuminated Pope, shold be so diligent, as to supply the And as they haue thrust into their forms of consecration the word (enim) for: so they haue left out in consecration of the bread these words (quod pro volis tradetur) which shal be deliuered for you. negligence of the Apostles were vaine: heere is a most manifest, and hereticall abuse,
and yet rather then the Masse, which Scholasticus as they falsely pretend composed, shall downe: downe must the Authority of Gods word, as not sufficiently deliuering the form of consecration of that life-giuing life-quickning, and inestimable Sacrament, by which Christ crucified, is most liuely commemorated, and all his graces, most really and effectually receiued, by the faithfull, and worthy receiuers, who come vnto that diuine Table, with a resolued Faith, a burning Charitie, and a pure Contrition, and bewailing of their sins; but to others, who come vnfaithfully and with purpose, or halfe inclination to wallow still in their sinnes it will be, as it was to Iudas (buccella intincta mortis) a dip∣ped morsell of death: but in the worthy receiuer, (O mira∣cle! O in estimable benefit!) there is a reall coniunction, and participation of that Christ, who sitteth at the right hand of his Father; like as the Regenerate in Baptisme, are truly Ioh. 3. and really regenerated, and borne of the holy Ghost, not because they haue the substance of the Holy Ghost, anewe imparted to their soules, to their sanctification; but for the reall graces, which they by that Sacrament receiue of the holy Ghost; euen so, in this most diuine Sacrament not the flesh it selfe, which was crucified, to vse S. Aug in Psal. 98 Austins words is carnally eaten, but the vertues, and graces of the flesh, which was crucified, is really eaten by the soule, in that sort as the soule can eat; that is spiritually & really by her affecti∣ons, & other immanent real & internal operations, so heer: as the food is spirituall, so the manducation, by faith, loue, and thanksgiuing, is spirituall, heere the mind, not the belly or stomack, is to bee prepared: Like as Saint Augustine speaketh. And like as before their consecration, so after their tran∣substantiation, and eleuation, such prayers, and actions are vsed, by him who composed their Canon, that either hee, must be reputed an egregious Arian Impostor, or some Ne∣storian seducer, making Christ either a Creature, or a san∣ctified man onely: or else, he did not beleeue that reall pre∣sence
of Christ himselfe, and the most Blessed Trinity, which is now imagined, and taught by the Pontificians; For if hee did beleeue, that after their eleuation, Christ in person, was really present, as a Compleate, and Consummate sacrifice, what Arrianlike impudency, was it in him, to Per totum Ca. no. in missal. appoint so innumerable signings, and crossings by the sinful and earth∣ly hands, of sinfull Priests vpon, and ouer Christ, and the sa∣cred Trinity it selfe? (but be like his many crossings did san∣ctifie before consecration, but not after, when they are on∣ly vsed as significations, or else because Christ himselfe the sacrifice, needeth no sanctification, they are vsed onely to driue a way Diuels, from the sacrificing Priest, (for Zuares & others will not deny but that the Dinels may and doe come so neere to their Sacrament, that they can both carry it away, and abuse it also) doubtlesse, Scholasticus would not haue beene so Sacrilegious to haue ordained Without all question the lesser is bles∣sed of the grea∣ter. ep. ad Heb. 7 Christ himselfe to bee signed and blessed so often, by sinnefull hands, and therefore if he appointed so many crossings, he did not beleeue a reail presence of Christ, but only a com∣memoratiue sacrifice, in his Creatures. And in good earnest, I put a certaine demand to the Pontificians, whether any one of them or their Priests, beleeuing Christ, to sit, at the right hand of his Father; may without maine Sacriledge offer to signe and blesse him with one of their crossings? or whether the blessed Virgin Mary, or Saint Mary Mag∣dalene beholding Christ vpon his Crosse actually consum∣mating that Sacrifice, that oblation, by which once of∣fered (to vse the words of the Ad hebr. 10. Apostle) hee hath sanctified, and consumated all those who beleeue in him, (in aternum) for euer: might without in explicable presumption, and sa∣criledge haue offered by blessing, crossing, or prayer, to haue giuen him any sanctification or assistance in that his dreadfull sacrifice, manifest it is, that as in that sacrifice, hee would endure no helper, nor suffer no compartner, so nei∣ther in this, if he were, as truly sacrificed, and offered vpon the Altar, as they pretend.
But Scholasticus the Composer of the Canon, doth yet more perspicuously, shew, that he did not beleeue the Pon∣tifician Transubstantiation; for besides, that hee calleth the Sacrament (panem vitae aeternae, et calicem salut is aeternae) the bread of euerlasting life, and the cup of eternall saluation; he also desireth God, to behold the same sacrifice, with a propitious and fauourable countenance, like as the sa∣crifices of Abel, Abraham, Melchisedech &c. The which Priests being of the Law of nature, did iustly, and necessa∣rily desire God, to looke propitiously vpon their sacri∣fices, because they were not perfect with any absolute per∣fection, being only creatures, and onely acceptable, for the deuotion of the offerers, which might bee tainted, with sin and imperfection; but to say the same of the sacrifice of Christ himself, if he were really present and really sacrifi∣ced, were horrible blasphemy; and I demand, whether Saint Magdalen, kneeling at the foote of the crosse, might with∣out sacriledge haue desired God the Father, to haue loo∣ked downe with a propitious and a fauourable counte∣nance vppon the sacrifice of his infinitely beloued sonne Iesus, as he did vpon the sacrifice of Abel? (to wit a lambe, or a sheepe) vndoubtedly if Scholasticus beleeued as the Pontificians doe, he was an egregious Impostor to ranke the Creator of infinite Maiesty with his creatures, and to equalize, or compare the sacrifice which was both accep∣table, and satisfactorious, (exrigore institiae) in the very ri∣gour of Iustice, with those imperfect sacrifices of Abel, and others, which did not, nor could not sanctisie the Of∣ferers. But further, yet in that which followeth, he quite ouer∣throweth the Papists, presence of Christ, in the sacrifice: for thus he prayeth Ibid. in Can. (Suppliceste Rogamus &c.) We hum∣bly beseech thee Omnipotent God, doe thou commannd these things to be carried by the hands of thy holy Angell, vp to thy high Altar, into the sight of thy diuine maiesty: thus there: Here I demaund of them, what in their consciences they
thinke the Author vnderstood by those words of the praier (iube) command and (haec) these things: who is heer com∣manded? What, Gods speciall Angell, Christ himselfe? but if you please, to vnderstand Saint Michael, or some o∣ther Angell, marke the Consequence: Christ himselfe, or Saint Michael must carry vp these things; either Christ Christ himselfe, or Saiut Michael Christ, vp to the high Altar, before the sight of the diuine Maiesty; then what a profound Gramarian was your Scholasticus, to call Christ (haec) these things, or else what a Sacrilegious impostor, to desire God the Father, to command Michael to bring vp and offer vp his infinitely beloued sonne before his Maie∣sty, who euer Heb. 4. 1. Col. 3. sitteth at his right hand, Rom. 8. making intereessi∣on for mankind, and all those who seeke to him. And if you will vnderstand your demonstratiue Article, (haec) these things, of the onely accidents of bread and wine, they are in good sooth not worthy carrying so high, neither by Christ himselfe, nor his Angell Saint Michael Charge not therefore, Oye Pontificians, Scholasticus with such sacri∣legious imaginations: had he beleeued as you doe, he wold haue prayed either in this or the like sort. O most morcifull Father, heere before me vpon this Altar lieth onely deere sonne Iesus, (of infinite dignity and vnspeakeable Maiesty) by me sacrificed to thee; him, in respect of his infinite digni∣ty, thou canstinot refuse nor reiect: for his sake, reiect not, refuse not mee, thy Priest, offering him to thee, make me partaker of his graces. &c. But thou wilt say, perhaps Scholasticus did vndoubted∣ly beleeue Transubstantiation: for hee saith, that there is a participation, of Christs body, from the Altar; true hee saith so, if hee bee not corrupted: but what then? Christ saide more, Eate, this is my body: know yee not O yee Pontificians, that it is a great mysterie? It is a Sacrament of the new Testament, and as a Sacrament it must be vnderstood, vsed, & practised? remember S. 1. Corin. 10. Paul,
twice repeating, doe this, or doe these things in comme∣moration of me? without all question within this space of a 1000. yeares. the canon, and liturgy of Masse hath beene so often pared & clipped, that it is hard to say, what Scho∣lasticus composed: and therfore vnlesse Scholasticus were a contradicting Scholler to himselfe, he must needs bee cor∣rupted if in any place of the Canon he seeme to speak for your transubstantiation. But I will acquaint thee by the way, courteous Reader) with a certaine accident: when I was writing vpon this very matter, in commeth to my Chamber M. 1. Col. one of the Ancient Priests of this place, preten∣ding not to come to conferre, but conferring with me, per∣haps to draw somewhat out of me touching my resolution: but he ingenuously confessed to me at last vpon conference that the Apostles did not institute the Canon of the Masse: for arguing with him about some other points and about traditios, he acknowledged that traditiōs Apostolical, must be carried vp, hand in hand, from Author to Author, vntill the Apostles times: what then (said I) thinke you of the Canon of the Masse? is it a Tradition Apostolicall? yes, without all question (said hee), a tradition Apostolicall: shew me (then said I) how, this Canon is carried vp, hand in hand, from Author to Author, from Record to Record, till the Apostles times: he failed, (as Bellarmine himselfe, must faile) for hee could not goe higher then the time of Gregory, and yet not authentically, and sufficiently, to him neither (as I easily shewed) and so fell downe, the Aposto∣licall Tradition of the Canon: but hee replieth (for they are resolued to see and not to see) yea but the Doctrine of the Canon, was a tradition Apostolicall and may bee carried vp to the Apostles times: where said I, find you then the eleuation and transubstantiation mentioned in, or be∣fore Saint Gregories time, or in Saint Gregory himselfe? I came not to reason, (said hee) well then I replied; at least you graunt that the very sorme, of the Canon, as it is now
vsed in the Romane Church cannot be carried vp, from re∣cord to record, from Author to Author, vntill the Apostles time; he ingenuously granted it, and so fell downe the Apo∣stolicall tradition, of the Canon of the Masse, and withall, so ended our conference. And here also, concluding, to speake any more concer∣ning transubstantiation out of Scholasticus, I passe ouer to another obseruation in this their Canon; and wil shew that their Scholasticus did not beleeue Purgatory flames, &c. And so downe, must their suffragatiue, and propitia∣tory sacrifice, for the burning soules in purgatory; if the Authority of their Masse must stand. I finde expressly, that those dead persons, for whome prayer is now pretended to bee made by the Romane Church, as though they were in the flames of Purgato∣rie, are In Canone msse in erati: que incipit me∣mente. domi. &c heere most significantly said, to rest in Christ, to sleepe in the sleepe of peace; now I pray the Pontifi∣cian Reader to teach mee what peace in Christ, what sleepe in rest is it to bee tormented incessantly, in that dreadfull fire of Purgatory? (for extremity and anguish e∣qualized by the Pontificians with the fire of the damned) dost thou vnderstand Christian Reader? dost thou thinke, that Scholasticus if hee were the Author of this prayer, would call the burning flames of purgatory, the rest in peace: the sleepe of peace? a very sweete rest of peace, doubtlesse, for such especially as shall continue in it, vn∣till the day of Iudgement: for they affirme so much that some who are burning in that rest, shall restlessely there rest, vntill the generall resurrection: and perhaps, when they end their Masses of purgatory rest, and of requiems they In fine miss. thus conclude them, (requiescant in pace) let them rest in peace: dsiring thereby, that the soules departed may rest in Purgatory, yea rest in Purgatory still. Doubt∣lesse, whatsoeuer they meane in their daily requiem-Masses, the Author of the Praier whosoeuer hee were,
desired that they might rest in peace, and in the sleepe of peace, to wit in some place of rest, vntill the day of Ge∣nerall iudgement, and resurrection: For most proba∣ble it is, that the Author of this prayer for the dead, was of opinion, of many of theTertull. lib. de anima cap. 55. deliuereth it as a matter as∣sured in his time that all soules of the faithful depar∣ted are kept in some lower part vntill the generall iudg∣ment Laotant lib. 7. cap. 21. Yea in Saint Bernards time this errour was rife hee helde it Serm. 3. De omnibus sanctis and who is ignorant that Iohn the 22. Pope held it and would haue defined it and caused preachers publikely to teach it. Gerson Serm. de pasch. Ioh. Ʋiltan. in Historia. See S. Austin in Psal. 36. and his Enchirid. cap. 108. the like haue S. Chrisost and Theoph. in 1. ad Corinth. 11. Iustin. lib. Questiq. 60. et. 67. r Grego, Niss. orat. 3. Auncient Fathers, of the Church, and some latter Popes, to wit, that the soules of the Faithfull departed, remained in some certaine ap∣pointed place of rest, vntill the day of Iudgement; which place some of them call vnder the Altar, but most mani∣fest it is, that if the Author of the praier, were in his wits, hee would not esteeme the dreadfull flames of pur∣gatorie for a sleepe of rest, peace of Christ, sleepe of peace, vnlesse it may bee saide, that hee thought that soules departed, doe put on the natures of Salamanders, small little beasts, who as fishes doe swimme in the waters, so they liue and breath in the fire it selfe. Or else per∣haps, hee was of Saint Gregory Nissenes opinion; with some of the other Auncients of the Church, who in one of his Orations, vppon the resurrection of our Sauiour Christ writeth thus: (animam vero, per se separatam, &c.) But the soule beeing by it selfe, and separated from the bo∣die, fire cannot touch, neither can darkenesse bee irke∣some or greeuous vnto it, because shee wanteth eies, and therefore with these agreeing considerations, and reasons, wee are compelled to approoue the resurrection of the deade, thus bee; proouing by the impassibility, of the soules separated, a resurrection of the body, that in it, the soule might bee punished, and afflicted, and so according to this Fathers opinion, the flames of purgatory should nothing at all afflict the soules departed, and ther∣fore they might bee said to rest in them, and to sleepe also a slecepe of peace in them.
Or else most probable it is, that he thought, the state of the soules departed, in respect of damnation or sal∣uation, was in some sort vncertaine, vntill the generall iudgement, (according as many of the ancient Fathers seeme to haue taught) and this vntill the sentence of dam∣nation, or saluation were by the Iudge pronounced: and therefore, although they were in a kinde of rest, and ex∣pectation of that which was to come, yet in respect of the communion of charitie, which is, betwixt all mem∣bers of the Church, he might thinke that prayers of the liuing might be auaileable for them, so that by them they might finde their Iudge more propitious. And this verie aptly, yoa necessarily accordeth, with other like eui∣dent matters in their Masses for the dead: for as by theirMissal. in co∣memorat. om∣nium fideliu defunct. sequence, which beginneth thus (diet irae, dies illa, &c.) A day of wrath is that day, they haue often relation, to the day of generall iudgement; and to the generall ac∣count, which is to be made that day, and therefore, the whole sequence is purposely pronounced, as in the persons of the dead, whoSee all this most euident∣ly in their se∣quence. dies Ire, &c. ibidem. desire  fauourable, and a mercifull iudgement at that day, and to be deli∣uered then, when the Goates shall be set on the left hand, and the sheepe vpon the right hand, so that there can be no tergiuersation at all, but that the au∣thour of that sequence, prayed that the soules of all faithfull departed, (for bee prayeth for all faith∣full departed, none excepted,) might finde a merci∣full iudgement, at the daye of the Generall ac∣count. And agreelingly to this, are liuers prayers also of the dead: And most expresly is their ▪ in their daily Masses of the dead: which is thus:In missis quo∣tidianis pre de∣functis. (Domine Iesu Christe, &c.) Lord Iesus Christ, deliuer the soules of the faithfull departed, from the paines of hell, and the deep lake deliuer them from the mouth of the Lion, that hel may not (note this sentence) swallow them vp that they
fall not into the darke; but let thy flander bearer or Signifer Michael, represent and exhibite them into that holy light which thou hast promised to Abraham and to his seede for euer; Thus there: he who seriously con∣sidering this prayer, pondereth those words, (the soules of all faithfull departed) and those, that they may be deliue∣red from the deepe lake, and that they be not swal∣lowed vp by hell, nor fall into the darke, he cannot easily be perswaded to thinke otherwise, then that the Authour of this prayer, did thinke (as many ancients did) that the state of the soules departed,August. lil. 1. retract. 14. & 12. de ciuit. cap. 9. epist. 111. ad Fortunat. Irenae. lib. 5. cap. ult. Ambros. lib. 2. de Cain. cap. 2 & lib. de bono mortis. cap. 10. Chrisost homel. 28. Haeb. Origen hom. 7. in Leuit. Hilarius, in Psal. 138. Theoph in 1. ad Corinth. 11. & in 11. ad Hoebr. Theodor. ibidem. was not certaine vntill the day of Iudgement: and that none of them were to see the glorie and face of God, vntill after the day of Iudgement, and generall resurrection, when they should receiue the promises as Theophilactus proueth and discourseth. This errour had very many and ancient patrons, as Bellarmine himselfe cannot denie; and without all question it may be thought the parent of another errour, of praying for the soules departed, to deliuer them from the fire of Por∣gatorie. Doubtlesse, a Nouell errour, and no Apostolicall tradition, because not clearely knowne, nor receiued in Saint Austens time, who most expresly in the learnedst, and perhaps the last booke he euer wrote (except his Re∣tractations,) affirmeth thatAugust. lib. de ciuit. dei. 21 cap. 26. see also the 16. chapter. perhaps it is true, (note the word perhaps) that there is a purging fire after death; by which, it is most manifest according to other places of him, that the Church in his time did not make Purgatorie sire a tradition Apostolicall, or article of faith: but of late, the Pseudosinode, and Schismaticall Councell vnder Euge∣nius the fourth gathered against that of Basil, which had deposed Eugenius before, and substituted Felix) contrarie to the ancient faith, of the Latine and Grecke Church determined Purgatotie pains for a point of faith. But of these imaginarie, and fatuous flames else where perhaps more largely. The word of God, as it is expounded of the ancient Fathers, doth dispell, condemne, explode them,
for if thereEpist. ad Rom. 8. & 2. ad Co∣rinth. 5. ad Thes. 1. cap. 4. Apoc. cap. 14. be no damnation to those, who die in Christ Iesus, beleeuing in him with faith, working by charitier? and if all those who die in him, euen from that moment of death rest from their labors? and that no sooner the earthly habitation is left off, but an heauenly habitation is put on? and those who beleeuing Christ loue Christ, desiring to be dissolued, and to be with him, are with him? and if gene∣rally the Apostle exhorteth and commaundeth, that Chri∣stians should not be so much as contristated, for those who die in Christ? in Iesus, and by Iesus, by whom, and in whom they sleepe; with many such like sayings: who, that is not eyther seduced by his education in poperie, or else for his ouercredulitie to their Priests misled, will beleeue, the imaginarie flames of Purgatorie? And heere I con∣stantly affirme, and the contrarie cannot be shewed (to wit) that all those Fathers who alowed praier for the dead, were more or lesse to be touched with some one of these errours, either that the states of the faithfull departed, could not be certaine vntill the day of iudgement, and that they were to be kept in certaine receptacles till that time, and that none of the departed were to see Gods face, vntill the day of iudgement:Austen, wri∣teth doubt ful∣ly here of in his Enchirid, cap. 109. where he affirmeth that sacrifice is of∣fered for the dead, either that they may haue full re∣mission, or else that their dam∣nation may be more tolera∣ble. He tea∣cheth the like, lib. 1. de orig. enime. cap 9. & 10. & lib. de cura pro mortui cap. 1. Azor. lib. institut. 10. cap. 22. affir∣meth that it was the do∣ctrine of cer∣taine ancient that their Masse did pro∣fit and ease the soules damned in hell. or else that the verie soules of the damned in hell might be holden by prayers, as IohnDamascen, erat. de mortuis. ciacon. Aqui∣nas alis. Da∣mascene approuingly, relating the historie of Trajanes soule doliuered by Saint Gregorie seemeth to hold: and all those who account the historie of Falconillas deliuerie, by the prayers of Tecla to be authenticall, seeme to affirme. And as for the historie of Traians deliuerie by Saint Gre∣gories prayers, although it be impugned by some later au∣thors, yet the historie is to be seene painted, in Saint Gre∣gories Monasterie at Rome, the which also, the great Ignatian Salmeron acknowledgeth: by which it is most manifest that the opinion, teaching that damned soules in Hell might be holpen or eased by the prayers of some liuing, seemed not so extrauagant and improbable in the Romane Church, when time was: by all which, and
muchCiprian see∣meth to shew how the com∣memoratue sacrifice was offered for martyrs in cō∣memoration of them. Cyprian epist. 62. lib. 3. & lib. 4. epist. 5. in like sort Ciril. speaketh in Cateches. more, that might be said to the same purpose, the courteous Reader may obserue how one errour breedeth another, to wit, vncertaintie of estate of the soules depar∣ted, vntill the day of iudgement, prayers for them; pray∣ers for them, Purgatorie fire; Purgatorie fire, requiem Masses, and Purgatorie sacrifices for them, and their fa∣bulous Indulgences with such like errours. There be many other things which I might iustly taxe in the Canon of their Masse, as repugnant to all anti∣quitie, and consequently not Apostolicall: the dreadfull eleuation of the Sacrament (not onely to be reuerenced, as a Sacrament of God) but to be adored and inuocated as the diuine Maiestie it selfe, their carrying vp and downe, the said Sacrament in their processions. But as execrable, rather then as inexcusable, I doe abhominate that Papall custome, and Nouell fashion of theirs, by which, they set the Sacrament vpon a white palfrey to be caried before their holinesses, whithersoeuer they shall make their pro∣gresse, to shew perhaps that they will be like the virgi∣nall Saints in heauenApoc. 14. who follow the Lambe, wheresoe uer he goeth. O mercifull Sauiour of mankind, (Psal 118. tempus faciendi, dissipauerunt legem tuam,) It is high time to doe, they haue dissipated thy law: in steede of thy diuine Maie∣stie, they haue set vp a God, dwelling in their tabernacles in their towers, and call the same, their God, the God of fortitude, the God of strength, and insteed of that thy onely sacrifice of the Crosse (daily honoured, inuocated commemorated, by thy faithfull Seruants) the Chime∣ricall and imaginarie reall, carnall, sacrifice of your selfe, in bread and wine vpon their idolatrous Altars. Open their eyes, thou who art the onely Sacrifice, oblation, redemp∣tion, and deliuerance of all mankinde, by that oblation which thou diddest once make for vs all vpon the Crosse, looke downe and consider how they abuse thy holy rite, and institution which thy Maiestie appointed, and all thy ancient Church receiued according as thyMath. 28. Mark. 14. Luke. 22. 6. Paul, 1, ad corinth. 11. Euangelists and
Apostle deliuered vnto them, that all thy faithfull, should receiue the Sacrament, whole and intire in both kinds, yet nowConc. Trident. sess. 21. comes the Tridentine Fathers, and they do not only decree, one kind to be enough, but they also accurse, and execrate (they curse, and thou wilt blesse) all those, who shall obserue and teach as necessarie thy institution, and shall practise according as all the Prime, and ancient Churches did: and this their treacherie, they will excuse, by protesting (take a Helen without an excuse, so the Tridē∣tine is named by Espencaus in his Commentarie vpon Ti∣tus) that the ancient Church neuer vsed the Sacrament vn∣der both kinds, out of opinion of necessity: as though your holy institution, your commandement deliuered, and inculcated by the Apostles and Euangelists did not bind vn∣der necessitie: But they will thus at their pleasures only like the2. Thess. 2. Outlaw or lawlesse man (by whom they were authori∣sed for this) described by your Apostle in his Epistle to the Thessalonians, change your law and dissipate the eternall league of the new and eternall testament. It will here be expected perhaps, that I deliuer my sense, and Catholike beleefe touching this most venerable Sacra∣ment: It is truly the same with that of the ancient Fathers of the Church, in whose words I will by and by expresse my faith, the which I see also most clearely agreeing with the reformed Lyturgie of the English Church: and the ar∣ticles concluded and agreed vpon by publike consent, in the conuocations of the English Church: which Lyturgie and Articles, when I lately most seriously perused, & consi∣dered, I saw a vehement propension & resolution in the au∣thors of thē, with all reuerence to embrace what was most agreeing to the word of God, & to that which the ancient Primitiue Church taught & deliuered: the which had I neuer read, I could neuer so haue thoght of thē: the english church & Lyturgy therof both, are in such vile obloquies with the Pontificiās. But I now perceiue that the aduersariesIsai. 28. (posuerūt spē fuā mendaciū) they haue made not one ly, but infinte lies
and calumniations against the Church of England, their hope: for in their schooles and Seminaries they commonly make their aduersaries speake what they list, and so to im∣pugne and confute them, and teach their young souldiers of Sanders his holy quarrell to doe the like. But to re∣turne to my purpose, my Catholike faith concerning this dreadfull Sacrament, I will deliuer in the words of some of the ancient and Catholike Fathers. Saint Austen expoun∣ding thatIob. 6. sentence and commandement of our Sauiour, (nisi mandus aueritis, &c.) vnlesse you shall eate the flesh of the Sonne of man, and drinke his bloud, you shall not haue life in you,August. lib. 3. de doctr. Christ. cap. 16. saith thus: he seemeth to commaund a crime, and a wickednesse, it is a figure therefore, commanding vs to communicate with our Lords passion, and that we pro∣fitably and sweetly lay vp in our memory, that his flesh was wounded and crucified for vs. The same he confirmeth in hisTractat. 27. in John. Treatise vpon S. Iohn, where he greatly taxeth the ig∣norance, and mistaking of the Capharnaites, who thought, that Christ intended to giue them such flesh to eat as them∣selues were, that is, true flesh, whereas (saith Saint Austen) Christ in those words, couered a grace. And in another place vpon thePsal. 98. Psalmes, thus he writeth most perspicuous∣ly, (Spiritualiter intelligite, &c.) vnderstand that which I haue spoken, spiritually, not this bodie which you see, you shall eate, neither shall you drinke that bloud which they, who shall crucisie me, will shead: I haue commended vnto you, a certaine Sacramēt which being spiritually vnder∣stood, will quicken you. And how this Diuine misterie being a Sacrament, taketh the name of the thing, whereof it is a Sacrament, heare him clearely decla∣ring the same toEpist. 23. ad Bonif. Bonifacius an Earle in Africke. Sa∣craments (saith he) haue a certaine resemblance of the things whereof they are SacramentsSee Theodoret for this pur∣pose in dialog. impatib. and for that re∣semblance they take the names, commonly of the things themselues: and therefore, as the Sacrament of Christs bodie, is after a sort Christs bodie, and the Sacrament of
Christ bloud, his bloud, so the Sacrament of faith (to wit) Baptisme is faith, thus he, like is the authoritie related in theirDe consecrat. dist. 2. cap. hoc est quod. Canon Law, (Sicut ergo celestis, &c.) Therefore euen as the heauenly bread which is the flesh of Christ, af∣ter this manner, is called the bodie, whereas it is truly a Sa∣crament of the bodie of Christ, that, which visible, pal∣pable, mortall, was put on the Crosse, and the verie im∣molation which is done by the hands of the Priest, is cal∣led the passion of Christ, the death of Christ, and the crucifying of Christ, not in truth of the thing, but in a signifying misterie, so the Sacrament of faith, which is Baptisme, is vnderstood faith. Againe:Contra adimāt cap. 13. Saint Austen, (non dubit auit, &c.) Our Lord doubted not, to say, this is my bodie, when he gaue a signe of his bodie, and therefore, vpon SaintTract. 59. in Iohn. Iohn, although hee acknowled∣ged Iudas to haue receiued (buccellam dominicam,) the Lords morsell, yet he receiued not, (saith hee) bread the Lord, but the bread of the Lord: of which words, what other meaning can there be? But that bread of the Lord is onely the outward Sacrament, which Iudas re∣ceiued: but bread the Lord, is the same Sacrament recei∣ued by the religious and faithfull, who withall beleeueth, thinketh, loueth, and hopeth in and vpon Christ cruci∣fied as his Sauiour, and so in soule by faith and loue ea∣teth him, and receiueth bread the Lord: according to that of the sameAugust. tract. 25. in Ioh. Father, beleeue, and thou hast ea∣ten: and that of SaintBernard. serm 3. in Psal qui habitat. Bernard, when they heard him, say vnlesse you eate the flesh of the Sonne of man and drinke his bloud, they said, that this is an hard speech, and departed from him, and what is to eate his flesh, and drinke his bloud, but to communicate with his passion, and to imitate that conuersation, which he held? To these Fathers, for this purpose, I adioyne SaintEphrem. in Harding against the challenge of D. lewel. Ephrem, thus confessing, Inspice diligenter &c. Beholde diligently, how taking bread into his hands, hee bles∣seth
and breaketh it, in a figure of his immaculate bodie, and in a figure of his precious bloud, he blesseth and giueth the Cup to his disciples: thus he.Lib. 4. contra Marcio. cap 40. Tertullian, when he was a sound Christian Catholike, thus pronounced: Iesus Christ, when he tooke bread and distributed it to his disciples, made it his bodie, saying this is my bodie, that is to say, the figure of my bodie. And a gaine in anotherLib. 3 cap. 19. contra Mar. place he speaketh thus, to Marcion: God in your Gospell cal∣led bread his bodie; that by the same thou maist vnder∣stand, that to bread he hath giuen to be a figure of his bo∣die, but a figure it should not be, if it were not a bodie of truth: thus he. I will adioyne two places out of Eusebius, who li∣ued then, when the Pastours of the Church were most vigilant against all errours and heresies: and therefore they would not haue suffered this doctrine in Eusebius, touching the Sacrament, if it had not beene agreeing to the Catholike faith of that time. Christ hauing offered, Eusebius de demonst. Euang. lib. 1. cap. 10. saith he, himselfe for a soueraigne sacrifice to his Father, ordained that we should offer a remembrance thereof vn∣to God, in steede of a Sacrifice: which remembrance we celebrate by the signes or simboles of his bodie, and bloud vpon his Table; and pleasing God well, we of∣fer a Sacrifice without bloud, and reasonable, and ac∣ceptable vnto him: thus he. In which authoritie of Euse∣bius I note that the Greeke word () is to be tran∣slated without bloud, to wit, a Sacrifice without bloud, though not without the signes of bloud; and the same Greeke word therfore in our English tongue is to be tran∣slated without bloud, not vnbloudie, for that word doth not sufficiently expresse the signification of the Greeke . Secondly this Father constantlyLib. 8. de de∣monstrat. Euan∣lia demonst. 1. teacheth thus: Iesus deliuered to his disciples the signes (or simboles) of his diuine dispensation; commaunding them, () to doe or celebrate the Image of his true bodie, for since he hath no more receiued the Sacrifices of bloud
and diuers creatures, ordained by Moises; he hath appoin∣ted, to be serued, with bread, for a figure of his body, thus he.Ambr. de sa∣cram. lib. 4. ca. 4. S. Ambrose did not beleeue Transubstanti∣ation, because many more wōrous actiōs should concur to Transubstā∣tiation then were in Crea∣tion, and his argument is from a greater wonder to shew a lesse, a maori ad mi∣nus as it is said Saint Ambrose, thus. If there be, so great strength, in the word of our Lord Iesus, that all things began to be, when they were not how much more shall it be of force, that the (ele∣ments) should be the same, they were before, and yet be chan∣ged into another thing? S. Ireneus is often cited by the Ad∣uersary for a propitiatory sacrifice and transubstantiation, but it is not possible for any one to write more effectually to ouerthrow their imagined propitiatory sacrifice & tran∣substantiation then he doth, and I desire the Christian Rea∣der, with patience, and with an vnpartiall eye, to read what I shall, somwhat more largely, deduce out of his expresse doctrine, in two of hisIrenaus lib. 4. cap. 32. et 34. chapters, of his fourth book against heresies. For first, he not so much as once mentioneth either pro∣pitiatory sacrifice, or transubstantiation, but rather hee expresly compareth the same sacrifice of bread and wine with the sacrifices of the olde testament, and maketh that the same is no more needfull to God then those were. He also most significantly auoucheth that it is a sacrifice of the things which are from vs; and hauing made a gene∣rall asseueration, that sacrifices doe not sanctifie the man, but that the pure conscience wherewith the Sacrifice is offered, doth sanctifie the Sacrifice: hee presentlie addeth thus, that therefore, the gift of the Church, is cal∣led a pure sacrifice, because the Church with simplicity of∣fereth, it (would he haue spoken thus, if Christ the Author of all sanctity, had beene really present?) further obserue, those words of him. This oblation, the Church, onely offereth, pure to the maker, offering to him, with thankesgiuing, of his Creature: and in the two and thirtieth chapter, hee calleth the oblation, (primitias, ex suis creaturis) the Primicies of his owne creatures, and there hee further
addeth, that God, who giueth vs his gifts, for nourish∣ments; the Church offereth the first fruits, of those gifts; which, (saith hee) is the very oblation of the new Testa∣ment which the Church receiued from the Apostles: and of these gifts, in the fiue and thirty Chapter, he saith, (ter∣rena quidem, &c. the earthly things, which are disposed for vs, it behooueth to be tipes of those things, which are celestiall, yet made of the same God; and disputing against such Heretikes, who offered of the same creatures, of bread and wine, with the Church to God, the Father of Christ, and yet denied God the Father of Christ to bee the Curteous Rea∣der obserue all this discourse clearely and truly gathered out of that Ancient Fa∣ther, or for proofe hereof vouchsafe to reade him and for the same purpose, see S. Chrisostome and Theodoret in Epist ad Haebr. maker of them, but another God, he twiteth them thus: that they make God who is the Father of Christ as it were needy, and to bee desirous to be serued and honoured with the Creatures of another God (would hee haue spoken thus, if Christ himselfe really offered had beene the sacri∣fice)? And in his 32, and 34. hauing clearely shewed, that God, rather requireth innocency, and integrity of consci∣ence, then sacrifice, yet in respect of gratitude (saith he) not as though God had neede thereof, sacrifice must bee of∣fered vnto him: and then addeth these words, speaking of the Church, offerre oportet igitur, &c. It behooueth there∣fore to offer to God, the first fruits of his creatures; euen as Moyses speaketh, thou shalt not appeare empty handed, before the sight of the Lord thy God, that in those things in which mā hath been grateful to God; in the same things, being so deputed, he may receiue that honor which is from him; and it is not the kinde of oblatious which is re∣fused; oblations were there, and oblations bee heere; sacri∣fices in the people; (to wit the olde Testament) and sacri∣fices in the Church, but the speciall manner, is onely chan∣ged; because it is now offered, not from seruants, but from such as are free. Thus he; and also expressy, in the first lines of this Chapter, he saith that therefore, the Church offe∣reth a pure sacrifice, not as though God had need of it, but because, he that offereth the gift, is honoured in the
gift, that is offered, if it bee accepted of. Would hee haue spoken thus, if he had beleeued, that Christ himselfe were really present, and really offered by the Priests hand? nay expresly, he addeth, that the Church offereth by Christ, and by the (Word) Christ, a pure oblation. By all these and ma∣ny such like obseruations in that learned and holy father, it is euident what maner of oblation he thought the Church had receiued; to wit of Gods creatures, of bread and wine. But the aduersary, notwithstanding all these euidences, in∣sisteth vpon these words of him: Christ taking that, which of a creature is bread, said, this is my body, and the Chalice, which is of that creature, which is according to vs; confes∣sing it, to be his blood: these be the words, vpon which they insist: which may seeme to make some what for the Luthe∣rans Consubstantiation, but nothing at all, for the transub∣stantiaters. Tell me O Christian, did Christ in verity, make the creatures of bread and wine, which are according to vs, to be his body, and bloud? that implieth contradiction, and is of those things which cannot be done; (as the Pontifici∣ans themselues will confesse) but tell me O Christian? did not Christ, when he said, bread was his body, and wine was his blood? did he not institute a Sacrament? it is cleare. Who wil not therefore thus inferre? that bread must be his body, and wine, must be his blood, in that manner, in which Sa∣craments, are called, and said, to be the very things, where∣of, they are Sacraments, to wit, Sacramentally, in significa∣tion, operation, efficacy. Saint Irenaeus meaneth (as it is most cleare) that naturall bread, and naturall wine (which are the things offered, as hee most often, and significantly affirmeth) Christ, confessed to be his body, and his bloud; the which because they can not be truly, and really, with∣out implying of contradiction, or without destruction of the creatures; (which he most clearly denieth, and is most euidently, against all, the whole discourse of that Father,) they must bee therefore the body, and bloud of Christ, sa∣cramentally, according to the doctrine of Saint Austin, inEpist. 23.
his Epistle to Boniface: and according as Baptisme, where∣with we are regenerate, is called water and the holy Ghost; not as though the substance of the Holy Ghost were a sub∣stantiall part of the sacrament. And whereas the same Fa∣ther expresly deliuereth thus: (Quemadmodum enim, qui est &c) for euen as the bread which is from the earth re∣ceiuing the inuocation of God, is now no more common bread, but the Eucharist, consisting of two things, earthly and heauenly: so our bodies, receiuing the Eucharist, are not now corruptible, hauing hope of resurrection. It is heere manifest, that he will haue the Sacrament and Sacri∣fice of the Church, to consist of two things, one earthly, the other heauenly, that is of bread▪ which is earthly, and of the earth: and the heauenly which is heauenly, because sitting in Christ, at the right hand of God his Father, and so ac∣cording to the nature of Sacraments, it is easily conceiued how this Sacrament may consist of two things, one earthly the element, and the other heauenly the thing of the Sa∣crament: (like as Baptisme consisteth of Iohn. 3. water, and the ho∣ly ghost) one signifying, the other signified; one present, the other absent; one visible, the other inuisible; one cor∣porall; the other spirituall; one touching the body, the o∣ther working in the soule: but it is against the nature of Sacraments, to haue them truly, and really, to consist both of the things signified and signifying as together: by an es∣sential and real coniunction of presence; as is manifest in al other Sacraments with them: but especially in baptisme, in which a morall and vertuall vnion only, not a reall con∣iunction, and Although the substance of the holy Ghost by his infinty and immensity bee present in all things euen in the water of baptisme: not∣withstanding Formally, and in respect of this presence he worketh not in the Sa∣craments. presence of the holy Ghost in substance with water, and in water is necessary. Moreouer this holy Father affirmeth, that like as the bread of the Eu∣charist, is not common breade, ter inuocation of God, so our bodies, receiuing the Eucharist are not corruptible, ha∣uing hope of the resurrection: consider curteous Reader how our bodies are by this Fathers saying incorruptible, to wit by hope of Resurrection, not because they are by
substance, or any intrinsecall quality in them, made in∣corruptible, but onely for the relation, and the respect, to incorruption, which they shall put on, at the gene∣rall resurrection; euen so, the bread and the wine, are still earthly, & after consecration, they loose not their na∣tures: as Dialog Im∣patib. Theodoretus saith: but, in respect of the sa∣cramentall coniunction, respect, and relation which they haue to Christs body, and his blood, they are said with the same body and blood to make the Eucharist: and so the Eucharist, to consist onely of two things, one Earthly, and the other Heauenly, as this Father deliuereth: and this is that which Ciprian de vn∣ctione Crismat. If this book be his, the Aduer∣saries vse it. Saint Ciprian saith, (speaking how bread and wine are the body and blood of Christ) different kinds (saith hee) and names indu∣ced to one essence, and the signes signifying, and the things signified, called by the same names. And saint Ambrose thus; Amb. lib. 6. ca. 1. de Sacram. therefore for a similitude, thou receiuest the sacrament, but obteinest the grace, and vertue of the true nature. I will yet, with thy patience, (curteous Reader) adde one sentence, of an Africane Father, in his booke de fi∣de ad Petrum, which booke, many assigne to Saint Augustine, but the Authour is Fulgent. de fide ad Petrum. c. 19 Fulgentius, an Aun∣cient Father and Saint, (firmissime tene &c) hould most firmely, neither in any sorte doubt of this, that the onely begotten Sonne of God, taking our flesh vppon him, did offer himselfe, as a sweete smelling Sacrifice to GOD; to whome, and the Father, and the Ho∣ly Ghost, the Prophets, the Patriarkes, and Priests, in the olde Lawe, Sacrificed bruite Beasts, and to whom in the new Testament, now, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, the Holy Catholike Church, through∣out the vniuersall Worlde doth not cease, in Faith, and Charitie, to offer the true Sacrifice of Breade and Wine: in those carnall Sacrifices, there was a figu∣ration of the flesh of Christ, which he should offer, and
of the bloud which he should shed, for the remission of our sinnes: in this sacrifice, there is a thansgiuing and a remem∣brance, of the flesh, which hee hath offered, and of the bloud which he hath shed for vs: thus hee, describing the faith of the Apostolike Church in his time, and of the Reformed English Church now. Weighing all these authorities with infinite like, which may bee brought out of all Antiquity, I haue greately meruailed how Transubstantiation hath crepte so farre into the Church, as to haue the same defined in so great a Councell, as that of Laterane was: doubtlesse, it is to bee imputed to some hiperbolicall speeches, of cer∣taine Fathers; and to that disposition of all sorts of people, who (like as theExod. 32. Iewes in the wildernesse,) desire some visible God to goe before them, whom they might adore as present, and inuocate, and offer sacrifice vnto him: but doubtlesse most of all, it is to bee attributed to the pride of the Romane Bishops, in whose Sees the mistery of ini∣quitie hath been euer working more or lesse, within some small space after the Apostles times, that thereby the Pro∣phecie of two Apostles2. Thes. 2. et A∣pocal. 17. S. Paul, and S. Iohn, might take place: and Rome with her spirituall whor domes might a∣postatate from Christ, and fornicate with the Kings and Nations of the worlde: and that of Christ be fulfilled, that when the Sonne of man commeth, he should hardly finde faith vpon earth. It cannot bee doubted, but that there haue bene alwaies some, still succeeding the Ancient Fa∣thers; such as Bertram, Berengarius, Scotus, Wallafrid, Al∣frike Archbishop of Yorke in his Epistle to Wolstane, who more or lesse, haue written against Transubstantiation: the bookes of whom, as well as of diuers others, wee may thinke haue beene suppressed, as well as that many others for the supporting, of Transubstantiation, and of many o∣ther Popish Positions, haue beene deuised, by some Po∣pish Monks, of the Roman Church, before the Art of prin∣ting was vsed in Europe, or the West. I haue lately perused,
the painefull, and commendable labours, of one Master Iames in a certaine booke of his, in which out of the works of the Pontificians themselues, hee hath shewed, a 187. Treatises, to haue beene counterfeited, and set foorth in the names of Ancient fathers: & out of my small reading I am assured, he might haue added many more which may be proued alike counterfet, out of the confessions of the Papists themselues; whereof when I spake vnto him, hee told me, that there was aboue 300, or 400. more treatises, which with like probable reasons, wil be hereafter shewed to be supposititions: One thing, I haue specially noted, that the most pregnant authorities, which are cōmonly brought by the Pontificians, for confirmation of their errors, are, for the most part, taken out of the supposititious & counterfeit works of the Fathers. Heer, in this place vpon this occasion of their counterfeiting fathers, I will tell you, of a certaine deuised Miracle (deuised for their transubstantiatiō) which was carried vp and downe this Kingdome, by some Igna∣tianed Priests, some two yeeres since. A certaine Church, (saith the relation) with all that was within it, with the very Tabernacle, and towre it selfe of the sacrament was consumed with fire, (the Sacrament onely, remaining vntouched, and hanging in the aire, vntil, that an Altar, be∣ing by order of the Bishop of the place erected, & a Priest appointed, to say masse vnder it, the same Sacrament of it selfe, descended down, vpon the Altar:) (but marke, what is deliuered also, in the same relation) & forsooth also at time of the eleuation, when the priest, that said Masse, eleuated that host then God (which he hadMy master valques in Rome taught, (& it is the o∣piniō of diuers Spanish Di∣uines) that Christ is truely and really pro∣duced by as many new and seueral substā∣tiall act ons productions, & makings as there be con∣secrated Hosts in the world: o∣therwise saide hee (and that most truly) trā∣substantiation cannot be de∣fended. made and consecrated) the miraculous host, hid it selfe, and could not be seene, till after eleuation; when it shewed it self again as before, han∣ging in the air: this, is the substance, of that miraculous nar∣ration, if I doe not misremember, but, for the name, either of the city, where the miracle was wrough, or of the name of the city of the Archbishop, who was sent vnto, vpon the appearing of the miracle, I doe not remember; neither
could I, when I reade the narration, twice or thrice seri∣ously ouer, think in what country those cities should stand; neither could any of the three Ignatianed Priests, who were in the house, coniecture where the Cities shold stand: And the names of the Cities, were so obscure, that (I pro∣test) I could hardly carry them out of the Chamber, where I reade the narration. I was some yeere since at my going ouer into Flanders very inquisitiue, of this miracle (be∣cause, as the Priests said, the miracle came from out of Flan∣ders, or France, from some of the Ignatians there) but IIf any one shal say, Christ is in penitrals (in Pixes) or if a∣ny one say loe he ere is Christ (at Brussels) loe there is Christ (at Louain) do not beleeue them saith Christ, for ma∣ny fals Christs shal arise. Mat. 24. Mar. 13. could not by any meanes possibly heare, any the least newes thereof; by which I esteemed it as a meere tale (like those of Brussels, & Louaine) as I indeed suspected also so much, when I reade it, though the three Ignatianed priests could not endure to heare any doubt to bee made therof, because both they, and their great Family, in which they were resident did beleeue it. Vouchsafe O Sauiour, to open their eies, that they may understand, how thy infinite loue did appoint and ordaine, at thy last supper, a venerable sacrament, and a most holy commemoratiue Sacrifice, as all antiquity & the true Catholike Church, hath euer taught: but notThe supersti∣tions Mexicās were accusto∣med the eue of their God Vitzilpuitzli to make a massie image of wheat, hony & the herb blit mixed toge∣ther like the wodden image of their God in the Temple: the women also made certaine bones, and peeces of paste, the which with their Massie image after diuers inuocations and praiers of their Priests ouer and vpon them, hauing first carried them vp and downe in procession they did eate with dreadfull and horrible reuerence; beleeuing the same to be the very flesh and bones of their God Vitzilpuitzli. Botero: Relationi vniuer∣sali. parte. 4. lib. 2. fine. aco∣mestible God, not a Visible God, not a Sensible God, not a tra∣ctable God, proposed as thy diuine maiesty it selfe to be adored, inuocated: who wet to ascend vp to heauen, & not to be found heer, or there in the desert, or in the secrets of houses, vpō earth (as at Brussels, Louane, &c (vntilthy glorious appearing, in al maiesty, with millions of all Angels: and if your humani∣tie, and Maiesty, bad intended to haue remained lying in the Sacrament, where you should need bearing vp: & lying in the sacrament, (not able to go it self) should need securi∣ty, as locking vp vnder lock & key: need adorning with gold
siluer, and pretious stones, to trimme you vp, thereby to procure deuotion:Math. 26. Mar. 14. how could you haue said, to your A∣postles, and in them to vs: the poore, you shall haue alwaies with you: but me you shall not haue alwaies with you? Good Iesus, if you were truly, really, and transubstan∣tially, to remaine in the Sacrament, how should you not be alwaies with vs? yea, and in more neede of our helpe, of oyle, and lights to burne before you, of locke and key to defend you, of Tabernacles made of gold and siluer to beare you vp, and to lodge you, &c. then the poo∣rest lazare, that is, who more or lesse, can helpe himselfe? No, no, sweete Iesus, you were not to remaine in this sort vnder such sensible signes. A Sacrament, a diuine Sa∣crament you instituted, and euen as you told,Iohn. 3. Nicode∣mus, and in him, all, that no man, vnlesse he be borne a∣gaine of water and of the holy Ghost, should enter into the kingdome of heauen, (not as though the substance of water should be regenerated in them, or transubstan∣tiated into them, nor their soules be sanctified, with the substance and the essence of the holy Ghost; In whose di∣uine person, there is nothing which is not an infinite sub∣stance, & an infinite essence) but that the regenerate should be washed with water outwardly, and their soules be in∣wardly sanctified with graces of the holy Ghost: so also in this your diuine Sacrament, all the faithfull, were with their mouth to eate corporally the elements of bread and wine, and their soules to be inwardly fed, and sanctified by the graces of your bodie and bloud efficaciously wor∣king in them. And seeing the aduersaries great Cham∣pionHarding in his answere to Iewels chal∣lenge. pag. 139. Doctor Harding, commendeth and produceth to proue the Romane presence in the Sacrament, the similitude, wherewith MartinBucer in comment. in 16. Math. Bucer vsed to expresse the manner of Christs presence, and how his bodie wor∣keth those graces in the soules of worthie receiuers: I will (it being as fit as similitudes vse to be) heere vse the same: (vt sol vere in vno loco coeli visibilis, circumscriptus, &c.
Euen as (saith he) the visible Sunne is truly circumscribed in one place of heauen, and yet, as present in his beames, is truly and substantially exhibited throughout the world: So the Lord, although he be circumscribed in one place of the arcane and diuine heauen, that is, of the glorie of his Father: notwithstanding by his word and sacred Simboles truly as whole God and Man; heObseruing this sentence out of Bucer, may not Par∣sons his calum∣niating spirit, be called in question, who reporteth that Martin Bucer should affirme to the Duke of Norfolke (who asked his opi∣nion of the reall presence) that if all the Euangelists had written were true, then Christs bodie must needs be there: what presence hee taught, you haue heere heard by him∣selfe confested, and by Har∣ding approued: but Parsons bringeth his answere to the Duke, as thogh that worthie man had doub∣td of the truth of th Euange∣list, a manifest caumny as you here see: but Parsons is sul of such stuffe. is as present exhibited, in the sacred Supper, and for that really, substantially: which presence the minde doth not, lesse certainly acknowledge, beleeuing these words, and simboles of the Lord, then the eies see, and haue the Sunne presentially demonstrated and exhibited by the corporall light. This is a hidden thing, and of the new Testament; a thing of faith; therefore hither are not to be admitted cogitations of the presenta∣tion of a bodie, which is consisting after the manner of this passible and fluxible life; we must simply adhere vnto the word of our Lord, and faith must yeeld supply to the de∣fect of senses: thus farre that learned man: and I wish the Reader to obserue the simplicitie of Doctor Harding, who produceth this place against Bishop lewel, as prouing the Romane transubstantiation. It proueth indeed, that Christ in his graces is truly and exhibited to the worthy receiuers of the Sacrament, which the Church of England in her Iyturgie, and articles of the conuocation, constantly with all the ancient Church Catholike deline∣reth. O how happy had it beene for Christendome, if lear∣ned men leauing off too deepely, to search into this dread. full misterie, had with a Christian simplicitie, applied themselues onely to the deuout and frequent vse of the same, and not so peremptorily to haue defined Christ, re∣ally & corporally to be present, eyther by impanation, as Rupertus Abbot, or consubstantiation, as the Lutherans, or transubstantiation, (which is most improbable: and a∣gainst the verie light of all antiquitie) as Pope Innocent and his I ateranists: but such is the pride of the Romane Bishops, all their Doctrines forsooth must be vncontrol∣lable
all their vses vnreprehensible, all their sentences vn∣appellable: but if they would haue vouchsafed to haue squared their faith to the ancient Church, they would haue perswaded and inculcated the reuerent and deuout often receiuing of it, as of a diuine Sacrament: but as for the manner of Christs presence, (seeing his Maiestie hath not more expresly deliuered it, then as in a Sacrament) they would haue beene reuerently silent. But theApocalip. 17. Cuppe of abhominations, was to come from Rome; for which one day, she will be consumed and destroyed, euen by those Kings and Kingdomes who haue beene drunke with the Cup of her fornications and abhominations. The seuenth Motiue. ANother Motiue with me, and very forcible,The seuenth Motiue. is their intollerable, or rather execrable ab∣use in their vaine indulgences, the which be∣ing void of all foundation in holy Scripture, are nothing at all, to be groundedSee ajetan. lib de Indulgent cap. 1. Roffensis consutat. assert. Lutheri Act. 18. Alphons. aduer∣sus hereses. verbe indulgentia. vpon any Apostolical tradition, or authoritie of ancient Fathers. Those pardons lay as hidden, & little regarded vntil that prophane Pope Boniface the eight, (of whom his predecessor Cele∣stine, reputed by the Romanists for a Saint prophecied, that as he had entered like a Foxe, so he should liue like a Lion, and die like a Dog, as accordingly it fell out) did by his im∣pious, and superstitious Buls giue pardons, to the visiters of Rome in the yeares of Iubilies,Platina in vita Bonifa. appointing the same, to be kept euery hundreth yeare, (although they are now ordained to be kept euery fiue and twentie, by Sixtus the fourth, as a little before they were kept every fiftie yeare, by the ordinance of Clement the sixth,) and in the same his Buls did cast abroad the dregs of the filthy Cup of his ab∣hominations: I call them dregs of the Cup, because be∣ing so iniurious to the death and passion of Christ, so per∣niciously
ouerthrowing all discipline, and as a canker de∣stroying good life, that I can hardly thinke of a name, vile enough for them. Dregges they are, therefore, because partly founded vpon the imperfect and impure defects of sinfull men, of whom there was neuer yet found one with∣out many sinnes, or so perfect that he couldPsal. 48. make re∣demption for himselfe, much lesse for his brother. Dregs, because this treasure, vpon which papall Pardons, are grounded, is blasphemously compounded, ioyntly of the infinite merits of Christ and his Saints: they seeme to ac∣knowledge Christs merits, to be inexhaustible and infinite, and yet they will needs haue compartners with him, as Saint Laurence, Saint Paul, &c. in the founding of this Pontifician treasurie: Dregs and most vaine dregs, be∣cause this treasurie is founded vpon the actions and me∣rits of Saints, not as they were meritorious, for so say they, they are rewarded in their owne persons, but as they were satisfactorious forsooth: (as though an action, in that it is painefull, may not be, and is not also meritorious according to their owne principles,) and therefore, be∣cause there were some Saints, who had more satisfactions then their sinnes required, (as though euerie sinne, though in Saints, had not an infinite malice, according to their owne principles, and euerie action, in that it is satisfacto∣rious according to their owne principles also, had not a finite, and a limited vertue) these their satisfactions re∣maining in the Popes Vatican treasurie, he may dispense thereof, to whom he shall thinke meete. What need then of the pecuniarie taxe of the Apostolicall Chancery, or pe∣nitentiarie, if there be such a treasurie? yes, that is to fill the purse, but not to inrich the spiritual treasurie of merits of Saints: and rather to buy some of them which are in∣exhaustible. I demaunded not long since of theM. G. B. Archpriest that was, vpon what authoritie of Scripture, the Pontifi∣cian treasurie of Indulgences was founded: considering se∣riously, he produced that ofAd Colless. 1. Saint Paul, (adimpleo ea quae
desunt, &c. I fulfill those things which are wanting of the passiō of Christ, for his body, which is the Church. I replied that according to the exposition of ancient Fathers S. Paul was said to fulfil what was wāting of the passions of Christ, because Christ was to suffer in his members vntil his Gos∣pell was peaceablye planted: and therfore theAct. 9. passions of Christs Saints were called the passions of Christ, and I added that it was meere blasphemie to say, that Saint Paul added any sufficiency to the passions of Christ, as though they were not sufficient in themselues: this and some like replies, he tooke so hamously (for he is exceeding troubled, if you seeme to call in question any o∣ther Popish errour, then that which is contained in the PopesBreuia. Paull. 5. contra iura∣mcatum fidoli∣tatis. Breefes agaist the oath of alleageance) that since that time I neuer had any conference at all with him, and whosoeuer shall conferre with him shall finde little profit thereby, for he is a man who can endure no replying. A iust Pithagoras, ipse dixit. Againe dregs; because whereas the Popes protend by them to deliuer (à pena & culpa) from sinne & paine, they deceiue the simple, for they themselues teach, that pardons do deliuer onely from paine or punish∣ment, but they must forsooth needs heere also equiuocate, and that in their holy Bulles, to make their marchandize more sailable: and yet perhaps the ancientBonif. apud Platin. in vita. deuisers of Pardons & most expresly Boniface the 8 did hold that they did deliuer from sinne also, for their most expresse words be (à pena & culpa) from paine or punishment & sin; but now they are refined forsooth, & they do deliuer only from any pains, whether already enioyned, or to be enjoyned, or to be suffered in fierie Purgatorie, but not from sinnes. Dregges, for where as they all generally teach, that as they are like in efficacie and vertue as they are in sound, so they do giue plenaries, and most full plenaries of Pardons,Indulgent. concess ad in stant. collegij. Anglica. for verie trifles and toyes; and I could not but thinke my selfe to trifle the time, if I should stand to set downe any of their particulars heerein, especially of
those most large vaine pardons, which the late Empresse, mother to this Emperour, obtained for her selfe and all o∣thers, vnto whom she should vouchsafe to bestow for a fauour one of her silly granes of glasse or horne: I my selfe had some fortie of them by that Empresses owne hands de∣liuered vnto me as a speciall Iewell. One thing I note in one of their Pardons obtained by the English Colledge, that whosoeuer wil obtaine the same, 13. Pardon. must say the Letanies be∣fore God, or some Image; they wel make a distinctiō betwixt God and the Image, for as Lactantius long ago said, where an Image is set vp to be worshipped, God cannot be there. Dregges, and most vaine dregges, because these pardons, are tied to little granes of glasse or horne, &c. so that if a man call vpon the name of Iesus deuoutly at the houre of death, he shall haue a plenarie, (prouided he haue an En∣glish graine) I call it not a dregge to say, that whosoeuer calleth vpon the name of Iesus, at the houre of death, be∣leleeuing in him as in his redeemer, by that saith which worketh with, and in charitie, that he shal thereby haue re∣mission of all his sinnes in Christ, and consequently of all paines; for (exempto reatu, eximitur & pena) the guilt of sinne being taken away, the punishment is taken away also: as ancient Tertul. de baptismo. cap. 5. Tertullian pronounceth. But I call it a vile dreg to say that such a one shal haue remission of all paine, proui∣ded he haue a grain (a very character of the beast) as though Christs passion were to worke by graines. The Popes trea surie indeed may, but not Christs passion, which worketh no otherwise then by faith and loue, in his word, and his holy Sacraments by him expresly instituted, & not by man deuised. I noted not long since, how Ignatius the Parent of the Nouell societie, (vnworthily called of Iesus) is pain∣ted vpon his death-bed, breathing out the name of Iesus, but to assure vs all, that he escaped Purgatorie, it is expres∣sed in the same pictures, drawne according to his life writ∣ten by Ribad. in vita Ignat. and his pictures ac∣cording to the same. Ribadinera an Ignatian, that he died not, with∣out a plenarie indulgence: belike he, who is alreadie bea∣tified
by Paul the fifths authoritie, and shall doubtlesse ere it be long, be sainted, when the Ignatians shall haue pro∣uided money enough for the Charges of canonization, had not satisfaction enough for himselfe when he died, and therefore had part of the Romane treasure giuen him: but when he is sainted, he will haue such store of merit and sa∣tisfaction (hauing gotten it in heauen belike) that there is no doubt, but he will greatly adde, to the treasures of the Church: and this addition had beene made long before this, if diuers thousands of Masses offered for his canoni∣zation to a certaine Popes Nephew, could haue procuredIt is a com∣plaint which I and diuers o∣thers haue of∣ten heard from the Ignatians, perhaps the purse for good vses posted vp and downe, is intended for these charges. the same. But* want of money is the cause why he is not, yet sainted, as many of themselues haue complained: and I su∣spect, that the time of his sainting doth approach, because now the Ignatians beginne euery where, to broach abroad those cōmentitious wonders, the which lesse then some two decades of yeares agoe, were scarce knowne or not to be heard of in Rome. But Saint Richard Holdcorne, and Saint Henry Garnet haue alreadie greatly increased this treasure, for they did great satisfaction, dying as glorious Martyrs: and how glorious and potent a martyr Saint Henry Garnet is you may gather, by the picture of the straw∣face, which they haue procured to be drawn of him beyond Seas: in which his face is drawen, as if it had appeared in the straw most shining with a crowne vpon his head, (to shew perhaps he is a king in heauen) with a star in the fore∣head (to associate him perhaps with the twelue starres of the Apoc. 12. Apocalips, signifying eyther the twelue Patriarkes or the twelue Aposes) with a Cherub also, (to shew perhaps that he is assumpted, to the second quire of Angels, of the intelligent Chrubins,) but they should rather haue exalted him to the Seraphins, for surely he had more good will for the Popes cause, then he had learning to de∣fend the Popes Monarchie, as it was euident at his triall when he gaue not satisfaction as was expected. For my part I greatly lament the mans case, knowing that he was other∣wise of a ciuill conuersation, although not deseruing the ap∣plause
which is now giuen him, his conuersation being ve∣rie ordinarie, & himselfe much giuen to drinke hot Sacks, (of which also he tooke very plentifully the day before his death, as very honorable persons do testifie) a liquor not fit for such as liue with ease (studying little, and praying little) and haue saturitie of bread, and conuerse much amongst womē: but he is with his Iudge, & hath receiued according¦ly as he was found going hence either good or bad, and if his repentāce were sincere, doubtlesse he hath found mercy. Againe dregs, because this their Papall Antonine a Saint with thē holdeth that the Pope by his absolute power can de∣liuer all soules out of Purga∣torie. Anton. 3. titulo. 22. cap. 5. Monarchy of the Pope ouer the souls in Purgatory, is not to deliuer thē ther out by way of impetration or intercession only, but by way of suffrage, & iust exchange by paying paine for paine, debt with debt, the paine of soules, with the paine of Christ, and his Saints; and yet I call these dregs, because as it seemeth few Pontificiās, do beleeue them, to be of like force, as they sound: for the most of thē, after they haue procured trentals of Masses vpon trentals for their departed friends soules, yet still they remaine in doubt of their friends states, and do procure new Masses vpon Masses. Doubtlesse it were good his holines would determine what number of Masses is suf∣ficient (bing accompanied with his powerfull grains) to de∣liuer a soul out of Purgatory, as wel as he determineth, what number & maner of miracles are sufficient, for the inrolling one into his Calender of Saints, for otherwise the iudiciall & discreet Pontifician will easily grow to suspect, that nei∣ther Masse nor grain are of so great validity, and valor, as is pretended, if after so many of thē celebrated for one soule, yet still more are required. Surely Robert Parsons who died not long ago in Rome, had one of these graines & plenaries for you shall seldom heare any Ignatian (according to their fashion for others) pray for the rest of his soule: perhaps they repute him a Saint as some seemed to doe in Rome, who got some of his haire, to keepe it for a relicke, (therein some what more wise then a certaine person within this Citie, of no very good name, who washing (the night before his death) Roberts the Monks feet lately
executed at Tiborne, pared off, some of one of his nailes, to keepe the same for a great relicke) but Robert Parsons, as his life and conuersation, was but ordinary, not passing vertuous in any respect, as all indifferent persons will say who haue conuersed with him, so his end was but ordina∣ry, in respect of Sanctity, and in some respect not like a Saint, because as I haue beene credibly informed, by those that were there at his death, he talked idlely, and raued some whole daies before his end, (a thing though very or∣dinary with such as dye of burning feuers as it is reported he did) yet not vsually in Saints: and it is thought, that his sicknesse, first grew vpon him, for that there was a question made, about the hauing his bookes examined in the in∣quisition, & it had so beene, if their great Cardinall Bellar∣mine, with Aquauiua their General, had not stood for him, as is reported. But, to returne to indulgences, it seemeth, that Popes themselues haue little better esteeme of them then dregs, who make such hauock of them. Great is that priuiledge of the Carmelites, who haue obtained of some holy Pope or other, that no one of their order, shall abide longer in purgatory, then vntil the next saturday after their death. This their priuiledge was publiquely defended in Paris, in the yeer of our Lord 1601. by Iames Rampont a Carmelite, vnder the moderation of their most wise and learned Master Bartholmew Girart a Nauarricke as Moun∣sieur Pierre Moulin deliuereth in his defence of his Ma∣iestiesPierre du mou∣lin en sa defense Article vingt∣vniesme. most Christianlike and learned premonition to all Christian Princes. As liberall, if not more liberall, was In∣nocent the fourth, who graunted to all such, as fought by his authority, and commaund, against Conradus, forgiue∣nesse of all their sinnes, not onely for themselues, but for their friends also, as Paris. in Hen∣rico 3. ad ann. 121. Mathew of Paris recor∣deth: like was the greate liberality of Pope Epist. leodien. contra Paschalē Paschall to the Earle of Flaunders, if he would vpon his commaun∣dement, despoile and afflict the Church, and Clear∣gie of Leedes, for ioyning in true obedience to their
lawfull Emperour Henry the fourth, with innumerable such like dregges, haue Christian People and kingdomes, beene bewitched, since the time of the Diuels rage and losing. Who can sufficiently deplore, the miseries of these times? Who will not cry out? O manners, O Times! and bewaile these crooked and distorted soules of men; bewaile such Marchandizing & traffique of soules, which is now growne so vsuall, that at Rome, there is a booke printed, called the Liber intitu∣latus Taxa can∣cellariae. seu pe∣nitentia. Aposto∣licae. taxe of the Apostolical penitentiary; in which book, there are taxes for dispensations, for absolutions of all sorts, and according to the greater or lesser difficulty, of the dispensa∣tion and absolution, greater or lesser is the mony-taxe; for money is all in all and all is vendible at Rome for mony, God, Altars and all, as Baptista Mantuanus long agoe de∣plored: yea & Berv. de con∣siderat. ad Eu∣gen. lib. 4. cap. 2. Saint Bernard, challengeth Eugenius Pope thus. Giue me but one, in all that populous City of Rome, who gaue consent to thy election, to be Pope, but either it was for present paiment or for hope of pament. If so ô ho∣ly Brnard, then hardly was Eugenius an Apostolicall Pope: for if Simon, who would onely haue bought for money, power to giue the holy ghost, lost all the lot and part heo Acts. Apo. c. 8. had with Christ, as that Peter saide, which could not de∣ceiue: then Eugenius, who really came into the Papacie, by Simony (as almost all others now doe, as both Heauen & earth will witnesse) hath no lot, no part, (in sermone isto,) (saith Ibidem. Peter) in this speech, in this Faith and Church of Christ; and so Eugenius no Pope, and so neither his succes∣sours. There was lately in this City, a very vnlearned Francis∣can Frier, who had store of this treasure, out of the merits of his Parent Saint Francis▪ (for all men who knew his conuersation, will sweare, he had no superfluity of merits of his owne, to bestow vppon others, and yet heeThe worst Pō∣tifician Priests commonly most ought after. was daily more frequented, and visited, then the grauest in the prison where he was, (for so it is that many English pontificians, seeke such ignorant, and intemperate Ghost∣ly
Fathers, as by experience, can haue compassion of others infirmity, bee it in any sinne of &c. This brother forsooth, had the life of his holy Father, hee had also certaine gir∣dles with certaine knots vpon them; the which, whosoe∣uer should weare, and deuoutly say some certaine praiers, vpon euery Marke the Practises of this Pardon∣monger: one of those knots, he should for euery one of them, haue some great pardon by the merite of Saint Francis; and by the wearing of the girdle, he should come to Heauen, and should haue so great a bléssing, neuer to diesodain death. These bauld pardons when I read in a copy out of his own hands, with astonishment I admired thereat, and procured an Assistant in the house, to speake with him, and to perswade him, to desist from selling such merchan∣dise any longer: but I profited nothing, for whensoeuer, his sheepe came to him, (not vnlike those, who in the fielde were wonted to heare his Father S. Francis preach, when men neglected the same) hee would still in steed of setting foorth the infinite merits of Christs death and passion, in∣culcate, vnto them the Merits of Saint Francis, and of his miracles, & of the knots of his girdles, vpon the which holding them in his left hand, hee would with his right hand point out the attributes and perfections of them, not without the laughter of some of them that haue beheld, & contemned the mans superstitious folly. That this is true, I appeale to the consciences, of such, who haue often heard him, and who haue also sent him better Angels, for his gir∣dles, then any he could giue them: God pardon him; and open his eies, and conuert him, to his mercy: if the man, did not perniciously, still labour to bewitch others, with such trumpery, and if hee were not a most vehement enemy a∣gainst the Oath of Allegeance (so vehement that to my face he hath iudged me worthy to bee burnt for my booke of the Oath of Allegeance) I would not so much as haue once glanced at his proceedings; but if hee hold himselfe discontented, and if the glory of God require it, there is much more behind, and he shall, if he desire it, drinke the
dregges of his owne cuppe, vntill he surfet. But leaing to discourse longer of this matter, I infinuate this one thing, that there are of my acquaintance, some English pontifici∣ans, as worshipfull, as ingenious, and as zealous (yea too to zealous,) as the best of them, and yet as they haue often professed vnto me, they could neuer vnderstand, nor con∣ceiue, the mistery of indulgences, which diuers haue often laboured to inculcate vnto them. Iesus vouchsafe it may be in the end for the saluation of their souls, and that they may vnderstand with what trumpery they are still pestered from Rome, and I intreat the curteous and Christian Rea∣der of these my Motiues to pray for their conuersions. The eight Motiue. ANother Motiue is their manifest abuse, in commaunding and decreeing, the publique Liturgy of the Church, (in, and at which, with common consent, and concording deuoti∣on, God is to bee honoured, by all sorts pre∣sent) to bee celebrated, and done in tongues vnknowne to the Laity, which cannot, but be a most intollerable and inexcusable abuse, to any one, who with an indifferent eye, shall peruse the 14. Chapter of Saint Pauls first Epistle to the Corinthians: where he so strictly chargeth (adding that 1. Corin. 14. they are the Lords commandements) that Church, and in her all other Christian Churches, that their publique ser∣uice and Liturgy, (which consist of preaching, praying, ex∣horting, and ministring of the Sacraments) should be done to the edification of the whole assembly: which hee in that Chapter, most earnestly and effectually, laboureth to shew, could not bee, if their publique preachings, exhortations, prayings, conferences, singing of Psalmes and other litur∣gicall actions, were performed in tongues, not knowne, nor vnderstood by the assembly, and especially, (to con∣found
the Rmane tiranny, against the Laity in whose ig∣norance their victory standeth,) marke, those words of the blessed Ibidem. Apostle: But if thou blesse in the spirit, (to wit in an vnknowne tongue.) hee that supplieth the place of the vulgar, how shall hee say, Amen, vpon thy blessing, because hee knoweth not what thou saiest? for thou in∣deede giuest thanks well, but the other is not edified. Doth hee not in these words euince, that in the seruice which is publike, (especially in the commemoratiue sacri∣fice, offered by all, and for all) such it ought to be, that the Laty, the Vulgar, may vnderstand, and thereby be edified? and hee expresly speaketh of edification, by vn∣derstanding the seruice: and I challenge any aduersary, to shew that the Apostle heere speaketh of edification, by dumbe Rites, Ceremonies, or vnknowne tongues: vppon this Chapter of Saint Paul, the Annotations in 14. 1. orinth. Rhemists haue made many impertinent Annotations, and those verie long (for that is their fashion, when they are in a Labirinth of dif∣ficulties, to make many large windings, and turnings, ei∣ther to confound the Reader, or else to make him thinke they can say much, and so cunningly slide away) but if it please the Curteous Reader to peruse them, he shall finde, that they doe not cite, any one sentence of Auncient Fa∣ther, Commenting vpon this Chapter: their consciences telling them, that by citing of the Fathers, they should therein discouer their owne turpitude. For if it would haue pleased them to haue reade Saint Hierome, Saint Chriso∣stome, Theophilact, Haimo, yea Thomas Aquinas, and all those Auncient Fathers, who haue made Comments vpon that Scripture, the fourteenth of the first to the Co∣rinthians, they would haue seene their owne turpitude, discouered, and their mistery of vnknown tongues, in pub∣lique seruice condemned; and that subuerted, which most of them with other Romane errours, sweare to obserue, and kepe in their vngodly oath made by their vnpious, Pius the fourth Pope of that name.
But I must tell them also with their patience, that this their practise, is against a certaine Canon of their great and Admirable assembly of aboue a thousand of Prelates vnder Innocent the third, (one. Later. c. 9 where it is decreed, and ap∣pointed, that where diers people had sundry rites, and languages, there should bee Priests prouided, to minister them diuine seruice, according to their rites and langua∣ges; and in the end of the Canon this reason of this con∣stitution is added, as cause of the constitution it selfe, that the Priests might preach and edifie the people, (verbo et exemplo) with worde and example. But the Romane Bi∣shops, in practising against this, seeme to imitate the old Romane Ambitious Conquerours; who in such lands as they powerfully subdued, did egregiously endeuor to exile the auncient, and naturall tongues of the inhabitants, and to bring their owne in vse: being wisely perswaded, that it is the politikest, most peaceable and surest way, to ob∣taine secure possession of the conquered. So these later Romanes, in their stiffe and obstinate requiring, to haue their language, reigne in the diuine, and publique ser∣uice throughout all Churches of the West, what else do they intend, but that the Pope may reigne throughout all those Churches? which more or lesse, through his excommunications, interdicts, promotions, presentations, and through the imbecility of Princes, and the blinde ig∣norance of Christian people, he hath conquered to his ti∣ranny: Baptizing them after the name of his See of Rome, Romane Catholikes, not after the name of Christ, Christi∣an Catholikes: for Christian is a name now out of vse, vn∣lesse it bee in the reformed Churches of Christ, where Christ is truly, and only honoured and glorified: but how∣soeuer, the Popes tiranny, bee applauded in seruice of vnknowne tongues, doubtlesse the 1. Petr. 5. Roaring Lion, laugheth thereat, to see by his institution, warres to bee proclaimed against Gods Scriptures, and all Antiquity; God to bee depriued of his Honour, (which consisteth in
the vnderstanding, seruice, and religion of the heart: for he being a spirit, Iohn 4. in spirit and truth hee must bee adored) the Christian flocke to bee dispoiled, of their spirituall deuotion and comfort, which is not possibly to bee had, without the conceiuing, and vnderstanding of such things, by which the spiritual comfort is to be brought and ingen∣dred in their soules. They pretend forsooth that the miste∣ries of their Masse, will bee had in greater admiration, if they be not in a tongue vnderstood, by the common peo∣ple. Alas, how wisely? for I hope, their people must vn∣derstand the mysteries of the Masse, and therein be instruc∣ted, as their Tridentine Catechisme commaundeth, and as the Rhemists glory in their preface to the new Testa∣ment: and if they must bee instructed, to vnderstand the Diuine rites and Ceremonies; Why may they not bee permitted to haue the seruice in a tongue that they doe vnderstand? Their goodly argument, that some of the auncient Fathers, carried the mysteries of the Church closely in the primitiue daies, falleth of it selfe: for was not that done in respect of the Infidels and Catechumens? but as for the faithfull, they all well knew that phrase (norunt fideles) the faithfull haue knowen; and they vnderstood all the mysteries for the most part. The primitiue Church, practised faithfully that of Christ, (Mat. 8. Luc. 12 quod in aure &c) that which you heare in the eare, preach vpon the tops of hou∣ses: but although you were iustly afraid to haue your Masse mysteries celebrated, in known tongues, in respect of infinite impertinencies, and contradictions that are in it; why should you not suffer so much, as is read of holy Scrip∣tures in your Liturgies, to bee read and song in tongues, known to the Church? And what may bee thought, that Christs Apostles, would write their Gospels, and Epistles, in the Greeke tongue, (Saint Mathew in his Gospell, and Saint Paul in his Epistle to his Countrimen, writing in the Hebrew tongue, onely excepted), but for that the Greeke tongue, was most common, throughout the East
part of the world where Christian Religion was, first plan∣ted? And in the Primitiue Church al I desire the learned Ponti∣ficians to tell me whether the Apori∣phall Liturgies of Iames, Basil, Chrisostom, Am∣brose, yea of S. Peter also (which they falsly pretend) were not writ∣ten by them in the most vul∣gar tongues v∣sed then in their churches? confesse your tiranny O yee Romans and abuse Gods Church no longer. Church-seruice, was in this part of the World of Europe, and that of Asia for most part in the Hebrew, Greeke, or Latine tongues: because the same were more or lesse common, where Christianity was first planted: as for other countries, where the Gospell was preached: as first in AEthiopia: who is ignorant, but that the Churches Liturgie, was from the time of the Eunuch, vntill this day, in the AEthiopian tongue? Sclauonians had the like, Armenians the like, Egiptians the like, Grecians the like, Latines the like, He∣brews the like: and what doubt can bee made, but that the Indian Conuerts by Saint Thomas had the like? And wheresoeuer the Apostles planted any Churches, what question can be made, but that they did obserue the rule and 1. Corin. 14. commaundement of the Lord, to his Apostles, that euery thing should bee done to edification, and that glorious prophecie should bee fulfilled, euery Philip. 2. tongue shall confesse to his name: yea, the very Formes of all Church-seruices, doe clearely shew, that the People and Clergie were answerablye to conioyne their pray∣ers together, and to answere each other, as it is deli∣uered in the Constitut. A∣postol. Clementis. Cirill in Catech. mistagog. Iustin. Apolog. 2. ad An∣tomum. litur∣giae Iacobi. Chri∣sosto. Ambro. Ba∣sil saepe. constitutions of the Apostles, the olde Liturgies, and other Auncient Fathers: and what else did the comming downe of the Holy Ghost in the formes of so many fiery tongues, at Whitsontide, else portend and signifie, but that euery tongue should con∣fesse the name of our Lorde IESVS? and where this more meetely, then in their publique assemblies, where they were to honour GOD, and yeelde to each other all spirituall Comforte, and consolation? which could not, nor cannot bee performed, in dumbe and barba∣rous shewes. I cannot heere omit to set downe a point of simplicity of their great Doctor, Doctor Harding, who answering
an obiection, made by D. Iewel out of Saint Basil. Hexa∣mer. hom. 4. Basil, affir∣ming that the people together, men, women and children made a sound in their answers in the Churches, in the pub∣like seruice to God, like to the sound of a waue, striking v∣pon the Seabanks: This profound Harding an∣swere to Bi∣shop Iewels challenge. page. 8. Doctor would haue Saint Basil vnderstood onely, of the peoples sounding the word Amen: wisely insooth. Doubtlesse, the Doctor was in a dreame, or else forgot what Countryman Saint Basil was, or of what countrey people, that Father spea∣keth:e August. in Psal. 16. expos. 2 Harding. supra. if he had remembred Greece, or euer read any of the Greeke Lyturgies, or seene the Greeke publike seruice, which vpon the day of Saint Athanasius, the Grecians are permitted to celebrate in their owne tongue, in Rome, he would haue well vnderstood, that the Grecian Christians make longer answers and responses, in the publike Church seruice then Amen. But his answere to an authoritie pro∣duced by that learned Bishop out of Saint Austen perhaps is wiser; no insooth, more fond, heare it: (Quid hoc sit, &c.) what this is (saith Saint Austen) after we haue prayed to God to make vs cleane from our priuate sinnes, we must vnderstand, that we ought to sing as with humane reason, not with voice as birds doe, for Owsels, Popiniayes, Ra∣uens, and Pyes, and such like birds oftentimes be taught of men to sound they know not what: thus Saint Austen. Now it is manifest that these words are to be taken, of vn∣derstanding what is sung: but what answereth Do∣ctor Harding to them? marry thus: These words are to be taken of the vnderstanding of the sense (saith he) not the tongue, which the seruice is sung in. Now, the Vicar of Saint Fooles should be his ghostly Father, were he li∣uing. How is this Rabby taken in his folly? these words are to be vnderstood, that the People must haue vnderstan∣ding, of the sense of the words, but not vnderstand the words. Helpe out your Doctor you of Doway: for doubtlesse he is grauelled: what would heere be∣come of him, if more of the sentences of the ancient
Fathers which comment vpon the 14. Corinthians first Epistle: had beene by himselfe produced, and other out of Saint Austen vpon Genesis ad literam: he would doubt∣lesse haue runne out of the field, or else haue beene stroken downe to the ground, especially if he had heard that miraculous voice from heauen, which Pius the se∣cond Pope writeth of. The Doctour was much delighted with visions in his life time, and therefore I will now for his sake set one downe for the Dowists to demurre vpon it. There was a great controuersie betwixt the Pope and his Cardinals, (as a Pius. 2. hist. Bohem. cap. 13. Pope relateth) whether the Morauians and the Russians conuerted to the Christian faith, by Ciril, should be permitted to haue the publike Lyturgie, and seruice in their knowne tongue or not. Their Apostle Ciril was earnest for it, with some of the Cardinals: others con∣tradicted it, which contradiction miraculously was checked with a voice heard from heauen, speaking thus to them; Let euerie spirit praise the Lord, and euerie tongue con∣fesse him: and so the Pope with his Cardinals were by the Angelicall vision, instructed how to vnderstand those Scriptures by the Angell cited, and therupon gaue way to Cirils request; that the Morauians & Russians should haue their publike seruice in their own tongue, which they haue to this day: wherein they doubtlesse find such a comfort, that by no meanes they will relinquish that holy vse, though some haue often attempted against it. I haue ob∣serued how since the English Pontificians haue had their Primers set forth both in English and Latine together, that they do farre more willingly, and more deuoutly read their prayers in the English tongue, thē in the Latin: protesting that they receiue far greater comfort thereby; wishing also that the publike Church-seruice might to their like comfort be proposed in that tongue which they vnderstood. Before God of his mercy, first touched my hart to listē vnto his gos∣pel, I would sometimes out of a contemptuous kind of curi∣ositie (where I was not knowne) heare a peece of a Sermon
in some of the English Churches heere in London: but by no means wold I stay or listen to the hearing of the singing of their Psalms, (for I did both loath and detest them) but when God vouchsafed to touch my heart, first with consi∣deration of the Romane abuses, both for doctrine and dis∣cipline, I began sometimes to commune with my selfe, whether perhaps, the English Church Lyturgie were not calumniated? Whereupon I would sometimes more con∣siderately, and (where I was not to be knowne) begin to giue more carefull, listening vnto the English Preachers, and also most curiously obserue the manner of the singing in the Churches: both which at very first me thought were performed with that simplicitie, integritie, and grauitie, that I began to thinke thus: perhaps God is amongst them; but when vpon often, and further more curious ob∣seruations, I found that all their seruice (except some few prayers, and those verie holy also) was composed out of the infallible word of God, his holy Scriptures: I resolued that the same must needs be good, if no essential part of seruice, were otherwise wanting. And when I found also that the Preachers continually did inculcate to their Auditors, in∣tegritie of conscience, and holinesse of conuersation with necessitie of good works, and of that faith which Ad Galat. 5. wor∣keth by charitie to saluation: I well and clearely perceiued how the Church of England was most egregiously calum∣niated by the Romane Doctors. And when I found also the ministration of the two principallest, (and singularly so termed) Sacraments: to wit Baptisme, and the holy Eucha∣rist, so sincerely and Euangelically, and so voide of all su∣perstition, ministred in their Churches, and withall found that Confirmation, Penance, Marriage, Orders, Visitation of the sicke, were for the substances thereof, religiously v∣sed in their Churches, I was not a little edified. But that which most edified me, was to obserue, how in their pub∣like Lyturgies, their minds seemed to me, (or at lest that they might) to concurre ioyntly with their tongues, and
with their religious and pious sounds, to beate the gates of heauen, and begge mercie at his handes onely: whom, with the most blessed Father, and the holy Ghost, I saw onely worshipped with diuine worship in their Churches. And although I wanted in some sewer that lowly, humble, and religious carriage, which the place, the manner of prayers, and assembly required; especially in some of the young sort: yet in the ministers themselues, and the ma∣trones with many aged men, and others of riper yeares, I saw them often kneeling with great deuotion and atten∣tion to my great edification. There I obserued not that drowsie oscitancie, leaning, and yawning, which is so fre∣quent in the papisticall Churches, yea euen amongst the Bern. in coena Domini. cap. 3. religious Monkes. There I obserued not the impudent and shamelesse attendings, courtings and obseruings of fine dames within their Churches, the which how intole∣rable it is in the papisticall Churches, especially in Italy and at Rome it selfe, I referre to the iudgement of all indiffe∣rent trauailers: doubtlesse their Churches there be still re∣pleate, with 2 Pet. 2. adulterous, lasciuious, wanton, and incestu∣ous eyes. Obseruing these things: O how happy thought I, art thou O England, if as thou enioyest the light of Christs Gospell, so also thou wouldest more and more by holy and pure conuersation, labour to excell the Churches of Sodoma, and Gomorha, where all impure Idolatry, and abhominations doe reigne? Heere I obserued also, the glo∣rie of God euer commended. Faith, Hope, and Loue in Ie∣sus Christ, incessantly inculcated, the Fathers of the ancient Church reuerently cited, the memories of the most blessed Virgine Mary, and Christs Apostles reuerenced and hono∣red: yea in their publike Prayers, and Sermons their ver∣tues and noble acts, preached, commended, inculcated, to be followed, and imitated: The buriall of the dead, verie religious and pious, and altogether Apostolicall: which obseruing, me thought these men sure doe striue onely for truth, reiecting all vncertaine traditions. And then with
all I could not, but inwardly be moued in my verie soule, against Stapleton, Sanders, Allen, Parsons, Bellarmine, and other like Pontificians, for their horrible calumniations, against the Church of England, and the gouernment there∣of, as though they buried their dead like dogs; perswaded not their people to good life, but onely to faith; that they ministred their Sacraments, very irreligiously, with such like imputations, all which I found to be meere calumniations. And I found the same Church so Apostolicall, so Christian, that me thought I saw the very Primitiue faith, and pra∣ctise of the Apostles, and the verie rites of their Church to be in it obserued. And in these obseruations I began more inwardly to be moued, because as my knowledge and in∣clination to allow of the Church of England, and to ab∣horre the Romane heresies and abuses increased: so also my soule increased in the loue of God, detestation of sinne, and auoiding the occasions of sinne, the loathing of this life, and an earnest desiring to be with Christ: whom (since my renouncing of Papistrie,) with the Father, and holy Ghost (as my soule, euidently testifieth vnto me) I do most sincerely loue and esteeme aboue all things in this world, and so fully with my whole soule & heart, that me thought I could comfortably and confidently say vnto it with the words of the holy Prophet, Psal. 114. (conuertere, &c.) my soule be couerted into thy rest, for the Lord hath done well to thee. And I could not, me thought, hinder the working of God within me, nor refuse that testimony of S. Paul: the holy Ad Rom. 8. Ghost giueth testimonie vnto our soules, that we are the children of God, yet so if we suffer with Christ, that we may also raigne with Christ. The ninth Motiue. I Should heere adde somewhat largely of their pernici∣ousThe ninth Motiue. doctrine, of equiocation, which hath beene ano∣ther, no small Motiue with me for my conuersion:
which doctrine the Ignatians haue specialy set a foote, at least in practise within this kingdome: they forsooth, who will not permit that the Scriptures of God, should be pro∣miscuously read by the vulgar people, haue in their vulgar language, in Pamphlets (rather libels being without name) dispersed throughout this kingdome, the pestiferous do∣ctrine of equiuocation, with their strange and paradoxi∣call half propositions, & Amphibologies: propositions (for∣sooth out of theirTreatise of equiuocation written or published by Henry Garnet. Ignatian Logicke) halfe written, halfe spoken, halfe concealed: and why, bring they not in also as well propositions of a triple difference? whereof one part may be spoken, a second written, a third concealed, and not vttered? and why not propositions of a quadruple diffe∣rence, as part written, part spoken, part by signes, and part by concealment? and so make mentall, verball, written, and dum or silent propositiō all in one, to set vp their vaine do∣ctrine of equiuocation. Some ingenious Pontificians of my acquaintance there are, who do what you can, yet you can∣not driue this doctrine of equiuocation into their heads, but such as haue beene brought vp vnder the Ignatians, and are deuoted vnto them, they haue their lesson at their fin∣gers ends. Not long since there wasIohn Koome. one of these Ignatian Priests, who being examined by the Archibishop of Can∣terburie not long before his death, did not onely denie himselfe to be a Priest, but also by religious oath, did for∣sweare the same: being challenged for it, he excused the same by the art of equiuocation, stoutly auouching that he had beene so taught by his master, a reader of the societie of Ignatius, and indeed it is the doctrine almost of them all, that any proposition whatsoeuer is or may be allowed, by the art of equiuocation, the same also may be confirmed, and auerred true by religious oath: and yet this equiuoca∣ting swearer so ready to forsweare and deny his Priesthood was a most bitter enemie against all such as would take or allow the taking of the oath of Alleageance in any sense whatsoever. I could produce many such examples of equi∣uocating
Ignatians, one I will not omit of a friend of the Ignatians, who wouldfaine haue beene an Ignatian, before this, but that Master Strange the Ignatian lately banishedR. C. the common col∣lector for Re∣cusants by the art of equiuo∣catiō protested to certaine Priests in the Clinke (cóplai∣ning of their wants) the ve∣ry day before the 1000, and certain 100 of pounds were taken from him that he knew not in the world where to fetch 20 shall. this man had not sor∣gotten his Ac∣cidence rule, huic habeo, non tibi, I dare a∣uouch there is no day passeth, in which he doth not reli∣giously vse this art. Some three daies since the 9. of Ianuary he hath sent in writing an e∣quiuocating super sedeas that because he was thé sicke (with an il sto∣mack for the oath of allegeance) he would provide for the Clinke prisoners no longer out of the towre, told him that his imperfections should not be laid vpon their order, being of such rare pharisai∣call perfection forsooth. This man is gracious with di∣uers worthie persons of the feminine sexe, into whole fa∣uours, he hath wound himselfe, so greatly that he can ob∣taine one of their fauours to weare next his skinne, and o∣uer his whole bodie a whole weeke togither, yea in the time of his holy imprisonment to comfort his imprisoned corps: Freshly vpon the discouerie of the damnable pow∣der-treason, it was his chance to be taken, & to be brought before the honorable Lord Maior of London, by whom being examined vpon suspition of his person, and religion, and asked whom he thought to be head of the Church of England, without any difficulty, he answereth thus, the King: which his answere might well haue deceiued, that honorable person, if he had not more narrowly, obserued some other of his answers, in which he found him faulte∣ring: and thereupon committed him to the Counter, where he staid not long: he being afterward questioned withall, by some zealous Romane Catholicks, how he could without deniall of his faith concerning their article of the Popes supremacie, acknowledge the King to be supreme head of the Church: what? replieth he peremptorily: I meant not the King of England, but the King of heauen: (the truest word he euer spoke, for the King of heauen is in∣deed the onely supreme head of the Church of England) and he added that he thought in respect of the dangers of the times, that he might iustly vse such equiuocation. Par∣don me courteous Pontifician Readers, that I thus, parti∣cularize this man (there is more in store) I doe it onely that our English Ladies, and some worthie persons of the deuout sexe may know, what manner of men those are, to whom they commit their secrets. And if
he hereafter deale with some of them, as he hath alreadie dealt with a verie worthie Ladie, (too worthy for him or any other Pontifician Priest) they will haue no great cause of Comfort in him or his like: I could discipher the spirits of some other equiuocating, and dicing westerne Priests (to conceale the rest) God turne their hearts to consider the states in which they stand, and vouchsafe O mercifull Iesus in 1. Pet. 2. whose mouth was found no guile nor deceit, rather to confound them, then suffer them to defend their equiuoca∣ting practise by your most sacred doctrine, and immacu∣late examples of your purest conuersation. The tenth Motive. TO proceed, the tyranny, by which they de∣nie The tenth Motive. the indifferent reading of Gods holy Scriptures, in the vulgar tongue, is most in∣excusable: doubtlesse the cause is, they do feare the taxing of their most manifest he∣resies, even by the simplest: I cannot blame them, for their pollicie herein. For manifest experience teacheth, that wheresoever the word of God is translated into vulgar tongues, and the same devoutly read, there po∣perie still falles more or lesse, an inuincible argument, that the spirit wherewith the holy Scriptures were written, worketh in the humble readers. Haue ye forgotten ye Pon∣tificians, that the Iewish Church, had the holy Scriptures written, and read vnto them in their vulgar tongue? why therefore shall the Christians of the new Testament be de∣barred of the vse of the same? are not the holy Scriptures, their riches, their treasure, and the cause of all consola∣ion to the devout readers? why doe you not then per∣mit vnto them the vse of that, which is their owne? but I must crie you mercie: for the Scriptures are one∣ly the treasure of the Romanes, and onely as part of the Popes Patrimonie, are at his disposing: Would God
also he would seriously peruse them and practise them, for in them is his Religion condemned: if you say, they are a∣bused, by some of the simplest; and that promiscous reading of them breedeth heresies: alas, alas, as though the simple people were the Deuisers or Authors of many heresies: how many heresies can you reckon, deuised by such as vnderstood none of the learned tongues? and what if some doe abuse the holy Scriptures? so innumerable abuse ple∣tures; innumerable abuse confession to horrible and abo∣minable proiects: innumerable abuse your Masses and in∣dulgences: and what is there, in the world, which is more abused, then the chaire of Peter it selfe, which is so continually bought and sold? What must wee away with it therefore? and is there no abusing of your voluminous decrees, decrees, your decrotals, extrauagants, Clementines, &c? I) there no abuse of your Philosophicall learning in your Churches? What? must all things, that are abused my our Church be removed? if so, doubtlesse, you would have a single-souled religion: for then away with the pictures of God the Father, in the forme of an olde man: which to my knowledge and experience, hath possest many in this kingdom with the Anthropomorphitan conceive, as thoghIn the same Pictures and many idle apa∣ritions: one I note in which it is ex∣presly, that when Ignatius eleuated the Host, Christ a∣peared mira∣culously not in the Host: but ouer the Host, in certaine cloudes in the forme of a mā. Apud Ribad. God himselfe had limmes and true members may I not say that some of your Ignatianed with Ignatius were so perswaded? in theRibadiuer. lib. 1. cap. 7. pictures of whose life, there is lately described, how the misteries of the blessed Trinity was re∣uealed vnto him, in which God the Father was portraited like an old Man, with a Globe in his hand, & the holy Ghost drawne like a Doue, and Christ Iesus with a Globe also in his hand. O Vanities, O horrible abuses: O ye Ignatians; is this the mystery, of the most dreadfull Trinity reuealed to your holy and beatified Father Ignatius? Doubt∣lesse the Deuill deluded him: and if, his Reuelations from Christ, and Saint Peter; and his Eleuations vp in the Aire, proue no sounder, they will proue but rotten and su∣perstitious ware.
But to proceede, if you feare seduction of your sim∣pler Sheepe in reading of the Scriptures, why are not your learned Priests, more daily in them? Why haue they no set Lectures, vpon them? Why are not your Diuines, bound to study some Comments vpon them? The true cause is, your Spirits, your Traditions, which you must not leaue, (vn∣lesse you leaue Rome and her very word of God) agree not together: yet for a fashion forsooth, the Scriptures must be read (as in Rome and Spaine) in your refectories: when your Schollers are at Dinner and Supper: and somwhere, vpon full stomacks (so full as short Commons can permit) after Dinner and Supper, in one of your Seminaries, (for it is not vsed in all) and then they must heare some quar∣ter of an hours commenting, vpon some peece of scripture, (the study of one peece whereof requireth a mans life) in which exercise, how greatly your Priests profit, one who lately came from your Famous Dowyan Seminary, will liuely discouer. It was my fortune lately to see, and read a letter directed from this Priest, out of the North, vnto a∣nother Priest, remaining in this house with me: in which letter he excuseth himselfe, with the other Priest, his friend heere, and defendeth (as well as hee can) himselfe from touch of inconstancy in friendship, which the other had ob∣iected vnto him: vsing these and the like words: doe not thinke good sir, of me, as though I were inconstant in my loue to you, I am still the same, according as the Hebrews 13. Apostle saith, Iesus Christ, yesterday, to day, and the same for euer which application of Sacred Scipture, when I read, I could not but laugh heartily, and I pittied withall, the state of the English Seminaries, and English Romane Catholikes: (for I was not then alienated from them in my heart) and I thinke that whosoeuer shall reade this, will easily obserue what a profound Scripture-Clerke he was; many such like Clerkes there are in this Kingdome: pardon mee Courte∣ous Reader, if I glaunce at one other, who hath a good will: for hee will forsooth preach commonly euery holy
day in a certaine Cathedrall residence of his. But his prea∣ching is commonly out of the Legends forsooth, or else out of the great looking glasse of examples, for, as for scrip∣ture, he is so penurious, that one day hearing of him preach vpon the Gospell of Christs tempting in the wildernesse, he cited a sentence or two of that daies Gospell, and both times broke Priscians head: but he scandalized as I thinkeSpeculum mag∣num exemploris. no mans head, there being scarce one, besides my self there, who vnderstood Latine, and such a good lde Harry per∣hapsy Math. 4. as did thinke that the Scripture might vse sometimes, false Latine for a mysterie. I would not glaunce at this mans insufficiency, but that he is so The Pontifi∣call Spirit of this man, you may gather by this: being in a Vitling house vpon Tower Wharfe and ready to de∣part the land (being bani∣shed with some nine other Priests) he puts his Arme out of a window, & (contrary to the liking of al his brethren) publikely and Bishoplike hee blesses & cros∣ses all the peo∣ple, which cau∣sed shame in some, & loud laughter in o∣thers. egregious a Champi∣on against the Oath, damning all that take it, yea and not allowing confessions of those, who haue gone to such Priests as allow it, he is surely a very worthy Marchant to tell a fable to a Gentlewoman, but inough heereof now all things haue their seasons. But to conclude, this my Motiue, it hath been by my selfe euer obserued, that such as adict themselues to the reading of holy Scriptures, are euer more or lesse inclining, to think well of the reformed Chur∣ches, and of their doctrines, which are so liuely deliuered in them: and out of my reading of holy Scriptures, which I haue euer daily vsed more or lesse, it hath fallen out that I haue many times contended (for argument sake) against some doctrines and practises of the Romane Church, and therefore it is, that the wise mens libeller chargeth) mee with the spirit of Contradiction: blessed bee that spirit of contradiction, which hath brought me to be a child of a∣doption, as I humbly trust, and beleeue I now am.z 1. Peter. 2.
A second Generall Head of Motiues out of their wicked Lawes. COnsidering, many and vniust Lawes, vnto which the Romane Bishops, haue against all Christian holy liberty, and to the sub∣uersion of many soules, and the great dis∣honour of God, tied their followers: the which, as I haue oftentimes heeretofore greatly admired, not seeing how they might be defended, so God, now vouchsafing to open my vnderstanding, I doe greatly detest them. For me to expresse all those which are both paradoxicall, and pernitious, were too great a la∣bour: I will therefore touch some few of them, which are in truth very many and yet I meruaile they are no more. Considering the pernitious, and shamelesse Doctrine of Cardinall Bellar. lib. 4. de pont. cap. 5. lib. Pecog. in recog li. de summe Pont. cap. 19. Bellarmine, who both in his controuersies, and in his recognitions reacheth, that although the Popes, should command any things in their Lawes, as Vertues, which are Vices: yet the whole Church, is bound, to obey the voice of their pastor, and to receiue the same vicious Lawes, as if they were Lawes of Vertues; but, hee will seeme to mitigate this his strange position forsooth; by adding that this his doctrine is to bee vnderstood of lawes concerning doubtful Acts, of Vertues, or Vices, not in Acts necessary, Thus hee very wisely breatheth heare and cold together, and what Bellar. columē. Ecclesie. et  tempestutio Augustinus. ∣dmi confutat. l Anti. p. 48. O Bellarmine tell me, you that are by Andrew Eudemon your Cretensian Ignatian brother, called the Piller of the Church, and the Augustine of this our time: cannot the infalliblenesse of the Popes Spirit, so guide, and assist him, that he shall not erre in proposing any vniuersall law to the Church, the which, shee is bound to receiue, as you say? And tell mee O Ignatian pillar, what mattereth it to saluation, or damnation, whether the things of themselues, bee necessary or not? if the Pope by his Commandement, make them so necessarie as the
whole Church shall be bound vnder paine of mortall sinne, and consequently vnder paine of damnation, to receiue them (though vitious) as you teach? alas, how perplexed is the state of Pontificians; if this Bellarminian doctrine bee true? they must commit vice, to obey the Pope, and so bee condemned therefore; or else for the Popes sake, God will fauour them so much as not to iudge them according to their workes, but according to the Popes corrupt affection, contrarie to his generall decree, deliuered by his Ad Rom. 2. & 13. & Psal. 61. & Iob. 34. Apostle, that euery man shall receiue according to his workes. The first Law. AMongst many of these Lawes first occurreth to my minde, that, where-with the vncharitable Popes straightly charge, that Caput à vobis secundo, & cap. sacris de senten∣tia excomm. Cō∣cil. Trident. Sess. 22. cap. 2. & 6. Aqu. 3. q. 79. art. 7. ad 2. Sotus. lib 9. de instit. q. 2. art. 2. ad 3. the sacrifice of their Masse (the which they beleeue, to bee the propitiatorie oblation, and selfe same Christ, which was sacrificed for the whole world, vpon the Crosse) to be offered by any of their Priests, for a∣ny excommunicated person, or by name for any Infidels, and Heretikes, by them for such reputed, whether they be sub∣iects, or Soueraignes. A law and custome most contrarie to the nature of the propitiatorie sacrifice of the Crosse; the which as it was once most sufficiently, and abundantly offe∣red, for the redemption of all, so it should be continually re∣membred, and faithfully beleeued for the saluation of the whole Church of Gods Elect; yea, and most religiously to be inuocated, and praied vnto, for the conuersion, and salua∣tion of all sinners whatsoeuer, Turkes, Iewes, Heretikes, or Infidels, for so much as may lie in vs to doe and procure: considering that it is the holy 1. Tim. 2. will of the most immaculate and pious sacrifice of the crosse himselfe, that all men should come, to the knowledge of his truth: for which cause also his blessed Apostle, the vessell of election ordained, that ob∣secrations, orations, postulations, and thanksgiuings, should be made for all Men, for all Magistrates, and all such as are
in Authoritie; and hee giueth the reason of this his ordi∣nance: because, as much, as in him is, God would haue all men to bee saued, and to come to the knowledge of his truth. And although the PontificianRemists An∣notations in 2. Tim. 2. Remists themselues, doe vehemently challenge by these foure different kinds of praiers, that the whole order of their Masse is comprehen∣ded, and specially distinguished; citingAug. Epist. 59 Austens autho∣ritie for the same: yet malice suffereth them not, to see their owne errout, most clearely condemned in this or∣dinance of the holie Apostle: (euen as it is by themselues expounded) in which hee expresly appointeth, that those foure kindes of praiers (of which, the very second, theAnnot. ibidem. Remists themselues eagerly expound, of that part of their Masse, when their Consecration is made, and when their Christ sacrificed, is most specially offered:) Obsecra∣tions, Orations, Postulations, and Thanksgiuings, (and yet who conceiueth their Diuinitie, that the word Ora∣tions in English, in Latine Orationes, in Greeke , should signifie properly their Consecration, Transubstantia∣tion; or Propitiatorie oblation) to bee made for all men, for Kings (who were Heathens when this ordinance was made) and all that are in preeminencie. But let the holie Apostle ordaine what hee will, let the Father St. Austen and others, euen (in their owne sense) expound this or∣dinance of their propitiatorie Sacrifice; yet forsooth, the Romane Bishops will seeme to bee so pure, that they will not onely refuse Communion with such persons as they doe excommunicate, and with Infidels; but they will further also out of more then pharisaicall cōtempt, renounce the communion of charitie, due to enemies, and refuse so much as to pray in their publike sacrifice and seruice by name, for theConflit. Clem. lib. 8. cap. 15. conuersion of Infidels, or any Here∣tikes: much lesse for any Temporall blessings and prospe∣rities, to them: yea, although they bee their Magistrates, their Liege Soueraignes. Who knoweth not, how the
zealous Pontificians, and Ignatians, will make out∣cries against such a man, as would in any publike ser∣uice pray but for the conuersion of their Soueraigne, by them reputed an Heretike? but to adde a prayer for his prosperitie or safeguard, it were not sufferable; but no more of this, it toucheth to the quicke. Yet God, from whose knowledge nothing is hidde, knoweth that this which I write is true, &c. I haue heard very crediblie of a superstitious Monke, who hath often protested, that hee will not by name in Masse, pray for the conuersion of any one, no, not of his owne Father: O hypocrisin blasphemam, O more then most blasphemous hypocrisie! damned Diues had in Hell greater charitie, when by name, and specially in what hee could, hee de∣sired, and procured the saluation of his Brethren vpon earth. Some one will reply, perhaps, and say, that in spe∣ciall and by name they pray for all, Iewes, Infidels, and Heretikes, vpon Good-Friday: I graunt it; but heare withall, that vpon Good-Friday they haue no Propitia∣torie sacrifice offered; which may bee polluted with pub∣like prayers for the conuersion of Infidels; and here by the way I maruaile, what mysterie is in it, that specially vpon that Anniuersarie day when Christ suffered, they will haue no Propitiatorie sacrifice offered, no recei∣uing of the Lordes Supper, vsed in their Churches. For some one of their Priests in euery Church receiuing and offering of Christ (onely vnder the forme of bread) doth not with them offer a perfect and proper sacrifice: Christ, forsooth, must bee vnder both kindes, else hee is not a perfect and proper Sacrifice, according to theBellar. lib. recog. pag. 85. where he ci∣teth many for the same opi∣nion. Bellarminian doctrine. Who detesteth not such foppe∣ries? the wise are caught in their wisedome. Oh, that they were rather conuerted then confounded. Further, what a maruaile, that they who pretend to bee so zealous for conuersion of sinners, that they willingly trauaileMath. 23. ouer Sea and Land for that purpose,
and to make their Proselytes twofold more children of hell, should bee so hypocritically pure, that in that sacrifice (which themselues make to bee the propitiation of the whole world, there should not bee some commemoration had, at least, for the conuersion of such their Magistrates, and Soueraignes, whom they repute Heretikes: The ancient Iewes, and their holy Priests, did pray in their publike sacri∣fices, yea offered1. Mach. 12. & 2. Mach. 3. Esdr. 1. cap. 6. Baruch. saepe. publike sacrifices for such as were A∣liens from the worship of the true God (although ioyned in amitie with them) as the Machabees doe expresly deliuer. The ancientClemens. l. 8. Constitut. cap. 15 Ignat. epist. ad Smir. Tertnll. A∣polog. ad scapulā cap. 2. Ambros. & Chrysost. in hunc locū. Aug. Epist 59 & alibi saepissime. Prosp. de vocatione Ge∣tium, l 1. cap. 4. Chrysost. hom. 79 ad Pop. Antio. l. 6. de Sacer. & hom. 77. in Ioh. homil. de Adam. & Eua iturg. Iacob. Basil. Chrysost. Some Ignatiās to temper this vncharitable position so mince the mat∣ter, that you may pray for increase of faith, in that place, where none but He∣retikes are pro∣uided that you doe not perso∣nat any. So my Master in Rome. Azor. aly. Christians with their most religious Bishops praied publikely, and offered sacrifice (so saith Tertullian) for the health and safetie of the Emperour; and all antiquitie concurreth herein with ioynt approuance of publike praier for all: If the Aduersarie reply, and say, such excommunica∣ted persons, such Infidels, are not capable of any good from the sacrifice: what? not of conuersion? not of repentance? not of reconcilement? apagesis: is your sacrifice so weake, that it is not potent, and powerfull, to doe any good that way? yea, but the Church hath forbid it, for a correction of the excommunicated? what? for a correction of the Infidels also? indeede, your Church, that is, your Pope, hath of la∣ter yeares since, they put on (tiphum secli) secular pride haue forbid it, but it was not so of old: let vs aske our Fathers, and they will tell vs, it was not so of old: bring out one an∣cient Father, O yee Pontificians, that ioyneth with you in this? I am assured you cannot; God forbid you could staine ancient Christian doctrine, so farre, as that it should forbid any publike praier, to be vsed for the conuersion of Infidels, Heretikes, &c. or for the temporall prosperitie, and safetie of lawfull Soueraignes whatsoeuer: by, and from such Priests and Prelates, as are their subiects. The second Law. HYpocriticall also and vaine, is that custome and law, by which they strictly forbid the eating of flesh vpon
their appointed Fasts, and yet permit, and allow the drinking of wines of all sorts, and in what quantitie it shal please; with eating also of preserues, and conserues, of any kind, march∣panes with spiced, and sugred cakes (only prouided, there be no dramme of butter nor creame in them, when they are vsed either in lent or vpon fasting-nights) so that their fasts seeme to pinch and afflict, only the poore (whose purses reach not to dainties) not the rich, who may drinke wine, till they surfet, and yet not breake their Papisticall fast. And whereas the Primitiue Christians in their solemne fasts (ac∣cording as the ancient Iewes) fasted till night, which custom continued a long time after,Caput solent. de cōsecrat. dist. 2. Epiph. Haeres. 80 Tertull. ad∣uers. Psychi. c. 14. but was afterwards fully bro∣ken for aboue some 1000. yeares ago: since when, the time of eating vpon publike fasting daies, beganne to bee vsed about three of the clocke in the afternoone: from which cu∣stome, they are now so farre degenerated, that the Ignatia∣ned Pontificians, will most commonly preuent noone, a whole houre, and the precisest of them (marke the supersti∣tion) say, it is enough to keepe the fast, so that a man be, in the middest of his repast, iust at noone: and now also, the precisest fasters will haue their drinkings at night, and almost all of them will eate either a good quantitie of bread, with sweet meats, with fruits, or some kind of broth: so that their fastings as they are now vsed, are indeede meere mockeries; I should say, as they are commonly vsed: and yet forsooth, these men must be reputed the preciseThe Ponti∣ficians who stād so strictly for their māner of fasting; I aske them why haue they brokē the fast of the fourth & sixth Ferie, and Sa∣terday in Rome which the an∣cient Romane Church held for a Tradition Apostolicall? See Innocent. 1 Epist. ad Decent. & cap. Sabbato de cōsecrat. dist. 3. & cap. Quia dis. distin. 5. de consecrat. Conc. Elibert Can 26. Clem. constit. lib. 5. cap. 16. 19. & vlt. Canon. Apost. Can. 68. Ignat. Epist. 3. ad Phill. Epiph. eres. 80. & 75. caput. de esu. carn. dist. 3. de consecrat. Pe∣ne omnes anti∣qui. Imitatours of the A∣postles in their fasting, and none reputed to fast, but they, no, though they abstaine all a whole day, and then make most sparing and temperate meales with a little flesh, at night only. With them, you may cramme your paunch to the brimme, you may drinke till you be drunke (ten times a day if you please) and yet you shall not bee reputed to haue broken your fast, so you make but one (though lucul∣lian) meale of Fish only in Lent; and of Fish and white meates out of Lent: but if you liue neuer so soberly, fasting till night, and then eate but a morsell of flesh, a Lollard
must be your name, a faggot your reward. O hypocrisie, simulata sanctitas, duplex iniquit as, dissembled sanctitie, is double iniquitie; yet herein I must needes Apologize, for some of the good, simple, and deuout Pontifician Women of this Kingdome, who in very truth obserue, sober, and godly fasts: for which I cannot but commend them, and will be gladde euer therein to imitate them, as farre, as the libertie of conscience, and Christian charitie may permit. I haue heard a very probable narration, how Robert Par∣sons (hee who had prouided rules of reformation, againstThese rules were most of them deuised by Cardinall Allen, but hee being dead, least the child, should haue beene father∣lesse, Parsons challenged them as his owne. the conuersion of England, as he speaketh) vpon a fasting euening, commending a kinde of order for fasting, which hee had in his head, and greatly taxing the libertie vsed by the English Romane Catholikes, spoke thus: Well said he, if England be euer conuerted, I make no doubt, but that I shall set downe an excellent order for fasting: and that stricter, I hope, then that, which himselfe at that present v∣sed (or else it would haue beene easie enough) for that very euening for his part, he eate vp a prettie boxe of mar∣malet. And here by the way, I must needes say that I haue seene in that man more care of dyet, then euer could iustly bee obiected against Caluin (whome the Pontifi∣cians so calumniate for his spiced bread and purestwines; But surely Caluin could not bee iustly taxed more for his bellie, then this man might be. But that you may know, how, many of the Pontifician Priests keepe their fasts: heare what I also haue most credibly heard. There commeth a certaine Formall Priest to a certaine Ladies, one fasting e∣uening: for his entertainement, shee prouideth some two or three sorts of fruits, yet withall seemeth to excuse her∣selfe, that it was no better: this is well Madame, (somwhat solemnely) replieth the Priest; but at such a Ladies said hee, wee haue seuen or eight seuerall dishes vpon fasting nights, &c. but enough of these their Apostolicall fasts: for my part I condemne none, (I wish my whole heart more fasting were vsed by such as are able) whose weakenesse requireth such fauourable fasting; but I
vtterly condemne the hypocrisie of their Doctors, who challenge their fasts only to be Apostolicall, and Christian, whereas it is most euident, that they are nothing lesse then such; and no where worse then in Rome the inerrable See. The third Law. THat there are permissiue and toleratiue lawes, for houses of prostitution, in some Papisticall Countries, I doe not so much admire (although they are vtterly to bee condemned) considering the circumstances of those Coun∣tries, and dispositions of the people; but, that in the Ci∣tie of Rome, the Mother-Citie; (the Mother-Church) in the Citie of the Apostolicall See, there should be publike tolle∣ration, and Papall permission, with a ciuill protection, both of bodies and goods, of such impudent prostituted Queanes, that is wonderfull; but more wonderfull, and most intol∣lerable, that the only Vicar of Christ, the Suffragane of the blessed Trinitie, the Vice-God of earth, should receiue tole out of such a Faire of prostituted Whores: but most execrable it is, that through permission of such abhomina∣tions the hearts of Cardinalitian and Papall Courtiers, are so linkeed with those infamous persons, that they cannot liue without them: I will not speake of the Clergies im∣puritie; St. Bernard shall speake for mee in their behalfes;p Bern. lib. 4. de considerat. c. 2. serm. ad Pa∣stores in Synod. charging them with keeping of Queanes in their priuate chambers. But heare how the soules of those lasciuious Courtiers and Romanes, are glewed to those filthes. When Pius Quintus (a man of many morall good parts) endeuon∣red seriously to purge Rome of that sinke, by banishing the Whores from out of the Citie, with them he droue away so many of the Courtiers, so many of ignoble Nobles, so many of the voluptuous Citizens, that Rome seemed almost na∣ked and dispeopled, so that thereupon the irresolute Pope, by a conniuencie was content to permit the filths to returne againe to their old trade in Rome, & the Roman Bishops to receiue stil their customary tribute for that wicked liberty & impurity. O most abhominable, & most filthy purpured city,
thy sinne is preached abroade, like that of Sodome and Go∣morrhe, and thou art not ashamed (Frons meretricis facta est tibi) thou hast gotten the forehead of a strumpet: shew me the like abhomination amongst the reformed Churches. You pretend many great matters: but doubtlesse, in com∣parison of their Rome, the very serrals of Constantinople, Adrianople, are pure and chast: yet who will excuse or de∣fend the impurities of any reformed Churches? not I, a∣mendment will be the best defence, God grant it. The fourth Law. HOw wicked and sacrilegious is that law of theirs, by which they will not vpon any extremitie whatsoeuer, celebrate or say any Masse, without their Altar stones, Altar∣clothes, Corporals, or Candels, &c. And although, they (almost all) hold, that to receiue the Sacrament at the houre of death, is absolutely necessarie (necessitate precepti) vnder necessitie of precept, yea, and as my Master Vasques in Rome with diuers others held, that it is necessarie (necessitate me∣dij) by necessitie of meane, like as faith is, without which by Gods ordinarie power it is not possible for any one to be saued, yet forsooth, they must and will let their sheepe goe out of the world without this Sacrament, if so be they want either Masse Vestiments, or Altar stones, or Altar clothes, to say their Romane Masse withall: O vaine Traditions of men, against the Commandement of God: is it not here most manifest, that (Math. 15. irritum fecerunt, &c.) they haue made voide the Commandement of God, for their owne Traditions? their owne Traditions, I said, for there is not one of them who can shew any authenticall record, that ei∣ther St. Peter, or any of the Apostles, or any of the Primitiue Priests, vsed at celebration of the diuine mysteries, massing Vestments, Altar stones, burning lights, &c. it were a meere toy to challenge these thinges to bee Apostolicall, which they cannot otherwise proue, then either out of
some counterfait Martiall or Abdias, or else the commen∣titious Pontificall (as they pretend of Damasus) whereof the Author is not yet certainly knowne, and if he were knowne, yet their owne Cardinals and Doctors haue pared so much of his credit away, with charging the booke with lies and fables, that his authoritie alone may not carrie a∣way such a matter as this is. The fifth Law. THat Law and custome, by which they commaund the Laitie, to receiue the Sacrament vnder one kind onely, is sacrilegious (to vse Pope Gelasius his phrase) and is an er∣rour in excusable. But the Tridentine Fathers haue found out an excuse for this inexcusable errour, this forsooth: that although Christ instituted, and commaunded all to drinke of the sacramentall Cup, the Apostles ordained as much, and withall the primitiue Church euer so practised: yet this was all done, not as a matter of necessitie, but of e∣lection, or choice for the faithful to receiue vnder one kind or both. Epist. Iude. Imperet vobis Dominus. Our Lord cōmaund you, and let the mouthes of such as speake so wicked things be stopped. What a doctrine of diuels is this, to say that the institution of Christ, the commaundement of Christ, or∣dinance of the Apostles touching the vse of the chiefest Sa∣crament of the Church, maketh not a law of necessitie? when their imagined transubstantiation came in, then also by degrees, brought they in the receiuing vnder one kinde (as sufficient for a mans whole life) pretending that whole Christ is really and substantially vnder both kindes, yea vn∣der any the least particle that may fall from the host, or any lest, moysture of wine-liquour that may hang and sticke vpon their Chalice side, or vpon their Priests lips (which being by them thus professed & beleeued,) I maruaile, and note by the way how Henry Garnets great M. A. V. fauouritisse in presence of him, and of other Ignatians, and diuers
worshipfull did scorne publikely at table, one D. Cecill for his licking with his finger, the patten which he vsed at ce∣lebration of the Masse. I desire the reader to iudge of their spirits. I my selfe hearig her derision excused the Doctor seriously, but since that time (some one and twenty yeares) I was neuer very gratefull to her, nor to her reuerend Fa∣ther Henry Garnet: they had then opposition with that Doctor, and therefore he was derided for licking vp such crummes as they esteemed their God. The sixth Law. THey annexe to holy Orders, the vow of Chastitie (and yet few, who take Orders make the said vow expresly, although all such consent to vndergoe their law of chasti∣tie) by which they most strictly command neither Priest nor Bishop to marry, & if any were maried before Orders, then after them they must abstaine from the lawfull vse of their wiues. This is one of their traditions, such a one as S. Paul spoke of, when 1. Ad Tim. 4. he foretold that some would come in later times teaching the doctrines of diuels, forbidding to mar∣rie, &c. By occasion of this law, their presumptuous spirits haue implied almost the whole Romane Cleargie more or lesse, with all kinde of impurities, yea some so nefarious, as are not by a modest penne to be expressed: perhaps, (though very rashly and inconsiderately) the first Authors of the Law, intended to haue brought in Chastitie and pu∣ritie into the liues of their Cleargie, but it hath fallen out farre otherwise: for it is a shame to speake what is done by many of them in secret. It is a shame saith Bernard. serm. 33 in Can∣tica. see him in serm. ad Pasto∣res in Sinodo congregat & lib. 4. de consi¦derat. cap. 2. & alibi. S. Bernard, to vtter what they doe in darke, yet what should I shame to speake that which they are not ashamed to doe? O wor∣thy Bernard might you iustly write thus in your time? A stinking contagiō creepeth this day through out the whole bodie of the Church; all are friends, and yet all are enemies; yea all seeke their owne; they are the Ministers of Christ,
yet doe seruice to Antichrist. And a little after: these are the men, and yet they will needs be Church-Gouernours, Di∣uines, Archbishops, Bishops: & how doe these men keepe their chastitie, who being giuen into a reprobate sense, doe things, that are vnmeete, for it is a shame to vtter what they doe in the darke: yet why should I be ashamed to speake that which they are not ashamed to doe? thus Saint Bernard: the which with infinite much more that might be cited out of all zealous Pontifician preachers, as Cornelius Musse, Panigarole, Ferus, Granatensis, Stella, Espencaeus, Ge∣nebrard, Bapt, Mantuan. Aluarus Pelagius, Nicholas Clemangis, Polydore, Mathew of Paris I touch onely, to shew what abhominable impurities and filth hath redoun∣ded by vertue of that Law, into their vowing Cleargie: (whom they permit notwithstanding to eate and drinke liberally and indifferently of wines, and all manner of meates, as the laitie, and to liue also freely, and to conuerse indifferently amongst women.) They impose a necessitie of that which Christ himselfe ordained should be free in such as haue the Math. 19. gift of continencie: but they will perhaps say none is restrained to this law of Chastitie, but such as doe freely enter into holy orders, vnto which this law of cha∣stitie is annexed: and such as haue made triall of themselues before: good God, what triall is made of such persons whom they nourish, and mew vp in the prime of their youth, in their Seminaries, and Colledges? farre from all societie of women, (whom if they would keepe still at short diet, and without wines, I could not condemne their vowig) who neuer made trial of themselues, whe∣ther they had the gift of continency or not? how many are there of your Cleargie, who eyther because their parents so appoint it: or else, because they finde it a readie way, and steppe to promotion: are willing to addict, them∣selues to that course of life, before they know by expe∣rience, whether they can be continent or not? nay rather which of them is there, (I appeale to their owne consci∣ences)
who by often yeelding more or lesse, to some of the morosous cogitations, (as they call them) doe not finde by experience, before they take holy Orderrs, that they haue not the gift of contiuencie, but doe more or lesse burne with their morosous desires, and cogitati∣ons.The Pontifi∣cians are such fauourers of Vowes of cha∣stitie, that I know some married cou∣ples, who li∣uing together commit hor∣rible impuri∣ties, and yet they will not preuent them by the remedy of nature, because against their owne vowes. I know diuers Ignati∣ans are verie forward to perswade mar∣ried couples to vow such pernicious continencie. I could heere particularize somewhat, but will not, hauing appealed to their owne consciences, and the consciences of such ghostly Fathers, as heare the confessions of their Diuines, who are at the next steppe to Orders. But let their ancient Histories be searched, and they shall finde that the Church of the East, (where religion was first planted, and the ordinances of the Apostles well knowne) would neuer admit of the necessitie of continen∣cie in Cleargie men, which some endeuoured to impose v∣pon them: In the holy Scriptures it is most cleere, that married Priestes and Bishops were permitted to vse their wines, and also to performe all Church-offices: so cleare this truth is in Saint Paul 1. Ad Timoth. 3. to Timothie, that he taketh or∣der how the wife and children of such persons are to be ordered. And who is so ignorant a Duine as not to know Valentia. de celibatu. cap. 2. Th.  2. 2. q. 88. Durand. lib. 4. dist. 34. 37. & alij. Scholastic. communiter ibidem Solus de iure & iustitia. lib.  & Petrus. â Soto in institut. sacerdot. lct. 5. Alphonsus â Casto aduersus. heres. verbo sa∣cerdot. Azor. institut. lib. 13. cap. 12. that, with Ʋalentia the Ignatian Diuine, all the chie∣fest Pontifician Diuines do acknowledge, that the Law, and Vow of chastitie is onely annexed to Priesthood, and holy Orders by mans law, to wit, by the lawes of some Roman Popes, & by their Sinodicall constitutions at most: and that Christ and his Apostles appointed nothing therin. I haue often maruelled how Pops, who haue bene so libe∣rall to dispense in all Church lawes, in all maner of Vowes and Oathes (yea and with Laicks most often in the vowes of Chastity) either Thomas is Aquin. 2. 2. q. 88. art. 10. ad. 3. Azor. lib. 6. cap. 1. Tom 1. & Theolog. omnes communiter. for some great good, to the parties
who had vowed or sworne: or to remoue some euill from them, or else for some spiritual good, or temperall profit to others: or, to remoue, some occasion of spirituall or tem∣porall euill and hurt, or else in respect of impotency or vna∣blenes, to keep the Vows: yea, who haue dispensed, & daily dispense, with promises, and oathes of fidelity, made to prin∣ces & other thirde Persons, will not, for the soules healths, of some of their polluted Bishops, and Priests, & to remoue so generall, & Vniuersal a scandall, from their Church, dis∣pense with all such of their Cleargy, who by their owne confessions, and experience of the whole world, are so farre from beeing continent, that they doe like impure horses (hinnire) neigh after the Wiues and Daughters of their Diocesians and Parishiones. I doe heere, constantly, and Christianly affirme, that it were more tollerable, and more agreeing to the vse of the most pure Sacraments, that all Priests, and Bishops in the World, being dispensed with∣all or otherwise freed, should marry, and vse marriage, then that one onely, incestuous sinne, or Sodomiticall im∣purity, by occasion of the Law of Chastity, This my discourse fal∣leth, if there bee sin in ma∣riage, as the ancient Encra∣tites and Ta∣tians held: o∣therwise it is inuincible, for doubtles dis¦pensation must bee graunted when other∣wise sin throgh impotency cā¦not be auoided. See Abbas. in c. c olim de cleri∣cis coniugat. Sotus. lib. 7. de iustit. q. 6. art. 2 Good old Azor lib. 12 cap. 13. granteth that for temporall peace, the vow of chastitie may be dispen∣sed withall, as though the remouing of sinne were not a greater cause for dispensa∣tion in any cause whatso∣euer. should bee committed. For as in the first (secluding the Law of Chasti∣ty ordeined only by Authority of some Roman Bishops, not expresly instituted by God) there should be no sinne, so in the other there is sinne inexcusablie, which in malice, (because insinite) surpasseth all the good of Chastity, (because finite) that may be in all other Priests. Had it, not beene better, that the impure Venetian Abbot (whose excesses, in soliciting of matrones, that worthy state would haue corrected, if the Pope would haue gi∣uen them leaue) should, haue beene dispensed withall, to haue married, rather then to haue beene by his most impure conuersation, part of that scandall, by which the whole Christian world, had like to haue fallen into a most dreadefull commotion? Had it not beene farre better for the Legat Cardinall of Cremona his soule, and more for Romes honor: that he shold haue bin dispensed withal; and haue brought a wife with him, rather then hee should
the same night, after that day in which he most bitterly had inueghed against the Marriage of Priests, be found in bed with a common strompet, as Math. Paris in Henri. 1. ad. ann. 1125. Huntingd. Westmonast. Flo¦res ad cundem annum. Mathew of Paris, with o∣thers, condently deliuer? had it not beene farre better for the Honour of the Apostolike See, that Iohn the 12. should haue dispensed with himselfe, and haue had, one lawfull wife, rather then to haue kept three infamous strompets, Stephana, Anna, Raynera? as Luitprandus Luitprand. Tic. lib. 6. cap. 6. et. c. 7. Onuphrius in Annotat. in pla¦tinam in Iohan. affirmeth: and accusing him also to haue committed many other most im∣pure villanies? What should I mention any thing of Pope Sergius, Iohn the 8. Iohn the 20. the 22. Alexander the 6, and diuers other most impure Popes &c. But what care, these Pharisees, how impure and filthy that of the dish is within so that they may be thought at lest to vow chastity? and to haue wils to be chast and pure? I thought not, to name any particulars concerning this point in any liuing; but seeing the Ignatians are so holy that they wil cas off al such faults, vpon others, as though they desired not so much as any conuersation with women: (and yet who bee they that now giue first entertainment to the gallant women at Saint Omers? who those that dayly conuerse with them? bee they not Ignatians?) I will deliuer heere one certaine thing which happened, (pardon me curteous Reader, if I abuse thy patience with relating of it) in their famous Dowist Vniuersitie and one of their Ignatian Schooles, and by an Ignatian also, who was Witnesses M. I. S. M. T. S. and M. W. C. obserued by Persons of worthy credit often to pollute himselfe most shamefully in the open schooles, yea & so apparantly, that it was thought the Reader could not but obserue it: the like is testified, and prooued of another in the same Schooles, but he was no Ignatian; and the like I saw of another, in the Diuinity Schoole of Rome, but he was no Ignatian, but vnder their Gouernment onely. But what doe I insist, to inueigh against their wicked Lawe▪ promiscuously binding all, that take Orders, whe∣ther they haue the gift of continency, or otherwise, not to
marry? they will doubtlesse obiect to me that I long after Marriage; they may Calumniate me at their pleasure: how I haue conuersed, it is well knowne (euen, amongst many Modest, Chast, very worthy, and worshipfull Gentlewo∣men) and I heere protest before God, that I neuer found a more reall & sincere detestation, against all carnal thoughts and molestations, or any desires of that kind, then at this present I doe: yet, I esteeme it farre more meet and agree∣ing▪ to Christs institution, and the Holy Apostles doctrine for any whatsoeuer he bee, rather to Marry then to burn; yea so much as to haue any least vnlawfull o sinfull desires, & rather (according to the Generall & Vniuersall Doctrine of all their owne Diuines in all other Vowes or Oathes) to be dispensed with his inconsiderate Vow, or else to haue it interpreted, and declared vnlawfull, rather then through impotency, impossibility, or imminent danger of not kee∣ping of his vowe, to commit any other sinnes of impurity or to giue any scandall to any other person. And so heere I conclude this matter, with a saying of Pope Pius, the se∣cond, as Platina in vi∣ta Pij. 2. Platina reports him, that as there were many reasons, to forbid Priests marriage, so there were more to allow them mariage: how many there are, hee that will reade Pelagius de planctu. Aluarus Pelagius and Clemangis de corrupto statu ecclesiae. Nicholas Clemangis, will easily acknowledge: and the Verdict of that Pope to haue beene most iust, and necessary. To Conclude this matter it is as cleere as the Heauens that the Pontificians are fauourers of al impudicity in their Clergy▪ by forbidding them marriage, and yet permitting them to eate, drinke, and conuerse as indifferently as the married doe. So are they also in many other cases, Authors, and Abetters of much Impurity: and heer I obserue, by the way (I know not by what secret spirit it comes to passe) that our English Ghostly Fathers, are for most part, easie inter∣preters and absoluers in case of most impure sinnes, but if a man disobey a Popes breefe, none or else very difficult is their absolution. A crooked deformed Priest, would not
a Priest forsooth, allowing the oath of Allegeance; and that Ignatian who denied me absolution, for that I held the Pope, had not authority to depose Princes, yet could he absolue the Master of the house, who was more then thought to haunt common queanes, himselfe also not vnacquainted with the notoriousnesse thereof. Hee was iust another Peere Cotton. God vouchsafe, to open the eies of the seduced, to leaue the society of that Congrega∣tion, which hath so shamefully Apostated from Iesus Christ his sacred doctrines and most holy institutions, and hath thus repleated her congregations with all nefarious impurities. Sundry other Lawes there are, which might iustly bee called in question: and whosoeuer will with indifferent eye consider all such lawes and customes wherein the Roma∣nists, doe most differ from the reformed Churches, hee shall find that they al haue expresse respect to set vp the Romane Monarchy; either in Temporals or Spiritualls: as for ex∣ample, the Law and Custome wherewith they endeuor to exempt from all correction of Ciuill Magistrates all Cler∣gie men, though their offences bee enormious and such as cry for vengeance from Heauen. Like is their Law of reser∣uing certaine Papall Cases, which causeth many sacrilegi∣ous confessions: like is their Law and Custome for their Penitents to confesse an intire number of all their sinnes with the Circumstances therof (changing the nature of sin) which causeth inexpressible conflicts and scruples, espe∣cially in consciences of their Women Recusants. But I o∣mit to write any more of these, and so passe to my other Motiues.
The Third Generall Heade, out of the obseruation, of English Pontificians Spirits. THus hauing set downe some of my chiefest motiues, out of the pernicious doctrines, and most wicked Lawes of the Pontifician Church: I am to prosecute the other two Ge∣neral heads, out of some obser∣uations of the Spirits, of the Chiefetaines of that professi∣on, in the propagation of their Gospell; and of their liues and conuersation. But for some respects I will at this present pretermit the latter (being not willing to descend into particulars of that kind) & for the other, my discourse shall It were bootles to descipher the liues and spirits of latter Popes: they are far worse thē those of whō Masson a famous Pontifician wri∣teth so liberally in Iulius the 3. at whose boldnes I maruell when I consider what the famous D. Iohn of Paris lib. de potest. Reg. & papal. writeth: E∣uery fact, saith hee, of the holy Father, must be interpreted in good part, and if it be theft or any thing that is ill in it selfe, wee must interpret it to be done by Diuine instinct, thus he. So Sixt▪ his pride, drunkennes, cru∣elty. Alexander the sixth, his im∣purity. Gregory the 14. hypocri∣sie and anarice, &c. al was by Di∣uine instinct, &c. only (omitting their Popes) touch the Spirits of such as haue bin Ringleaders, against the present state, and Church of England: in prosecution whereof; if I seeme sharpe and bitter, and to touch to the very quicke, not the skinne onely, but the very soule of the Ignatious Spirits: I desire the Readers fauourable construction, and to interpret that I doe nothing out of malice, or for reuenge, but onely that Britany may see, what serpents shee nourisheth with∣in her bowels (would God, not too neere &c?) & how extreame dangerous it is, for the publik weale of this State, that Pontifician English are permitted to haue such free conuersation with them in Flanders, France, Spaine, &c. and to demonstrate, that if Britanie, haue iust cause to feare Rome, and the Popes Dominions; the last and least Cause, is not, because the Ignatians are there, powerfull fauourers of al hot and malecon∣tented
Spirits; prouiding Sanctuaries and Cities of Refuge, for Tesmonds, Owens, Gerards, &c. which men also in Flanders, England, &c. change not their Spirits but the ayre; being euery where the same in their vndermining and indirect courses, for setting vp, the Papall Monarchy. First therefore, whereas they pretende, to be Apo∣stolicall men in the manner of their amplifying and their planting of the Roman Religion (in which acti∣on if in any, man necessarily must be guided by Gods Spirit) it is not possible, that their pretence should be sound; vnlesse they therefore hold themselues Apo∣stolicall, because they doe in the worst sort, imitate those two Apostles who desired of Christ, that fire might come downe from heauen and consume those who would not receiue him: Luc. 9. to whom the good and meeke Shepheard, answered: (Nescitis, &c.) you know not, of what spirit yee are, by which an∣swer, hee vtterly condemned, the spirits of all such, who seeke, to bring in Christ, and Christs Doctrine, by subuersion of States and Kingdomes. And what are the Pontificians tainted with this spirit? O yee heauens! speake for me; nay, the very stones will speake, that the Of Gregory the 7. Paschall, Victor Alexander, Inno∣cent, Boniface, &c Fathers of the Roman Church de∣scribed, by them, that sate vpon the red, blacke, and pale horses, haue often, vnder pretence of religion, taken peace out of the Christian world, causing such dreadfull Commotions, as the very memory thereof cannot but affright a tender and Christian minde. It is needlesse to recount the thundring sentences of Popes against Emperours; fresh in memory, are the impious sentences, of Pius the 5. Sixtus the 5. against our late Soueraigne of famous memory; tending to the whole subuersion of this Kingdome; who by their bulles of deposition, and excommunication Bull. Sixti 5. Pij. 5. contua Regi∣nam. charged vnder the paine of excommunication, all
English Subiects, forceably to depriue that most Gra∣cious Lady, and Queene Elizabeth: and although God of heauen had set her ouer vs, yet the earthly god, with his triple crowne, to whom all power vpon earth was giuen (as one of them speaketh) sitting in the high throne of his See, did Bull Pij. 5. vnqueene her; & make her as another ordinary Subiect. But what? were the English Chiefe-leaders guilty of any one of these plots, and practises? Let Cardinall Allen, march first, who although he Related by the moderate An∣swerer. would seeme to touch, and repre∣hend those, who gaue information to Pius the 5. it was not for want of good will to the matter it selfe, but because the state of England did not then permit it  the Pontificians, being not strong enough, to put in execution, Pope Pius his depositiue sentence; for otherwise in his booke called the defence of En∣glish Catholikes, hee doth most eagerly defend the Popes power, to depose Princes, and constantly a∣uoucheth that he may charge all Subiects, and autho∣rize them to depriue Princes in case of Heresie, and other needfull occasions of Church, and Common Wealth: the which doctrine as he doth, most politik∣ly and cunningly seeke to establish, by sophisticall reasons and many deuised vntruthes: so is hee most learnedly confuted, by that singularly learned and iu∣dicious Prelate, the Bishop Bilson of the supre∣macy. Bishop of Winchester, so sound∣ly, that neither Allen himselfe, nor any of his Semi∣narists, durst euer, yet attempt to make any reply a∣gainst that very learned and iudicious worke. Againe, call to minde Cardinall Allens declarati∣on, to the Nobles in England in 88, the which hee himselfe conceiued and dictated, in very great haste to three or foure Scribes, together at once, to haue with speede more copies to send hither into England, thereby to incite the Peeres and all Pontificians of this Kingdome, to ioine with the Armado; which
King Philip of Spaine sent hither, for the conquering of this Kingdome: which Spanish fleete came also full fraught, both with Pope Sixtus his prophesies, his blessings, and curses,; and with the blessings of their maide of Lisboe, with a vaine prediction of their victory; but through the power of God, both Horse and Horseman, were drowned in the Seas, where, most of their ships, with the Popes blessings and cur∣ses, made shipwracke, God conuerting their curses vpon their owne heads. These bookes of this Cardi∣nall, with many other of his discontented speeches, against the English State before 88. doe discouer liue∣ly, how much he had borrowed of a worse spirit, then that was which our Sauiour f condemned in two ofLuc 9. his Apostles: I say before 88. for I haue obserued since that time (God checking by that miraculous o∣uerthrow his spirit,) he hath beene farre more mode∣rate, then Robert Parsons; into whose soule, how a double spirit of that kinde hath ascended from be∣low, it is almost superfluous, to stand to prooue. His Doleman, which I know by some speeches that I haue heard from his owne mouth he purposely intended a∣gainst the vndoubted Title of our most Gracious So∣ueraigne (whom Iesus vouchsafe long to preserue) and to intitle as much as lay in him, the Archdutchesse with an imagined and chimerian title to the English Crowne; and to that purpose he dispersed as many of those bookes into this kingdome, before the death of Queene Elizabeth as he could conueniently: earnest he was with me, some fifteene yeeres since to haue brought some of How often haue I heard this man reioice at the shuffling and ci∣uill commotions which he foreimagined would light vpon the English at Queen E∣lizabeths death. How often haue I heard him say and Ios. Creswell also with diuers other Ignatians, that England will neuer be happy and fully conuerted, without the sword and a conquest thereof. his Dolemans ouer with mee into England, which I vtterly refusing, highly displeased
him therewith. Againe his publike reioicing, when he heard by a false Alarum, that the Spaniards had safe∣ly landed in England in 88. and his deiected counte∣nance, when that false newes, by true report was checked: How ioyfully did he trot vp and downe, to carry the first newes amongst the Popes friends and Englands? Enemies But good God; how was hee confounded, at the hearing of the second newes, of the burning and drowning of the Spanish Fleete? All Elements concurring to the confusion of Pharaohs host. This Diuers worthy persons haue ob∣serued this spirit in Parsons, espe∣cially that wor∣thy Deane of Life, D. G. who for his loue to his Countrey, and openly disliking the Ignatians courses, was by Parsons & others of his fellowes procuremēts, ba∣nished out of the low Countries. mans spirit was euer thought to be plot∣ting and deuising, for Englands conuersion by En∣glands subuersion: against which time, he had pro∣uided certaine rules of reformation; amongst all which I will tell you one pretty one. When England is conuerted, at first (said he) there must not be admit∣ted into it any religious, excepting poore Capuchins, and the contemplatiue Carthusians and his owne bre∣thren the Ignatians, for some selfe pretences as is ob∣serued. A politike deuise, that so he, and his, might haue the shooting at the purse & the hitting of it; for* When in Spaine by a witty libell the Capuchine Friars were de∣scribed to shoote from the purse, the Franciscans wide of it; the Ig∣natians were de∣scribed to hit it in the very mid∣dest; with this posie (teattino) which word sig∣nifieth (Theatine) and I hit thee Of this the Ignatiās complained, to the present King, who wittily replied to them: Doe ye not then his the purse Fathers, and all will be well. the Capuchines hauing no possessions, shoote from the purse; the Carthusians being contemplatiue should not so much as draw an arrow to shoote at the purse; and so he and his might carry away the bell, and doe all, and purse all. How Ioseph Creswell, another of that societie, and an English Chieftaine, hath beene tainted with that spirit, it is too to manifest; hee must forsooth, car∣rie Priests, that come from Spanish Seminaries into England, vp and downe to visite the Peeres of that Kingdome, and to take their leaues of them, that they may bring some comfortable newes, to the oppressed English of their Kings intentions, for England; hee
must carrie them also, vnto the late King of Spaine, to kisse that Kings hands; and to heare from the Kings owne mouth, words of comfort, (not of patience) to carrie to the distressed English Catholikes; that hee forsooth, would aide and assist them, as soone as possibly hee could, &c. Oh, how did I my selfe see, and heare the same man about some fifteen yeres since, applaud, & commend a certaine Spanish Adelantado, is an Admirall. Ade∣lentádo, for protesting and vowing, that if his master the King of Spaine, would giue him leaue and allow∣ance, hee himselfe would imploy, all he could make, towards the subduing of England, (this was the Ad∣mirall, of whome I mentioned before, that hee affir∣med his King and Master, had no neede of England) and the reducing of it, to the Roman Religion? A∣gaine the entertainement, and encouragement, which the same The same Cres. caused a Te De¦um to be saide in the Roman Col¦ledge, for a false alarum of the Spaniards good successe in Ire∣land. Creswel gaue to Winter in his traiterous pro∣iect, standeth firme in our English records; and the acknowledgement of Garnet himselfe, to haue beene partaker of Winters plotte, doe demonstrate, both, of what spirit Creswell was, and also, of what spirit the English Ignatians probably are, whereas their Prouinciall Garnet, was so deeply by his own confes∣sion tainted. By The relation of the solemnity Wherewith Philip the third and his Queen were re∣ceiued by the Colledge of the English in Valla¦dolid. pag. 31. those verses (amongst diuers others set vp in the colledge of Valladolid, in Spaine, when the King that now is, with his Queene, was by the same entertained) with this posie ouer them, (fugient a facie ignis.) they wil flie from the face of fire; and ouer the same posie, beeing set also the Armes of England, the Lions; and the Armes of Valladolid, which are Fire. Those verses I say approoued, by such Ignati∣ans as did read them, and many since which haue de∣fended them, do demonstrate the Ignatians holy spi∣rits, against this Countrey.
These are the verses, first in Latine. Perdomat indomitos, effrenatos{que} Leones flamma; feras vincit, vincitur igne Leo. Angliacisaeuo, ne lanient dente Leones, innocuas pecudes, innocuos{que} greges: Ferteciti Hesperias, Britanna adlittora, flammas; indomitas{que} feras Pincia flamma domet: Sic fugient timidi, posita feritate, Leones; sic poterit tutum, viuere mite pecus. In English thus. The vntam'd Lions, sterne and bold, with fire are ouercome. Fire tames them, when nought else preuailes, with fire, it must be done. Lest English Lions, with their teeth, and with their cruell pawes, Should teare the tender English flocke, which are to neere their iawes; Bring Spanish fire to British shores, bring foorth your Pincian flame: So will they leaue their cruelty, and fly away for feare; So shall the gentle cattell, liue in safty, euer there. But William Hoult another, who in 88. was all in all, in Flanders; was not hee to be touched with this spirit? doubtlesse the state of England, is not vnac∣qainted with his proceedings; but one thing I can here report of him, from the mouth of a certain Eng∣lish Ignatianed Priest, correctour of the presse at S. O∣mers, to wit, that the said William Holt, in 88. sent in∣to
England as many currants, as stood him in fiue hundred pounds; by that meanes, to conuey some letters, into the same Kingdome: (doubtlesse, those letters carried some mysterie with them, that were so closelie and with such great care to bee carried.) But the practicall spirit of that man, and his solicitudes for England, are to well known, therefore, of him ynough. But one word with the Corrector, who iumpe at the time, when the damnable Powdertreason should haue been acted, came downe from Rome, and in the company of some fiue or sixe Ignatians, (a matter not vsuall to haue so many Ignatians sent together in one mission for England) appointed and purposed with all expedition, to passe for England: but so soone as they vnderstood, of the discouerie of the powder plot, they all, and this Corrector, also, changed their cour∣ses and setled themselues elsewhere, one of the speci∣allest of them now playing the Rector at S. Iohns mount in Louain. At the same time with like care, all the The sudden, vn∣expected, and diligent inquity and search made after these books, was much noted by diuers of the Seminary of Doway, and much descanted vpon in secret, when the Pow∣der-plot was discouered, and many thereupon inferred, surely the Ignatians fingers were in it. bookes of Doctour Stapleton, were sought for with such hast, as though they should haue beene presently put into the possession of the Ignatians; to whom Doctour Stapleton, had bequeathed them, for the first colledge they should haue in Oxford. What these things might portend, I would it were not too to easie to coniecture. For my part, I will not iudge any certainetie, onely I obserue, howe in that most hellish attempt, when Apoc. 9. Abaddon, with his smoakie Locusts, would haue blowen vp together all the glo∣ries of this kingdom; there were none but Ignatians, as Garnet, Gerard, Holcorne, Tesmond: or Ignatianed, as Catesby, Rookewood &c. (who loued the Fathers so dearly, that they esteemed of none, who did not high∣ly reuerence the Fathers) were to bee found, parta∣kers, or abettors of that hellish attempt; and yet the Ignatians, and their friends beyond seas, what with
their Iohn Gerrard, and Oswald Tes¦mond do beyond seas with most horrible othes protest, that they had no knowledg of the owder▪ treason. equiuocations, protestations, &c. haue so clea∣red themselues, that amongst those outlandish people, there are very few who thinke the holy Fathers guil∣ty: but all suspition that is, lighteth vpon the poore Secular Priests, which (God knoweth) are farthest frō such courses: if they haue not drunke more, or lesse, of the Ignatians cuppe; but there is no suspition of the holy Fathers; (God forbid,) no rather, let the ac∣knowledgement of Garnet himselfe, with his owne letters, (euidences vnappeallable) and that which was done before the most honourable, and most publike Court of this Kingdome, be all inualid, and counter∣feit, rather, then that any Ignatian, should bee found guiltie of so execrable a treason. O immortall God of heauen! how hath the God of this world, blinded their eies! that they will post vppe and downe, the strawie face of that wretched mā? they doubtles here∣in are delighted with counterfeits, and a maske of straw prouided for the fire with the worshippers ther∣of. Here, if I may be so bold, I would aske of the Presi∣dent of Doway, (because he is a speciall chieftaine a∣mongst them) what spirit might bee obserued to haue been in him, when hee, with more then ordinary con∣tentment, entertained Guy Fawkes, the Powder-match∣man, some diuers whole daies together, before his com∣ming into England, with much conference with him; not without admiration of diuers of the Colledge, (who knew not the mistery) considering the meannes of the man. Surely if the D. N. Vice-president had been there then, who cried auengance on a certaine Soueraigne, when he was for his clemency commended by a true hearted English Priest: hee had been a fit man to haue been of the Councell. But I maruell, not at his cursing spirit, for he came from the Campe, to the Seminaries, and of a souldier, quickly (which in ancient times would not haue been so commendable) was made a Priest. But alas
to make an end of this matter, that the Ignatians, and the Ignatianed, were too too well acquainted with some great matter to be acted about the Powder time. For when I was last beyond the seas, a graue person re∣ported in my hearing, and in the hearing of a reuerend Priest, that theR. V. meeter-maker of their English hymnes spoke openly in Antwerpe, at a table where diuers were drinking together, some fiue or six weekes before the Powder-treasō time, that there was some great attempt in hand in England. Perhaps the good man knew not the whole secret, if he did, then perchance for very shame he concealed it, for I hardly thinke he would detest the fact, who so eagerly commended the stinking Ignatian Queres, or Pruritanus; and the most villanous Polonian Exetasis against his Maiesties most excellent state and person: which bookes also, are most singularly esteemed by some beyond seas; of which I thinke, if the most ex∣cellent Arch-duke knew, they should not be so dearly esteemed of by him. But I surcease to write any more of this kind, I haue perpaps discouered so much of the Ignatian spirit, that some of them will attempt by some meanes or other, to attenuat my spirit: but I weigh it not, for nothing more welcome to me then death it self, so that I may be found prouided, and ready to meet him and to be with him, after whom my soule longeth and breatheth so much, as this corruptible flesh of mine will permit me. My redeemer hath numbred my daies, andm Psal. 138. hath put my imperfections in his sight, and before he calleth me, no man can thrust me hence: his truth is witnesse to my soule, that in this writing, I seeke onely his glory, in whom confiding, I feare no man. And I humbly wish the English Recusants to beware of such seducers, as come vnder the garments of sheepe, but in∣wardly are rauening wolues, who plotting to bring to passe their conuersion of England, seeke nothing but the subuersion thereof, rather then their desires should not
take effect. And therefore, as themselues well know, are euer inculcating matters, to the disgrace of the Church, and state-gouernment of this Kingdome; & cannot well indure, that any Priest in his Sermons, should so much as commend and inculcate obedience to temporall ma∣gistrates. I my selfe was at my first comming sixteene yeeres since into this Kingdome, not a little reprehen∣ded by two Ignatian Priests, because vpon that text, Matth. 22: Marke 12. Giue vnto God that which is Gods, and to Caesar that which is Caesars; I had (said they) too much insisted vpon the latter part thereof, in perswading of obedience to the temporal magistrate, and yet in that sermon (which was not aboue an houre and halfe long, I am assured) I discoursed not twenty lines of that subiect. To proceed, I gather another tricke of naughty Spi∣rits, especially in the elder and latter Pontifician Monkes and Friers, who haue set forth so many coun∣terfet and comentitious treatises, in the ancient Fathers names, by that meanes to establish and confirme their doctrines, of their transubstantiation, their Popes su∣premacy, their confiding in merits of Saints, adora∣tion of Images, &c. Wherein, I do constantly affirme, that the most pregnant, and clearest proofes, which they pretend for most of their Romane positions, are taken out, either of such counterfeit bookes, as some of the learnedst Pontificians call in question; or else out of such commentitious bookes, and putatiue workes, of ancient Fathers; which by very sufficient proofe, may bee shewed, to bee not currant. And when withall, I obserue, what order they haue taken with their Indices expurga∣torij, Romanus, Neapolitanus Hispanus, Belgicus editià Povtificijs. Expurgatory Indices; not onely, to giue annotations, but further to corrupt the very texts of Authours; so that none, of later Pontifician Authors, in short time (such as Caietane, Ferus, Stella, Ludo∣uicus Granatensis, Polidore Virgill, Claudius Espex. &c.) shall bee found sound, and to speake like
themselues: yea, they sticke not to corrupt, the ve∣ry texts of ancient Fathers, whose editions they day∣lie innouate at Rome, Paris, Lions, &c. The indu∣strious His Treatise of corruption of Scriptures, Fa∣thers, Councels, by the Pontifi∣cians. M. Thomas James, hath produced many of such corruptions, and promiseth much more; one of them for a tast, which I also obserued long agoe, and proposed to a learned man, but receiued no sa∣tisfaction, I will heere giue to the Reader: it is a cor∣ruption, of a saying of S. Gregorie Nissene, which is this, (Illam solummodo naturam, quae increata est, co∣lere, ac venerari didicimus:) were haue learned, onely to worship, and adore, that nature which is increate: but the Spanish Expurgatorie Indices, say, the word (onelie) must bee put out of the text: a good cause why; the reader, cannot but obserue the mysterie; therefore I passe it, with silence. Doubtlesse these men, who are so impudent, to set foorth their owne late Authours otherwise, then themselues wrote; and are not ashamed, to corrupt the texts of ancient Fa∣thers workes: it is no maruell, that they do so shame∣fully, in their ranslations, peruert the sacred word, abhorring nothing more, then in those places of con∣trouersies, in which they dissent, from the reformed Churches, to haue their translations reformed, accor∣ding to the originalls of sacred Scripture, in which the word of God was first written, by the Authours thereof. Many shifts Bellarm. lib. 2. de erbo Dei. Bellarmine, Stapleton, Har∣ding, & others deuise, to wash away this dastardly ter∣giuersation of theirs, in refusing trial by the originals of Gods Scripture; but, the imputation is iust, and vn∣remooueable, and will help to bring their Babell to her confusion, together with her Expurgatory In∣dices, of late, and ancient Authours. Further, the naughty spirits of many Pontificians, as Bellarmine, Stapleton, &c. haue seemed manifest to me, in that they doe, most egregiously (to bring, the
reformed Churches in hate and contempt) calumni∣ate them, to teach such doctrines, as they vtterly de∣test, and disclaime from. As first, they accuse them, that they, giue iustification to faith onely, (meaning ostentimes, such a naked faith, as they teach void of charity, that is, faith informed, as they speake) a mere calumniation. For, who knoweth not, that the resor∣med Churches make iustifying faith, that, which in∣separably Galat. 5. worketh by charitie, as the Apostle spea∣keth? againe, they are accused, to exclude, necessity of good works to saluation, and all reward also, of good workes at saluation: meere imputations. For, as they continually inculcate, and commend necessity of good works in their pulpits, more effectually, then, in many of the Pontifician Churches (whose Prea∣chers, are much busied, with extolling the merits of Saints, the worth of indulgences, &c.) So likewise, they publikehe professe that God, will not bee vn∣mindfull of the least good worke (done, as it ought for his sake,) to reward the same. They are general∣ly calumniated, (amongst the good English Pontifi∣cians, who meane well) that thy make Gods he Au∣thour, and impeller of, and to sinne: a meere calum∣niation. There are indeede, some doubtfull speeches, in Caluines Institutions, but if it would please them, but to interpret fauourably his speeches, in like for as they interpret, the speeches of many later Dinines, yea and sentences of the very scripture it selfe, which in some places, seemeth more directlie to make God the Author of sinne, then euer Caluine did: their ca∣lumniating spirit would bee satisfied, and know, that hee teacheth nothing else then, what their own Chri∣stian Philosophers do teach, therein: of Gods imme∣diate, and positiue concurring, to the entitie, and na∣ture of euery sinne, and to the entitie, and nature of euerie morall, or naturall occasion, of sinne: and if
hee should say, that God, as a vniuersall Cause, doth not onely immediately, concurre, and intrinsecally coworke, with morall second Causes, in their mor∣all euill actions, as you all teach, or must teach, vn∣lesse you bee Heretikes: but also, that God, as the Prime vniuersall, and supreame independent Cause, of all things doth in a kind, of priority of nature, also preuent, and moue such morall second causes; in their free morall actions, beeing either of vice, or of ver∣tue: tell mee, is there none of your Pontifician Do∣ctours, Friars, or Monks, who teach the same, if not farre worse? who can be ignorant of this? who hath vnderstood, of the great I my selfe when I was some yeere ago in Doway, saw this doctrine that God doth moue with a pri∣ority of nature, of causality, and effectually, all morall agents in all their actions; printed in cer∣taine Theses, which were to be defended pub∣likely, vnder the moderation of one D. Estius, who obstinately (as I was there informed) defen∣ded the same po∣sition. controuersie, betwixt the Ignatians, at Doway, and some other Professours of that Vniuersity? the noise of which scandalous con∣trouersie soundeth euen vp to Rome it selfe, there to be determined, &c. The English Liturgy is most egre∣giously calumniated to be vaine & irreligious: a most slanderous imputation: for the forme thereof, is con∣formable to all antiquity, & is very religious; and if some priuate disorderly persons, sometimes minister not the Sacrament according to the forme there pre∣scribed, what of that? But I haue often wondered, why the speciall absurdities and abuses (if there be so many in the Booke of English Common Praier, as they pretend) haue not been by any of the aduersaries in some special sort largely discouered and confuted, considering how often, and in how speciall sort, the many turpitudes, abuses, cōtradictions & fooleries of their Roman Masses haue been learnedly deciphered. Commonly, and daily, is the Church of England calumniated, for giuing vnto the Prince, the Title of Supreame head or gouernor of the Church of Eng∣land; which yet is giuen in no other sense, then to shew that very power and Supreame Iurisdiction which all Ancient Christian Emperours and Kings
in the 1. Paralipom. 28. & 2. Paralip. cap. 17. & 19. Reg. 4. cap. 18. & 3. Reg. 2. old Testament, and since, haue euer more or lesse had in their Kingdomes; to wit, that for the publike setling, establishing, execution and admini∣stration, of all manner of iustice, whether in matters of Religion, or other Temporall causes; the Prince, hath Supreame authority; and that without his command, or permission no man may, so much as beare, or wagge any rodde, of any publike Iustice, or gouernment. But touching the ministra∣tion of Sacraments, giuing of Orders, giuing the power of the Keies, and in or touching defining of faith; it is a meere foppery, to say, the Prince challen∣geth any such matter in this Kingdome, or that any such is giuen him. But in al such respects, he doth most religiously acknowledge himselfe to be one of the sa∣cred sheepe, of Christs sacred flocke, vnder Christ his ministeriall Shepheards of the English Churche. Re∣member, I pray you how Parsons his Ca∣tholike letter and answer to our Kings Apology. Parsons admitteth, that the Kings supreamacy (as his most excellent and pious Maiesty, most religiously, and excellently explaneth the same in his Apology for the Oath of Allegeance) is allowable and such as may be receiued. The truth is, you care not so much for what the Prince hath, as, for that the Pope is excluded from his gainful Supre∣macy, ouer this Kingdom; who was accustomed with his Annats, Reseruations, Vnions, Comendaes, Expe∣ctatiue graces, Prouisions, Presentations, Nominatiōs, and with infinite such like 1 ad Tim. 6. nouelties of names, and prophanations, to corrupt all Church discipline and Religion of this Kingdome, as the Lincoln. Epise. a∣pud Matth. Paris. in Henrico. 3. famous and holy, Robert, Bishop of Lincolne, long agoe obiected, to your holy Pope Innocent the 4. And heere to note by the way, your vanities; you thinke it, to be eternall blemish to the Church of England, for that King Hen∣rie for loue of Queene Anne Bolleyne, as you say, and to be diuorced from Queene Katharine, did exclude
the Popes authority out of England, meerely vpon fancy and passion. But alas, your deuise is vaine; for it was first giuen vnto him by the learned Vniuersity of Oxford, then Pontifician: vpon this occasion, which I desire you to marke. There was earnest suite, made by some certaine Pontificians, to the Kings Maiesty to condemne Martin Luthers opinions, as being, the very same in many points, with those of Iohn Wicleff; who had beene long before, often con∣demned, in that famous Vniuersity of Oxford, and by many of his former predecessors: whereupon the King being desirous to see a copy of Wicleffs Articles; one was brought vnto him, the which hee seriously perusing, found one of them, to be thus, (to wit) that the Bishop of Rome, had no power, nor iurisdiction by right ouer the Church of England: Which, when, the King saw hauing at that time, the weighty con∣trouersie, about his diuorce, with the Bishop of Rome, he seemed to like thereof; but willing to doe nothing rashlie or against Faith, This standeth recorded in Ox∣ford, as M. Tho¦mas James hath affirmed vnto me very lately. hee presently, dispatched the same Article, to the Vniuersity of Ox∣ford; to haue it, by the learned anew examined; and their iudgements freely to bee giuen vpon it; the which was accordingly done, and the Article appro∣ued: whereupon that Prince resolued, by Consent and Authority of Parliament, to exclude the vsurped power of the Bishop of Rome, ouer the Church of England: which vnder his most tyrannicall oppres∣sions, had a long time groned: but by this meanes came to be deliuered from the Egyptian seruitude, as the holy Bishop of Lincolne long agoe Prophesied it would. And if King Henry the 8. vpon your supposed motiues did impugne, the Papacy, yet, I pray you, what greater, disgrace is it to the Church of England, that King Henry should exclude the Popes suprema∣cy? then it is to the Church of Rome that he should
establish the Statute of sixe Articles, for your Masse auricular confession, &c? and what disgrace to your doctrine of adoration of Images? because the vsur∣ping and auaricious Empresse Baron in Anall Platin. in Adrian. Irene, caused the same by a Synod of Bishops to bee decreed in Nice? And I pray you, doe you, thinke worse of your Iubilies, because Platina in Bo∣nif. 8. & Walsing. in Edward. 1. Po∣lychron. lib. 7. cap. 40. Boniface the 8. who entred most ambiciously like a Foxe, liued like a Lion, and died like a Dogge, brought them in? beware of such mis∣likes, it will not be for the profit of Romes purse? Againe, the Church of England is calumniated eue∣ry day, by all the Ignatians, as though she had no true orders or iurisdiction: I dare affirme, that in it there is as certaine, and as assured a succession of orders & spi∣rituall iurisdiction, as in the Church of Rome it selfe, which hath so often tottered, with so many schismes; and hath bin pestered with so many Apostatical Popes; as both Baronius, and Genebrard deliuer. I my selfe very lately searched (for my own satisfaction) the Re∣cords, and I find clearly, that Archbishop Parker, was sufficiently, truly, and canonically ordered and conse∣crated, by such Bishops as had receiued orders and consecration according to the Romane Church; he swore not, thou wilt perhaps obiect; obedience to the Bishop of Rome a toy. Where, in all antiquity, finde you the vse ofswearing subiection to the Bishop of Rome? Romane Tyranny brought it in to the Church, and Christian liberty hath exploded it. It is indeede, the soule of your Religion, that subiection to the Bishop of Rome, is a meane, necessary to salua∣uation, as necessary as Baptisme it selfe. O prodigi∣ous Doctrin, it is not enough, say these men to saluati∣on, to be vnited with Christ, and subiected to our im∣mediate Pastors, who are in vnion, with the whole Catholike Church, touching the Catholike faith; vnlesse we be also vnited, by immediate subiectiō vnto
the Pope of Rome; who may both be an Heretike, and also, contaminate the Church, with his pernici∣ous Lawes: So that if a Pope Nerolike, (as Boniface the 8.) would by pernicious Lawes, draw you from Christ; and like as a Heliogabalus (as Iohn the 12.) would draw you to all impurities, and teach you to diuide the Church, by opposing, against the true Pope, after his iust deposition by the whole Romane Clergy, & most Bishops of Italy assembled in a Synod: or Ottomanlike (as Paul the 5.) will teach you, against Christs institution, not to yeelde temporall obedi∣ence, to your lawfull Soueraigne; if hee out of his throne, take vpon him, to dethrone him: vnlesse forsooth, you be subiect to such Vicars of Christ, you cannot haue saluation in Christ. O prodigious and vaine Doctrine! of these times the holy Prophets (O ye Britaines) haue forewarned vs, let vs beware of them. What vile calumniation is that by which the refor∣med Churches of England, are charged, to deny the seeing of Gods face and glory, vnto the Saints depar∣ted, vntill the day of Iudgement? What a slander, that she respects no Holy daies of Christ, or his Apo∣stles? I dare say, that the memories of the Apostles, are in many places, of this Kingdome as religiously obserued, as the Sundaies are with them: but in the obseruation of the Sabbath, our Lords day; the Church of England doth, so farre surpasse all Papistical Churches, yea of Rome it selfe, that it were a sinne to make any comparison therein betwixt them. Caluino Turcis∣mo. Willi∣am Rainolds calumniateth Caluin that hee teacheth, that Christ, by his corporall death redeemed not man∣kinde. A meere Calumnious imputation: his doctrine is, that Christ by his meere Corporal death (had he not subiected himself, to haue vndergone, his fathers dis∣pleasure against mankinde, and to haue clothed him∣selfe,
as it were, with the deserts, punishment and guilt of man) he had not, fully made that satisfactiō for man∣kind; of which the Scripture so often speake: of which doctrin who can be ignorant, who is acquainted with holy writ? Great is their spight against that man; but notwithstanding all their malice against him, he liued peaceably, laboured faithfully, and died Christianly, leauing such a posterity of books behinde him, which checketh the daily & continual innouations of Rome. Grieuous, is the imputation, to the English Church for condemning, and contemning the ancient Fathers whereas the most it striueth for, is to support that, of Tertull. lib. de prescriptio. Tertullian: (Quod antiquissimum, verissimum) that, which is most Ancient (euen in the Fathers) is most true. At first when counterfeit Martials, Abdias, Cle∣ments, Markes, Dionises, were produced, the Prelats of the reformed Churches, were more afrighted then hurt; and to such Fathers, they might iustly giue the Anatheme, because such fathers, had impugned and contradicted, that Gospell of Christ, the which, who∣soeuer, though an Angell from heauen shall doe, we are warranted by the ad Galat. 1. Apostle to giue him the Ana∣theme. But in, and for true Fathers, the Church of England reuerently, and constantly auoucheth, that of Vincent. Lirin. contra Heres. cap. 4. Tertull. de prae∣script. Vincentius Lirinensis to take place, Quicquid, non unus, aut duo, &c. Whatsoeuer, not one, or two but al together, with one and the same consent, open∣ly, frequently, and constantly, shall bee knowne to haue held, written, and taught, that, she also without any doubt knoweth, must, by her bee beleeued; and this most iustly, the English Church admitteth, it be∣ing as cleare, as the verie no one daies, that all Fathers of the Ancient Church, neuer taught, helde, nor wrot any thing, in this sort, which is not clearely, agree∣ing to Gods word; which is the onely Rule of Chri∣stian faith.
But iustly to retort vpon them: who knoweth, not that for most, of their Roman nouel positions, the Ad∣uersaries haue no Ancient Fathers? and therefore to de∣fend themselues being vrged, they do not produce Fa∣thers but stand to their imagined Traditions, written no where, in Antiquity, but only reserued in the Ro∣mane Bishops and Churches brests, as they pretende: this is their City of refuge: as for example; When a world of Fathers, concurring with sacred Scripture is produced to shew that the Virgin Mary (whose name bee euer blessed amongst, and aboue all women) was conceiued in Originall sinne, yea, some of them, with S. Anselme auouching, that shee was borne in sinne: (which I can hardly beleeue) doe they heere, sticke to the Fathers; nothing lesse? their imagined traditions must take place. Againe, when whole centuries of Fathers, (and those assembled in Synods) bee produced, to affirme that Popes, haue beene, and may bee Heretikes; will they heare admit of the Fathers? nothing lesse; all re∣cords must be coūterfeit, their own best Authors, de∣ceiued, rather then the Fathers authorities admitted, against their Popes infallibilies. When irrefraga∣ble authorities, of most ancient Fathers, are produ∣ced, to shew that the holy Scriptures, are the onely inerrable rule of Christian, Catholike faith; and the square, by which the writings and faith of all men, and all Churches must be examined, and tried: will they heere, allow the Fathers? No, alas, they flye the field, and seeke after some maimed sentences, for Traditions; of which Traditions, when it is also shewed, out of the Fathers that they must also, be tri∣ed by holy Scriptures: will they heerein receiue the Fathers? euen as before, renounce all: and runne to the present voice, of their Church; which Church is with them, the Pope alone, or Pope and his Cardinals.
Againe, when all the Fathers, that euer commented vpon the 14. of the first to the Corinthians, with the authorities of many others, bee produced, to shew that the publike Church Liturgy, ought to be in such a tongue as may be vnderstood, by the assembly, and for their edification: will they heere, accept of the Fathers? Good God, they fleet vp and downe, like men in mases, to finde some probable reasons, for their barbarous seruices. Againe, when innumerable authorities, of anci∣ent Fathers, are clearely produced, for iustification by onely faith (Ad Gal. 5. which worketh by charity) and against their Laterane Transubstantiation: will they admit the Fathers? Good God, their subterfugies, are innumerable: either they will skippe ouer them, and runne onely to the text of Scripture, (This is my body  else, they will expound all their sayings: that  still remaineth: the natures of the crea∣tures are not changed: Christs flesh, which was cruci∣fied is not in the Sacrament: Christs flesh is present as in a Mystery, as in a Sacrament, as in a figure, &c. with infinite such like, most expresse sentences: They will, I say, so figuratiuely expound them all, to shew; that as they detest any figuratiue exposi∣sition, of the words of Scripture, in this Sacra∣ment, so they themselues delight in nothing more, then in figuratiue expounding most plaine sentences of the Fathers, discoursing of this my∣sterie. Againe, when authorities of all the ancient Fathers, that euer had occasion to entreat of the obedience of Subiects towards their naturall Princes, and lawfull Soueraignes, bee produced, to shew that Christians ought to obey them, Ad Rom. 13. euen for conscience sake, al∣though they be persecutors of the Christian Religi∣on;
and that they neuer vnderstood of the Im∣periall Papall power ouer Kings, and kingdomes, which the Romane Bishoppes, now assume to themselues: will they heere strike saile, and doe homage to the Fathers? No, God wot, they flie out of the field; and for the most part, either they passe ouer the question with silence, or else if they bee English, and Ignatians, or Ignatianed, they fall to libelling, and with namelesle Pamphlets, labour continually to traduce Magistrates, Gouernment, Maiesty; onely striuing by such a nouell Gospell (to the Apologies of which they are ashamed to put their names) to set vp the maiesty of the Romane Papall monarchy, & after destroying of the Romane Empire, to ruinate such Kingdomes, as were, according to the predictions of holy Prophets, to rise out of the Romane Empire, vntill the times of malice bee . I iustly touch them heere for writing of , in defence of this Gospell, to which bookes they are ashamed, or else afraide to put their names: wherein, they shew themselues, to bee right Parsonians, and Ignatians, or else deepely ignatianed. Those infa∣mous libels of stinking and prophane Pruritanus; and the most blasphemous masked Polonian Exetasis, a∣gainst the maiesties, glories, and gouernments of these Kingdomes: and expressely the most disloiall quipping in the Polonian Exetasis, of Englands titleP. W. The Corrector. W. Pater Gib. to France; Who composed them? Ignatians: who diuulged them? Ignatians, and Ignatianed. The vn∣sauory Pruritanus (worthy to bee retorted into the Popes bosome, but that the Maiesty of Gods Scrip∣ture may not bee abused) who caused them to bee re∣printed againe, after that most of them were taken at the Venetian Embassadors? Ignatians. Who brought new store of them againe, ouer into England? Igna∣tians.
Who were so well pursed as to giue eight shil∣lings apcece, yea an angell for such a prophane Pam∣phlet, comprised in a sheet or two of paper? The Ig∣natianed, and Brethren of the societie. Who compo∣sed the late idle Pamphlet, of the Puritan and Prote∣stant Sister, communing against the Oth of Alle∣giance? A simple and silly Ignatian creature, God wot. Who was the Authour of the late brag∣ging recapitulation, in the title of which, the namelesse Composer, (who as it is reputed, resting in S. Iohns Mount, should haue put P. W. to the end of the Pamphlet, rather then H. I.) promiseth a re∣capitulation, together with a declaration; but faileth in the latter; for he declareth nothing; only he recapi∣tulateth, a certaine learned booke, as it is thought of Leonard Lessius, the demonstrating Diuine; which booke as yet appeareth not. Some say, the cause is, that the Sorbone Doctours of Paris hearing of it, haue written to Rome against the publishing of it, to the Popes Holinesse, for that (say they) France is not in a fit temper for such doctrines. Others say, the French Ignatians haue written vnto their Generall Aquauiua, to haue the worke stopped, because in this time, when their credits are so shaken euery where, for like pernicious doctrine it would greatly That doctrine must not be al∣lowed in France, which poore English Recu∣sants must main∣taine with all vt∣ter extremity, & manifest perdi∣tion of their soules. hurt their cause. This is done to saue the Ignatians skinnes whole, and yet the poore English Recusants, termed both in Italy and France, the Popes Asses, must beare the brunt of the Popes quarrell, though it be to their vtter ruines. I rather thinke the booke is kept in, out of diffidence of their cause, and that the Louanian so∣cietie of Ignatians, will not permit their Diuine to enter into such an vnsound quarrell, leauing it, as they say, for the English to defend and vndertake. Alasse, the good English like Asses must vndertake all, and vndergoe all; yet there was neuer people vpon earth
who haue had worse successe with traiterous do∣ctrines and conspiracies then they. Againe, who was the composer of the late Libel against me? the which I neuer read, to make my selfe merry therewith. But I heartily also reioiced that I was found worthy to suf∣fer contumely and disgracefull slanders for truths sake, and for my Countries and Princes sake. Some silly Saint-Omeristian boy, for his Fathers the Ig∣natians: who as it is reported, made themselues of∣tentimes merie with the same at their recreations, & after their full meales; whom I here leaue to the ma∣king of Libels stil, if they hold that a fit course to sup∣port their desperate cause: only giue me leaue (Cur∣teous Reader) here with two or three particulars, to shew how the young Ignatians like Crabs, learne of the old, like as to write namelesse bookes for their gospell, so also to blaspheme maiesty and soueraign∣tie, and to commend and engender disloyall spirits, and to discommend and checke the naturall and loy∣all. Some yeere agoe, and as much as since Iuly last, my selfe, with diuers other Priests, arriuing at S. Omers, we heard there a certaine Ignatian preach vpon that Matt. 7. text, Beware of false Prophets, &c. In which his Ser∣mon, before the whole English audience at S. Omers, he did most bitterly inueigh against all such Priests, as in England did allow and commend the Oth of Alle∣giance to be taken: and according to his Pat. Fea. name, hee did so feake them, that hee doubted not to call them Wolues, yea rauening Wolues: and although (said he) they say Masse, minister the Sacraments, say their o∣ther praiers, liue vertuously, and so appeare with the outward clothing of sheep, yet they are Wolues) their rauenous and woluish sinne, being because they did not teach forsooth according to the order Marke the na∣ture of the Popes Mission, as the Ignatians inter∣pret it. of their mission, (marke his words,) nor according to his com∣mandement,
from whom they had their mission (can you conceiue the mystery of those wordes, the order of their mission?) in teaching the Oath of Allegi∣ance to be lawfull: surely this order of mission is that policy, which Robert Parsons ment, when to a certain Pope, seeming loath to send such proper men into England (as came before him, to kisse his feet, and to take his Benediction) where it was probable they should fall into danger of death, and saying that ere it were long he would take some other course for the conuerting of England) that politik man replyed thus in the very hearing, and not without admiration of those Priests. Holy Father it is meet that they stay not, but goe, and that the Parsous policy. policy be still continued; which word policy stroke so deeply into one of those M. Wors. Priests minds, that he hath politikely kept himself out of England; & liueth still a poor life beyond seas rather then he will come into a Plentiful Country to vphold Robert Parsons policie with danger of his life. When the Reporters of the late most detestable murther of Henry the fourth, the French King was somewhat fresh, and newes was brought how, that most hatefull villaine Rauilliacke, did seem to make some shew of repentance at his end: in so villanous a sort, (as before God his repentance was as bad as the deed it self to wit in these words, (as it was reported) that hee was sorry, for that he had committed mur∣ther, but not sorry that he had killed Henry the fourth the king of France: which report when I heard, I both detested, and reproued the repentance, as wicked, and as diuelish: but against me therein; (although diuers Priests and Recusants were at Table) onely a certaine Pat. Freem. alias Warr. Ignatian Priest opposed himselfe; desending Rauilli∣acke, that in such a kind of repentance he might haue true and Christian contrition: to which, (seriouslie
beholding the man & ashamed of his Spirit, and almost of my selfe (who was then a fellow prisoner with him) I replied thus,A certaine pe∣danucall Ignati∣an in his confu∣tation of Anti∣cotton, subscri∣beth his Epistle Dedicat. to the Queen of France thus: Seruus bu∣milimus, Cliens ob sequen sissimus, O rator sidelissimus, unus Patrum de Societate Jesu. Father, (for so they must be all called) you and your order, haue little reason, in any re∣spect to defend that most wicked villaine, considering what a Patron, the late murthered King, was to your Order, but notwithstanding my reply, he held on, to maintaine his paradoxe. He is now recollecting his spirit, at Louaine. God indue him, with better Diui∣nity, and sounder distinctions before he returne into this Countrey; he was heere reputed halfe a Saint; and therefore, I doubt, he may returne againe some∣what sooner then welcome to England. Not many yeeres since, there was a certaine wor∣thy, and very worshipfull Gentle woman (for whose loyall heart, to Prince and Countrey, and for al those, who with her, haue issued from the same stocke, I dare vndertake, I am so well acquainted with their true English hearts and dutifull affections) who being at S. Omers, had, and wore about her necke, a cer∣taine Iewell, which was once belonging to a great Princesse. The Iewell being very precious and of gold, had set into it an Agnus Dei, and vnder a cleare Christall vpon one side thereof, it had the picture of our Sauiours face, vpon the otherside, the picture of our most excellent Soueraigne, when hee was a childe: but how, that good Gentlewoman, was taken vp by an Ignatian Priest in my hearing for wearing of it, about her necke, and before her breast; because it had our Princes picture vpon it, (who, as the Ignatian said, was a persecutor, and an enemy to Catholike re∣ligion) I can tell, because I heard his reprehensions of her; and defended her, wishing her, and charging her, in what I could, to continue that custome still. But since that time, (I being not long to stay at Saint Omers, and returning into England) I know not how,
they haue beene so busie with her, that for one respect or other, shee could not keepe it, quietly, but hath sent it away to Loretto; when I saw the Gentlewo∣man at S. Omers, some tweluemonth, and more agoe, I was very earnest with her, to know vpon what oc∣casion, she had put the Iewell away, but I could not possibly learne of her: (she respecting doubtlesse the Ignatian Fathers credit, at S. Omers) onely shee told me, because she could, neuer, be in rest about it, but that they would be still vrging toI doe not well remember whe∣ther her word was to get, or beg it. get, or begge it from her, she vowed it to Lorette, whither also, shee accordingly sent it, notwithstanding many oppositi∣ons against the same her fact: where also, now it re∣maineth, hanging vpon the blessed Virgin Maries Picture, which is there worshipped and adored. These three particulars, with some like, which I partly haue forgotten, partly omit: I write not (God is witnesse) for any other end, but to discouer their Spirits; that they may be taken, as they are, for the very despisers of authority of whom the Apostle Iu∣das hath so expressely foretold long agoe: admoni∣shing vs to beware of them. For, it is a thing which I haue euer specially obserued, that those who are the children of God, are guided with Gods Spirit, espe∣cially, when they are prosecuting of the workes, which apportaine to God: if therefore these men, do thus most egregiously abuse themselues, in the deli∣berate prosecuting of their religious courses, what may be thought of their Spirits? They doe often im∣pose as against the truth of the Gospell of the refor∣med Churches, thatI dare stand to the defence of it that the liues of Calan, Beza, were more com∣men dable, then the life of Par∣sons, Creswell, or Hoalt & Garnet, their famous Martyt, who was (as it is reported by honourable persons) tipfie a very few daies before his end. Caluin was a wicked man, an in∣cestuous man: that Bean also was voluptuous man, before he fell from them. But let them not tell what maner of men, they were, when they were with them, but when they left them, & when they were gon from them: for if they liued vertuously, religiously, obari∣tably,
iustly, (being gone from them) either it will be thought, that they were calumniated to haue beene vicious, when they were with them, or else that it was their corrupt religion, and the spi∣rit thereof, which then led them to wickednesse. It is credibly reported that Robert Parsons, being desirous to haue had Iohn Gerrards life, written, a∣mongst many things, to haue beene put in the same: one speciall matter should haue beene, that hee had conuerted to the Romane profession; some of the damned crew as they once called themselues; to wit, the two Powder-wrights, and Catesby who was ano∣ther of the damned crew, as is reported, and who was conuerted (as they speake) by Gerrard: and perhaps some others of them: by which it is cleare, that Ro∣bert Parsons, thought it no staine to the Romane reli∣gion, to haue mostI could nomi∣nate diuers Stū∣pets, turned to them, but not conuerted, some are liuing, some are dead. New∣gate is well ac∣quainted with such persons, and do not such haūt thither some∣times, yea, and confesse, and yet professe still? wicked men, turned vnto it; and I hope it is no staine to the Professors of Ignatius so∣ciety, that their Protoparent Ignatius had so little feeling of God, or so little sense of a religious life, be∣fore his wonders, (which as the thunderclaps, made Luther a monke, they say) so they made Ignatius, the Parent, & Father of so many renowned Ignatians.Bolsec. in vita caluin. Hierome Bolsecke, a professed enemy to Caluin, wri∣teth most calumniously against him, that being a Pa∣pist, he was both accused, and conuicted for Sodo∣my, and marked therefore, vpon his shoulders; the records whereof, saith that lying Priest, remained at Noioune; whereas yet no credible person could euer see them: the which if it had beene true, why, (tell mee some Bolsekian) was, hee suffered, to preach vp and downe afterwards, in diuers Parish Churches, of the Pontificians? And were, those of Geneua, so prodigall of their soules, and rechlesse of their ho∣nours to commit themselues to such a man, so pub∣likely defamed? and why did not Bolseke discouer
this imputation before he fell out with Caluin? & was driuen to Lions, where to purchase credite with the Archbishop, he deuised such lies against Caluin, as hee thought good? I doubt not, but this against Cal∣uin is alike true, with that which is written against Martin Luther byCocleus in vita Lutheri. Cocleus: vpon a certaine time forsooth, (saith Cocleus) when the gospel of the dumb Diuell was reade; Luther being then by, sodainly he fell downe crying out, I am not dumbe, I am not dumbe: by the same shewing himselfe to bee possest with a dumb Diuell: a likely tale surely, that notwith∣standing this, the Augustine Friers who were not ig∣norant, what the Canons of the Church had proui∣ded in such a case, should with the authority of the Bishop, to whom their Monastery was subiect, pro∣mote him to the degree of Priesthood, and afterwards honour him with the great dignity to bee a Doctor, and professor of Diuinity amongst them. Surely ey∣ther Cocleus is an impudent lyer, or else those Augu∣stine Fryers were impudent fellowes, to promote their dumbe Diuell to such honourable and diuine dignities; as Priesthoode, and Doctorshippe are. Away with these fables, and the like, which Cocleus and Bolsek haue deuised touching the ends & deathes of Luther and Caluin, the which were both religious and pious, as diuers worthy persons who were pre∣sent at their ends haue testified: but obserue these mens humors, one Cocleus, or one Bolsek professedPlatina, Man∣tuan, Caranza. Crantius, Sabel. Nauel. Marian Martin Polon. and almost all o∣ther historians from him till Onuphrius. Benno Cardin. in vita Grego. 7. enemies must be beleeued against Caluin or Luther, & a whole centurie of Authors & Pontificians, descri∣bing a papisse Ioan & her most hateful end, must not be beleeued: one Cocleus against Luther must bee belee∣ued, and yet a Cardinal and a learned man of the Col∣ledge of Cardinals with diuers other must not be be∣leeued against Gregory the 7. deploring and decla∣ring his wicked life: nor Sigibert relating his misera∣ble
end. I might here adde somewhat, touching their spirites in giuing credite to their lying Legends; but of that perhaps more fully hereafter: and truly I hope that considering their Popes haue so often pared their breuiaries (though leauing yet, many corruptions both in their feasts of Dedications and in their office of Katherine virgine and Martyr, and elsewhere) that before it be long they will cracke Surius his credite also for his many fables, as they haue already, more or lesse broken the credit of Iacobus a Voragine. Archbi∣shop of Genoa in his golden Legend: of Vincentius Belluacensis, and Antonine of Florence, whom they cal Saint Anthonine: but I will here onely with the Rea∣ders patience, relate one of their miraculous fables:Iacob. a Worag. whichI Legend. aurea. Anton. hist. part. 2. it. 13. cap. 6. Vincent. Specul. lib. 23. cap. 140. these three mentioned do relate. When Charles surnamed the Bald, came to S. Egidius his Monastery (say they,) he being perplexed with a most grieuous sin, which he was ashamed to confesse, he signified the same his griefe to Egidius, desiring him to pray for remission that of; whereupon he praide and that so heartily, that a cortaine Schedule, by the hand of an Angell was giuen to Egidius, in which it was writ∣ten, that pardon was granted to Charles; and withall it was added in the same Singraphe, that whosoeuer should afterwards call vpon Egidius for remission of any sinnes by him committed, hee should (if hee did leaue to continue and commit the same) not doubt to haue remission there of by the merites and inter∣cessions of Saint Egidius. How great was Diana of the Ephesians? but farre greater is Egidius of the Ro∣mans. Fie vpon such horrible blasphemies against the bloud of Christ, and to the great dishonor of that name, in whichAct. 4. onely wee purchase saluation: this vile fable reported by three such witnesses, whereof two were Archbishops, and one of them a Romane Saint: the other a Bishoppe, was sometimes vsed to
be read and sung in old Breuiaries; but now it is scra∣ped out by Cardinall Quignone: but yet notwithstan∣ding, there is as bad stuffe in this kind, left behind for the dishonour of Christ and of his Apostlesad Corinth. 4. (who desired to bee esteemed no other, then as the Mini∣sters of God, and the dispensers of his misteries) for they haue made them Coredeemers, & Coaduocates with Christ. Heare courteous Reader what they sing to them, and then doe thou iudge. First in latine thus. Breuiria Ro∣man. comu. Apostole.Qui coelum verbo clanditis, Serasque eins soluit is, Nos apeccat is omnibus, Soluite Iussu, que sumus, Quorum, praecepto subditur; Salus, & languor omnium, Sanate, aegres moribus; Nos reddentes virtutibus. Thus Englished by Verstegane. Yee, which by wordes, the heauens close, And loose thereof the lockes againe, Vouchsafe, us free, by your behests, From all the sinnes, that vs restraine. To whose commaunding subiect are, Infirmittes, and healthes of all: Our ill disposed, customes, cure, And vnto vertue vs recall. Whose eyes, are not shut, if here he doe not plain∣lie obserue, how they haue taken the glory of onelie Redeemershippe and Aduocacy from Christ, and haue transferred it vpon his Creature? how plaine is it, that they beg those things from the Apostles, which Christ onely doth giue, and from whose onely
hands, we are to expect them, to wit, peace and salua∣tion? Vouchsafe O Christ, to open their eyes, that seeing, they may see; and be conuerted, and thou (O God) heale them; thou (O God) restore them to all vertues. I should here, declare somewhat, how the Romane Church, trauaileth to make her Religion, to seeme and appeare magnificent, pompous, glori∣ous by deuised shewes; a fitte deuise indeed to draw the simple, but wiser trauailers and indicious persons obseruing such artificiall and stagelike representati∣ons,Diuerse both noble and very worthy Gentle∣men haue taken great offence at the Spanish Fop∣peries in their processions and haue been great∣ly confirmed to continue still in the single and sincere integrity of the reformed Churches. gather another conclusion thereout; to wit, that their Religion is, humane, not diuine, not agreeing to the true ancient Christian simplicity of Christs Church. Do they think, that their sumptuous carrying their God vp and downe streetes, their publike incen∣sing and adoring of it, their deuising of many rich re∣presentations, to set forth their solemnities will draw the wiser people, of such coūtries as are auerted, from the Romance Church? no God wot, there is nothing more, auerteth them, then such open and heathenish∣like kind of worshippes, which were neuer dreamed of in ancient Churches, nor commended by any an∣cient institution of any Gouernours of the same. The Conclusion. But I will make haste towardes the Conclusion of these my motiues; yet before I end, I am constrained for the satisfaction of others, to shew, with what conscience and reason, I dare aduenture, to leaue communion, with that Church, which is so famous, and so conspicuous, and which hath beene euer visi∣ble, for so much as concerneth externall succession, & an outward kind of profession, of many pointes of Christian Doctrme, since Christs time: (as like con∣tinuing of succession can be shewed in the Chur∣ches of Hierusalem, Alexandria, &c.) It cannot be de∣nied, but that the Romane Church in the Apostles
time, was a pure and sound part of the Christian Ca∣tholike Church, (although in her very infancy, shee was sliding, if you beleeue Onuphrius, which moued S. Peter to hasten and returne vnto her, and althoughOnuphrius in annotatan Pla∣tmam in vitam Petri. Euseb. lib. 3. hist. cap. 31. Eusebius relateth Egesippus, to affirme, that whilest the Apostles liued, the Church was an immaculate Virgine, and pure from errour; but they being dead, there did presently arise those, who did impugne the Apostolicall truth) notwithstanding these things, I doubt not to say, that the Romane Church continu∣ed long time found in all substantiall matters of Chri∣stian doctrine, vntill humane Traditions beganne to entermixe themselues, with religion instituted by di∣uine authority, which then most apparantlie began, when the Church came to enioy temporall peace, and prosperity, presently after the dayes of Constantine the Emperour, in whose time, and by whose donation poyson was powred into the Church, as theVita Silaestri approbata. life of Siluester Pope deliuereth of a certain Angelical voice, pronouncing as much: the operation of which poison shewed it self, partly in effect, in the time of Damasus, when by reason of the competency, and contention which was betwixt him, andAmmian. Mar∣cellia lib 27. cap. 2 Ra on in Annal. Vrsisine for the Romane See; so much bloud was shed, that I hope, (ifI Cortil 2. Marcellin ibid. Scrates l. 2. ca. 11 affirmeth how the Bishop of Rome exalting themselus aboue the limits of Priesthood into temporall domi∣nion contended for the Primcay ouer all other Churches. Saint Pauls argument bee true) the Romane Church was then very carnall, oppressed with such grieuous con∣tentions, and not being in vnity of spirite, thinking the same thing, but hauing such horrible schismes a∣mongst them; and I doubt not to affirme, but that Damasus more or lesse as hee was delighted (accor∣ding to the fashion of Romane Bishops) with sump∣tuous attendance in his person, so also more or lesse brought in sumptuous seruice, and pompous ceremo∣nies into the Church: and this the Pontificians can∣not deny, if diuers thinges that bee in Damasus his Pontificall bee truly attributed to that Popes institu∣tion
and collection (which in sundry thinges I be∣leeue not,) but this Bishoppe is made a Saint in the Romane calender: the Lord knowes for what ver∣tue, or when he was first fainted: perhappes for his tumultuous entrance, or pompuous conuersation in the chaire of Rome, in which respect hee may be re∣puted in some degree the Protoparent of many his Successors. These beginnings and entrances of corruption & vanity into the Church of Rome obserued, which in succeeding times, and in ages after ages grew into most horrible grieuous prophanations by the subtlety of Satan, whilest the Gouernours of the ChurchesMath. 13. were a sleepe, that is, were lulled with temporall peace, and prosperity. I seriously first consider, those Propheticall wordes of ourLuc. 13. Sauiour, in which hee hath foretold, that when hee should come, he should hardly find faith vpon earth: which defection from faith, as it was to bee, and generally to ouerwhelme the whole world before Christs second comming; so, who coulde long agoe precisely say, when it was to beginne: onely after-experience hath de∣monstrated it, and doth tell vs, that according to a∣nother Propheticall prediction of the most blessed2 ad Thes. 2. Apostle, who hath expresly deliuered, that this de∣fection and Apostacy should bee, when that man should sitte in the temple, that is the Church: at whose comming the Romane Empire should be taken out of the way, and who should extoll him∣selfe, (sitting in the Temple) aboue all, that is called, or worshipped as God, vpon earth: who should also, in himselfe, and by his followers worke wonders and miraculous prodigies; bosting and bragging therein: who should also Apostatat from the charity of truth, that is, from the iustifying faith in Christ Iesus onely: that iustifying faith in Christ Iesus onely, which is so
much, and so often commended in sacred Scripture; & who also should Apostatate from most Articles of Christian doctrine. For, vaine is that exposition of the Remists, who would faine interprete this Aposta∣sie, of which the Apostle speaketh to bee from the Pope, and from his Primacie, and particular Romane Church; (vaine I say,) for who will say that a man might not iustly haue departed from the communion of such Popes, asGenehrard. lib. 4, Chronol sulo 10. Baron. ad aun. 900. & anno 908. Plaim. in vita sapissime, in Bo∣nifa. 7. & 8 in Silucst 2, Renedict. 9. in Ioh. 8. they themselues account Apostati∣call, and not Apostolicall? who only are related in histories, to make vppe the externall number of succession? and I pray you, what was the case of so many hundreds of Prelates, and your owne Car∣dinals, who at Pisa departed from the Romane true Bishoppe; true (I say) for externall succession? what of the Prelates of the Councell of Basile, which consi∣sted of most Bishoppes of the West, who departed from the communion of Eugenius, (with the Ponti∣ficians, the vndoubted Bishoppe of Rome?) What of the Clergy, and part of the Church of Rome it selfe, who departed from Liberius, when Eusebius one of the Romane Church, with some others were grieuou∣sly persecuted? It is a vaine narration of our Ignati∣ans, and others to say that this Apostasie, prophesied by the Apostle, and Christ, must be interpreted from the Bishoppe of Rome: for it is most euident, that it must bee from Iesus Christ himselfe, and the true iu∣stifying beleefe in him onely; and most vain it is for them to say, that the infallibility of doctrine, was so tyed to the visible succession of Bishoppes in the Ro∣man particular See: for if so, how comes it to passe, that against Iohn the 23. the true Pope for succession, it was proued in a generallCan constant. Sess. Councell, that hee had pertinatiously thought, and often taught, that there was no immortality of the soule, no resurrection of the body? what might not a man haue
departed from the communion of this Pope? if not; then the whole Romane Church, which in the coun∣cell of Constance, apostated from him; made that A∣postacy, of which the Apostle foretold. Which if it be true, what will become of Paul the fift with his con∣gregation? The Remists fearing that the defection from the Romane Empire, and destruction of the same, should bee a steppe to proue that he who hath ouerthrown the same, and set another forme of gouernment in Rome, absolute, and soueraigne; and yet not, as of the Romane Emperour; doe therefore most shame∣lesly, in theirAnnotat. 17. Apocalyps. vpon the word Baby∣lon. annotations vpon the Apocalipse so separate the gouernment of Rome, and of the Church in Rome, as though they were not vnited together, but remained still, in that sort in which they both were in the time, when the Apostle made this predi∣ction: for thus they write in expresse termes: where∣by it is plaine (say they) that whether Babylon or the great Whore, doe signifie Rome, here or no, yet it can∣not signifie the Church of Rome, which is now, and euer was distinct from the terrene empire of the same. Thus they without all shame, or learning; where they would faine put off from the Pope and his Cardinals, the reproch of hauing the terrene Empire, or gouern∣ment of Rome in their hands: which I verily suppose they doe hold so fast, that they will not leaue the sameApocl 7. vntill the tenne hornes (which earst as Kinges haue receiued power after the beast, that is, vpon the de∣caying and desolation of the beast, and haue also ioi∣ned for the appointed time, power with the beast, a∣gainst the lamb, because iointly concurring to vphold the impious superstitions, and abhominations of the Whore, of whose cuppe they haue all drunke, euen almost till they haue vomited it vp againe) God put∣ting into the hearts, shall eate the Harlots flesh, and
make her naked & desolate, & consume her with fire. This harlot, which shall be so eaten, and burned by those Kings, who had earst drunke of the cup of her whoredomes, Whom can shee designe, but (as Ibidem. Saint Iohn saith) that City which had command ouer the Kings of the earth, to wit, earst in her Emperours, af∣ter in her Popes and Cardinals should, haue power, and command ouer the Kings of the Earth: the which who seeth not, is verified in the City of Rome it selfe? as not onely certaine Ancient Fathers, but certain,Ribera in 14. Apocal. viega in 17. Reist. in A∣pocal. Bellarmin. lib. de Rom Pont. Ignatians themselues also expound it: (and if it signifie not Rome, let the Aduersary produce some other City heere described) so that, the Beast that was and is not, to wit, the rule and command of the City of Rome, which was before in the Consuls, Senators, and Commonwealth, buf now it is not, (because it is in the Emperours) shall be againe in thePontifx &c. The Pope and the Purpured Fa∣thers iudge the world. Coquae con∣tra Praemon. Pope, and his purpured Cardinals. To proceed, where should this defection, rather be, then in Babylon which S. Iohn hath foretold? Now that by Babylon Rome (according to the exposition Hieron. in pro∣logo Didimi epist. 17. ad Marcel. Tertul. lib. aduer. Judaeos. of the Ancient Fathers) is to to vnderstood, Annotm 17. Apocal. the Remists themselues dare not stiffely deny it; now as cleare as the Sumit is, that therefore Rome is called Babylon, because shee hath made drunke, with the cup of her whordomes, all Kings of the Earth, and all Nations, who haue pledged her: which by no meanes can be expounded, of Rome heathenish, both in re∣spect that shee did not, infect with her whoredomes, the Countries and prouinces, which she conquered; but rather she obteined no Countrey nor Prouince, of whose whordomes she drunke not her self, by bring∣ing their gods Images, into her Capitoll to bee wor∣shipped and adored with the Images of their Romane gods. And manifest it is, that the Prophet speaketh
of a cup of fornication, which Kings, and Nations, were to drinke of; somwhat after his time: but Rome heathenish, and he Emperours, were in their ruffe and most triumphing, when S. Iohn made this Prophesie: againe, Tertull de resur∣rect carais cap. 25 Bellar. vnderstan∣deth, that the tn Kings which shal hate the Whore, shall diuide the Romane Empire taking kingdom to themsees, & afterwrd de∣stroy Rome it selfe. Bellar. lib. 3. de Pout. cap. 13. the Kings of the Earth, who were to drinke of the cuppe, were afterwards, to hate this Whore, and to make her desolate, therefore, and in respect, of her abominations: now this can by no meanes, be vnderstood of Heathenish Rome; which was long a∣goe conuerted to Christ, and her blemishes of Ido∣latry, washed out by the blood of the Lambe, in the the time of Constantine. And to say, that Rome Chri∣stian, should be punished, for the cup of Whordomes, which Rome Heathenish, gaue to the Kings of the Earth, to drinke of, is a meere chimera; vnlesse they can shew that the most iust God, will punish Jacke (as is said) for Gill, or else, they can prooue vnto vs a Pithagarian transmigration of soules, from Rome Heathenish, into Rome Christian. Further, it is, most apparent, (as I haue mentioned aboue) that the cupps of whordomes, heere spoken of, should be in the hands of one, who had been first Hierom. epist. 17. ad Marcel. Rome was then in part the purpured Whoe, and Babylon. a Spouse, and had for her husband Iesus Christ, from whom she was to fornicate and to commit Adultery, with her fauourites, the Nations and Kings of the Earth; to whom also, she was to send cupps of forni∣cation, to wit of false Doctrines, rites and impure su∣perstitious: and the same Kings to drinke thereof, and to pledge her, by louing embracing of her doctrines: now, as cleare as the Sunne it is, that Rome Heathe∣nish, was neuer a spouse of Iesus Christ; but Rome Christian was; and therefore egregiously commen∣ded by the Cap 1. ad Rom. holy Apostle in his Epistle to the Ro∣mans. Besides, to dispute probably, the clothing of* Apoalop. 7. this Whore, with Purple and Searlet, in her Pope and Cardinals, the writing of the name Mystery, (ac∣cording
to the like expresse Prophesie of S. Iohn) in the Popes Diademe; beset with many precious stones,* Ibidem the Popes Diademe; beset with many precious stones, which I very crediblie heard (when I was student in Rome, not without a kinde of astonishment) to haue beene once placed there, and sette in that part of the Diademe, which was for the Popes forehead: but now it is remooued. Her persecution, against such as giue testimony, to the name of Iesus: that in it only, without anyintermixiō of humane helpes, saluation is to be had. These things; with many such like agreeing to sacred Scripture, testifie that Rome is the Whore. And heere, I note by the way, how incredible, the cruelty of that City is, against such as giue testimony to the holy name of Iesus. For besides, their most close couping vp of such as they persecute, into their darke chambers, in their inquisition: their mercilesse separation of them from all friends, whatsoeuer; the most extreame penurious diet, wherewith they af∣flict them; the great iniuries that they offer vnto them in dispoiling them, of all they haue; whether it be gold, siluer, or precious stones; (by which they might releeue themselues) the horrible torments, and torturings; the dreadfull threats of imminent death, by certaine tragicall representations &c. they are also sworne, as I haue beene informed, (although I will not stand to iustify it) at their entrance into the inquisitions, neuer to discouer, whatsoeuer shall bee done to themselues, or whatsoeuer they may per∣ceiue and see done to others in that place. O cruell! the Pontifician Priests in England doe thinke them∣selues extreamly dealt withall, to be kept together in common Prison, with free accesse to each other, and with accesse also of friends vnto them, (except vpon some speciall restraint, which as it neuer lasteth but for a time, so it is neuer so great, but that friends may come at least to the gates of such Prisons, to bring
them reliefe) And in some Prisons about this City, they are permitted with keepers, or without keepers; to passe vp and down the City freely, to their friends: yea, and diuers of them of whom the State is not assecured, for their loiallty by the taking of the Oath of Allegeance, haue daily this liberty. Iudge Christian Reader, hereupon, what measure, the Pope, and his, measure to such, as giue testimony to the dreadfull name of Iesus, in respect, of that clement course, which is taken with such as hee sendeth into this Kingdome, directly, or indirectly, to bring the same to his subiection and command. God in his mercies, may auert what he, and his intend, but giue me leaue to speake, I see that ofLuc. 16. Christ, verified, The children of this world, are wiser in their generation, then the children of light. God forbid, I should wish the blood of any to be shed: yet God forbid, but I shold pray for the preuenting of al seducers of soules, and the moderate & charitable restraining of them. But to returne, to my purpose, that the Church of Rome, may be this Whore and fal into false doctrines; heare whatHieron. in epi∣taph. Marcel. S. Hierome, writeth of her pronesse to corruption in his time. (Heretica, &c.) An Here∣ticall tempest being risen in these Prouinces, brought a ship, full of blasphemies, into the Romane Port. And feete bemired with dirt, did mingle themselues, into the pure fountaine of the Romane faith; then holy Marcella, after shee perceiued that the faith, which was praised by thead Rom. 1. Apostolicall mouth, was violated in many things, so that Priests, many Monks, and especially men of the World, were drawne in to assent, thereof, and the simplicity of the Bishop also was deluded; she publikly resisted; thus hee. Consi∣der Christian reader, a woman must make resistance against a shippe of blasphemies and heresies, infe∣cting the Roman Church: A woman must awake the
simple Bishop, or else euen then, Rome had commit∣ted whordome, from her spouse. Alas, there wanted a Marcella in the Church of Rome, in the time of Iohn the 22. when thatGerson. in 4. par∣te serm. de pascha∣te Adrian. in 4. sent. de Sacramēt. Confirmat. Bellar. lib 1. de Pont. cap. 14. Ioh. Villan. bist. lib. 10. lege compeudium errorum iohan. 22 apud occbam. Pope with his Court, taught, that the Saints departed, see not God till the day of iudgemēt: Yea, he not only taught it in Rome, but also sent his Preachers, abroad, amongst which Iohn Crea∣ture, Generall of the Order of Minor-Friers, came to Paris, where hee preached the same Heresies, and would haue continued, had not feare of fire, which was threatned, by the King of France, stopped him in his course. In like sort, was the Romane Church, polluted, and deluded with her Bishop; asTertull. lib. ad. ucrsus Paxeam. Tertullian recor∣deth, when she sent letters of communion to the he∣reticall Churches of Asia, and Phrigia, who profes∣sed, and acknowledged, the impious, and hereticall doctrine of Montanus and his Prophetisses. And as shee hath beene often corrupted, in the fountaine; so hath her corruption spread it selfe, throughout the whole Church; to fulfill the Apostasie, and defection foretold by Christ, and his Apostles. And I would demand, of these men, who rest upon theSuccessio sedis, &c. Succession in See is onely a matter of name, succession of faith hath the thing it selfe and truth. Greg. Na∣rianzen. in orat. de laudibus A∣thanas. visible succession, onely of the Bishops in the Romane Church, (the like being to be found in other Churches, which themselues condemne for hereti∣call.) First, what they would haue done, if they had beene with Aaron, and the whole visible Church of the Iewes, where, in the desert, in worshipping their Golden Calfe, theyExod. 32. pretended to keepe a feast to their Iehouah, who had brought them out of Aegypt? would they haue obeied Aaron? and haue followed the multitude? Againe, when Elias complained (and this afterPsalm 86. 88. 110. 132. see Iere. 33. greater promises, had beene made by God to Hie∣rusalem and their Church, then any can bee shewed
made to Rome or the Church there) that hee3. Reg 19. him∣selfe, was left alone in Israel; and that all but hee with Achab and Iezabel the Idolatrous Princes, wor∣shipped Baal (though, euen then, and in Israel also, not onely in Iuda, as the Papists will haue it) God hadIbidem 7000. who had neuer bowed to Baal) what would they haue then done? would they haue pub∣likely followed the face of that Church? and that vi∣sible Gouernment? and not rather, haue beene in so∣ciety, and communion with the inuisible company? Or rather, I aske, would they at that very time, haue followed the visible multitude in Iury and Hierasa∣lem, which atReg 3. cap. 22. 3. Reg. cap. 9. that season did sacrifice, and burne incense in the high places? by whose Idolatries, it cannot be denied; but that the whole Church of Iu∣rie, was contaminated, and polluted at lest with the communion of that Idolatrous multitude, although the Priests of Hierusalem withall did offer Sacrifice, to the true God of Israel. Againe, what would these men haue done in the time of Achaz, and Manasses? in the daies of both which most sacrilegious Kings; the Priests with the whole publike visible Church,4 Reg. 16. & 4. Reg. 21. worshipped strange gods? would they then haue ioined with the visible Church? and haue obeied the Idolatrous high Priest of that time? and I hope, they will not saie, that the Law ofDeuteron. 17. Deuteronomy decreeing that who should not obey the high Priests sentence for the time, should die therefore, did not excuse, the whole Church of Hierusalem, in obeying Vrias the highReg. 16. Priest, who according as King Achaz of Iuda had commanded him, had erected an impious Altar, ac∣cording to that of Samaria; setting aside, that, which God himselfe had appointed, vntill the King should determine thereof. AgaIne, what would these haue done in the time of
Annas, and Caiphas, the high Priests? whose precepts and commandements, neither Christ nor his Apo∣stles would obey, although they sate vpon the chaire of Moses: yea, and although, Christ had before taught the Iewes, that theyMath. 18. should doe, what the Phariseis and Scribes sitting vpon the Chaire of Mo∣ses, should teach and command them to doe? Belike, these men, if they had beene, in those times, regar∣ding theDeuter. d7. Law of Moses, which decreed, that whoso∣euer, disobeied the sentence of the high Priest, should die; would haue associated themselues, with Annas, and Caiphas against Christ, and his Apostles; rather then, with the poore contemptible company of Christ disciples, which was so small, and so inuisible, at the time of Christs passion, that some of the Ad∣uersaries, would seeme to haue it, to haue remained and consisted onely in the most blessed Virgin Mary, (though this most falsely.) For doubtlesse, there were, diuers then secretly dispersed in the land of Iewry, who beleeued in Christ, and had heard no∣thing of the scandall of the crosse: And althoughMath. 26. Mar. 14. Luc. 22. Peter, with mouth denied, and abiured Christ, yet I cannot thinke, but that faith in his heart was still firme, and also, that some other of the Apostles, and good deuoute women did still in their hearts con∣stantly beleeue in him, and were parts of his hidden Church there. But the Aduersary, will obiect, that visible Succes∣sion, and the Authority of the High Priests in the Church of the old Testament, was not a sufficient warrant, for such as should follow them, comman∣ding any thing, against Gods Law? Againe, that their succession, was not to continue, but for a time, and in the end to bee abolished, and quite remooued. Good God, as though the Law of Deuteronomy, were not an euerlasting Law, and most
expresse for the high Priests authority? so expresse, that your high Priest, now, and his Bellar. lib. 4. de Ron. Pont. rp. 16. Baron. in Annal. Caetan. Tollet. Stapleton, Allen, ally. Cardinals, in his behalfe, doe chalenge greatest prerogatiue of pow∣er, and iurisdiction from the same. Good God, as though, visible succession had not beene promised, to be in that place, of which sal. 131. God said, it was his resting place for euer? of which Dauid speaking vnto God, said thus? Arise, O God, into thy rest, thou and the Arke of thy sanctification? Of which place, King 3 R g 9. Salomon, in his dedication of the Tem∣ple, spoke such magnificent promises? As though Ierem. 33 Psal. 8. God, had not promised, visible succession in the 33. of Ieremy, in the linage of Leui, for euer? Protesting that his promise and pact should faile with the day, and night, before it should faile with the Church of Ierusalem; with many, yea, infinite such like promises in the holy Scriptures: and yet notwithstanding, the same; we see that the succession of that Church is vt∣terly extirpated. How much rather, may the Church of Rome haue her succession, either extirpated, aboli∣shed, or corrupted, the which can shew no speciall promise for her selfe, and for her euerlasting establish∣ment? there are indeed, most firme promises, for the Catholike Church of Christ; but for the Romane par∣ticular Church, there are no promses at all, if there be any, let them be produced. And if the Aduersa∣ry reply, and say, the Romane Church, was once a Pure Church, and a Virgin, therefore shee must, bee so taken still, vnlesse, you can precisely shew the time, when, and by whom, corruptions were intro∣duced into that Church. Vpon this reply, they tri∣umph, they insult, but it is, God wot, very vaine: for, if Cockle and Darnell was to bee sowed by the Math. 13. enemy, when the Pastors of the Church were a sleepe? (not sleeping a naturall sleepe, but a sleepe of ease, se∣curity, prosperity, pleasure, ignorance:) What mar∣uell
that the precise time when such cockle and dar∣nell was sowed, cannot bee deliuered? for tell mee, O thou wirty aduersary; who should haue specified the time? the Pastors? they were a sleepe: yea, and by them sleeping, the Diuel sowed cockle and dar∣nell of heresie, of idolatry of impurity: and there∣fore a sleeping and a dreaming disputer, may I call thee who wouldest bring out sleeping witnesses: but yet to satisfie your triumphing reply; although the precise times, places, and persons cannot bee expres∣sed, when your heresies first begā to take root, first to bud or to spring forth; yet wee can specifie the very indiuiduall, personall, singular, and speciall persons, times, and places, where & when your opinions were first receiued, as Articles of Faith and beleefe. And what? is it not an euident demonstration, to shewe any thing to bee nouell and new, if it can bee demonstrated, when the same was not recei∣ued, although the speciall time, and maner of the be∣ginning of it cannot euidently bee shewed and de∣monstrated; but onely probably conceiued by some probable coniectures? And although the Romane Church doe boast of a visible and a conspicuous com∣pany, professing Christ (although most corruptly) con∣tinuing from Christs time, yet that is not inough, vn∣lesse they can also shew succession in doctrine. For a man who would relie for his saluation vpon the pub∣like and most conspicuous Church professing Christ, what should hee haue done in the time of Constantius the Arrian Emperour? when the whole visible con∣spicuous Church, ouerwhelmed with Arrianisme, decreed in councels so greatly, and so dan∣gerously, that as Hierom. aduers. Lucferia. Saint Hierome reporteth, the whole world maruailed, how it was become an Arian: yea and most lamentable, was the face of the visible Church, especially in Rome, it selfe: when Liberius
returning out of banishment, Hieron. lib. de scriptoribus. in for∣tunat. & in Chon Libertus ipse in Epist. ad Episc. Orient. apud Bel∣lar. lib. 4. cap. 9. de Pont. & Bellar. ibidm. Athanas. in Epst ad Sot. vitam agentes, Damasus Pope in Liberio. Hilar. lib. contra Con∣stant. ozom. lib. . cap. 14. Nicepb. lib. 9 cap. 37. & alij. subscribed to the A∣rian faith (which had beene, before decreed, in diuers publike, almost vniuersall Councels, of the whole Church, as at Millaine, at Ariminum, &c.) and by the same subscription, confirmed, and decreed as a point of Catholike faith; what the Bishops before had resolued vpon, and subscribed vnto: for in the subscription of Bishops, and confirmation of Popes consisteth the robour and strength of Romane Arti∣cles of faith, so infallibly that the whole Romane Church is bound to receiue them & to professe them after such decrees and subscriptions. And truly, the answer, which Liberius made before his banishment, and whilest hee was constant in the Catholike faith, vnto Constantius the Emperor, is for the same purpose very worthy reading: for, whereas the Emperour thus obiected vnto him, what was hee? and what thought hee of himselfe? who would oppose himselfe against all Bishops of the world: hee answered (not thinking as our men now doe of the Popes sole iner∣rablenesse, neither as daunted with the whole visible multitude against him,) most resolutely Theodoret. lib 2. hist. cap 16. thus; that although hee and Athanasius were Ʋbi suut tan∣dem, &c. Where are they now, who exprobrate vnto vs pouerty, and do insolent∣ly brag of their wealth? where are they who de∣fine the Church by a multitude and despile the little flocke? Gregor. Nazianz in Arianos. Orat. 11. alone, yet the cause of faith was nothing the worse; for long ago said hee, there were onely three, who withstood the Kings (hee meaneth Nabuchodonozor) commande∣ment; but doubtlesse these men, who stood so much vpon the visibility of succession; and vpon the grea∣test multitude, would vpon the returne of Liberius backe to Rome, (& his sitting in that chaire also some good time, before hee againe renounced the com∣munion with the Arrians and their faith, to which hee had subscribed before) they would surely haue communicated with Liberius, and haue despised the contemptible, and persecuted Church of Athanasi∣us and Felix, with some few Romanes, who then right∣ly
beleeued, and professed Christ. Besides if it bee ne∣cessary to ioyne with the greatest multitude profes∣sing Christ after the Romane fashion: doubtlesse, haue was the case of their Romanists in times of their very many, very great, and grieuous Certaine De∣cades of most horrible schismes haue beene in the Romane Church Platina Baron. per Anal. schismes; when their whole Church hath beene ouerwhelmed with the power of some Anti-Popes: besides, to argue (ad hominem) in the time of the Councell of Franck ford, when the Bishops of France, Germany and England, with diuers of Italy decreed against your second Ni∣cene Councell, commanding adoration and worship∣ping of Images; what might a faithfull Christian of the West haue done? was hee to obey the decree of Franck ford or not: if you say yea, then your Nicene Councell is condemned: if not, then alwaies the greatest multitude, and the publike visible Pastors, though assembled in Councell, are not to be obeied; which was then very great and conspicuous: especi∣ally, if you had adioyned their authorities, with all those Prelates of the East Church, who in diuers and sūdry councels vnder Constantine & the two Leos who had before condemned the adoration of Images, you should haue found the same farre to haue surpassed that of your Tridentine Councell in Germany, con∣sisting for most part of your Titulary Italian Bishops. In time of the Cocil. Ba. Sess. 34. See the Epistle of the Fathers of the Councell of Ba∣sile to the Ele∣ctors of the Em∣pire, Tom. 3. Con∣stitutio. Imperial. pag. 456. Councell of Basile, when Eugenius the 4. Pope, was deposed and accused by that Coun∣cell and Felix, elected in his roome by the Bishoppes of France, Germany and England; with diuers also of Italy, and some also of Spaine, tell mee were the secret Eugenians in those Kingdomes (if there were any) bound to follow the greatest multitude of Pre∣lates? beware you graunt it; for it will not stand with the credite of your visible succession. Doubt∣lesse the state of the Christian Church was such at that time, that a Chrrstian was bound onely to adhere to
the euerlasting, and indeffectible head of his Church, Christ Iesus; and was no more bound to follow Felix then Eugenius with his councell at Florence: (the which Schismaticall councell (to note by the way) was the first that publikely decreed the number of seuen Sacraments, and Purgatory fire, as soundly and as catholikly, as some few yeers after, the Tridentine fathers assembled, of a few French or Spanish, but most Italian Bishops, (whereof also many were Titular onely, and were made to fill vp the number) decreed many heretical, and most pernicious positions against the ancient and apostolike faith: and it is no maruaile they did so egregiously erre, for they were not to determine any thing which might displease Rome, & therefore so soone as some of them beganne to con∣sult about reformation of the Court and Church of Rome, with the Bishoppes thereof, presently by a peremptory Placet of Pius the fourth, the whole Councell was dissolued, and their good intentions wholy frustrated, they onely leauing behind them, their subscriptions to their corrupt decrees; which subscriptions notwithstāding, were neuer made so ful and perfect, that the number of the Prelates subscri∣bing, hapned to bee one whole hundreth, at Concilium Tri∣dent. editum a innio. anie one of their sessions and generall subscriptions. But to returne to my purpose, if Saint Iohn in his Reuelation, doe so clearely pronounce, that the wo∣man (by whom the Church of Christ is described, ac∣cording to the exposition almost of all) is to flee into the desert, there to be nourished, fauoured, and pro∣tected by God (per tempora, tempus, & dimidium tem∣poris) for times, for a time, and for halfe a time; byApoc. 12. which flight is vnderstood the secretnesse, hidden∣nesse, and inuisibility of the true Church, not only for three yeers and a halfe, as all the Pontificians for most part eagerly doe contend, but for some longer time
sufficient, for the accomplishment of all such things, which haue beene foretold by the Prophets: but be∣cause I would incline, to interprete this flight of the woman, to haue been about the time of Constantius, or else to signifie some other particular desolation, & destitution of the Church, when shee was persecuted by the Gentiles, I doe not much insist vpon it: and yet although this generall destitution of the Church, should last but for a short time (as they desire,) yet it quite ouerthroweth their ground of the Churches Almost all Pontificians ac∣knowledge that in Antichrists time the true Church shall bee in conspicuous without any pub∣like uic so Bellarmine Dried. Saes. Valnt. Rmists clearely vpon the 2. to the Thes. 2. continuall, and neuer intermitted, manifest, and v∣niuersall conspicuity. Further, without all question, if the Apocal. 13 whole world shall admire after the image of the beast, which image of the beast, must of necessity be vnderstood of some kind of Monarchicall gouernment, Empire or rule; the which like an Image shall represent, and stand as it were, in stead of the Romane Empire it selfe; then doubtlesse, the number of those, which shall refuse to adore the Image of the beast, and to acknowledge the Popes temporall and spirituall absolute Monar∣chy, will not be great, but small at the very first, till God by the spirite of his mouth, shall vouchsafe, by degrees to destroy the harlot, where the image of this beast resideth. To confirme what I haue said, I will annexe the prophesie of one Hildegard a religious Virgine; whom the aduersaries repute a Saint, and Theodoric. Niem. 2. lb. de priuilegijs Imperij cap. de Ob. 2. & 3. whose bookes (in the which this prophesie is) Euge∣nius the third, in a Councel at Treuers, (at which Saint Bernard was present) receiued and approued. This deuout Virgine hauing prophesied of a defection that should bee from the Romane Empire, she foretelleth also of a general diuision that should be in the church and withall, how by reason of the wickednesse, pride and neglect of Religion, which all would see in the
(Popes) Apostolicall (as shee calleth them) all King∣domes* This her pro¦phesie is aging to the doctrine of laned  in his booke of the auibility o the Pope, and in the time of Pope Julis all the Prelates of France at Toues in a Councell there, affimed the same, as Iohn d Ss relateth in Lewis the 12. would thereupon choose vnto themselues, Archbishops and Gouernours of other names, vnder whom they might and would professe Christ and his pure Religion, leauing (saith she) vnto the Pope, Rome alone, with a few territories adioyning thereunto: & vnder such Gouernours and Archbishops (saith shee) Peoples and Kingdomes, shall embrace iustice, & ob∣serue the ancient customes and disciplines, as the an∣ciēts were accustomed to do; Thus she: by which pro∣phecie, it is euident, what this Saint, and all those, who approued her books, thought of necessary subiection to the Bishop, and Church of Rome. Not vnlike is that which they write of their Pro∣phetisse Lib. 4. reuelat. cap 57. Brigit: shee bringeth in the mother of Christ thus speaking to her sonne: Rome is a plentifull field; to whom Christ answered, thou sayest true; but cockle hath ouergrowne this field, and therefore it must bee clensed with a sharpe iron, it must bee purged with fire, and plowed with oxen; therefore I will deale with it, as he who remoueth plants into another place: for The Bishop of Ehesus was threatned by God to haue his Candlesticke e∣mooued out of his lace fo lea∣uing of his first charity, Apocal 2 What presump¦tion therefore  the Roman Pops to thinke theis Candlestick can∣no remoued, who haue aban¦dned all the pri∣mitiue chaity of the Apostles, and are whol▪ degene rated into a c∣tai of sin, bt I wish thē to ead the ▪ of S. Pauls epist to them. such a punishment is prouided for that City: as if the Iudge would say, flea off the whole skinne, draw out of the flesh all the bloud: cut all the flesh into peeces, and breake all the bones, that all the marrow may flow away; thus there: and if the pro∣phesie of the worthy virgine Meethildis be truly re∣lated from her, the controuersie with Rome is at an end; for shee in expresse termes foretelleth, that the Church of Rome, should wholy apostotate from the faith of Christ; and that there should remain in Ger∣many, a poore and persecuted Church, which should serue and worship God, religiously and purely. This is cleare, & likewise that of Iohn Capistran is as cleare, that Rome in time would be so purged, and the Popes
and Cardinals brought so in order, that there would bee none found, who would make haste to be Pope; contrary to the fashion now Read dist. 79 cap si quis. and Baron Anno 912. vsed, when no one al∣most entereth canonically, but either by fauor & can∣uasing of some Cardinall, or procurement of some Prince, or by bargaine, (as Simon would haue bought power to haue giuen the holy Ghost.) This Iohn Capi∣strane, whom I mentioned, was reputed a Saint by them; as likewise was Iohn of Calabria, as Possine in a par. verbo Cllus. Posseuine in his Apparate affirmeth of him of whome Roger Houeden reporteth, that hee should affirme, that onel Houd. in Ric. 1. who should be Antichrist and a Pope was then born in Rome: vulgar is the like prophesie of Ioakim Ab∣bot by me mentioned aboue, of Antichrist then born in Rome: sundry are the like prophesies, which them selues also admit, amongst themselues, to their owne confusion, and yet forsooth, they would tie all (vnder pain of damnation) against all Scriptures, and all Anti∣quity, to embrace their nouelties, and in no case to forsake Rome: but against this their paradoxe, I may most iustly vse the words of Tertul. Apolog. cap. 6. Tertullian, vnto them, vsed by him in like case: vbi religio; vbi venera∣tio, &c. Where is Religion? where worship, and reue∣rence due from you to your Elders? in habit, liuing, discipline, sense: and last of all, euen in speech, you haue renounced your Ancestors; you alwaies prayse Antiquity, but day by day you liue newly: thus he: so these men, in all their vanities of Pardons graines, round wafers, merites of Saints, Purgatory fire, tran∣substantiation, adoration of Images, &c. pretend A∣postolicall Tradition, but being vrged to shew them to be ancient, and to carry them vpward towards the Apostles, they faint in the midway; and when for∣sooth they faile, they will then vow, professe, pro∣nounce, and protest; that although they know no
mention made of them, yet sure they were all vsed before that time, euen from the Apostles dayes: and here they stumble into that absurdity (which they vainely obiect against others) to witte of inuisible, inaudible, and vnlegible Traditions: (one of their Rules of faith) the practise whereof, in ancient times they cannot shew: and although the pure Church of Christ, had beene for many yeares together so inuisi∣ble, so inconspicuous, that there could no known, nor set Congregation be defined, where Christ was pub∣likely and conspicuously professed, in the publike face of any Kingdome: yet such are the impieties, impurities, Idolatries, and most presumptuous and tyrannicall vsurpations of the Bishop of Rome, and consequently, of the Church of Rome: that I could not but thinke desperately of my soules saluation, if (after God my Sauiour, and most deare Aduocate, hath vouchsafed to open mine eyes) I should otherwise associate my selfe vnto her, then by way of compas∣sion, greatly lamenting her abuses, bewayling the heauy iudgements of God, which hang ouer her head: humbly praying that her humiliation may bee in that manner as their Iohn Capistrane foretold; or as their Prophetesse Briget foretold it should be, by meanes of the frankes: rather then so, as theRomulo regnan te Roma Trium phante, Sibilla Delphica dixit, regnum Rome, rue ferro, Flam ma fam, frigore. Sybill Delphick foretold it, to wit, that Rome should be rui∣nated with the sword, fire, famine, and cold. I doe with my very heart bewaile her estate, and at this pesent with the words of the Religious and lear∣ned Arnulphus spoken in a Synode at Remes, (as Barro: anno 992 numero. 22. Ba∣ronius reporteth them) O Rome to be lamented, which to our Ancestours, diddest yeeld bright lights of Fa∣thers; and in our times sendest forth monstrous dark∣nesse, which in the Ages to come, will bee infamous; What? ô yee Reuerend fathers? what? (I say) doe
you thinke, him to be? who sitteth thus, in a lofty throne, in his purple Robes, and glittering Gold? certainly, if he be without charity, lifted and puffed vp with knowledge, he is a very Antichrist, sitting in the the Temple of God; and shewing himselfe, as if he were God: but if he haue neither charity, nor knowledge, then he is an Idoll, and to seeke answer from him, is to seeke it, from the very stones; thus he. But more iustly may a man, bewaile the mysery of this time, when so monstrously, the Bishop of Rome, PaulBreuia. duo Pu∣li. 5. cout. Iura Fidelitatis. the 5. sitting in his purple Robes, hath sent out Briefe vpon Briefe, without charity, without knowledge: so without knowledge, and consideration of the times, that as I haue credibly heard, many of the I∣talians themselues call him therefore, Grosse headed, and in scorne Tramontane: so without knowlege, that (notwithstanding, the continuall challenges, of lear∣ned Persons, Ecclesiasticall Prelates, and of the Kings most excellent Maiesty) he will not once vouchsafe to giue1. Pet. 3. ratione fidei, an account of his faith in his Briefes, which is so earnestly required at his hands: that ac∣cording to the inference of learned Arnulphus, hee may bee reputed a Purpured Idol. Void also and without charity; because not giuing his English fol∣lowers any comfortable instructions, hee exposeth them by his peremptory commands onely, to vtter ruine of themselues, & their families: void of charity, because he depriueth such Priests as are in al other er∣spects his, of their faculties: (so they are now called for the Priesthood being changed, the law must be chan∣ged, & lawes being changed, new names must be deui∣sed:) a yet hee prouideth not for them any meanes to liue, and his charitable Disciples here in England, doe euery where proclaime and exclaime most bit∣terly against them. Lastly, I greatly bewaile her
auaricious impurities, for if the Archbishop of Can∣terburie, their S. Thomas Becket, duist say, his motherThomas Cantua epist. ad ch. . Rome was become a strumpet, and prostituted for re∣ward, because Alexander the third, his good father, did not suddenly satisfie his immoderate desire a∣gainst his Soueraigne King and some Prelates of this kingdome: What? may not we now more iustly exclaime against her for her dailey prostitutions, by most corrupt rewards and corruptions? and for the daily practises of her against this Kingdome, to the vtter ruine and subuersion of the same, onely aiming at profit and Soueraignety? But heere giuing a conclusion to my former dis∣course, I humbly beseech thee, good God, to inspire the hearts of the Honourable Magistrates of this Kingdome, that as they doe, so they will continue; prouidently, and effectually, to stoppe the Ignatians transcendency, ayming at nothing else, but the sub∣uersion of Soules, and Popish thraldome of this King∣dome: and good God, vouchsafe to heare the praier of a sinfull wretch, beseeching thee also, more ful∣lie* O Rome, heare the voice once made to Phoas, and doe thou re∣pent O Kng al∣thogh thou build aboue the cloudes; thy Pal∣lace, may be ta∣ken: the sinne ihin w mrre Thy within thee, O Rome, wil marre a, and thy Pal∣lace will downe although thou downe although thou build aboue the cloudes. to open the eies, of such, which are already in part opened to see Romes tyranny, but not as yet o∣pened to see her filthy Idolatry, and to renounce cōmunion with her. That ambicious her (I say) who, as she did in the time of Lotharius, the Emperour, (as Tom. 1. Constitut. Impeial. n rati∣on fol. 50. he complaineth, in a Synodicall Epistle, written out of a Councell of Collein) so now also, boasteth that shee hath a kind of Diuinity, that shee shall bee eter∣nall, that she shall see no widowhood; and that shee shall neuer erre: but the day of her satall iudgement, wil shortly approach; when her Pharaonical de wil beApoal. 18. drowned, and shee like a Milstone be cast into the red Sea of Gods iust iudgement. Vouchsafe deare Sa∣uiout to come quickly; and in the meane, that by her
lying Prodigies, and false wonders, shee may seduce no more, but rather that all such as are already se∣duced by her, may returne to thee, see her manifest impurities, and Idolatries, and renounce them, and Returne (I say) to thee, the onely Aduocate, and Re∣deemer of mankinde, and the onely Lifegiuing-Shep∣heard of our Soules, onely, to be blessed, honoured, and followed, for euer. Amen. Propitius sit mihi peccatori, Deus unus, Pater, Filius, & Spiritus Sanctus, cui soli, Honor & Gloria. Amen. Errata. Page 21 mag. for Pulcer read pulheriam. pag. 24. lin. 18. for he r. she pag 38 l. 1. for number that rea, number (in summe this) that. same pag. l 9. for in some, r. tooke some. pag. 44. marg. Stap princip. Doctriu. lib. 6. cip. 8. r. lib 6. cap. 7 pag. 6. in some copies for maodzim r. maozim pag. 97. for Haebr. 4. 1. r. Haebr 1. Alphabet 2. Page 7. may it please thee Courteous Reader, after the tenth verse in English to insert these which through the Authors ab∣sence were left out. Make haste, lesire be brought with speede; these cruell beasts to tame. And in the same page in the third Latine verse for ne lanient, r. lanient ne, pag. 19. lin. 3. for speake r. speaketh, pg 23. lin 6. for gnatin . Igntianed I doubt diuers more, like faults haue escaped, the which it may please the Courteous Reader to correct.
