22681 99843487 8226
THE MAGISTRATES SCRIPTVRE. PSALME. 82. 6. 7. I haue said yee are gods, and yee all are the children of the most highest, but you shal die like men & fall like one of the Princes. I May call this text the Magistrats scrip∣ture, considering the state of kings & go∣uernors, how much good they might do, and how lit∣tle they performe. God becomes a rememberancer vnto them, and first shewes what a high calling Princes and rulers haue: and then least they should be proud of it,
& make their magistracy a chaire of ease, he turnes vpon them a∣gaine, as though he had another message vnto them, & tels them, that though they be aboue other, yet they shall die like other: and though they iudge here, yet they shall be iudged hereafter, and giue account of their stewardship how they haue gouerned, as straite as their subiectes how they haue obeyed. A good memorandum for all in authoritie so to deale in this kingdome, that they lose not the kingdome to come. I have said yee are gods, &c. How can he call them gods, which cals himselfe the onely God, & saith, there are no more gods but he? Esay 44. 5. 45. 21. I haue made thee Pharao his God, saith God to Mo∣ses, Exod. 7. 1. because he had gi∣uen him power to speake vnto
Pharao in his name, and to execute his iudgements vpon them. Out of this name, Rulers may learne how to gouerne, & subiects how to obey. As inferiour Magistrates do nothing but as the superiour Magistrate prescribeth: so they which rule vnder God, for God, must rule by the prescript of God, and do nothing but as their con∣science tels them that God would doe himselfe. Therefore they which vse their power against God, which beare the person of God, and execute the will of the diuell: which make lawes against Gods law, and be enimies to his seruants, are worse then Balaam, which would not curse whom God blessed, and so much as in thē lieth, make God a lier, because they cannot so wel be called gods as diuels; such gods go to hell.
I haue said yee are gods, &c. First this name enformes vs what kind of rulers & magistrates we shold choose. Those which excell all other men like gods amongst men: for a king should be a man after Gods owne heart like Dauid, as all those whom God set ouer his people in his mercie, and not in his anger, had some note of ex∣cellencie aboue the rest, which God chose them by, as it is the Magistrates marke: the mildest man, Numb. 12. 3. or the wisest man, 1. Reg. 4. 31. or the iustest mā, Heb. 7. 2. As though if al these had met in one, the Inquisition should haue stayed there, & all giue place to him: but our vertues are so singled that he which was called the mildest, is not called the wi∣sest, and he which was called the wisest is not called the iustest, as
though God found some defect in his owne election, for when he chose one milde, another wise, and another iust: he shewed that hee would haue one which is milde, and wise, & iust, like him∣selfe. Elisha thought that the sin∣gle spirite was not enough, but re∣quired that the spirite of Eliah 2. King. 2. 9. might be doubled vpon him, be∣cause he was a Prophet which should teach other. So we should picke out thē which haue a dou∣ble spirit to be Magistrats, because they must gouerne other; as God picked forth Iosua in Moses his roome. He might haue chosen manie out of all Israel, which had the spirite of wisedome, but he chose Iosua, of whom he saith that he was full of the spirite of wise∣dome, Deut. 24. 9. Shewing that if one be better then another, he
should be chosen before the rest. Therefore Samuel went ouer all 1. Sam. 16. 5. the sonnes of Ishai, to annoint a successour to Saul, and put backe one after another which thought themselues fit: yet there was but one amongst them which pleased God, & the Prophet could scarce discerne him: so necessarie it is that this choice be committed to none but the godly, because he which would haue chosen the best, yet liked another before him. Therefore there was such a scru∣tenie 1. Sam. 10. 20. amongst the tribes to finde out the mā whom God had cho∣sen, as Iethro taught Moses to cull Exod. 18. 21. out of all the people, those which had best courage and feared God, and dealt truely, and hated coue∣tousnes. Therefore a wicked man may not supply the place of God, as the Scribes & Pharisies sate in Matth. 23. 2.
Moses chaire, but as it is said of Iu∣das, let another take his place: so let better take their place, for they which are called gods must be like God. If all should be holy as he is holy: how much more should they be pure as he is pure, wise as he is wise, iust as he is iust, which beare his name, which supplie his person, and guide the world to good or euill. If the race should be to the swift, and the battell to the strong, then as Saul did exceed all the men of Israell from the shoulders vp∣ward: 1. Sam. 9. 2. so he which commaunds other, should exceede other in gifts of grace, that they may know him from the rest, and say this is hee that excells the rest in vertue, as Saul did in stature: like the king of Bees, which is fairest of all the hiue. There∣fore
if Pharao would let none but Ioseph gouerne Egypt, in whom was the spirite of God, Gen. 41. 38. much more ought Christian Princes in the choosing of Io∣sephs in their common wealthes. And therefore they ought not to be like Rehoboam, which made them his counsellers, whom he should haue banished the court, 1. Reg. 12. 8. Secondly, this extolleth the calling of Magistrates, as Iacob honoured Iosephes children, whē he said they should be called af∣ter his name: so God honoureth the Magistrates, when he giues them his owne name, calling them gods, as though there were a kind of godhead in them. These things pertaine to the wise and they themselues doe not al∣wayes see it: yet he which hath a
spirituall eye, and carrieth the pa∣terne of God in his heart, may see another likenesse of God in Magistrates then in common per∣sons: as the builders of the temple had a speciall wisedome and spi∣rite, which God gaue them for that work which they were cho∣sen vnto. So when Samuel had annointed Dauid, he saith that the spirite of the Lord came vpon 1. Sam. 16. 13. Dauid from that day forward, as though he had another spirite af∣ter, then he had before. So there is a difference betweene kings and subiects: though they be not gods, yet they are liker God then other: the Prince is like a great image of God, the Magistrates are like lit∣tle images of God, appointed to rule for God, to make lawes for God, to reward for God, to pu∣nish for God, to speake for God,
to fight for God, to reforme for God: and therefore their battailes 1. Sam. 28. 26. 2. Chron. 9. 6. are called the Lords battailes, and their iudgements the Lords Psal. 2. 6. iudgements, and their throne the Lordes throne, and the kings themselues, his kings, to shew that they are al to god like hands: by some he reacheth mercie, by some iustice, by some peace, by some counsell, as Christ distri∣buted the loaues and the fishes Matth. 14. 19. by the hands of his disciples: this God requires of all, when he cals them gods, to rule as he would rule, iudge as he would iudge, correct as he would correct, re∣ward as he would reward, be∣cause it is said that they are in steede of the Lord God, to doe 2. Chron. 9. 8. as he would doe. This is a good studie for Magistrates in all their iudgements to consider, what
God would doe, because they are in steede of God. I rule for God, I speake for God, I iudge for God, I reward for God, I correct for God: how would God doe? how would he de∣termine? And it shall be my sen∣tence: as we should thinke how Matth. 11. 29. Christ prayed before we praie, and how hee spake before we speake, because his actions are our instructions: so they should thinke how Christ would iudge before they iudge, because Gods law is appointed for their law. Such a thought must needs le∣uell Deut. 17. 19. the way before them, and put them in minde of a good and iust, and holy iudgement, be∣cause God is good, and iust, and holie. Thirdly, they are called gods,
to teach them how they should gouerne, howsoeuer other care for the glorie of God, the perfor∣mance of his wil, the reformation of his church, Princes, and rulers, which are gods themselues, are to doe the businesse of God as their owne busines: because they are gods, Gods businesse is their busi∣nes, Gods law is their law, Gods honour is their honour. When the king, or iudge, or magistrate doth seek the kingdome and glo∣rie of God, he should thinke that he seekes his own kingdome and glorie, and therefore seeke it and further it as earnestly & diligent∣ly as he would his owne, and rule and iudge, and speake, and punish, and consult, as he would for him∣selfe: euen as Dauid counted Gods Psal. 139. 21. foes his foes, and Gods friends his friends: and Moses persecuted Exod. 32. 27.
thē which were Idolaters against Num. 16. 15. God, as he did them which were traitors to him. Fourthly, they are called gods to encourage them in their office, and to teach them that they need not feare nor dread the persons of men, but as God doth that which is iust and good without the iea∣losie of men; so they should for∣get themselues to be men, which are led by the armes betweene fa∣uour and feare, and thinke them∣selues gods which feare nothing. This boldnes is so necessarie in them, which shold iudge all alike, that in Deut. 3. 28. Moses encoura∣geth Iosua: in Iosua. 2. 18. the peo∣ple encourage him: in the 9. verse, God doth encourage him, saying, that he wil be with him: but here he is with him, for hearing God call them gods, shewes that God
is there, nay, that they are as God, which powres such a princelike 1. Sam. 10. 9. spirite vpon them, as he did vpon Saul, so soone as he was king. So hearing that they are gods, it should change them, and make them excell the order of men, vn∣till they resemble God, after whō they are named: as Salomon stu∣died 1. King. 3. 9. and prayed till hee was wi∣ser then al that he gouerned. Then 1. King. 4. 30. they need not blush to read this testimonie, I haue said ye are gods, &c. or else it will seeme a checke vnto them. As manie sit in gods place, and yet neuer knew that the scripture called them gods, nor 1. Sam. 25. 25. why they haue this name no more then Naball: so many play Nabal in their offices, and are rea∣dier to aske who is Dauid? who is Christ? when his cause comes before them, then speake or doe
any thing for him. But the womē go before them like Abigail, as though God would shame them with the weaker vessel. Doth anie man but they forget his name? Princes and rulers haue manie names of honour, but this is the honorablest name in their titles, that they are called gods: other names haue bene giuen them of men for reuerence or flatterie, but no mā could giue them this name but God himselfe. Therfore their name is a glasse wherin they may see their duetie, how God doth honour thē, and how they should honour him, and think what am I more then he, that God should set me in his owne chaire, & giue me his owne name more then to another? he hath not done so to al. They which are called his chil∣dren are happie, they which are
called his disciples at happie, they which are called his seruants are happie: but how happie are they whom he calleth gods? It seemes that if he could haue called them by a higher name then his owne he would haue called them by some other name; but this word is enough to put them in minde of all that they should do: thinke that yee are gods, and it wil make you ashamed to obey the diuel, or the world, or the flesh in any thing. Therfore how can that Ro∣mish Antichrist, which sits in the 2. Thess. 2. 4. temple of God with his kings & Magistrates, and set themselues a∣gainst God be called gods? Are they gods where Gods cause is worst heard? are they gods which make lawes against God? Are the gods persecuters of Gods childrē? Nay doth he notly which cals thē
noble, or soueraigne, or gracious? If they deserue not their titles, how do they deserue their places? Can they thinke of their names and not be abashed? Can they sit downe in Gods place and speake against him? iudge against him? decree against him? Doth iniqui∣tie become gods? doth partialitie become gods? do bribes become gods? They are greedie gods, Idol gods, belly gods, and may be ter∣med gods, because they are like 2. Cor. 4. 4. the God of this world, which do but staie like Nebuchadne∣zar, Dan. 4. vntill their iniquities be full, that they may be cast out like beastes, a derision to them whom they gouerne. But they which regard this ho∣norable testimony of God, as Ne∣hemiah said, whē he was tempted Nehem. 6. 1. to fly, should such a mā as I fly? So
whē they are tēpted with bribes, say, should such a man as I take bribes? Should such a man as I do wrong? Should such a man as I be a liar? or swearer? or a scof∣fer? or a drunkard? or a gamester? or an vsurer? or a prophaner? vpō whom all eyes are set to take their example, and would harken soo∣ner then vnto God himselfe? Thē he resolueth to rule according to his name, knowing that all the soules which might be wonne by him, shalbe required of him, as the sins of Israel were imputed to Ieroboam. Thus God doth flatter them as it were to profite them, 2. King. 15. 30. and cals them gods, to teach them their duetie to God. All should be godly, but they shold be like gods: that is, as I may say, more thē god∣ly, or the next to God in godli∣nes. If anie come betweene, they
loose their honour, and should thinke themselues put downe like a guest which is set lower, or a Iustice turned out of his office. For so God doth humble them, and disgrace them which disho∣nour their callings, as he did Saul when the princely spirit departed from him, his sons & his daugh∣ters, and his subiects did fauour 1. Sam. 22. 7. Dauid more then him, that he 1. Sam. 19. 4. & 17. 1. Sam. 21. 17. could do nothing with them: be∣cause God did not loue him, he would not let his seruants loue him: but when Dauid came to the 1. Sam. 14. 45. crowne, because he had grace with God, he prospered in all that he went about, & reformed what 2. Sam. 5. 10. he would; for the Lord (as he saith) subdewed the people to him, that is, made them incline to his will: as we read of Saul, in the begin∣ning of his raigne before he had
rebelled, a band of mē did cleaue vnto him: of whom it is said, whose hearts God had touched: as though while the rulers hearts 1. Sam. 10. 26. do stand toward God, the peoples harts should stand towards them, & they should carry thē like God to all their desires: as it is said of Dauid, whatsoeuer the king did, 1. Sam. 3. 26. pleased all the people. Thus their name tels them how they should rule, and by conse∣quent, teacheth vs how we shold obey. God cals them gods, there∣fore he which contemneth them contemneth God: God cals them fathers, therefore we must reue∣rence them like fathers: God cals them Kings, Princes, Lords, iudges, powers, rulers, and gouer∣nors, which are all names of ho∣nour: & shall we dishonour whom God doth honor? Our first lesson
is, Feare God: the next is, Honor Prou. 14. 21. the king, 1. Pet. 2. 17. We may not put king before God, nor any other before the king, that is as Paul interpreteth, We must obey Rom. 13. 5. for conscience sake, not against cōscience, for thē we put the king before God, which Christ saith, haue no power but from God, & Iohn. 19. 11. therfore cannot make themselues magistrates, no more thē they can make thēselues gods. As none but God could giue this name, so no man which exalteth himselfe can chalenge this honor, no more thē Heb. 5. 4. Simon Magus was greater because Acts. 8. 9. he called himselfe a great mā; but they to whō God saith, I haue cal∣led you gods, as though he had the naming & appointing of thē. Eue∣ry power is frō God, for by nature Rom. 13. 7. no mā can chalēge power ouer o∣ther, but by the word: & therfore
euerie soule which is subiect to God, must be subiect to them, for 1. Pet. 2. 23. he which cals them kings, cals vs Iere. 27. 12. subiects: this is their patent, as the queene of Sheba said to Salomon, 2. Chron. 9. 8. that God hath chosen thē kings, and set them vpon the throne. As he said, and all things were made, Gen. 1. so as he saith all things should be. Therefore vnlesse I say, that they haue their ordination from God, though they be lords, and Iudges, & Magistrates, yet are no Lords, no Iudges, no Magistrats of God. And therefore the Pope and his Cardinals, to whom God neuer said, Yee are Lords, or Iudges, or Magistrates, are no Lords, no Iudges, no Magistrates of God: but that which the Lord saith, they are that they are, & no more, thogh they put on a triple crown, and as the Lord cals them, so men
should call them, if they were worthy to be called as others were, Watch men, Pastors, Do∣ctors, & Teachers: but seeing they be not worthie of these titles, why should they haue higher? They which giue them more then the Lord giues them, make thē proud and insolent, and tyrannous, more then they which are Lords and Iudges, and Magistrates in deede. But for these titles and base borne honour, which they haue incro∣ched from men that puffe them, & trouble them like Sauls armor, 1. Sam. 17. 39. they would either intend the du∣tie of ministers, and teach as the Apostles did, or else forsake those offices, and be ashamed of abiding in that calling which belongeth not vnto them; as Zacharie spea∣keth: Zach. 13. 4. whereas now they are so combred & mingled, as one saith
of the Pope, he is neither God nor man: so may it be said of both him and his Cardinals, that they are neither good ministers, nor good magistrates, but linsie wol∣sie, a mingle mangle betweene both, and like neither. Seeking a superfluous title, they haue for∣gotten all necessarie studies: for they neuer preach nor write, but to maintaine their kingdome, which fals like the towre of Babel, Gen. 11. faster then they build. Therefore as Naomi said, call me no more Naomi, which signifieth beauti∣ful, but cal me Mara which signi∣fieth Ruth. 1. 20. bitter. So they may say, call vs no more bishops, or pastors, or do∣ctors, which signifieth preachers, but cal vs robbers, & sleepers, and giants, & pharisies, whom we suc∣ceed, for they haue no other reasō why they shold be called bishops
which do not watch, or pastors which do not feed, or doctors which do not teach, but that the Idols were called gods, though Exod. 20. 23. they were vnlike God. If their bodies had growne as far out of square since Christs ascension, as their titles, & pompe, and honor, they might stand in the maine sea and not drowne, for their heads would be aboue the water. It followeth. But ye shal die as a man. Here he distinguisheth betweene mortall gods, and the immortall God. Yee haue seene their glo∣rie, now behold their end, They shall die like other. It had bene a great Sessions for all other to die, but for Magistrates, for Princes, for Kings, for Empe∣rors to die as they die, what a bat∣tell is this? which leaues no man
aliue, shall the gods die to? He giues them their title, but he tels them their lot. Though their power, though their welth, thogh their honour, though their titles, though their tyrannie, though their traine, though their friends, though their ease, though their pleasure, though their diet, thogh their clothing be not like other, yet their end shall be like other, nay their ends are like to be more feareful thē other: for God makes them examples of great mē, as he did of Pharao, & therfore we see so manie strange and sodain deathes of Princes more then of other. Exod. 9. 16. Therefore he spake with the least when he said, Yee shall die like other: for few of them escape the sword, knife, or poison, which other neuer feare: but if all your
subiectes were your friends, yet yee shall die like other: for are ye not cold when winter comes? are ye not withered whē age comes? are yee not weake when sicknesse comes? and shall yee not go whē death comes? Therefore be not proud of thine honor, as though it would last alwayes, for thou shalt die, and then all thine honor shall forsake thee, and another shall rise in thy place, as great as thou, and when his glasse is run, another shall follow him, and so another till death haue all. Be not cruell in thine authoritie, as though it would last alwayes, for thou shalt die, and then thine au∣thority shall die with thee, & they which remaine aliue shall send curses after thee, because thy life was a scourge. Be not secure for thy wealth, as though it would
last alwayes, for thou shalt die, & then another shall take thy riches, and thou shalt go to giue account how thou camest by them. How many things doth he implie whē he saith ye shall die? this is a barre in their armes, which makes the proudest peacocke lay downe his feathers so often as he thinks vpō it, though he pricke them vp a∣gaine. Whereby the holy Ghost would haue them learne, that no∣thing will make them liue, and rule, and deale so well in their thrones, as to remember that they shall die and shortly giue account for all. Signifying that prosperity makes vs forgetfull of our ende, and that these mortall gods liue as though they were immortall. A hard thing for Princes to remem∣ber death, when they haue no lei∣sure to thinke of it, but chop in the
earth before they be ware. Like a man which walketh ouer a field couered with snow, sees not his way, but when he thinkes to run on, suddenly falls into a pit: euen so they which haue all things at will, and swim in pleasure, which as snow couereth their way and dazeleth their sight, while they think to liue on & to reioyce still, suddenly rush vpō death, & make shipwrack in the calme sea. Ther∣fore it is good for them to heare they ar gods: so it is meet to know they shal dy. Wherfore ye shall dy saith he in the next words, as if he would preuent some conceipt that they would take of words which he cast out before, he cools them quickly before they swel, & deferres not to another time, but where he calles them gods, there he calles them wormes meat, lest
they should crow betweene the praise and the checke. I haue saide ye are gods, but ye shall die. But for this die manie would liue a merrie life, and feast, and sport, and let the world slide: but the remembrance of death is like a dampe which puts out all the lights of pleasure, and makes him rub, and frowne, and whine which thinks vpon it, as if a mote were in his eye. O how heauie ti∣dings is this to heare thou shalt dy from him which hath life and death in his owne hands: when the messenger is sent to thē which raigne like gods: as if he should say, euen you which glister like Angels, whom all the world ad∣mires, and sues, & bows to: which are called honorable, mightie and gracious Lords: I will tell you to what your honor shall come: first
yee shall wax old like other, then yee shall fall sicke like other, then yee shall die like other, then yee shalbe buried like other, then yee shalbe consumed like other, then yee shalbe iudged like other, euen like the beggers which crie at your gate. One sickens, the other sickens: one dies, the other dies: one rots, the other rots. Looke in the graue & shew me which was Diues, and which was Lazarus. This is some cōfort to the poore, that once he shall be like the rich: one day he shall be as welthie, as mightie, as glorious, as a king: one houre of death will make thē al alike: they which crowed ouer other, and looked downe vpon them like oakes, other shall walke vpon them like wormes, and they shall be gone as if they had neuer bene. Where is Alexander that
conquered all the world, and after sought for another, because one would not satisfie him? Where is Zerxes, which could not number his armie for multitude? Where is Nemrod which built his nest in Gen. 11. 4. the clouds? Where is Sampson which slew an armie with the iaw of an asse? Where is Constan∣tine, Nero, Galigula, Titus, Vespati∣an, Domicius, thunderboltes in their kinds? One hundred Princes of England are dead and but one aliue: the rest are gone to giue ac∣count how they ruled here, when they sustained the person of God. VVho vvould haue thought (saith Ieremy) that the enimy should haue entered into Ierusalem, and spoiled that faire Citie? yet he brake in∣to it, and Ierusalem was ransackt like other. Who would haue thoght that Herod which was ho∣nored
like a God, should haue bin deuoured with wormes, and sa∣uour that none could abide him? yet while he was in his pomp, so∣dainly he was strokē, & al his glo∣rie eatē with worms. Who wold haue thought that Iesabel that beautiful tēptation, shold haue bin gnawn of dogs? yet she was cast to dogs, & not an ear left to seasō the graue. What wold he think that should haue seene Salomon in his roialty, & after see him in the clay? O world vnworthie to be belo∣ued who hath made this proud slaughter? Age, Sicknes, & Death: the three sōmoners which haue no respect of persons, made them pay the ransome thēselues, & bow to the earth whence they came: there lie the men which were cal∣led gods. How soone the flower of this world is faded! Yesterday
the tallest Cedar in Libanus, to day like a broken sticke troden vnder foote: yesterday the stateliest vpō earth, to day shrowded in earth, forsaken, forgotten, that the poo∣rest wretch aliue would not be like vnto him, which yesterday crouched & bowed to his knees. Then wo to them which had the names of God and the sinnes of men, for the mightie (saith Esay) shalbe mightily tormēted All their friends, and subiects, and seruants forsake them, because they go to prison, to trie the mercie of hell, & take what the spirite of darknesse will heape vpon them. There lie the men which were called gods, and thus ends the pilgrimage of kings, princes, and rulers, this is our life: while we enioy it we loose it: like the sunne which flies swifter then an arrow, and yet no
man perceiues that it moues. He which liued 900. yeers could not Gen. 5. 27. hold out one houre longer, and what hath he now more then the child which liued but a yeare? Where are they which founded this goodly Citie? which posses∣sed these faire houses? which wal∣ked these pleasant fields? which erected these stately tēples? which kneeled in these seates? which preached out of this place but 30. yeares ago? Is not earth turned to earth? and shall not our sunne set like theirs whē the night comes? Yet we cannot beleeue that death wil deale with vs. as he hath dealt with them: though all men die, yet euerie man dreames, I shall scape, or at least I shal liue till I be old. This is strange, men cannot thinke that God will doe againe that which he doth dayly, or that
he will deale with them as he deales with other. Tell vs that all other shall die, and we beleeue it: tell one of vs that we shall die, and we beleeue it sooner of all then of one: though we be sore, though we be weak, though we be sicke, though we be elder then those whom we follow to the ground. So they thought which lie in this mould vnder your feet, as you do. If wisedome, or riches, or fauour could haue entreated death, these which liued before vs would haue kept our possessions frō vs: but death would take no baile, we are all tenants at will, and we must leaue this cottage whenso∣euer the landlord wil put another in our roome; at a yeares, at a mo∣nethes, at a weeks, at a dayes, at an houres warning or lesse. The cloth which we weare vpon our
backes, the graues which are vn∣der our feet, the sunne which sets ouer our heads, the meate which goes into our mouthes, do cry vn∣to vs, that we shall weare, & set, & die, like the beasts, and soules, and fishes, which now are dead in our dishes, but euen now were liuing in their elements. Our fathers haue sommoned vs, and we must sōmon our children to the graue. Euerie thing, euerie day suffereth some eclipse, nothing stands at a stay, but one creature cals to ano∣ther, let vs leaue this world. while we play our pageants vpon this stage of short continuance, euerie man hath a part, some longer, & some shorter, & while the actors are at it, sodainly death steps vpon the stage like a haulke, which se∣parates one of the doues from the flight, and shootes his dart,
where it lights, ther fals one of the actors dead before them, & makes all the rest agast. They muse and mourne, & bury him, and then to the sport againe: while they sing, and play, and daunce, death comes againe and strikes another: there he lies, they mourne him and bu∣rie him, as they did the former, and play againe: so one after ano∣ther till the players be vanished, like the accusers which came be∣fore Christ, and death is the last vpon the stage. So the figure of this word passeth away. Manie which stand here may lie here or elsewhere within this tweluemo∣neth: but thou thinkest it is not I, and he thinketh it is not he, but he which thinketh so, commeth soonest to it: if we should liue but a yeare, we would prepare our selues to die, and do all that God
would haue vs, that we might liue in heauen, and scape the fierie lake, where the glutton hath not a droppe of water to coole the tip of his tongue. But now we know not whether we shall liue a week to an end, we wil do nothing that he bids vs, but abide the venture: so one is taken after another, and because we are not readie, there∣fore we go against our will like Lots wife out of Sodom. This is our fashion to set the best last, vn∣till we cannot forsake our sinnes, nor hope of mercie. Thus I haue proclaimed to all Kings, Princes, Iudges, Counsellers, and Magi∣strates, that which Esay did to one, Set thy thinges in order for thou shalt die. Yet 25. yeares were be∣hind, when the Prophet warned him to set all things in order, yet I cannot promise you 25. yeares,
for many princes doe not raigne so long, for one that doth. That which Esay spake to one, heere God pronounceth of all, Yee shall die: therefore take the message which is sent vnto you, & when you thinke of your honor, think of your end. These two remem∣brances to beare in mind, that yee are gods, and thinke that yee shall die. The holy ghost thought e∣nough to teach you how to liue, and how to rule: and for vs that haue not so much as the name of an immortall thing, like them which are called gods, that we may be like God hereafter: let vs prepare before the accompt, for none are in heauē, but they which left the world before the world left them.
A GODLY PRAYER TO BE SAID AT all times. BEcause I haue sinned O Lord, and done wicked∣ly in thy sight, and pro∣uoked thee to anger by my abhominable wickednes, ma∣king my bodie which thou hast ordained a vessel for thine honor, an instrument to most detestable filthines, ô Lord be merciful vnto me, & pardon me this great wic∣kednes: looke not vpon me good father with the eies of iustice, nei∣ther do thou draw against me the sword of iudgement, for thē how shall I that am but dust stand in thy presence, when thy wrath∣full indignation commeth forth
as a whirlewind, and thy heauie displeasure as a mightie tempest: seeing the earth trembleth, the depthes are discouered, and the verie heauens are shaken when thou art angrie? Exercise not ther∣fore thy furie against me, that am but as chaffe before the wind, and as stubble against a flaming fire: though I haue sinned grieuouslie in thy sight, preferring my wic∣ked desire before thy holy com∣mandement: esteeming the plea∣sure of a moment before eternall and euerlasting ioyes: nay, which is worse, making more account of vilenesse and vanitie, and ex∣treame folly, and madnes, then of the glory and maiestie of the most excellent, wonderfull, and blessed God, nothing dreading his dis∣pleasure whose wrath maketh the diuels to quake, and burneth
vnquenchable vnto the bottom∣lesse pit of hell: whose might is so great that by the breath of his no∣sthrils he is able in the twinkling of an eye to destroy a thousand worlds: yet am I bold, prostra∣ting my selfe before the throne of thy maiestie, heartely to beseech and humblie to entreat thee, that thou wilt not deale with me ac∣cording to my merites, for I haue deserued that thou shouldst raine downe fire and brimstone from out of heauen vpon me to deuour me, or to open the earth vnder∣neath me, to swallow me vp quick vnto hell: but thou art gra∣cious and full of compassion, and rich in mercies, therefore do men put their trust vnder the shadow of thy wings. I haue none in hea∣uen to flie vnto but thee, nor in earth, of whom I may receiue any
comfort, but at thy fauourable hands, which are stretched out day and night to receiue all that by earnest repentance turne vnto thee, being readie to ease all those that are laden with the burthen of their sinne, and to re∣fresh their distressed consiences. In the multitude of thy mercies I approch vnto thee O Lord, desiring thee to looke downe from the height of thy sanctuarie vpon me poore and wretched sinner, and to wipe away mine offences and to blot out my mis∣deedes, especiallie this my vn∣gracious, vncleane, and vngod∣ly act, that it may not come vp in remembrance with thee, nor be imputed to me for euer, for thy sonnes sake O Lord, in whome thou art well pleased, in whom thou wast fully satis∣fied
vppon the crosse for my sinnes: graunt me free pardon and remission of that I haue so foolishlie by my exceeding frail∣tie committed against thee in this shamefull deed. But O thou my vncleane and vnthankfull soule! my vngodly and rebellious heart! what did I sinfull wretch, and execrable caytife, so blindly and desperatlie attempt? How art thou become quite sencelesse, that thou wast so readie to an∣ger thy most louing God, and to prouoke thy most mightie iudge, that thou mightest satis∣fie thy filthie flesh, suborned both by thine and Gods most mali∣tious aduersarie, to grieue and vex the spirit of the Lord, and to damne thy self for euer? Hath not God of his singular fauour made
the heauens of old, and placed the sun and moone in them, two glo∣rious lights with innumerable starres, a wonderfull workman∣ship for thy vse and benefite? Hath he not lifted vp the clouds by his strong arme, and heaped treasures of raigne, haile, and snow to doe thee seruice? Hath he not in the midst of the world laid the foun∣dations of the earth, that thou mightest haue a stable habitation, and mightest from thence behold euerie way thou lookest the wals of his beautifull pallace. Hath he not gathered the waters into one place, and made the drie land ap∣peare, and drawne forth by his power a pure substāce of aire be∣tweene heauē & earth, that fishes might multiplie in the seas, foules in great aboundāce flie in the opē face of the firmament, tender
plants, hearbs, flowers, and trees in all varietie, grow and fructifie vpon the ground: yea creeping things, cattell and beasts increase in infinite number, in pastures, fields, gardēs, orchards & groues; and all these to doe thee pleasure? Hath he not further giuen thee springs and riuers, gold and siluer, pearles and iewels euen plentie; of streames, stoanes, and mettal, to furnish thee with whatsoeuer for profite thou needest, or for plea∣sure desirest? Hath he not made thee Lord and ruler ouer all his creatures, euen ouer the huge Ele∣phants, the Whale, the strong Lion, and Vnicorne, and horse of warre? ouer the sauage Tigars, beares & wolues? ouer the migh∣tie Eagle, Griffin, Vultur, Ostrich and haulke? Art thou not clad & defended, fed & enriched, cheered
and renowned by these his crea∣tures, & that al the parts of thy bo∣die, & senses of thy minde might be partakers of his goodnes, and with his sweetnes refreshed, com∣forted & delighted in great mea∣sure? Yea aboue all this, hath he not breathed into thy bodie an immortall soule, that thou migh∣test remaine with him in glorie for euer? Did he not at the first frame thee like vnto himselfe, that he might therefore loue thee as his sonne? Did he not cast into thy spirit the beames of his wise∣dome, that thou through thy vn∣derstanding mightest behold him & his glory & stirred vp sparkes of goodnes in thy heart, that thou mightest by thy affection imbrace him and his bountie, and be made perfectly blessed by his infinite happinesse, who when Adam thy
vngratefull father by distrusting him that had faithfully promised, was throughly able to fulfill his will, and resolutely determined exceedingly to aduance him, hauing giuen him this whole world in testimonie thereof by discontenting his minde with the excellent estate he was placed in of vnspeakeable loue, vnlesse he might be as good as God him∣selfe, proudly desiring to make dust the fellow of him who was from euerlasting infinitly full of wisedome, power, grace and ma∣iestie, and had done all this at the perswasion of the most trai∣terous rebel of his right gracious king, and spitefull enimie of his most bountifull master, euen then when this most villanous con∣spiring with Gods notorious ad∣uersarie, had deserued immor∣tall
hatred against him & all that pertained vnto him: yea thee as yet vnborne, but contained in him whose whole masse by this impi∣ous disobedience became by iust iudgemēt a temple of cursed estate for euer, and for euer: thou also thy selfe bringing forth fruite of cōtempt of his Law, who is most holy, mercifull and mightie: yet euen then I say, of vnspeakable pi∣tie and compassion intended, nay promised, nay laboured to deliuer him and thee from that dreadfull vengeance which ye had purcha∣sed by your own wicked and vn∣gratious demerits, and to recon∣cile you base abiects and vile cast∣awayes, and yet stubborne and spightfull haters of the great God Iehouah, who when there was no meanes to be found in heauen, nor seas, nor in the earth, nor vn∣der
the earth, but that he should damne his onely begotten sonne, the verie brightnes of his glorie, who neuer offended him, but was an eternall delight vnto his soule, and reioycing vnto his spirit, that thou mightest be saued, a grosse lumpe of slime and clay, still vex∣ing him by thy wickednes: yet deliuered his sonne into the full power of Sathan, to put him to a most shameful death, by the hands of most detestable persons, and did cast him farre away out of his fauour, and threw him downe into the bottomlesse pit of his vn∣supportable wrath and indignati∣on, that thou mightest be placed betweene his owne armes in the kingdome of heauen, in all roial∣tie and glorie, as his deere and entirely beloued sonne. Whie therefore wast thou ô my vnholy
and vnthankfull nature so readie and prone, so violent and head∣long to commit thinges highly displeasant in his sight, who in a manner, and as farre as it was pos∣sible slew himselfe for thy saftie when he had no creature so diso∣bedient vnto him as thee? O thou my inward soule, and spirite of my minde awake and stand vp to defend thy selfe, for thou art besie∣ged with mightie enimies, the prince of darknesse, the rulers of the aire, the spirituall craftinesse and pollicies of hell! why arisest thou not thou sluggard? thy foes in great nūber are prepared with manie ambushmentes, hauing a huge armie all maliciously bent with venimous dartes to pearce thorow thy heart: they are ente∣red thy hold at all fiue gates of thy outward sences: yea they
haue broken downe thy inward doores, and haue left thee but one window towards heauen to e∣scape by, euen thy praiers where∣to the spirite of God waiteth thy speedie comming: make hast ô thou heauie with sleepe, or thou art taken by thy cruell enimies, whose handes are of iron, and their teeth of steele to grinde thy verie bones to powder: har∣ken no longer to that stincking harlot, thy wicked appetit, which lying in thy bosome, desireth nothing but thy vtter destructi∣on; shee perswadeth thee that thou art in no present daunger, that shee may reioice at thy mi∣serable end. It may be thou thin∣kest O thou chiefe of fooles and oxe that art fed to the slaughter, that though thou go on a little
way in thy pleasant path, thou maist returne backe when thou wilt, and thy little wandring will not greatly be regarded. O thou vnwise and sottish of heart! when wilt thou vnderstand? Hath the sonne of God indured such paine for the smallest of thy sinnes, and makest thou so light account of so grieuous crimes? Doth the law thunder curses, and plagues, and euerlasting torments against thy least vnordinate motions, and didst thou not dread to performe so shamelesse a practice? Knowest thou not that the eyes of God and his Angels behold the doing that thou wouldest be ashamed to doe in the presence of vngodly men, or vncleane beasts? or doest thou not consider how thou diddest grieue the spirite of God, who hath vouchsafed of his infinite
mercie to dwell in thy bodie to this end, chiefly that he might mortifie thy carnall lusts? Why didst thou then defile his temple which he hath sanctified to be an house for himself to dwell in? take heed thou driue not out so wor∣thie and noble a guest, by such swinish and fleshly behauiour, who if he once depart, then shalt thou be an hold for diuels, and legions of damned spirites, that they may stuffe thee ful of al man∣ner of iniquitie, and then at length become pitch and brimstone to maintaine the fire of Gods scor∣ching wrath in thy sinewes, spi∣rits, and inward bowels, drinking out in full measure the dregges of the wine of his rage and fury: and canst thou be so blind and reach∣lesse, that for the vaine pleasure of sinne for a little while, thou wilt
constraine God to torment thee euerlastingly, who it may be euen at this instant, if thou wilt still trie his patience and long suffe∣rance, will sodainly take thy spi∣rite from thee, or come in iudge∣ment to recompence to all sinners by his finall sentence in the bur∣ning of the whole world, the sti∣pend of horror, shame, confusion & vtter reprobation: and waigh with thy selfe that to approch to God is the chiefest ioy of the cho∣sen, to behold his glorious coun∣tenance in the face of his sonne, whereas thy sinnes doe separate thee from him, and make thee a∣fraid to speake to him by prayers, which is thy chiefest and greatest solace in this mortall life. How much more wil thy vngodlinesse make thee wish delay of the last iudgement, the speedie and pre∣sent
comming whereof is a chiefe prop of our fight, in the midst of so manie troubles and temptati∣ons: and withall, remember how the diuell that roring lyon labou∣reth by this impure act to make thee most filthie and lothsome in the sight of God, and reioyceth to see thy gracious father, mercifull Sauiour, and comfortable sancti∣fier so abused and withstood, and angred by thee whom he hath wonderfully made, carefully pre∣serued, and deerely redeemed, and tenderly loued, that if it may be thou shouldest by vtter apostasie dishonour him in the face of the world, who hath aduanced thee in the presence of all his Angels: and though thou be so sure in faith that thou canst not vtterly fall (the consideration whereof should make thee more duetifull
and not incourage thee in a sinful course) yet maist thou by little and little, and by often falling, bring thy selfe into a better liking, both of the wicked, and of wic∣kednes itselfe, whom thou ough∣test to hate with a perfect hatred, and then God by iust iudgement cast thee into a sure sleepe, that thy filthihesse may be seene of men, and thou condemned to the griefe of the righteous, and scor∣ned to thy shame of the vngodly: and in the meane season, by pro∣uoking Gods iudgement, be spoi∣led of thy goodly ornaments, of thy godly desires, of religious thoughts, of zealous affections, of christian communication, of ho∣ly indeuours, of assured perswasi∣ons of faith, of stedfast waitings through hope: of constant suffe∣ring by patience, and heartie re∣ioicings
from loue. In the perfect consummation of which things because all happinesse consisteth, beware thou carelesse wretch, lest sodainly by thy abhominable filthinesse, thou either for a time wholly depriue thy selfe of com∣fortable feeling of these things, or much diminish thy present graces and blessings receiued of the ho∣ly spirite, to the glorie of God the Father. But why doe I vtter my voice, or striue to make a dead carkas moue? O quicken thou me that art the fountaine of life, and call thou out of heauen thy dwel∣ling place, that my wandring soule may heare the voice of her shepheard, and follow thee whi∣ther soeuer thou leadest: nay of thy tender compassion take me vp vpon thy shoulders, and carrie me gently into thy fold againe:
for theeues haue stolne me away, and haue bound my feete so that I cannot go, and they watch for me vntil thou art gone that they may carrie me away quicke from thy pastures: O do thou therfore pre∣sently deliuer me, and giue me thy helping hand: O cast thou downe by thy spirite my raging lust, and by thy grace subdue mine vntamed affection. I am weake O Lord and vnable to re∣sist the force of my mightie ad∣uersarie: send thy helpe from a∣boue, and saue me out of the iawes of the cruell lion: thou hast de∣liuered me out of the mouth of hell; ô let not the gates thereof a∣nie more preuaile against me: let me not anie longer be occu∣pied in vngodlinesse, least mine enime triumph ouer me, saying in his malicious hart, there, there,
so would I haue it. Let this sinne be farre from me ô Lord, that I should defile my selfe anie more with this notorious wickednesse: worke therefore in mine heart an vtter detestation of it, that I may euer hereafter keepe my selfe pure and vnspotted for thy kingdome. Thou that art able to make of stones children to Abraham, mol∣lifie I praie thee my stonie heart, that all manner of son like affecti∣ons may be imprinted therein: plucke vp ô good father these rootes of bitternesse, that no vnsa∣uorie fruite may come of the tree which thou by thine owne hand hast planted. I desire, I looke, I call, I crie, for thy assistance, that I may cōquer this vnruly motiō. O blessed sauiour, that hast grāted so manie petitions vpon earth to them that were carefull for the
bodie, fulfill I pray thee this my desire, not for health, nor strēgth, nor riches, nor honour, nor for food, nor apparell, but for thine heauenlie grace and inspiration: yea let me lose all those rather thē be left to my sinfull flesh, that I should be ruled anie longer there∣by. Mortifie good father in me the old bodie of sinne, and giue vnto me a new bodie, purged frō these dead workes to serue the li∣uing God: renew my spirite day∣ly, that I may cast away these works of darknes: let it be enough ô merciful Father, that my weak∣nesse in failing heretofore, hath bin made known vnto me least I shold be too proud. Now let thy strength appeare, in putting this mine enimie vnder my feete, that thereby I may be bold to put my confidence in thee. Why should
my bodie made by thine hand, and my soule framed according to thine image, be giuen ouer as a pray into the hands of Sathan? Deliuer me ô Lord from the snare of the hunter, and preserue me from the hand of mine enimie, who lieth in waite for my spiritu∣all life, and laboureth mine euer∣lasting destruction: so shal I praise thee for thy great goodnes, and magnifie thy name for giuing me conquest ouer my aduersarie that is too strong for me. To thee I fly for succour till this tempest be o∣uer past: hide me I pray thee vn∣der thy shield & bucker, that none of the fierie dartes of Sathan take hold on me. Good Lord for the loue thou bearest vnto mankind, or thy sons sake, who hath taken our nature vpon him, graunt that I may not be tempted aboue my
strength, and that in all tempta∣tions I may flie vnto thee, as a horne of my saluation, yeelding thee most humble and heartie thankes for that thou hast giuen me a desire to withstand my sin∣full flesh: which thy worke I be∣seech thee for thy namesake to perfect and fully ac∣complish. VVatch and pray lest you enter into temptation: the spirite indeed is vvilling but the flesh is vveake.Matth. 26. 41.
Another zealous prayer. ETernall God almightie and all mercifull: we thy vnworthy seruants pro∣strate before thy throne of grace, do yeeld our selues, body and soule vnto thee for all thy be∣nefits, which thou from our birth hast heaped vpon vs, as though we had alwayes done thy will: although wee occupied about vaine things, neuer marked, ne∣uer loued, neuer serued, neuer thanked thee so heartelie for them, as we esteeme a mortall friende for the least courtesie. Therefore we come with shame and sorrowe to confesse our sinnes, not smal, but grieuous: not a few, but infinite: not past, but present: not secret, but presump∣tuous, against thy expresse word
and will: against our owne con∣science, knowledge and liking, if any had done thē but our selues. O Lord, if thou shouldest require but the least of them at our hands, Sathā would chalenge vs for his, and we should neuer see thy face againe, nor the Heauens, nor the Earth, nor all the goodnes which thou hast prepared for mā. What shall we do then? but appeale vn∣to thy mercie, and humblie desire thy fatherly goodnes, to extend that compassiō toward vs, which thy beloued sonne our louing sa∣uiour hath purchased, so mighte∣ly, so gratiously and so dearely for vs: we beleeue and know, that one drop of his bloud, is sufficient to heale our infirmities, pardon our iniquities, and supplie our ne∣cessities, but without thy grace, our light, our strength, our guide,
we are able to do nothing, but sinne, as wofull experience hath taught vs too long, and the exam∣ple of them which are void ther∣of, whose life is nothing else but the seruice of the world, the flesh and the diuel. Therefore good fa∣ther as thou in speciall fauour hast appointed vs to serue thee, like as thou hast ordained all other crea∣tures to serue vs: so may it please thee to send downe thy heauenly spirite into this earthly mansion, to illuminate our minds, mollifie our hearts, change our affections, subdue our reason, regenerate our wils, and purifie our nature to this duetie: so shall not thy benefites, nor thy chastismentes, nor thy word returne void, but accom∣plish that for the which they were sent, vutill we be renued to the image of thy sonne. Good Lord
we beseech thee, looke downe in the multitude of thy compassions, vpon thy millitant Church, this sinful Realme, thy gracious hand∣maid our dread soueraigne, her honourable Counsell, the ciuill Magistrates, the painfull Mini∣sters, the two. Vniuersities, the people that sit in darknes, and all that beare thy crosse. Gather vs into one cōmunion of thy truth, and giue vnto euerie man a spirite to his calling, that we being mindfull of the accompt, and that we are called Christians, may firmely resolue, speedely begin, & continually perseuer in doing & suffering thy holy will. Good Lord blesse and sanctifie our mee∣ting, that no temptation hinder me in speaking, nor them in hea∣ring, but that thy word may be heard and spoken as the word of
