23778 99838402 2778
A New Discouery by Sea, with a VVherry from London to Salisbury. OR, A Voyage to the West, The Worst, or the Best. That e're was exprest. By IOHN TAYLOR. LONDON, Printed by Edw: Allde for the Author. 1623.
TO THE NOBILITIE, Gentrie, and Communaltie, Who are inhabitants, or wel-wil∣lers, to the welfare of the Citie of Salisbury, and County of Wiltshire. Right Honourable, WOrshipfull, and louing Country∣men, I haue named my Booke and Voyage, The Worst, or the Best, which I euer vndertooke and finished, and it lyes in your pleasures, to make it which you please; I am sure for toyle, tra∣uaile, and danger, as yet I neuer had a worse, or a more difficult passage, which the ensuing Discourse will truly testifie; yet all those perils past I shall accompt as pleasures,
if my infallible Reasons may moue or per∣swade you to cleere your Riuer, and make it Nauigable from the Sea to your Citie; I haue in part touched what the proffit and Commodities of it will be vnto you, and I haue briefly shewed the Inconueniences which you haue through the want of it: I haue also declared, that the maine intent or scope of my comming vnto you with a Wherry; was to see what lets or Impedi∣ments were the hinderances vnto so good and beneficiall a worke. All which I haue (according to my simple Suruey, and weake Capacity) set downe, which with the mer∣rines of my most Hazardous Sea-progresse, I humbly Dedicate to your Noble, Worship∣full and worthy Acceptances, euer acknow∣ledgling my selfe and my Labour in your seruices oo be commanded in all dutie. Iohn Taylor.
A Discouery by Sea, from London to Salisbury. AS our accompt in Almanacks agree, The yeare cal'd sixteen hundred twenty three: That Iulyes twenty eight, two houres past dinner, We with our Wherry, and fiue men within her, Along the christall Thames did cut and curry, Betwixt the Counties, Middlesex and Surry: whilst thousands gaz'd, we past the bridge with wō∣der, Where fooles & wise men goe aboue & vnder. We thus our Voyage brauely did begin Downe by St. Katherines, where the Priest fell in, By Wapping, where as hang'd drownd Pirats dye; (Or else such Rats,Any Ra that eats Pye, is a Pyrat. When past down the Riuer there was not any Post or Horne there, bu since it is most wor∣thily Re∣paired. I thinke as would eate Pye.) And passing further, I at first obseru'd That Cuckolds-Hauen was but badly seru'd, For there old Tyme, had such confusion wrought, That of that Ancient place remained nought. No monumentall memorable Horne, Or Tree, or Poste, which hath those Trophees born, Was left, whereby Posteritie may know Where theire forefathers Crests did growe, or show. Which put into a maze my musing Muse, Both at the worlds neglect, and Times abuse, That that stout Pillar, to Obliuions pit Should fall, whereon Plus vltra might be writ, That such a marke of Reuerend note should lye Forgot, and hid, in blacke obscurity▪
Especially when men of euery sort Of countries, Cities, warlike Campes or Court, Vnto that Tree are plaintiffs or defendants, All estates or degrees doe either loue or feare this Hauen.Whose loues, or feares, are fellowes, or atendants: Of all estates, this Hauen hath some partakers By lot, some Cuckolds, and some Cuckold-makers. And can they all so much forgetfull be Vnto that Ancient, and Renowned Tree, That hath so many ages stood Erected, And by such store of Patrones beene protected, And now Ingloriously to lye vnseene As if it were not, or had neuer beene? Is Lechery wax'd scarce, is Bawdery scant, Is there of Whores, or Cuckolds any want? Are Whore-masters decaide, are all Bawdes dead, Are Panders, Pimps, and Apple-squires, all fled? No surely, for the Surgeons can declare That Venus warres, more hot then Marses are. Why then, for shame this worthy Port maintaine, Let's haue our Tree, and Hornes set vp againe: That Passengers may shew obedience to it, In putting off their Hats, and homage doe it. Let not the Cornucopiaes of our land, Vnsightly and vnseene neglected stand: I know it were in vaine for me to call That you should raise some famous Hospitall, Some Free-schole, or some Almes house for the poore That might encrease good deeds & ope heau'ns dore 'Tis no taxation great, or no collection Which I doe speake of, for This great erection, For if it were, mens goodnesses, I know Would proue exceeding barren, dull, and slow:
A Post and Hornes, will build it firme and stable, Which charge to beare, there's many a begger able; The place is Ancient, of Respect most famous, The want of due regard to it doth shame vs, For Cuckolds Hauen, my request is still, And so I leaue the Reader to his will. But holla Muse, no longer be offended, 'Tis worthily Repair'd, and brauely mended, For which great meritorious worke, my pen Shall giue the glory vnto Greenwich men. It was their onely cost, they were the Actors Without the helpe of other Benefactors, For which my pen, their praises here adornes, As they haue beautified the Hau'n with Hornes. From thence to Debtford we amaine were driuen, Whereas an Anker vnto me was giuen With parting pintes, and quarts for our farewell We tooke our leaues, and so to Greenwich fell. There shaking hands, adiews, and drinkings store We tooke our Ship againe, and left the shore. Then downe to Erith, 'gainst the tyde we went Next London, greatest Mayor towne in Kent Or Christendome, and I aproue it can, That there the Mayor was a Waterman, Who gouernes, rules, and reignes sufficiently, And was the Image of Authority: With him we had cheap Reck'nings & good cheere, And nothing but his friendship we thought deare. But thence we rows'd our selues and cast off sleepe Before the day-light did begin to peepe. The tyde by Grauesend swiftly did vs bring before the mounting Larke began to sing,
And e're we came to Lee, with speedy pace The Sun gan rise with most suspicious face, Of foule foreboding weather, purple, red, His Radient Tincture, East, Northeast o'respread, And as our Oares thus downe the Riuer pul'd, Oft with a Fowling-peece the Gulls we gull'd, His name is Arthur Bray a Wa∣terman of Lambeth, & a good Markman.For why the Master Gunner of our ship, Let no occasion or aduantage slip, But charg'd and discharg'd, shot, and shot againe, And scarce in twenty times shot once in vaine. Foule was the weather, yet thus much Ile say If't had beene Faire, fowle was our food that day. Thus downe alongst the spacious Coast of Kent By Grane, and Sheppeies Ilands downe we went, We past the Nowre-head, and the sandie shore Vntill we came to th'East end of the Nowre, At last by Ramsgates Peere, we stiffly Rowed The winde and tyde, against vs blowed and flowed, Till neere vnto the Hauen where Sandwich stands, We were enclosed with most dangerous sands. There were we sowsd & slabberd, wash'd & dash'd, And grauell'd, that it made vs We were fiue men & two of vs were afraid two were not afraid, and I was halfe a∣fraid. halfe abash'd: We look'd and pry'd, and stared round about From our apparant perils to get out, For with a Staffe, as we the depth did sound, Foure miles from land, we almost were on ground. At last (vnlook'd for) on our Larboord side A thing turmoyling in the Sea we spide, Like to a Meareman; wading as he did All in the Sea his neather parts were hid, Whose Brawney limbes, and rough neglected Beard And grim aspect, made halfe of vs afeard,
And as he vnto vs his course did make I courage tooke, and thus to him I spake. Man, monster, fiend or fish, what e're thou be That trauelst here in Neptunes Monarchy, I charge thee by his dreadfull Three-tin'd Mace Thou hurt not me or mine, in any case, And if thou be'st produc'd of Mortall kinde Shew vs some course, how we the way may finde To deeper water, from these sands so shallow, I which thou seest our ship thus wash and wallow. With that (he shrugging vp his shoulders strong) Spake (like a Christian) in the Kentish tongue, Quoth he, Kinde sir, I am a Fisherman Who many yeares my liuing thus haue wan By wading in these sandy troblous waters For Shrimps, Wilks, Cockles, and such vsefull matters, And I will lead you, (with a course I'le keepe) From out these dangerous shallowes to the deepe. Then (by the nose) along he led our Boate Till (past the flatts) our Barke did brauely floate, Our Sea-horse, that had drawne vs thus at large I gaue two groates vnto, and did discharge. Then in an houre and a halfe, or little more, We throgh the Downes at Deale went safe on shore. There did our Hostesse dresse the Fowle we kill'd, With which our hungry stomacks well we fill'd, The morrow being Wednesday (breake of day) We towards Douer took our weary way: The churlish windes awak'd the Seas high fury, Which made vs glad to land there, I assure yee. Blinde Fortune did so happily contriue, That we (as sound as bells) did safe ariue
At Douer, where a man did ready stand To giue me Entertainment by the hand. A man of mettle, marke and note, long since He graced was to lodge a gratious Prince, And now his speeches sum, and scope and pith Is Iack and Tom, each one his Cosin Smith, That if with pleasant talke you please to warme ye He is an Host, much better then an Army, A goodly man, well fed, and corpulent Fill'd like a bag-pudding with good content, A right good fellow, free of cap and legge, Of complement, as full as any Egge: To speake of Him, I know it is of Folly, He is a mortall foe to Melancholly, Mirth is his life and trade, and I thinke very That he was got when all the world was merry: Health vpon health, he doubled and redoubled, Till his, and mine, and all our braines were troubled, Vnto our absent Betters there we dranke; Whom we are bound to loue, they not to thanke, By vs mine Host could no great proffit reape Our meate and lodging, was so good and cheape, That to his praise thus much Ile truly tell, He vs'd vs kindely euery way and well. And though my lines before are merry writ, Where ere I meet him Ile acknowledge it. To see the Castle there I did desire, And vp the Hill I softly did aspire, Whereas it stands, impregnable in strength Large in Circumference, heigth, bredth, and length, Built on a fertile plat of ground, that they Haue yearely growing twenty loads of Hay,
Great Ordnance store, pasture for Kine and Horses, Rampiers and Walls, t'withstand inuasiue forces, That be it well with truth and courage man'd, Munition, victuall'd, then it can withstand The powers of twenty Tamberlaines (the Great) Till in the end with shame they would Retreat. Tis gouern'd by a graue and prudent The right Ho: the Lo: Zouch Lord Warden of the Cinque ports. Lord, Whose Iustice doth to each their right afford, Whose worth (within the Castle, and without) The fiue Ports, and the country all about, The people with much loue, doe still recite, Because he makes the wrongers render Right. The kindnesse I receiued there was such, That my remembrance cannot be too much. I saw a Gun thrice eight foot length of Brasse, And in a Wheele I saw a comely Asse (Dance like a Dogge) that's turning of a Spit, And draw as it were from the infernall pit, (Whose deepe Abisse is perpendicular One hundred fathome (or well neere as farre) So christaline, so cleere, and coole a water, That will in Summer make a mans teeth chatter, And when to see it vp, I there had stood, I dranke thereof, and found it sweet and good. So farewell Castle, Douer, Douer Peere, Farewell Host Bradshaw, thanks for my good cheere. My bonny Barke to Sea was bound againe; On Thursday morne, we launchd into the maine, By Folstone, and by Sangates ancient Castle, Against the rugged waues, we tugge and wrastle By Hyde, by Rumney, and by Rumney Marsh, The Tyde against vs, and the winde blew harsh,
'Twixt Eolus and Neptune was such strife, That I n're felt worse weather in my life. Tost and retost, retost and tost againe; With rumbling, tumbling, on the rowling Maine, The boystrous breaking Billowes curled locks Impetuously did beate against the Rockes, The winde much like a Horse whose wind is broke, Blew thicke and short, that we were like to choake, As it outragiously the billowes shaues The Gusts (like dust) blowne from the bryny waues, And thus the windes and seas robustious gods Fell by the eares starke mad, at furious ods. Our slender Ship, turmoyld 'twixt shores and Seas, Aloft or Iowe, as stormes and flawes did please: Sometimes vpon a foaming Mountaines top, Whose heigth did seeme the heau'ns to vnderprop, When straight to such profunditie she fell As if she diu'd into the deepest Hell, The Clowdes like ripe Apostumes burst & showrd, Their mattery watery substance, headlong powr'd; Yet though all things were mutable and fickle They all agreed to souse vs in a pickle, Of waters fresh and salt, from Seas and skye, Wihch with our sweat ioynd in triplicitie, That looking each on other, there we saw We neither were halfe stewd, nor yet halfe rawe, But neither hot or cold, good flesh or fishes For Canniballs, we had beene ex'lents dishes. Bright Phoebus hid his golden head with feare, Not daring to behold the dangers there, Whilst in that straight or Exigent we stand, We see and wish to land, yet durst not land,
Like rowling Hills the Billowes beate and roare Against the melancholly Beachie shore, That if we landed, neither strength or wit Could saue our Boate from being sunke or split. To keepe the Sea, sterne puffing Eols breath Did threaten still to blow vs all to death, The waues amaine (vnbid) oft boorded vs, Whilst we almost three houres beleaguerd thus On euery side with danger and distresse Resolu'd to runne on shore at Dengie Nesse. There stands some thirteene Cottages together, To shelter Fishermen from winde and weather, And there some people were as I suposd, Although the dores and windowes all were closd: I neere the land, into the Sea soone leapt To see what people those same houses kept, I knockd and cald, at each, from house to house, But found no forme of mankinde, man or No dwel∣ling within neere three miles of those Cot∣tages. Mouse. This newes all sad, and comfortlesse and cold Vnto my company I straightwaies told, Assuring them the best way I did thinke Was to hale vp the Boate, although she sinke. Resolued thus, we altogether please To put her head to shore, her sterne to Seas, They leaping ouerboord amidst the Billowes We pluck'd her vp (vnsunke) like stout tall fellowse. Thus being wet, from top to toe we strip'd (except our shirts) and vp and downe we skip'd, Till winde and Sunne our wants did well supplyThe towns name is Lydd, two miles from Rumney in Kent. And made our outsides, and our insides drie. Two miles from thence, a ragged town there stood, To which I went to buy some drinke and food:
Where kindely ouer reckon'd, well misus'd, Was, and with much courtesie abusde. Mine Hostes did account it for no trouble, For single fare to make my paiment double: Yet did her minde and mine agree together That I (once gone) would neuer more come thither. The Cabbins where our Boate lay safe and well, Belong'd to men which in this towne did dwell: And one of them (I thanke him) lent vs then The Key to o'pe his hospitable Den, A brazen Kettle, and a pewter dish, To serue our needs, and dresse our flesh and fish, Then from the Butchers we bought Lambe & sheep Beere from the Alehouse, and a Broome to sweepe Our Cottage, that for want of vse was musty, And most extreamly rusty-fusty-dusty. There, two dayes space, we Roast, & boyle & broyle And toyle, and moyle, and keepe a noble coyle, For onely we kept open house alone, And he that wanted Beefe might haue a Stone. Our Grandam Earth (with beds) did all befriend vs And bountifully all our lengthes did lend vs, That laughing, or else lying Our beds were Ca∣bles and Ropes eue∣ry feather at the least 20. fatham long. downe did make Our backs and sides sore, and our ribs to ake. On Saturday the windes did seeme to cease, And brawling Seas began to hold their peace, When we (like Tenants) beggerly and poore, Decreed to leaue the Key beneath the doore, But that our Land-lord did that shift preuent Who came in pudding time, and tooke his Rent, And as the Sunne, was from the Ocean peeping We launch'd to Sea againe, and left house-keeping.
When presently we saw the drisling skyes Gan powt and lowre, and Windes and Seas gan rise, Who each on other playd their parts so wilde As if they meant not to be Reconcilde, The whilst we leape vpon those liquid hills Where Porposes did shew their finns and Gills, Whilst we like various Fortunes Tennis ball At euery stroake, were in the Hazzard all. And thus by Rye, and I walk'd to Winchelsey, where I thanke my Couzin Mr. Collins, the Mayor there, he made me kindely welcome. Winchelsey we past By Fairleigh, and those Rockie cliffs at last. Some two miles short of Hastings, we perceiu'd The Lee shore dangerous, and the Billowes heau'd, Which made vs land (to scape the Seas distresse) Within a harbour, almost harbourlesse. (We giue God thankes) amongst the Rocks we hit, Yet were we neither wash'd or sunk, or split. Within a Cottage nigh there dwels a Weauer Who entertain'd vs, as the like was neuer, No meat, no drinke, no lodging (but the floore) No Stoole to sit, no Locke vnto the doore, No straw to make vs litter in the night, Nor any Candlesticke to hold the light, To which the Owner bid vs welcome still Good entertainment, though our cheare was ill. The morrow when the Sun with flushed face In his diurnall course began to trace, The winde exceeding stiffe and strong and tough, The Seas outragious, and extreamely rough, Our Boate laid safe vpon the Beachy sand Whilst we to Hastings went or walk'd by land. Much (to that Towne) my thankfulnesse is bound, Such vndeserued kindnesse there I found.
Three nights we lay there, and three daies we spent Most freely welcom'd, with much merriment. Kinde Mr. Mayor his loue aboue the rest; Me and my crew, he did both feed and feast, He sent vs Gold, and came himselfe to vs; The May∣ors name was Mr. Ri∣chard Boyse, a Gentle∣man whose laudable life, and honest gouern∣ment is much be∣loued and aprou'd.My thankes are these, because his loue was thus. Mine Host and Hostesse Clayton both I thanke And all good fellowes there, I found so francke, That what they had, or what could there be got They neither thought too heauy or too hot. The windes and seas continued still their course Inueterate seem'd their rage, vntam'd their force, Yet were we loath to linger and delay: But once againe to venture and away. Thus desperatly resolud, twixt hope and doubt Halfe sunke with launching, madly we went out, At twelue a clorke at noone, and by Sun set To Miching, or New Hauen, we did get. There almost sunke (to saue our Boat at last) Our selues into the shallow Seas we cast: And pluck d her into safety to remaine Till Friday that we put to sea againe. Then mongst our old acquaintance (storms & flaws) At euery stroake neere deaths deuouring iawes: The weary daye we past through many feares, And land at last quite sunke ore head and eares. All dropping drie, like fiue poore Rats halfe drownd From succour farre, we halde the Boate on ground: Cast out our water, whilst we brauely drop'd, And vp and downe to drie our selues we hop'd. Thus we our weary Pilgrimage did weare, Expecting for the weather calme and cleare:
But stormes, flawes, windes, seas, tooke no minutes rest, Continuall fiercely blowing, West Southwest. A Towne call'd Goreing, stood neere two miles wide To which we went, and had our wants supplide: There we relieu'd our selues (with good compassion) With meate and lodging of the homely fashion. To bed we went in hope of rest and ease, But all beleaguer'd with an host of Fleas: Who in their furie nip'd and skip'd so hotly, That all our skins were almost turn'd to motly. The bloudy fight endur'd at least sixe houres, When we (opprest with their encreasing powres) Were glad to yeeld the honour of the day Vnto our foes, and rise and runne away. The night before, a Constable there came, Who ask'd my Trade, my dwelling, and my name: My businesse, and a troope of questions more, And wherefore we did land vpon that shore? To whom I fram'd my answers true, and fit (According to his plenteous want of wit) But were my words all true, or if I lyde, With neither I could get him satisfide. He ask'd if we were Pyrates? we said no, (As if we had, we would haue told him so.) He said that Lords sometimes would enterprise T'escape, and leaue the Kingdome in disguise: But I assur'd him on my honest word, That I was no disguised Knight or Lord, He told me then that I must goe sixe miles T'a Iustice there, Sir Iohn, or else Sir Giles: I told him I was loath to goe so farre, And he tolde me, he would my iourney barre.
Thus what with Fleas, and with the seuerall prat Of th'Officer, and his Ass-ociates, We arose to goe, but Fortune bad vs stay: The Constable had stolne our Oares away. And borne them thence a quarter of a mile, Quite through a Lane, beyond a gate and stile, And hid them there, to hinder my depart, For which I wish'd him hang'd with all my hart. A Plowman (for vs) found our Oares againe, Within a field well fill'd with Barly Graine: Then madly gladly out to Sea we thrust, Gainst windes and stormes, & many a churlish Gust: By Kingston Chappell, and by Rushington, By little Hampton, and by Midleton, To Bognors fearefull Rockes, which hidden lie Two miles into the Sea, some wet, some drie, There we suppos'd our danger most of all, If we on those remorcelesse Rockes should fall, But by th'Almighties mercy, and his might, We Row'd to Selsey, where we stay'd all night. There, our necessity could haue no Law, For want of beds we made good vse of Straw, Till Sol, that olde continuall Trauailer From Thetis lap, gan mount his flaming Car. The weather kept it's course, and blow'd, and rag'd, Without appearance it would e're be swag'd, Whilst we did passe those hills, & dales, & Downes, That had deuour'd great Ships, & swallow'd Towns. Thus after sixe or fiue houres toyle at least, We past along by Wittering, West and East, Vpon the Lee shore still the winde full South, We came neere Chichesters faire Hauens mouth.
And being then halfe sunk, and all through wet, More fear'd then hurt, we did the Hauen get. Thus in that harbour we our course did frame To Portsmouth, where on Monday morne we came. Then to the Royall Fleete we Row'd abord, Where much good welcome they did vs afford. To the Lord Generall, first my thanks shall be, His bounty did appeare in gold to me, And euery one abord the Prince I found, In sted of want, to make their loues abound, Captaine Penrudduck there amongst the rest, His loue and bounty was to vs exprest, Which to requite, my thankfulnes I'le showe, And that I'le euer pay, and euer owe. On Tuesday morning we with maine and might, From Portsmouth crost vnto the Ile of Wight: By Cowes stout Castle, we to Yarmouth hasted, And still the windes and Seas fierce fury lasted. On Wedn'sday we to Hursts strong Castle crost, Most dangerously sowsd, turmoyl'd and tost: Good harbour there we found, and nothing deere, I thank kinde M. Figge,Mathew Figge, a right good fellow. the Porter there, He shew'd vs there a Castle of defence Most vsefull, of a round circumference: Of such command, that none can passe those Seas Vnsunk, or spoil'd, except the Castle please. On Thursday we, our Boat row'd, pull'd and hal'd Vnto a place which is Key Hauen call'd. The winde still blowing, and the Sea so high, As if the losty waues would kisse the skie, That many times I wish'd with all my hart, My selfe, my Boat, and Crewe, all in a Cart;
Or any where to keepe vs safe and dry, The weather raged so outragiously. For sure I thinke the memory of man (Since windes and Seas to blowe or flowe began) Cannot remember so stormy weather In such continuance, held so long together For ten long weekes ere that, tis manifest, The winde had blowne at Sowth or west Southwest, And rais'd the Seas: to shew each others power, That all this space (calme weather) not one hower, That whether we did goe by Sunne or Moone, At any time, at midnight, or at noone: If we did launch, or if to land we set, We still were sure to be halfe sunk, and wet. Thus toyling of our weary time away, That Thursday was our last long look'd for day: For hauing past, with perill, and much paine, And plow'd, & furrow'd, o're the dangeroas maine, O're depths, and flats, and many a ragged Rock, We came to Christ-Church hau'n at fiue a clock. Thus God, in mercy, his iust iudgement sparing (Gainst our presumption, ouer bold, and daring) Who made vs see his wonders in the deepe, And that his power alone aloft did keepe, Our weather-beaten Boate aboue the waues, Each moment gaping to be all our Graues. We sinking scap'd, then not to vs, to Him Be all the Glory, for he caus'd vs swim. And for his mercy was so much extended On me (whose temptings, had so farre offended) Let me be made the scorne and scoffe of men, If euer I attempt the like agen.
My loue, my duty, and my thankfulnesse, To Sir George Hastings I must here expresse: His deedes to me, I must requite in words, No other payment, poore mens state affords. With fruitlesse words, I pay him for his cost, With thanks to Mr. Templeman mine Host. So leauing Christ-Church, and the Hauen there, With such good friends as made vs welcome cheere: Some serious matter now I must compile, And thus from verse to prose I change my stile. GOD, who of his infinite wisedome made Man, of his vnmeasurable mercy redeemed him, of his boundlesse bounty, immense power, and eternall eye of watchfull prouidence releeues, guards, and con∣serues him; It is necessary, that euery man seriously consider & ponder these things, and in token of obe∣dience and thankfulnesse say with Dauid: What shall I render, and the man hauing thus searched conside∣rately, the causer of his being, then let him againe me∣ditate for Men should con∣sider why God hath giuen them a being in this life. what cause hee hath a being: indeede it may be obiected that almost euery thing hath a be∣ing, as stones haue being, trees, hearbs, and plants, haue being and life: Beasts, fowles, and fishes, haue being, life, and sence: but to man is giuen a Being, life, sence, and reason, and after a mortall an immor∣tall euer being; this consideration will make a man know that hee hath little part of himselfe, which hee may iustly call his owne: his body is Gods, he made it; his soule is his, who bought it; his goods are but lent him, by him that will one day call him to a rec∣koning,
for the well or ill disposing of them: so that man hauing nothing but what he hath receiued, and receiued nothing but what is to be imployed in the seruice of God, and consequently his Prince and Countrey, it is plainely to be perceiued, that euery man hath,No man is owner of himselfe. the least share or portion of himselfe to boast of. I haue written this Preamble, not onely to en∣forme such as know not these things already; but also to such whose knowledge is, as it were fallen into a dead sleepe, who doe liue as though there were no other being then here, and that their life and being was ordained onely of themselues, neither God, Prince, or Countrey, hauing no share or portion of them or of what they call theirs. But oh you Inha∣bitans of Salisburie, I hope there are no such craw∣ling Cankerwormes, or Common-wealth Caterpillers amongst you. Nay, I am assured of the contrary, that there are many who (with religious piety open hands and relenting hearts) doe acknowledge that your goods are but lent in trust vnto you, and doe patiently beare the ouer-burthensome relieuing of many hundreds of poore wretches, which (were it not for your charity) would perish in your streetes. This being entred into my consideration, that your Citie is so much ouercharged with poore,Here is an honest course set downe for the inrich∣ing of your rich, and the relie∣uing of your poore. as hauing in three Parishes neere 3000. besides decayed men a great many, and that those fewe which are of the wealthier sort, are continually ouerpressed with su∣staining the wants of the needy, the Citie being as it were at the last gaspe, the poore being like Pharaohs leane Kine, euen ready to eate vp the fat ones: I haue
made bold to write this Treatise ensuing, both to en∣treat a constant perseuerence in those who haue be∣gun to doe good workes, and an encouragement or animating of all others, who as yet seeme slowe in these good proceedings. And if any thing here writ∣ten by me, be either impertinent, extrauagant, rude, harsh, or ouer bold, I humbly entreate you to im∣pute it rather to my want of iudgement, learning, and capacity, then to any presumption, or want of loue and duty to the Citie and cause, which is hereafter handled. It is sufficiently knowne that my intent and pur∣pose at this time, was not to make any profit to my selfe vpon any aduenture (as it is deemed by many) by my passage from London to Salisbury with a Wherry,His name is Gregory Bastable, and his ordina∣ry place where he plyes, or attends his labour, is at the Tem∣ple, and there also plyes Tho∣mas Estman another Wiltshire man, which went with me. but I was entreated by a Waterman, which was borne in Salisbury, that I would beare him com∣pany for the discouery of the sands, flats, depthes, shoales, Mills, and Weares, which are impediments and lets, whereby the Riuer is not Nauigable from Christ-Church, or the Sea to Salisbury. Which after many dangerous gusts, and tempestuous stormes at Sea, (which I haue recited in verse before) it pleased God that at the last we entred the Riuer, which in my opinion is as good a Riuer, and with some charge may be made as passable as the Riuer of Thames is vpwards from Brentford to Windsor, or beyond it; the shallow places in it are not many, The Mills neede not be remoued, and as for the Weares, no doubt but they may with conscience be compounded for. By which meanes of Nauigation, the whole City and Countrey would be relieued, loyterers turned
into labourers, penurie into plenty, to the glory of God, the dignity and reputation of your Citie, and the perpetuall worthy memory of all benefactors, and well-willers vnto so noble a worke. If you will but examine your owne knowledges, you shall finde that in the whole dominion of Eng∣land, there is not any one Towne or Citie which hath a Nauigable Riuer at it, that is poore, nor scarce any that are rich which want a Riuer with the benefits of Boates: The Towne of Kingston vpon Hull in York∣shire, the Riuer there was cut out of Humber, by mens labours 20. miles vp into the Countrey, and what the wealth and estate of that Towne is, (by the onely benefit of that Riuer) it is not vnknowne to thousands: but you men of Sarum may see what a commodity Nauigation is, neerer hand; there is your neighbour Southampton on the one side, and your deere friend Poole on the other, are a payre of han∣some looking-Glasses for you, where you may see your want in their abundance, and your negligence in their industry. God hath placed your being in a fertile soyle, in a fruitfull valley, enuironed round with Corne, and as it were continually besieged with plenty: whilst you within (hauing so many poore amongst you) are ra∣ther lookers vpon happinesse then enioyers: more∣ouer (by Gods appointment) Nature hath saued you the labour of cutting a Riuer, for I thinke you haue one there as olde as your Citie ready made to your hands, if you will bee but industrious to amend those impediments in it, I dare vndertake to be one of the 3. or 4. men which shall bring or carie 16. or
20. Tunnes of goods betwixt the Sea and your Citie▪ Now, with extreame toyle of men; Horses & Carts, your wood is brought to you 18. or 20. miles, where∣by the poore which cannot reach the high prices of your fewell, are enforced to steale or starue in the Winter, so that all your neere adioyning woods are continually spoyled by them: which faults by the be∣nefit of the Riuer would be reformed, for the new Forrest standeth so neere to the water, that it is but cut the wood and put it into a Boate, which shall bring as much to your Citie as 20. Carts, and foure∣score Horses: besides, by this Riuer you might draw to you a trade of Sea-coale, which would enrich you, and helpe the plaine and inland Townes and Villages where no wood growes. And for the Exportation of your Corne from Port to Port, within our owne Countrey, as it is well knowne what abundance of your Barley is continually made into Mault amongst you: which if you had cariage for it, might be brewed into Beere, wherewith you might serue diuers places with your Beere, which is now serued with your Mault: besides cariages of Brickes, Tyles, Stones, Charcoales, and other necessaries, which is now ca∣ried at deere rates by Horse or Carts, which now you send in Carts, or on Horses backes, to Southampton, to Bristow, and to many other places: so that the deerenesse of the Cariages eates vp all your commo∣dities and profit, which discommodity may be auoy∣ded, if your Riuer be cleansed: and what man can tell what good in time may redownd to your Citie from the Sea, by forraigne goods, which may be brought into Christ-Church Hauen by Shipping? nor can it
be truly imagined, what new and vsefull profitable businesses may arise in time by this meanes. Our Forefathers and Auncestors did in their liues time in former ages doe many worthy and memo∣rable workes, but for all their industrie and cost, they did not (or could not) doe all; but as there was much done to our hands, so there was much left for vs to doe, and very fitting it was that it should be so, for it is against common sence and reason our Fathers should toyle in good workes like drudges, and wee spend our times loytring like Drones: no, what they did was for our imitation. And withall, that wee should be leaders of our posterities by our examples into laudable endeuours, as our progenitours hath before shewed vs: we are their sonnes and offspring, wee haue their shapes and figures, wee beare their names, we possesse their goods, we inherit their lands; we haue materials of stones, Timber, Iron, and such necessaries which they had, (if not in greater abun∣dance) and hauing all these, let vs withall haue their willing and liberall hearts, and there is no question to be made, but that our Riuer of Auon will quickly be cleansed to the honest enriching of the rich, and the charitable relieuing of the poore. I am assured that there are many good men in the Citie & Country of Wiltshire, and others of worth and good respect in this Kingdome, who would willingly & bountifully assist this good work: but (like Gossips neere a Stile) they stand straining curtesie who shal go first: or the Mice in the Fable, not one will aduenture to hang the Bell about the Cats neck, So that if one good man would begin, it would be (like a health drank
to some beloued Prince at a great feast) pledged most heartily, and by Gods grace effected most happily. You haue already begun a charitable worke a∣mongst you, I meane your common Towne Brew∣house, the profit of which you entend shall be wholy imployed for the supply of the poore and Impotents which liue in your Citie; frō which sort of people (be∣ing such a multitude) the Brewers there haue found their best custome; for no doubt but the meanest beg∣ger amongst you, is (in some sort) more valiant then the richest man: because the one dares to spend all he hath at the Alehouse, so dares not the other; for the poore man drinks stifly to driue care away, and hath nothing to loose, and the rich man drinks moderatly, because he must beare a brain to look to what he hath. And of all Trades in the world a Brewer is the Load∣stone, which drawes the customs of all functions vnto it. It is the marke or vpshot of euery mans ayme, and the bottomlesse whirlepoole that swallowes vp the profits of rich and poore. The Brewers Art (like a wilde Kestrell or vnmand Hawke) flies at all games; or like a Butlers box at Christmasse, it is sure to win whosoeuer looses: In a word, it rules and raignes (in some sort) as Augustus Caesar did, for it taxeth the whole earth. Your Innes and Alehouses are Brookes and Riuers, and their Clyents are small Rills and Springs, who all (very dutifully) doe pay their tri∣butes to the boundlesse Ocean of the Brewhouse. For all the world knowes, that if men and women did drinke no more then sufficed Nature, or if it were but a little extraordinary now and then vpon occasion, or by chance as you may terme it; if drinking were vsed
in any reason, or any reason vsed in drinking, I pray yee what would become of the Brewer then?Some make a profit of quarelling, some picke their ly∣uings out of conten∣tions & de∣bate, some thriue and grow fat by gluttonie: many are brauely maintained by Bribery, theft, chea∣ting, rogue∣ry, & villa∣ny: but put all these together, and ioyne to them all sorts of people else and they all in ge∣nerall are drinkers, and conse∣quently the Brew∣ers Clients and Custo∣mers. Surely wee doe liue in an age wherein the seauen deadly sinnes are euery mans Trade and liuing. Pride is the maintainer of thousands, which would else perish; as Mercers, Taylers, Embroyders, Silk-men, Cutters, Drawers, Sempsters, Laundresses, of which functions there are millions which would starue but for Ma∣dame Pride with her changeable fashions. Leachery, what a continuall crop of profit it yeelds, appeares by the gallant thriuing, and gawdy outsides of many he and she, priuate and publike sinners, both in Citie and Suburbs. Couetousnesse is Embroidered with Extortion, and warmely lined & furred with oppres∣sion. And though it be a deuill, yet is it most Idola∣trously adored, honoured, and worshipped, by those simple Sheepe-headed fooles, whom it hath vndone and beggered. I could speake of other vices, how profitable they are to a Common-wealth; but my inuention is thirsty, and must haue one carouse more at the Brewhouse, who (as I take it) hath a greater share then any, in the gaines, which spring from the worlds abuses: for Pride is maintained by the humble, yet one kinde of Pride doth liue & profit by another: Leachery is supported by the cursed swarme of Bawdes, Panders, Pimps, Applesquires, Whores, and Knaues, and so euery sinne liues and thriues by the members, Agents, Ministers, and Clyents, which doe belong vnto them: but Drunkennesse playes at all, all trades, all qualities, all functions and callings can be drunk extemporie, not at any great Feast, or but at euery ordinary dinner or supper almost, when
men are well satisfied with sufficiency, that then the mysterie of quaffing begins, with healths to many an vnworthy person (who perhaps would not giue the price of the Reckoning to saue all them from hanging (which make themselues sicke with drin∣king such vnthankfull healths) I my selfe haue often∣times dined or sup'd at a great mans Boord, and when I haue risen, the seruants of the house hath in∣forc'd me into the Seller or Buttry, where (in the way of kindenesse) they will make a mans belly like a Sowse-tub, and inforce me to drinke as if they had a commission vnder the deuills great seale to murder men with drinking, with such a deale of comple∣mentall oratory, As, off with your Cup, winde vp your bottome, vp with your taplash, and many more elo∣quent phrases, which Tully or Demosthenes neuer heard of; that in conclusion I am perswaded three dayes fasting would haue beene more healthfull to me, then two houres feeding and swilling in that manner. If any man hang, drowne, stabbe, or by any vi∣olent meanes make away his life, the goods and lands of any such person, is forfeite to the vse of the King: and I see no reason but those which kill them∣selues with drinking, should be in the same estate and be buryed in the highwayes, with a stake droue through them: And if I had but a graunt of this suite, I would not doubt but that in seauen yeeres (if my charity would but agree with my wealth) I might erect Almes-houses,Let these Lines be considered if I lye or not. Free-schooles, mend highwaies, and make Bridges; for I dare sweare, that a num∣ber (almost numberlesse) haue confessed vpon their
death-beds, that at such and such a time, in such and such a place, they dranke so much which made them surfeit,Let these Lines be considered if I lye or not. of which surfeit they languished and dyed. The maine benefit of these superfluous and man∣slaughtering expences comes to the Brewer, so that if a Brewer be in any office, I hold him to be a very ingratefull man if he punish a Drunkard, for euery stiffe pot-valiant drunkard is a Post, beame, or Pil∣ler which holds vp the Brew-house: for as the barke is to the tree, so is a good drinker to a Brewer. But you men of Salisbury, wisely perceiuing how much Euill to your Citie, hath come by the a∣buse of Good drinke, you would now worke by contraries, to drawe Good for your poore out of these forepassed and present Euils. To drawe euill out of good is deuillish, but to worke or ex∣tract goodnesse out of what is euill is godly, and worthy to be pursued. The abuse of good drinke, and excessiue drinking hath made many beggers a∣mongst you, to the inriching of a few Brewers, and now you would turne the world off from the Bar∣rels, as I would off from the Coach-wheeles, that the benefit of your new built Towne Brew-house might relieue many of those poore amongst you, who haue formerly beene impouerished by the in∣riching of your Towne-Brewers. It is no doubt but they will oppose this good worke of yours, as the Image-makers in Ephesus did Paul, when  preached against their Idolatrous worshipping Dia∣na;Tobyah. Arabians. Amonites. but be not you discouraged, for Nehemiah (in time) did build the Temple, although Sanballat and many others did oppose him, for as your intents are
Pious, so no doubt but God will make your euents prosperous. Now to turne from Beere and Ale to faire water, (your Riuer I meane) which if it be clensed, then with the profit of your towne-Brewhouse, and the commodity of the Riuer, I thinke there will be scarce a begger or a loyterer to be found amongst you: I haue written enough before concerning the benefit of it, and to encourage such as seeme slow towards so good a worke, which had it beene in the Low-Countries, the Industrious Dutch would not so long haue neglected so beneficiall a blessing, wit∣nesse their aboundance of Nauigable Riuers, and ditches, which with the onely labour of men they haue cut, and in most places, where neuer God or Nature made any Riuer; and lately there is a Riuer made nauigable to St. Yeades in Huntington-shire, wherein stood seauen Mills as impediments in the way. And now the Citie of Canterbury are cleering their Riuer that Boates may passe to and fro betwixt them and Sandwich hauen: the like is also in hand at Leedes in Yorkeshire; Now, if neither former or pre∣sent examples can moue you, if your owne wants cannot inforce you, if assured proffit cannot per∣swade you, but that you will still be neglectiue and stupid, then am I sorry that I haue written so much, to so little purpose, but my hopes are otherwaies;  blinde, lame, and couetous excuses be laid a∣side, then those who are willing will be more wil∣ling, and those who are slacke or backward, will in some reasonable manner drawe forward: And there is the mouth of an vncharitable obiection which I
must needs stop, which is an old one, and onely spo∣ken by old men, for (say they) we are aged and stricken in yeares, and if we should lay out our mo∣neys, or be at charges for the Riuer, by the course of Nature we shall not liue to enioy any proffit to re∣quite our costs; this excuse is worse then Heathe∣nish, and therefore it ill becomes a Christian, for as I wrote before, man was not created, or had either the goods of minde, body, or Fortune bestowed on him by his Maker, but that he should haue the least part of them himselfe, his God, Prince and Coun∣trie, claiming (as their due) almost all which euery man hath. The oldest man will purchase land, which is subiect to barrennesse, and many inconueniences, he will buy and build houses, which are in danger of fire, and diuers other casualties, he will aduenture vpon Wares or goods at high prises, which to his losse may fall to lowe rates: he will bargaine for cat∣tell and Sheepe, who are incident to many diseases, as the Rot, the Murraine, and diuers the like, and all this will he doe in hope to raise his state, and leaue his heires rich; at his death perhaps (when hee can keepe his goods no longer, when in spight of his heart he must leaue all) he will giue a few Gownes, and a little money to Pious vses, a Groce or two of penny loaues, and there's an end of him, so that there remaines no more memory of him. But this good worke of your Riuer is not subiect to barrennesse or sterilitie, but contrarily it will be a continuall haruest of plenty, it is not in danger of be∣ing consumed, or wasted, but it is assured of a per∣petuall encrease. The names and memories of con∣tributors
towards it, shall be conserued in venerable and laudable remembrance, to the eternizing of their fames, the honour of their posterities, and the good example of succeeding times to imitate. Therefore you men of Salisbury I entreate you in this case to be good to your selues. Or else you may say here∣after, If we had beene Industrious we had beene hap∣py: If we had not beene couetous, wee had beene Rich. Now, to returne to my trauels and entertaine∣ments: as I passed vp the Riuer at the least 2000. Swans like so many Pilots swam in the deepest pla∣ces before me, and shewed me the way: When I came to the Towne of Ringwood (14 miles short of Salisburie). I there met with his Maiesties Trum∣peters, and there my fellows Mr. Thomas Vnder∣hill, and Mr. Richard Stocke, Mr. Thomas Ramsey, Mr. Randall Lloyd, with others, which I name not, did walke on the banke and gaue me two most ex∣celent flourishes with their Trumpets, for the which I thanke them in print, and by word of mouth. At last I came to a Towne called Forthing Bridge, where (not many dayes before) a grieuous mischance hap∣ned, for two men being swimming or washing in the Riuer, a Butcher passing ouer the bridge (with a Mastiffe Dogge with him) did cast a stone into the water and say a Duck, at which the Dog leapd into the Riuer and seasd vpon one of the men and kild him, and the Butcher leaping in after thinking to saue the man, was also slaine by his owne Dog, the third man also hardly escaping, but was likewise bitten by him. From thence I passed further, to a place called
Hale, where we were welcommed by the Right Worshipfull Sir Thomas Penrudduck Knight, whom we carried there in our Boate, and who I am assured will be a forward and a liberall Benefactor towards cleering of the Riuer. So passing on our course by the Villages of Bur∣gate, Breamer, Chartford, Downton, and Stonelye, we came at last to Langfoord, where we were well entertained by the Right Honourable the Lord Ed∣ward Gorge, (Lord barron of Dundalke, and Cap∣taine of his Maiesties strong and defencible Castle of Hurst, in Hantshire) to whom in loue and duty we profferd the gift of our tattered windshaken and weatherbeaten Boate, which (after our being at Salisbury, being but two miles from thence) his Lordship accepted. And though he knew she was almost vnseruiceable, yet his noble bounty was such, that he rewarded vs with the price of a new Boate. I had some conference with his Honour concerning the impediments and clensing of the Riuer, and I know he is most forwardly and worthily affected towards it, and no doubt if it be pursued, that then he will doe that which shall become a Gentleman of his Honourable calling and Ranke. So on the same Friday at night we came to Salis∣bury where we brought our Boate through Fisherton Bridge, on the West side of the Citie, taking our lodging at the signe of the Kings head there, with mine Host Richard Estman, whose brother Thomas, was one of the Watermen which came in the Boate thither from London; on the morrow I with my company footed it two miles to Wilton, where at the
Right Honourable the Earle of Pembrooks, my Lord Chamberlaines house, I was most freely (and beyond my worth and merit) kindely welcommed, by the Right Worshipfull Sir Thomas Morgan Knight, with whom I dined, and by whose com∣mand I was shewed all or the most part of the ad∣mirable contriued Roomes, in that excellent, and well built house, which Roomes were all richly a∣dorned with Costly and sumptuous hangings; his Maiestie some few dayes before hauing dined there with most magnificent Entertainment, as did ex∣presse the loue of so noble a House-keeper for so Royall a Guest: vpon the sight of which house with the Furniture, I wrote these following verses. If Wholsome Ayre, Earth, woods, & pleasant springs Are Elements, whereby a house is grac'd: If strong and stately built, contentment brings, Such is the house at Wilton, and so plac'd. There Nature, Art, Art-Nature hath embrac'd; Without, within, belowe, aloft compleate: Delight and state, are there so enterlac'd With rich content, which makes all good, and great The Hangings there, with Histories repleate Diuine, profane, and Morrall pleasures giuing With worke so liuely, exquisite, and neate, As if mans Art, made mortall creatures liuing. In briefe, there all things are compos'd so well, Beyond my pen to write, or tongue to tell. Then was I shewed a most faire and large Armo∣rie, with all manner of prouision and Furnitue, for
Pike, Shot, Bills, Halberts, Iauelins, with other Weapons and munition, which for goodnesse, num∣ber, and well-keeping, is not second to any Noble∣mans in England: Afterwards I went to the Sta∣bles, and saw my Lords great Horses, whom I saw such and so good, that what my vntutour'd Pen cannot sufficiently commend, I am forced with si∣lence to ouerpasse. But amongst the rest, the paines and industrie of an ancient Gentleman Mr. Adri∣an Gilbert, must not be forgotten, for there hath he (much to my Lords cost and his owne paines) vsed such a deale of intricate Setting, Grafting, Planting, inocculating, Rayling, hedging, plashing, turning, winding, and returning circular, Trianguler, Qua∣dranguler, Orbiculer, Ouall, and euery way curi∣ously and chargeably conceited: There hath he made Walkes, hedges, and Arbours, of all manner of most delicate fruit Trees, planting and placing them in such admirable Artlike fashions, resembling both diuine and morrall remembrances, as three Arbours standing in a Triangle, hauing each a recourse to a greater Arbour in the midst, resembleth three in one, and one in three: and he hath there planted certaine Walkes and Arbours all with Not a Tree stands there, but it beares one good or rare fruit or other. Fruit trees, so plea∣sing and rauishing to the sense, that he calls it Para∣dise, in which he plaies the part of a true Adamist, continually toyling and tilling. Moreouer, he hath made his Walkes most rarely round and spacious, one Walke without another, (as the rindes of an Onion are greatest without, and lesse towards the Center) and withall, the hedges betwixt each Walke are so thickly set, that one cannot see thorow
from the one walke, who walkes in the other: that in conclusion, the worke seemes endlesse,A round worke is endlesse, hauing no end. I touch not the match∣lesse ad∣ioyning wood and walkes of Rowlington here, whose praises cō∣sists in it selfe, my pen being insuffici∣ent. and I thinke that in England it is not to be fellowed, or will in hast be followed. And in loue which I beare to the me∣mory of so industrious and ingenious a Gentleman, I haue written these following Annagrams. Adryan Gilbert, Annagrams Art redily began A breeding tryal. Art redily began a breeding tryal When she inspir'd this worthy Gentleman For Natures eye, of him tooke full espiall, And taught him Art, Art redily began, That though Dame Nature, was his Tuteresse, he, Out-workes her, as his workes apparent be. For Nature brings but earth, and seeds and plants, Which Art, like Taylers, cuts and puts in fashion: As Nature rudely doth supply our wants, Art is deformed Natures reformation. So Adryan Gilbert, mendeth Natures features By Art, that what she makes, doth seem his creatures. THus with my humble thankes to Sir Thomas Morgan, and my kinde remembrance to all the rest of my Lords Seruants there, My legges and my labouring lynes returne againe to Salisbury, and from the next day (being Sunday) to Langford to my Lord Gorge his house, with whō I dined, & left my humble thanks for the reckoning. In briefe, my fruitlesse and worthy lip-labour, mixt with a deale of Ayrie, and
non-substantiall matter I gaue his Lordship, and the like requitall I bestowed on the right Worshipfull M. Thomas Squibb, Mayor of Sarum, with M. Banes, M. Iohn Iuy, M. Windouer, with all the rest; and more then thankes, and a gratefull remembrance of their Honourable, Worshipfull, and friendly fauours, I know they expect not, and lesse then such a common duty as Gratitude I must not, or cannot pay. To shut vp all in few words, I know his Maiesties pious inclination is so ample, that he will be graciously plea∣sed with any of your laudable endeuours for your welfare and commodity, if you take good and spee∣dy aduice, then no doubt but the effects will be ac∣cording to your honest intendments. So farewell Salisbury till we meete againe, which I hope will be one day: in the meane space I pray thee take this poore Pamphlet as a louing pledge of my returne. Me thinks I see already, Men, Horses, Carts, Mattocks, Shouels, Spades, Wheelebarrowes, Handbarrowes, and Baskets at worke for the clea∣ring of your Riuer: But if my thoughts doe deceiue me, and my expectation faile, I shall euer hereafter giue small credit to their intelligence. So once more Salisbury I wish thee thankfully well to fare. On Thursday the 21. of August, I tooke Winche∣ster in my way homewards; where I saw an ancient Citie, like a body without  soule: and I know not the reason of it, but for aught which I perceiued, there were almost as many Parishes as people. I lodged at the signe of the Cock, being recommended to the Host of the house, by a token from Salisbury, but mine Host dyed the night before I came, and I being
weary, had more minde to goe to bed then to follow him so long a iourney, to doe my messuage, or deli∣uer any commendations: but the whole Citie see∣med almost as dead as mine Host, and it may be they were all at Haruest worke: but I am sure I walked from the one end of it to the other, and saw not 30. people of all sorts: So that I thinke if a man should goe to Winchester for a Goose, he might lose his labour for a Trader cannot liue there, by venting such com∣modities. On Friday I gallop'd a foote pace one and twenty miles, from Winchester to Farneham; where I and one of my company hired a couple of Hampshiere Ie∣nets with seauen legs, and three eyes betwixt them, vpon whom wee hobled seauenteene miles, to Stanes, whence on Saturday the 23. of August we footed it to Brent∣foord, and Boated it to Lon∣DON.
