24072 99853624 19016
THE True Copy of tvvo Letters, with their seuerall Answeres, contayning the late Apostasie of the Earle of Lauall, after his returne from Italy. Wherein the principall poynts in controuersie with the Papists, are lear∣nedly and fully confuted, By D. TILENVS. Faythfully translated by D. D. S. LONDON, Printed by Simon Stafford, for Nathanael Butter, and are to be sold at his shop in Paules Churchyard, neere S. Austens Gate. 1605.
To the most Christian and mighty Monarch, James, by the grace of God, King of great Brittayne, Fraunce and Ireland, Defender of the true, ancient, and Catholike Fayth. MOst mighty and renowmed King, behold, I offer to your Maiesty these vnexpected and vntimeous letters, wherein the fine and pure gold of Saba, is mingled with the olde and corrupt drosse of Egypt, to be tryde by the diuine touchstone of your sacred wisdome, per∣swading myselfe, that the reading of them shal not be so picasant to your Maiesties eares, as the dis∣contentment, in beholding the sudden fall, and mise∣rable Apostasie of so great a personage, and of my knowledge, so greatly deuoted to your Maie∣sties seruice: besides that great hope and expecta∣tion, which was had throughout all France of him, to be (one day) a helpe and comfort to Christs true Church there. I may here very well compare him to the folly of the Lark, which, while it playes with the feather, and stoopeth, is caught in the Fowlers net: so he, dallying in his youth & prime of yeres,
being deceyued by the beautifull feathers & glas∣ses of pleasant Italy, was caught by the char∣ming intisemēts of those Antichristian Vipers, with whose venome being once stung, hard was it to find such medicine, for the cure of so dāgerous a discase: not doubting in this mean time, but as your Maiesty would be glad to heare of his healing and rising againe to the imbracing of the truth, from whence he fell: so likewise on the other part, I am fully perswaded, that your Maiesties wonted care shall continue in this your newe Monarchy, that no person of any quality and marke here∣after, shall bee licenced to trauell, especially to Spaine & Italy (places most dangerous for practi∣sing of treasons, & betraying of their own soules; yea, the liues of their owne Kings and countries) but with such a strict caueat, that if they continue not constant in the profession of the truth, wherin they haue bin taught, that at their returne, They shal expect the rigor of your lawes, to be executed against them more seuerely then heretofore haue bin, lest by their ouersight and daily increase, they may not onely indanger Christes Church in your dominiōs, but also your Maiesties person & state, which God forbid should euer come to passe in this our age, or in any other following. I craue humble pardon, that remēbers other mens matters
to your Maiesty, in forgetting my self; for charity should begin at her selfe, praying in all submission, that this small mite of mine may be receyued with that accustomed fauour (which sometime I in∣ioyed more liberally,) as your Maiesty vseth to accept the rich treasures of others dayly of∣fered to your Maiesty, and this to bee but the earnest of a better worke to follow, and a remem∣brance of my dutifull affection, humbly submitting my selfe, and this my rude Translation, to the royal & most learned censure of your Maiesty, who can far better iudge therof, then I haue deliuered it. I make an end, beseeching the Almighty King of Kings, long to preserue your Maiesties life, & to prosper all your good actions and godly enterpri∣ses, to his glory, to the comfort and good of the Church and Common-wealth. Your Maiesties most humble and loyall Seruant, D. D. S.
The Translator NO man (Christian Reader) can serue two masters, saith our Sauiour Christ; for the cō∣fort that is of God is sweet and delectable: but this is not for al men, but for those only, which despise the vanities of this world. It is impossible to taste of God and his pleasures, & to loue disor∣dinately the things of this life. All men would in∣ioy gladly the sweet conuersatiō of our Lord; but few there be that will forgoe their owne worldly desires, and willingly despise their earthly content∣mēts: they desire greatly to haue the inward com∣fort of the soule; but withall, they desire to satisfy their own extraordinary lusts and appetites. This may well appeare in the Apostasy of this Noble man, very godly & carefully broght vp in his ten∣der yeeres in the true Religion, who casting off all true feare of God, loue of true Religion, and the great honour & commendations that his house & predecessors had, for professing & maintaining the same against the enemies therof, suffering himselfe in the prime of his yeres, with pride and preiudice, two of his chiefe guides into Italy, to be bereft of that precious & inestimable pearle of Christs ve∣rity: for pride insinuating her selfe, crept into his soule (a most dangerous ghest) & taking once pos∣session, is very hard to be expelled againe. Pre∣iudice on the other part, so great an enemy to the
truth, that it makes the mind vncapable of it; for if in his heart he had laid a sure groūd, all his enemies had not shaken it, much lesse ouer thrown his Re∣ligion. Ye see, be loued, what it is to serue two ma∣sters, as he would haue done. I compare him vnto those, who kindles a fire vnder greene wood, and leaues it so soone as it begins to flame, leauing off a good beginning, for want of seconding it with a suteable proceeding: but rather lazily & cowardly being ouercome with the pleasures of the coūtry, and the curiosity of his young and vayne conceits, forgetting the seruice of God, wherin he had liued before, betook him to the seruice of Antichrist, & with-drew himselfe, as with a discontented mind, from the company of his chiefe Gouernour, both graue, wise, and godly, giuing himselfe ouer to the company of those deuouring Serpents, who neuer left him, vntil he was broght into the endlesse La∣borinth of their superstitious Idolatry, & made his soule drunk with the new wine of the cup of the Beast. I beseech you therefore, all that loue your owne saluation, to take here your example, and eschue the company of the vngodly & wicked, but especially such, as in the habits of simple Lambs, come secretly as Wolues, to infect and deuoure your soules, vnder the pretence of holinesse and de∣uotion: and so I bid you farewell.
The Translator to D. Tilenus, his anci∣ent acquaintance, the Au∣thour hereof. THou true TILENVS to thy Lord LAVALL, And faithfull Teacher of his tender yeeres, Thy learning great, and pietie appeares, By diuine answeres to repaire his fall: Thy truth doth shine, his vntruth to deface. Thy heauenly dewe distilleth from aboue, To heale his soule, whom thou so deare didst loue, And leadeth him the way to sauing grace: But if so be thy counsell hee neglect, Yet thousand eyes shall read thy leaues and lindes, And shall be scanned by a thousand mindes, With endlesse praise thy Trophees to erect: Where your great fame, and his disgrace shall stand, Inrol'd fer euer with a Brittaynes hand. D. D. S.
The Aduertisement of the Authour to the Christian Reader. CVriosity and pleasure are two dangerous diseases, and euery one apart, is strong ynough to ouercome his patient: how much more, while being both together, they conioyne to assayle him, as it were, agreeing both by the body and the soule; the one ingendring himselfe within the spirit, the other within the flesh, each of them consuming and destroying the parts that breed it; euen as the Worme de∣stroyeth the Apple, the Viper, her mother: They symbolize in many things, and as two sister-like twinnes, they attyre thēselues with one selfe same habit; the definition of the one, not much disagreeing frō the nature of the other: So that to this end an ancient Father sayd, That Adultery was nothing else, but a curiosity of an other mans pleasure; the one alie∣nating the spirit of the patient from the knowledge of salua∣tion, and causing him to take appetite to those things, wher∣of the ignorance is wisdome, and the practice damnable, ma∣keth him the disciple of the father of lyes, subiect to the Prince of darknesse, the first inuenter of those mysteries of hell: the other changeth his body, which ought to be the member of Iesus Christ, the temple of the holy Ghost, into the member of an harlot, and habitation of vncleane spirits: both of them be bad, very fit to corrupt youth, to seduce it to the stewes of Antichrist, where there is somewhat to please both those intising humours: for what doth more resemble the curiosity of Magicke, then the charmes of hallowed Agnus Dei, of the Transsubstantiation? to the characters of Soccrers, then the marks of the beast, deciphered in the book of Reuelation? A great part of this deuillish Art bewrayeth itselfe by auricular confession, imitating the forme of inter∣rogatories, registred in the decrees of Buchart, Bishop of Lib. 9. cap. 5. Wormes. As touching the pleasure of the flesh, where may a man find the exercise more free, the excesse more enormous, then within the great Babylon, where the bodily lust hath no lesse sway, then the spiritual: Where haue bin inuented these
sacred Canons, which do not only with the Council of Tole∣do, Dist. 3. C. 4. Is qui non habet Caus. 12. q. 1. c. dilectis∣sionis. permit concubines, but also commaund and ordaine the community of wiues with Plato, and of goods with the Ana∣baptists? Behold these two rocks, which, as wel as ambition & couetousnes, ouerwhelme the faith of many by lamentable shipwrack. This is the course, wherin lately the Earle of Laual ouerthrew himselfe, to the great griefe of those, who hoped hee would one day succeede to the piety and vertue of his predecessors: but these qualities are gifts personall, not he∣reditary, as the name & temporall goods. After that he had languished a long time in these diseases, possessing both his spirit & his flesh, there was also marked in him diuers symp∣tomes and signes of an euil successe; and among other things, was perceiued a fact direct cōtrary to that which S. Luke de∣scribes: for hauing past to change the ayre in Italy, a country which is not thoght very good for those persons that be most Act. 19. 19. wholsome and whole, he did not refuse all kind of pleasures for his body; & besides, made prouision of mortall receits for his soule, buying at a high rate, writings, like to those, which the disciples of the Apostles cast into the fire, notwithstāding they were of great value, so soone as they did imbrace the christiā faith at Ephesus: by which purchase, he declared very well, to be more disposed to take place in the Temple of the great Diana of the Papists, thē to haue preserued that wher∣with it pleased God to haue honored him in his true Church, who condēneth those detestable curiosities: and in the end, the Apostem beginning to grow & gorge forth the venome contained in these his two letters, in which he propoūdeth di∣uers questions, not so much as to receiue light of his doubts, wherin such diseases had tane away both his desire & vnder∣stāding: but because after a iust refusall of a verbal conferēce made vnto his vniust demaūds, being addressed to those who vnderstood that resolutiō which he had already taken, he had need thē of some other mask to end the Catastrophe of his Tra∣gedy, instead of extreme vnction, & funerall preparations of his religiō dead in his soule long time before, dissembling in the mean time this spiritual death toward these, who did their indeuour for his preseruatiō, as appeares in matters of estate, who cōceale, for certaine dayes, the death of their great Prin∣ces:
but seeing he could not so wel coūterfet the voyce of Ia∣cob, but that the hands of Esau did discouer him: neither was he able himself to support any longer the pestilēt smel which his neutrality did breathe forth amōg the liuing & the dead, betwixt the preaching of the Gospel, & the Idolatrous masse, but that he was forced to discouer his maske. And hauing trāsported himselfe to the Couent of the Capucians in Paris, he burted solemnly his religion, accōpanied with many exor∣cismes, abiurations, confessions, pentiencies, and such ceremonies: which did serue him no lesse to his obseques, thē did the des∣perate painting & attiRes to Iesabel, which she did take in the instāt houre she was to be cast Forth of the window to break her neck. They had great desire to adorne the lamentable pompe of the poore young Earle, by some pray, which they thought to haue caught on our professors: and to this effect, after the refusall of the verball conference which he deman∣ded, the Iesuits had perswaded him to aduise in that same in∣stant vpon the said doubts, with diuers persons in diuers pla∣ces, hoping that in diuersity of stile, they might incoūter cer∣tain differēces of beleeuing in those that should answer: but not finding one iust subiect on our part, to fal in any such in∣conuenience, but rather to alienate him frō the wickednes of the corrupters of his youth: We supposed nothing should di∣uert vs frō putting to light, the obiections made on the one part, & the answers giuen on the other side; to the end, that cōFerring the one with the other, euery one who hath eyes to see, may vnderstād, that those which wil not know that which is, should imagine to thēselues, to see that which they see not; which be the two kinds of blindnes, wherwith God by his iust iudgement doth punish those that forsake the spirit for the flesh, the truth for vanity; the light for darknes, the Sauiour of the world, for the son of perdition: neuerthelesse, we hope, God willing, that those, who haue not much edified Christs Church by their life, shall farre lesse ruine the same by their death, seeing that their voluntary separation from our cōmu∣nion, doth no other thing then ease vs frō the necessary trou∣ble of cutting thē off frō our society; no more then the wind, which driueth away the chaffe in the ayre, easing thē which in the meane time are about to clense the floore. Farewell.
The first letter of the Earle of La∣uall, to his master D. Telenus. SIR, I am to render you exceeding great thanks, for the receiuing in so good part, the newes of my returne: but if any other hath noted the con∣trary in you, that hath bin against my intention & mea∣ning, who haue nothing in more respect, then to serue you, and not in any sort to offend you. These faire in∣structions which pleased you to giue me, haue brought into me a great ioy and contentment, imagining with my selfe, that they haue proceeded frō a person of such learning, as you be; and that beare mee such good will, as to loue me: the one, knowne to the whole world, the other beleeued of me with a great satisfaction. But this discourse, which it hath pleased you to propound, touching the manifest difference of 2. Religions, hath moued in me a desire to learne more of you, who hath left in me such a taste, that I desire rather to make the demaunds of an ignorant, then to be made wise in any thing by your answere. I will rather intreat you to in∣struct me in the controuersies, then to strengthen mee in my beleefe. And first, to shew me, if the visible Church hath remained any space of time in her purity, and how long? or if she hath euerso remained; or if she hath had only that quality of purity since Caluins time? Secondly, if ye hold for constant and firme, the heads of Religion, that were debated & resolued vpon, in the soure first generall Councils? Thirdly, if the calling or sending be necessary to Ministers, and of whom had Caluin it? Fourthly, if the sacred Scriptures interpret
them, then euery one is capable for the vnderstan∣ding thereof. Fiftly, all the Heresies that haue bene confuted, doe wee not hold them iustly and well ouer∣throwne? Sixtly, if we receiue the Fathers as witnesses only of matters of their time, and as Historiographers, or not? Seuenthly, if the inuocation of Saints be euil, because it steales away the honour, which is due vnto God: or if it be superfluous and to no purpose, because they vnderstand vs not? Eyghtly, if all bodies bee circumscribed or not? I pray you now, not to an∣swere so subtilly, that I cannot vnderstand you, lest perhaps, you may distrust, that some other, and not my self haue made them: as you may iudge, that the order and the stile cannot proceed but from such an ignorant person as I: so also, the subiect and matter is concey∣ued in my spirit, by writing of that, to which, for the most part, there is need of no other answere, but your nay. I craue your pardon for disturbing you from your graue and waighty affayres, to learne me the A. B. C. and am, and shall be more then any person, Your most affectionate and bound disciple, to serue you, LAVALL. D. Telenus Answere to the Earle of Laualls first Letter. SIR, I prayse God with my whole heart, that in the end he hath put in your mind, this iust & right re∣solutiō, as to keep one eare for the truth, the which
being in this world, as in a strange & for raine country, or as it were imprisoned by the father of lyes, incoun∣ters more enemies that accuse her, then of aduocates that defend her. I know her accusatiōs by those questi∣ons, which it hath pleased you to demaund of me: your modesty requires, that I receiue them, as from the part of an ignorant: but it is a long time since I learned, that the most profound Doctors of Sorbon could not bring forth more better, nor more beautifull. Neuertheles, I reioyce to behold you to take on the quality of a disci∣ple, that binds your conscience to delay all reuolting at least, vntill that time, that sure knowledge shall teach you both the reason & the groūd therof: but I beseech you to pardon me, if my answers surpasse a little the li∣mits of yea and nay, which your letter hath prescribed me, considering, that there requireth a little more time to draw a stone out of a pit, then in casting of it in; and that the center & the circumference of an answer, well made, is not only so much the wil of him that makes, the demaund, but principally the need he hath to know & vnderstand it. Also I perswade my self, that ye vnder∣stand not the name of disciple after the maner of the Pithagoreans, that alledge for all reasons & answers, the yea and the nay of their master: a style, which for the present is not fitting but to the disciples of the Pope, of whom only selfewil holds the place of all reason & au∣thority. And although you desire to be rather instruc∣ted in the controuersies, then fortified in your beleefe: and that you perceyuing so clearely, that such answers, vpon doubtfull and intricate questions, should serue meerely all, eyther for the one, or for the other, and would increase in you, rather the number of your
doubts, then lighten the darknesse of your ignorance, by the light of that same knowledge, which consisteth not in the simple affirmation or negation, but in solide and necessary demonstration. Such was the opinion of S. Austen praysing Nebridius, which hated greatly a short answere to a great question, iudging him that knew not how many things might and ought therevp∣on bee spoken, was not worthy to haue propounded them. And since that the almighty God would not permit that I should remayne neere your person, vntill that time, that your age should bee more capable of more exact instructions: I thought, notwithstanding my farre absence, I was bound to repayre that breach, that in taking vpon you the title of a disciple in your letter, you haue honored me in that, which sometime I inioyed: and hauing not since changed any thing, ex∣cept my dwelling, and not my affections to continue my seruice towards you, I should bee thought vnwor∣thy of your good will and kindnes, if I should content mee, after the maner of Trumpets, to haue giuen you courage by my former letter, without bringing now the helpe and succour, which you craue against the as∣saults of your doubts. The first Question, or rather doubt, which you demaund of mee, is this, If the Church visible hath re∣mayned any certayne time in her purity, and how long? Or if she hath remained continually? Or whether shee hath this purity since Caluins time? To them then who assault you, and that make no other Buckler but of the Fathers, they shall suffer me to answere to this question by the mouth of Eusebius, or by Egysippus, who is more ancient then Eusebius;
and very neere to the age of the Apostles themselues, who sayes in his History ecclesiastical, that the Church hath remayned virgin-pure, chaste, and whole, so long as the Apostles did liue; and after the generation of those, who had heard that heauenly wisedome with their owne eares, then errour entred, and tooke possession within the Church: but to others that de∣sire instruction, there is required a more particular an∣swere, lest they should thinke, that wee desire rather to cut the knots, then to loose them: I say then, that this purity is to be considered, either in regard of the doctrine, or good life; and that both the one and the other is in the Church, according to the condition and measure, which is assigned to her, during the space of her residence heere on the earth: 2. Cor. 11. in the which estate, as touching her head, who is Iesus Christ, she is euer pure; but not altogether pure in herselfe: for seeing euery member of the same is subiect to fayle, as well in doctrine, as in life, and that wee knowe her heere but in part; the body which is composed of these members, cannot bee Ephes. 4. 7. wholy pure and perfit: and to consider the body of the Church, without her members particular, whereof shee is compound, were as much, as to transforme her into an Idea Platonica, only the Prophets and Apo∣stles, by a vocation, and speciall prerogatiue, and by an assistance and helpe immediate & extraordinary of the holy Spirit, were exempt and free of all errour in the doctrine, the which in this respect, and by good reason, is the true and onely rule of all purity: and according as the Church drawes either neere, or is far distant, the measure of her purity increaseth or decreaseth: and
when she is called pure, that is, either in respect of her head, or in regard of a part thereof, which is receyued in the heauens, which they call the Church Trium∣phant; or, rather in regard of the end shee aymes at in this world; euen so, as they call a house, an edifice, which is but yet in building, and before it be complete and ended. And like as the purity of the Church is subiect to alteration; euen so is her forme or externall behauiour, in respect whereof, they call it visible: for although she remayne euer visible in her selfe, yet so is it, that she is not alwayes visible to others, especially to those that haue not the eyes which be requisite for the seeing of her; as the Sunne it selfe is not to be seene by Heb. 18. 38. Apoc. 12. 14. Math. 2. 13. a blind man: and the Almighty, for the preseruing of her from her persecutors, retyred her sometimes to the wildernesse, to secret caues and dennes, euen as he did withdraw his Sonne Christ Iesus into Egypt, to preserue him from the rage of Herode: And then shee became inuisible, but not to God, neyther to herselfe, but only to the eyes and iudgement of the blind world. I say then, that the Church militant hath euer retained that measure of purity, which the holy Ghost hath communicated to her, not only since Caluins time, but the Apostles dayes, euen to vs present this day: As also the sayd measure was much different & diuers in sun∣dry times & places, the which vndoubtedly did moue the ancient Fathers, to compare the Church vnto the Moone, which sheweth her selfe sometimes of more, otherwhiles of lesse light, as it were eclipsed, and hides herselfe altogether, as it were, from the world, without danger notwithstanding all this, either to be lost or scat∣tered, as well appeared in the Church of Israel, in the
time of Ely the Prophet, where there was a Church of seuen thousand, that did not bow their knees to Baal, which was not perceiued there externally. If your pre∣tended teachers shall not graunt vnto me, that which heretofore is alledged, I shall cause them, by the autho∣rity of Bellarmine, to deny the purity of their owne Ro∣mane Church, and after this maner I will proue it: The Church that may altogether bee compounded of vnfaithfull persons, wicked and reprobates, can haue, neither puritie in her faith, nor in her life. But so it is, that the church so described by Bellarmine, may be wholy composed of such people: therfore she can haue no kind of purity. The Assumption is proued and made cleare in his booke of the Church, in the last Bellar. li. 3. cap. 2. de eccl. Paragraph, where Bellarmine saith, that is the definitiō of the Church, according to the which, some be of the bo∣dy, & not of the soule thereof, hauing no internall ver∣tue, and being as it were, the haire, the nayles, and cor∣rupt humours of the body of man: and of such sort be the Infidels, wicked and reprobates, as Bellarmine him∣self expresseth them, who may make external professiō of faith, cōmunicate to the Sacraments, & subiect thē∣selues to the Pope, which be the 3. essentiall conditiōs and only necessaries according to this Cardinall, for to be in the Church. By the same Authour, I will argue againe after another maner. That which may be destitute of fayth, hope and cha∣rity, cannot remaine in purity, yea, rather may lose all. But the church according to Bellarmine, may be voyd of al those qualities: therfore she may lose al her purity. But if any shall reply, that Bellarmine adioynes, that the sayd vertues are to bee found neuerthelesse in the
Church. I aske, whether they be of the essence of the Church, or not? If the first, wherfore sayes he in his de∣finition, that they be not necessary? But if the second, how can a Church without faith, hope and charity, bee thought pure? Learne then (sir) by these two arguments, as by two marks, or rather ensignes, the purity of the place, where those people would lodge you: neuertheles, this is that Annal. tom. 6. an. 484. §. 4. & tom. 7 an. 530. §. 5. Church which Cardinall Baronius maintaynes and de∣fends to haue neither spot nor blemish. Wheras ye write & desire, that the time may be she∣wed and marked, in the which errours and vncleannes haue entred into the Church of Rome: surely, this dis∣course would prolong too much my letter, which you desire me to make short, & would importune more by her prolixity, then it should instruct you by her vtility, more proper to a history then to doctrine. Is it inough, that a poore Hydropique should beleeue to be sicke, & to haue need of phisike, when he is so swolne, that he is almost in danger to burst, although none can precisely mark & shew him the houre when as his liuer began to be consumed? Surely, while as the fire is in the house, the water within the ship, the enemies within the town, the Wolfe within the fold, those that hope to preuent the danger, or rather to preserue them be more aduised and circūspect, then those that wil beleeue nothing, vn∣lesse they shew them at what time, & how that is come to passe, and who busies thēselues in searching the cau∣ses & the beginnings. we know, that already in the daies of the Apostles, the mystery of iniquity began to work 2. Thes. 27. Acts. 20. 2 it selfe, which S. Paul foretold, that after his departure, there should enter rauenous wolues among the flocks; & in that night, after the husbandman had sowne the
good seed, behold, the enemy also did sow the Tares. Mat. 13. 25. Sur. tom. 1. die 8. Ian. Bar. Tom. 9. Anno. 805. §. 3. The Antichrist was not begotten in one day. This Beare was not so soone licked, and put in form, as he of whom speaks Surius & the Cardinall Baronius, who of a wilde beast, became a reasonable creature, made him∣self also Frier in that same instant, after he had prostrated himselfe before the relikes of a certaine Lady, and ha∣uing beside entertayned the Nunnes of the Couent. The Romance Beare ought to be some other thing be∣side, then a simple shorne Munke. Your second demaund is touching the 4. first general 2 Councils, to wit, If we hold for certaine, that which was there treated and resolued? I answer, that those points cō∣cerne either the doctrine, or policy of the Church: those then be collected in the Symboles, composed in the said Councils, and wee hold them for true, so farre as they are agreeing to the holy Scriptures. In this here we will vse the liberty which Bellarmine takes, after the maner of Pope Gelasus, saying, That in the Councill of Conc. Chal. de Laicis cap. 20. Praef. in lib. de Pontif. Calcedon, there is something good, & something euil, and that wee may receiue the one, & refuse the other: and in another place he dispenseth with himselfe, to re∣proue in the same maner the Council of Constantinople, for hauing attempted somewhat, that did not please the Church of Rome. Behold then, how he handles these two of the first 4. generall Councils: for the rest iudge, if ye please, which is most reasonable, to submit themselues to the Coūcils, because the Pope doth ap∣proue them, who maintaines himselfe to be aboue thē; or because the Councils haue submitted themselues to the word of GOD; the one, which is taught in the Church of Rome; the other, in our Church.
The third question is, Concerning the sending of the Mi∣nisters, 3 if it be necessarie for them, and of whom Caluin had it? I answer, that it is necessary; and that Caluin had it of the Church of Geneua, & of Farel his predecessor, who had also his of the people of Geneua, who had right and authority to institute & depose Ministers: for so decla∣reth S. Ciprian, saying, that the people obeying to the Lib. 1. Epist. 4. commaundements of God, should separate themselues from a wicked guide, and not to meddle with the sacri∣fices of any sacrilegious Priest, cōsidering that the said people haue chiefe authority to make choyce of wor∣thy persons, & to reiect the vnworthy. This was so pra∣ctised by the people of Geneua, and in diuers other parts of Europe, where in these latter times they did forsake those sacrilegious Priests, and sacrifices of the Pope, for to establish faithful Ministers & proclaimers of the gos∣pel. And to be short, the reformed Churches had their calling & sending, partly from God, and partly frō their people, and partly from the Church of Rome: from God, as the chiefe cause; from the people, as by lawful instrument. frō the Church of Rome, as by a corrupt instrument. God gaue the essence, and the forme inte∣riour to this sending: the reformed Church gaue the testimonies & approbations, and the exteriour forme: the Church of Rome hath added thereto, abuses and corruptions, which our succeeding Ministers haue re∣nounced. The fourth question is touching the interpretation 4 and vnderstanding of the Scriptures, to wit, If euery one be capable of the vnderstanding of it, interpreting it by it selfe? I answere, that if by this capacity, ye meane a na∣tural faculty of man, & by the vnderstanding, a know∣ledge
to saluation: so far off is it that euery one is capa∣ble to the vnderstāding therof, or to purchase this intel∣ligence by his study & trauels: but rather herein all be naturally blind and foolish; and it is necessarily requisit, that which our Sauiour Christ did to his Apostles, ope∣ning their vnderstandings to conceaue the Scriptures, should be done to all them, which desire to vnderstand them wholsomely: for as the bodily light cannot be re∣ceiued, but by eyes corporall, that be open; euen so, the spiritual light of the Scriptures cannot be seene, but by the spiritual eyes of faith, which God opens to his own elect, in giuing them so much thereof, as is necessary for them to saluation: in doing whereof, he works often∣times by degrees, as he did with the blind man, spoken of in the Gospel, whom he lightned by little. Whoso∣euer Mark. 8. 24. be the meanest of the world, vnderstand these pas∣sages, which defend the bowing downe before Ima∣ges: who commaund to giue the cuppe of the Lord to all: which beare also, that this is the docttine of de∣uils, for to forbid mariage, and the vse of certain meats, &c. The Gospel is not hid but to those who perish, and whom the God of this world hath blinded. This 2. Cor. 4. 5. sayes S. Paul. The fift demaund is, touching the confuting of he∣resies, to wit, If that we hold them not for well and iustly 5 Orat. 2. in Arria∣nos. 2. Tom. 3. 6. confuted. I answere, that these heresies refuted by the word of God, or as S. Athanasius saith, stoned by argu∣ments taken out of the holy Scripture, are well & iustly conuinced: for this is one of the vses, wherefore it was giuen by heauenly inspiration; neither hold we that for refuted or ouercome, which is onely done by the wit∣nesses of man, and by the authority of the Pope, who
doth not condemne heresies, but in seeming to bee an enemy to them, to the end the better he may establish his owne: as did Zophyrus, that by such slights wonne Babylon. The most ordinary and common argument of the Pope, for to refute heresies, is by the fagot, & the hand of the hangman, according to the Logick of the Inquisition of Spayne, and the practise of the Iesuites, their Apostles in the New found world, against the poore Pagans; notwithstanding that the scholasticke diuines maintaine, that the Infideis ought not in any The 21. 9 O art. 8. case to beforced to receiue the faith; yea, not after ye haue ouercome them in warre, and made them slaues. But in this there appeares to vs yet one of the confor∣mities of the pretended Vicar of Iesus Christ, with his master the cōmission which the one giues to his Apos∣tles, beares this; Go ye, teach all nations, &c. That which Mat. 28. the other giues to his, is, Go kill, massacre, poyson all people, who will not obey me. Now followes the sixt question, Of the authority of 6 the Fathers. The opinion of the Church of Rome is di∣uers vpon this poynt. There be that hold, that all the writings of the Fathers be true and authenticke, and it behoueth to maintayne all their opinions to be true, e∣uen Dft 9. C. uoli meis. to the last iote. This is it which the glosse sayes vp on the decree authenticke in the Church of Rome, without teaching of vs, how we may obserue this ordi∣nance, when the opinions of the Fathers bee contrary one to another. The more modest & best aduised saies, they should be esteemed for Historians, and witnesses of matters of their time. We say, that in regard of the questions of right, that bee in controuersy, the Fa∣thers 1 Cor. 13 9. haue bene, and should be esteemed for disciples of the trueth, and not for Masters, knowing in a part,
and prophesying in a part, and that they haue not com∣prehended the whole trueth, but only according to the measure of the grace of Iesus Christ: we esteem them for Instruments of God, where they haue spoken the Ephe. 4. 7. truth; but where they haue a little erred, in going out of the right way, we cease not neuerthelesse to hold them for the children of God, beleeuing that the heauenly Father hath couered their infirmities: neither doe wee despise the faire haruest of learning, that aboundeth in their writings, for certain cares of cockle, which are min∣gled with them: but we do hate those, who gather no∣thing but the Cockle and their errors, who defile and corrupt, as much as they may, by their Index expur∣gatorius, the good grayne, which is there, who preferre their Briers to their Roses, and in stead of concealing their owne shame, kissed it, and caused it to be reueren∣ced by the people. As for their testimonies in questiōs concerning the matter of fact, we accept them in things of their times, & that be of their knowledge, especially when it is well grounded and assured: for it shalbe pro∣ued, that they haue mistaken thēselues both in the one and in the other; and there is none, except the Prophets and the Apostles, to whom, by a speciall prerogatiue, pertaineth the condition of witnesse without reproof, Luk. 24. 48. Act. 1. 8 and free of exception. Otherwise, the writings of the Fathers, at least, those who write the History of their times, should be equal to the Canonicall Scriptures. I report me herein to the testimony of that great Cardi∣nall Annal. tom. 1. an. 34. An. 39. §. 22. Baronius, hauing spoken in one place, that the Ca∣tholike Church falles not at all times, nor in al things: yea, the holyest Fathers thēselues say in another place, that the Acts of the Apostles written by S. Luke, merit
more faith, then any authority of the Ancients; and in another place, that which the most true & sincerest wri∣ters haue reported of the Apostles, hath not remained in her owne integrity, without corruption. As touching The Inuocation of Saints, your seuenth question: I answere, It should bee reiected in regard of both the two reasons alledged by your selfe; to wit, as well, because it is sacriledge against God, as also, vnprofitable for vs: for to see, heare, vnderstand, re∣ceiue, & to heare the requests of all apart, al at one time, and in all times; this is a propriety belonging onely to God, and his Sonne Iesus Christ, from whom they steale his honor, & make the Saints to vsurpe his office, when one S. Iames, another S. Clowd, is called vpon in one same time, in a thousand places, from the East to the West, of a million of persons, for thousand and thou∣sands of diuers things: also, when they beleeue that the Saints can vnderstand, & are sufficient to satisfie & con∣tent euery one. And by this you may perceiue the abu∣ses of the Iesuites, who perswade you, seeing it is per∣mitted to aske the help of the liuing, that it cannot bee prohibited to call vpon the dead also, of whome wee haue as little certainty that they can heare vs, as of commaundement that we should reclayme them. Your last question, is, Of the circumscription of the body. To which I answere, that euery true body is circum∣scribed; and to be a body and not to be circumscribed, that is to say, limitted and bounded, imports contra∣diction: for if the dimensions be essentials to a body; and if it be necessary, that the dimensions be termina∣ble, which was neuer yet denyed, it followes then of necessity, that it is bounded and circumscribed: and if
this necessity accompanieth all bodies in generall, how much more, a humane body, or body of man, which is not Mathematicall, neither composed only of matter and of forme; but which is organick, composed of vn∣like parts & of diuers kinds? of which then followes, that those that take from him the circumscriptiō, to the end, to lodge him in one time & instāt in diners places: and insted to amplify the power of God, destroyes ther∣by both his verity & wisdome, his might and his God∣head altogether: His verity, in so much as hee should haue in him, yea & no: if that he might say of one selfe same body, that he is circumscribed, & not circumscri∣bed; one, and none; organick, and not organick: His wisedome, because there would be disorder and confu∣sion in his works: his power, because it should haue imperfection, to wit, a humane body, not hauing that, Didy. de Spirit. S. Virgil. cont. Sa∣bel. &c. which made her to be so. To conclude his Godhead, because the creature finite should be equal to the Crea∣tor, who is only infinite; by the which argument, the Ancients foresaw the Deity of the holy Ghost: but if they will say, that the place is not of the essence of the body, & consequently, that the one may be without the other: it must be demaunded, if the time is not as well out of the essence of the body, as a body may bee then without time? Conclude so, should not this be without time & without sence: if they reply again, that the hea∣uen, although a true body, yet it is not contayned by a∣ny place, that inuirons it without. The answere is, that for all that it is not exēpt of circumscription, being cir∣cūscribed by the limits of her proper greatnes, & forme inseparable frō it: and euen so, the bodies of the faith∣full, that while they shalbe transported aboue the hea∣uens,
which we see shal not be without their circūscrip∣tions, although it be that an other body compasse them bout, as the ayre doth vs below, or that it be that no∣thing compasse vs. I beleeue ye haue oftentimes heard this sentence of S. Austen, Take away the roome from a bo∣dy, August. ad Dard. and there shalbe then no part at all in them. We say with the said Father, that this circumscription agreeth with the body of our Lord, who is aboue clothed with hea∣uenly glory, yet not spoyled of his humane nature; nei∣ther can we read without horzor, that which the Pope commaunds to be beleeued in this poynt, to wit, That De conso∣crat. dist. 2. C. ego Bereng. he is handled by the hands of the Priests, torne and broken by the teeth of the faithful, sensually and carnally: Termes and speeches according to the Romane Church, must be ta∣ken precizely: for as Bellarmine teacheth vs, there is no Bellar. de Imag. l. 2 cap. 22. forme in speaking in the matter of faith more exact, thē that which they vse, who abiure an heresy: wherof fol∣lowes, that this maner of speaking by Pope Nicholas to Berengare, for the abiuring of his pretended Heresy, ad∣mits not the glosse adioyned to the margent; that is to say, whosoeuer should take these tearmes by the mea∣ning of the letter, should fall in heresie, worse then that of Barengarius. But what is this? sayes not your preten∣ded teachers, with a high & cleare voyce, That the glo∣rious bodie of our Lord may be eatē by a mouse, deuoured by a dog. Then behold, I pray you, how they circumscribe it, inui∣roning & bounding it in the intrailes of a filthie beast, which is the place and the lodging, which these honest Harbengers assigne vnto him. Behold, there is the faire Hellen of their doctrine, with whom they would make you inamored; shall you then receiue for principles of fayth, the bar∣king of such Cerbres?
You haue here my answers vnto your 8. demaunds, which you shall find more cleare then subtil, more gen∣tle then ingenious, more necessary then tedious: and if the desire of learning be as wel grauen in your heart, as it is represented in your letter, as a charitable Chri∣stian, I wil beleeue you, not withstanding the assurance of your friends & seruants, who in all parts publish & lament your reuolt wholly resolued on. I shallbe very glad, that this written answere to your letter, may be communicated to those, whom ye esteem most ca∣pable for the examination thereof. I am not ignorant of their ordinary replies. Also I know for the ouerthro∣wing of them, it shal suffice to apply therunto, the con∣clusions, which may be drawne from the principals, set downe by me: and to do them a little, & a little by de∣grees, it would exceed the bounds of a letter, and your owne ordinance and desire: but if there rests yet any doubt on these poynts, or others; & that the assurance which ye haue of my particular affection to your ser∣uice, and to your saluation, may make you desire the true light, rather by my pen, thē by the mouth of some other more neere vnto you: I shall esteem it for singu∣lar great honour, the commaundement which it shall please you to giue me: for to God it is not acceptable, that I should esteeme that voyage of Rome, or the aire of the Court, or the vayne hope of I wot not what, to haue so changed that naturall inclination, which I was wont in some other time heretofore to marke in you, that ye would enter into into a new Religiō, trauersing amids these mists of vncertain doubts & irresolutions, without any assurance in your spirit, of any receiued knowledge, with these remorses of conscience in your
heart, with a brain ful of doubts, which you say, to haue growne in you, euen while ye were writing vnto me. Herein you would resemble the sunne in March, which remoues the humours, without bringing force to re∣solue them: or to do as those, whom curiosity makes to taste of a drug vnknowne, the effect whereof cannot be knowne but by their death. No, no, I cannot beleeue it; I know what a poore Pagan hath heretofore taught Cic 1. Off. you, that it behooueth neuer to vndertake any thing, which is doubted to be iust, because that Iustice shines of her selfe by the contrary; all doubts shew that therin is euill: how much lesse then, those that haue bene lear∣ned in a better schoole, that whatsoeuer is done with∣out Rom. 14. 13. fayth, is sinne? and would they resolue themselues without this certainty to alteration, where they goe either to life, or to death eternall, if they haue any re∣mainder, I wil not say of godlines and Religion, but of honor & courage? And heereupon I pray the Father of light, who illuminates the blynd, who, whē he plea∣seth, Ioh. 11. 29. Mat. 13. 46. rayses the dead, although they were dead foure dayes, to open your eyes, to discerne well that Pearle, which they would bereaue you of, with the false and counterfeit drosse which they offer to you in exchāge, to open and perce your eares, that you might discerne the voyce of the Shepherd, from the howling of the Wolfe, and to touch your heart, for to arrest and stay you rather with his Sonne, who hath giuen his life for you, than to the sonne of perdition, who hath pursu∣ed the corporall death of your Predecessours, and now agayne conspireth and lyeth in wayte, by all the subtill practises and deuices hee can, for the spirituall death of your soule.
Surely, this is our honour and profit, and not that of Gods, when as he speaketh to vs, our shame & damage, not his, when as we disdaine to heare him, he can better passe our shame, then we can his grace. But aduise we ourselues, lest our cōtempt of his mercy kindle the iust wrath of his anger making himselfe to be felt, by afflic∣ting those, who in his speaking to them, reiected him. I cannot thinke without amazing (sayth the Prophet Dauid) Psa. 119 of the righteous iudgemēt, which thou shalt cause, & the great feare, wherewith all my bodie trembles as it were. These be the verses which your father (now departed) of good memory, had oftentimes in his mouth, whē as he heard speaking of such reuolting from the Religion, as master Merlin your late master told me. God graunt, that the remembrance of his death may helpe your life, in fol∣lowing that same verse, which this Psalme recommen∣deth to vs. I beseech you excuse my boldnesse, and lay the reason on your owne goodnes, who hath giuen it to him, who fearing lest abusing of it in a danger so pe∣rilous, should be construed a kind of treason, not only by your faithfull seruants, and true friends, but also by your self one day, when the truth, now smoothered in your spirit by the deceiuings of Sophisters, shall rayse it selfe, and according to his nature, shall obtayne to swim aboue falshood & vntruth. This shall be at that time, when as appealing from your selfe, to your selfe, I remit & promise to my selfe, the right vnderstanding of the publike cause, with an acknowledgement of my particular zeale, and so haue bene, and with a will to re∣mayne Your most humble; and most faithfull seruant, D. TILENVS.
The second letter of the Earle of La∣uall, to his master D. Tilenus. SIR, I thinke my selfe very much bound to you, in that you haue taken the paynes and the care, to an∣swere to the poynts, wherein I craued some light. You say to the first, which is of the purity of the church, that incontinent after the death of the Apostles, that it was corrupted: And Caluin referres himselfe to the Cal. lib. 4 sect. 3. ancient Church of S. Basil, S. Ambrose, S. Chrisostome, and S. Austen. This is in his booke of Institutions, and Lord Du Plessis affirmes the first eyght hundred yeres, who was the first that gaue mee the occasion, to read the History of that age. In another poynt, tou∣ching the sending of the Ministers, you say that Farrel had it frō the people: it behoueth then, that eyther the people there were Catholiks, or that they were instruc∣ted in the religion by some Doctor; & by consequence it is necessary, that a Doctor of the Religion procee∣ded the people of the Religion, & so without any sen∣ding or calling vnles it was extraordinary, or else from the Church of Rome. You alledge a passage of S. Ci∣prian, who sayes, the people obedient to Gods Com∣maundement, should seperate thēselues from a wicked guide, & not to meddle with a sacrilegious Priest. If ye receiue after that meaning, where he saies that the peo∣ple may discharge their guide, that is to say, a Pastor: wherefore also receiue ye him not in that which he saies, that the Priest sacrifices, & that shewes at least, that this was holdē certayn in those dayes. Finally, for what de∣fect or errour was it of the reformed Church, that it be∣hooueth,
that her pastors should haue their sending (as you say) in a part from the Church of Rome, as from an instrument corrupt? This is to do, as the Church of the Husseits in Germany, whereof all the Doctors for the most part, had their order of Priesthood from the Church of Rome, fayning to be thereof, at the least, as I heard it, of the greatest part of their owne country people: but whether that bee or not, it imports not much. Beside this, I demaund you, the way of saluati∣on being in all ages open, and our Sauiour Christ ha∣uing suffered for al them, who should apply vnto them∣selues the merit of his death, what doctrine, I pray ye, held they that were the faithfull, three or foure hun∣dred yeres since? And if you had beene in that time there, in what Vessell had you put your selfe, to haue arriued to the port of safety? Touching the Testi∣mony of the Fathers, you say, you accept of them, vp∣on the questions of the fact of the things done in their time. Saint Austin sayth, that he caused the Masse to be celebrated. This is a question of fact, and a thing done in his time. I abuse your patience, in detayning you so long, to read nothing that is worth your paynes, and I demaūd you no farther, but to assure you, that I am more then any person Your most affectionate and bound Disciple to doe you seruice, LAVALL.
The second answere, of the second letter, written by Telenus to the Earle of Lauall. SIr, I perceiue by that which it pleased you to write to me by the Gentleman coming to this place, that with my answere vpon your honest demaundes, yee are satisfied with that which I haue spoken cōcerning fiue of them, to wit, 1Of the authoritie of the foure gene∣rall Councells: the interpretation of the holie Scriptures: 2the the refutation of Heresies. 3The inuocation of Saintes, 4the cir∣cumscription of Bodies: 5The doubtes which remaine, be concerning these three, 1Of the puritie of the Church. 2The sending of the ministrie. 3Of the authoritie of the Fatherst. Touching the first, yee pretend contradiction, as ap∣peareth in that which I haue spoken, that the purity of the Church did not continue, but for the time of the Apostles, and whereas Caluin enlargeth it to continue three hundreth, and Lord du Plessis to eight hundreth yeeres. I answere, if so be that ye consider rightly of my letter: ye shall finde it is not I that pronounce the sentence, but Egesippus and after him, Eusebius and Ni∣cephorus: and that my intention is to put that sentence in your hands, only to close the mouths of those who estourdissis & deaffes you with their sturre of the Fa∣thers: But for the chief poinct of the question, & for your instruction, I haue answered, altogether other∣wise, and largelie enough, to the which ye replie no∣thing at all, the substance of my answere is, that the Church militant hath retained euen to our time with∣out interruption, the measure of puritie which the holie Ghost hath giuen her: But to haue reserued this
purenesse, it followeth not, that she hath conserued nothing which is not pure: or that the inuentions of men, or the ordinances of the Popes doe make parte of the puritie, no more thē Hydropsie makes part of the health of a mans bodie, although it be therein contai∣ned and inclosed. Euen as the health of mannes bodie consisteth not in a poinct indiuisible, also neither ma∣keth the puritie of the mysticall bodie of the Churche militante, and compassed with her infirmities, as well the faith as in the life; & as they call a man whole, who neuertheles is not without some euill humours in his bodie, comparing him to a sicke patient, fast tyed to the bed, and consumed with the pocks. So doe wee call the Church, that was nerest to the Apostles pure, in regard of the ages following, in the which the my∣sterie of iniquitie was conuerted in the ministrie, or rather into the kingdome of wickednes and Idolatrie, the one and the other is a noysome humour in the bo∣die of the Churche, but the one is in secret, and the o∣ther in publike, the one in seede, and the other sprin∣ging vp, the one in the parts indifferents, the other in the noble partes: the one a scabbe, the other a sprea∣ding cancre, the one proceeding for lacke of know∣ledge, in those who were come from heathē custome, the other in lacke of conscience in them, who would from Christianisme, bring vs to Paganisme, Epicu∣risme and Atheisme. Touching that which I haue answered to your de∣maund, concerning the calling of the ministerie, and especially of Farrell, who had it of the people, suffici∣entlie authorized to geue him the same, according to the testimonie of S. Cyprian. You answere two things First, that it is necessary that a Doctour of the religion 1
go before a people of the religion, for to teache them. 2. the second that by the testimonie which I alledge, forth of the said Father, it apeareth, that in those times the Priests sacrificed. To the first poinct I answere fo∣wer things. First that in which you say that it ought to be done, it is done when the order is in his entier: But that in a generall disorder and confusion, such as was the Popish in the time of the reformation, all the formalities of order, should no more be required, then they may be obserued. Secondly that the Doctors sent by God ought not 2 at all times to acknowledge the cornet cappes, the for∣ket mires, neither their triple crowns. And that those that first reuealed the byrth of Iesus Christ, was ney∣therPriest of the law, neither pastors of the Churche, but Pastors and shepheards of the field: So the Here∣ticks Origenists were discouered, and refuted by a wo∣man, while as the Pope of Rome, the pretended head Tom. 5. an. 399. s. 19. 20. of the Churche was sleeping as Baronius him self con∣fesseth: God seruing himself somtimes of instruments very contemptible to effect his work, in confounding his enemies, by the goade of an oxe, in the hād of Sam∣gar, by an hammer in the hand of Iahell: by the chaft∣blade of an asse in the hand of Sampson, by a stone, in the hand of Dauid, against Golyah. Thirdly, such like proceedings hath bene before times approoued, euen before the destruction of or∣der, 3 Theodor. lib. 16. 23. & 24. to wit in Edesius & Frumentius, preaching the E∣uangile to the Indians, without being sent or called: also in a poore woman a slaue, who planted the same in the kingdome of the Iberians. Fourthly, that by the propre confessiion of diuers 4 and many Doctors of the Romaine Church, yea euen
Cardinalls, disorder was verie great and extreame in the said Church, and that shee had neede of reforma∣tion, as well in the head as in the members, as well in the Faith as in the maners. Beholde in the Frier Onu∣phrius this notable apothegme of Pope Adrian 4. re∣peated & confirmed by the pope Marcell. That ther is Oauph. In vita marcil: lib. 2. non vi¦deo q̄uōmo∣do quolocum hunc altissi∣mūtonent sl∣uri possunt. I see not how those which hold this high place can be safe. no meane to be Pope, & to work his saluation: shall we beleeue that he who cannot make his owne, hath anie care of ours, and of that of the whole Church. As touching that where ye say that it is a great fault to the reformed Church that it behooueth that hir Pa∣stors had her sending in a parte from the Churche of Rome, as from a corrupt instrument: I answere, that my letter beareth not, that it is necessary of right; but that this was found wanting in our first pastors: this was not any want, but to acknowledge the fault to amend it, our chiefe perfection consisting to acknowledge & to correct our imperfectiōs, seing we be neither Ana∣baptists who acknowledge not the Churche, where there is a great & notable want in maners, neither Pa∣pist, who maintaineth that their Church cannot erre in the faith, an error, or rather a receptacle, couertour & goulf of al the errors of the world, which carry away with it not only the feeling of the disease, but also the hope of their healing. He that furnished to you this point, should consider, that in throwing it against the Church reformed, he might verie well retorque∣ted against the Romane church, in the which we finde the Popes thēselues to haue bene made by instrumēts very corrupt: & among others the Pope Simmachus was cōfirmed by King Theodorick who was an Arrian, Theod. le. ior. lib. 3. leauing to speake of those that were rather monsters then Byshops or men, hath giuen the sending or cal∣ling
to the whole race of their Hierarchie. And as cō∣cerning the feminine Papesse Iane, ye haue learned in your voyage that in Rome, they holde not the whores there for corrupt instruments, & by the testimony of Cardinal Bellarmine, the magistrates sin not, in assignīg Bell. de a miss. in grat. & sta∣tum pro 2. 18. Beron, tom. 9. Ang. 26. & verse 54. to them to haue a quarter within the Cittie, for theyr dwelling, albeit he knowe perfectly that they would abuse it to an euill purpose. The Clergie of the holy citie, not being so superstiti∣ous as were they of Grece, in the time of Theodorus Stu∣dites, who said that it was a dāgerous thing for the soul of a Frier to haue but one beast of the feminine kinde. And to the second point of your Reply, I say, that wee avowe that there was sacrifices in the time of S. Cyprian & that there shall be sacrifices to the consum∣mation of the world. But yet that concludes no thing for the Sacrifice of the Masse, pretended reall, propi∣tiatorie for the liuing and for the dead, for their sinnes paines, and satisfactions: good to coniure stormes, to heale diseases, to winne Battels, to purge the great crimes to draw the soules out of purgatorie, to finde things lost, &c. The word sacrifice is taken some∣time for the whole office and diuine seruice: Saint Paul saith, that he sacrificed the Gospel. And he called Rom. 15. Philips 3. sacrifice the faith of the faithfull, also their prayers to God, their almes for the poore, their collecting for the Ministerie, the offerings that were made to the ho∣lie assemblies, and from whence they tooke the Eu∣chariste, was called Sacrifices: & this is one of the oc∣casions, for the which the name was attributed to the holy Supper. The same answere may serue to your last Reply. As touching that which I spake of the testimonie of the Fathers: whereon you conclude,
seing that I accept then on the questiōs of fact in mat∣ters of their time, I ought thē accept the Masse, which S. August. witnesseth to haue caused to be celebrated in his time, I say that the same equiuocation which is in the word of sacrifice, is in the word of Messe: albeit the vsage of this heere, is farre more new in the Chri∣stian Church, then that was of theirs. In diuers Fa∣thers, it is not found at all, & onely but touched in S. Augustine, & that but in a writtē work which the most learned holdeth to be counterfeit: & that alwayes in a farre different signification than it is taken for nowe adayes. I counsell you to take it into that same sence which S. Augustine doth, by the proper confession of of Bellarmine, (that is) Promissione for one dismissing, and that you giue one fare well to the Masse, which is called in Lattine, Missam facere missam. Touching that newe question, which you make in your letter: to wit, seeing that the way to saluation hath beene open in all Ages: to all those who will apply vnto them the mirrit of the death of our Lord. What doctrine (I pray you) professed they who were of the choosen number, three or foure hundred yeeres since: and if I had beene in those dayes, in what vessell should I haue cast mee into, for com∣ming to the port of saluation. I answere that the great Doctor of the Elect in all Ages, is the holy Spirit: for they are taught of God, Iohn 6. ver. 11. as witnessed Iesus Christ: and all their doctrine in all times is that of the olde and newe Testament: which neither Sathan, neither his Vicar the Antichrist, could euer destroy. Of this doctrine, God hath alwaies reuealed as much as was necessary for thē to saluatiō; whether they did read by themselues, or that they vnderstood it by o∣thers:
you haue an notable example in the Historie of S. Barnard, who being a little while before the time which you set downe perceiuing the corruptions of In the life of S. Barnard neere the mids therof. his time, at the very houre of his death (rempted by Sathan) he clensed himselfe of that filthinesse, confes∣sing that he could not obtaine saluation by his merits, (which was the doctrine publiquely taught in the Schooles at that time) neither pretending it but by grace: declaring that our Sauiour possesseth it by a a double right, by the inheritage of the Father: and by the merit of his Passion, and that contenting him∣selfe with the one, he gaue him the other, if you desire a more particular clearing of this question; see the Book of the Cathologue of the witnesses of the troth, and you shall finde that there hath beene no age so darke, wherin the troth hath not spread some beames amids the smoakes which arise out of the bottomles pit of Rome: And if God had giuen me life in those times, I beleeue assuredly, that he would haue giuen me the grace, either to abstaine from this Papisticall poyson; or to vomite it vp in time, preseruing me frō this infection: as hee preserued his children from the fire of the Babylonian Furnace. In briefe, I would haue done that, which afterwards I did in Spaine, and at Rome, and that which I wish you had performed in the same place, by the example of some of your fol∣lowers, making their prayers, and exercises of godli∣nesse in priuate, without defiling themselues with idolatrie, which is committed in publique: & to goe out of this Babylon in heart, though they found them as touching the body, there engaged. The totall summe is: to saile in the sea of this world which is vi∣sible, and materiall is required a ship visible and mate∣riall:
but to arriue at the hauen of saluation, as this port is spirituall, & in no wise of this world: so many enter there without materiall and visible vessell: that is, without being locally, and corporally in any cer∣taine materiall Temple, or visible Church. And this I maintaine is happened to many, during this great and generall reuolt, vnder the tyrannie of Antichrist, foretold in the Scripture; which like a long and furi∣ous tempest hath rent and strangely disfigured the ship of the visible Church, by the wines and waues of humaine inuentions which haue made many both Pilots, and passengers, for to loose the Loadstarre of Gods ordinances. But suffer mee I (pray you) Sir, to aske you, to what port, or hauen you pretend to attaine in this ship of neutralitie, in which you stay so long in the roade, betweene the two barques of Preaching, & the Masse, And if he, who iudgeth men such as he findeth them, calling you vnexpectly to appeare before his throne, finde you thus disposed, what sentence would you hope from his mouth. I beseech him with al my heart, to cause you to thinke vpon it, and so to prepare and direct you, rather by change of life, then Religion. In the meane time, I rest: SIR, Your most humble and affectionate Seruitour: D. TILENVS. FINIS.
