24336 S118699 99853906 19307
THE TRAVEILER of Ierome Turler, de∣uided into two Bookes. The first conteining a no∣table discourse of the maner, and order of traueiling ouersea, or into straunge and forrein Countreys. The second comprehending an excellent description of the most delicious Realme of Naples in Italy. A woorke very pleasaunt for all persons to reade, and right pro∣fitable and necessarie vnto all such as are minded to Traueyll. ¶ Imprinted at London by William How, for Abraham Veale. 1575.
To the Right honou∣rable and renowmed Ba∣rons, the Lord George, Hugh and Vitus, brethren, of the auncient house of the Schonburges. Lordes of Glaucha, and Waldenburge: Ierome Turler sendeth gréeting. RYght hono∣rable and renou∣med Barons, it is nobly written by Isocrates, that chil¦dren oughte too keepe their fathers Friends as diligēt∣ly: as they woulde their owne inheri∣tance. And your father of worthy me∣morie, loued my father deerely, & hee liued togither with your Grandfather many yeeres in the Courte of Duke George the noble Duke of Saxonie, and he was borne in the dayes of your Greatgrandfather of Austine Turler his father, who was then Consull of
Lesnick, which towne is vnder your in∣risdiction at this day, and whereof my Vncle is nowe at this present Con∣sull, one whom yee knowe ryghtwell. Wherefore, I haue often deuised with my self, by what meanes I might like∣wise continue this frendship, or rather testefie my dutie towards you & your familie, and if it could bee, how to en∣large the same, but hetherto I coulde finde no good opportunitie, for that yee were of so smal yeeres that wanted rather instruction in discretion, and good manners: then to bee occupied in debating of graue matters, and also yee had such instructers, and schoole∣maisters, that if yee followed their do∣cumentes there should redownd great honour to your selues, and great com∣moditie to your subiectes. Albeit then it be so, that ye haue no neede of myne admoniciō, either to the studie of ver∣tue & godlinesse, or towards the attai∣ning of good artes & learning: yet the significatiō of a mans dutie is wont to be acceptable to good natures, & such
especially such as are of Nobilitie, and descended of the greatest parentage. Thus staying my self vpō this groūd: I sēd vnto ye this booke which I haue written in the behalf of such as are de∣sierous to traueill, and to see forreine Cuntries, & specially of students. For since Experience is the greatest parte of humane wisedome, and the same is increased by traueil: I suppose there is no man will deney, but that a mā may become the wiser by traueiling. How beit if in any thing: surely in this most diligent circumspection is very requi∣site, by reason of the daungers that of∣fer themselues vnto traueilers, and the weakenesse of mans iudgment, which vnlesse it be then confirmed by vse & experience, and holpen by the counsel of others: it will soone be brought into errour. Here is moreouer to be added, that the youth and flourishing yeeres are moste commonly employd in tra∣ueill, which of their owne course and condicion are inclined vnto vice, and much more ernestly imbrace the same
if it be entised thereto, which manica time and often chaunceth in trauey∣ling: wherfore, mee thinkes they do a good deede, and well deserue of al mē: that gyue preceptes of traueyling. Which thing, althoughe I perceyue that some haue doone: yet haue they doone it heere and there in sundrie Bookes, and not in any one certeine place. And being a necessarie thing to haue all such matter in a readinesse as may well and profitably be said of one thing: I haue therefore handled that argument according to the definitiue Methode, as they speake in the schooles, and haue comprehended al∣so, as I iudge, in one Booke, whatsoe∣uer is necessarie for any to know con∣cerning the due taking in hand of tra∣ueill, and the prosperous perfourming of the same. I haue also adioyned vn∣to this discourse another booke, wher∣in I haue applied those preceptes of mine, vnto such things as seemed vnto me worthy the seing and obseruing in the Realme of Naples, which beeinge
none other thing then an example of such documentes as wee haue set down in the first Booke: I haue therefore made the title vnto all the whole wri∣ting, Of Traueill, and of the Realme of Naples, because no man shall thinke that I haue coupled contrary thinges togither. For although in deede it bee one thing to intreate of the Realme of Naples, and another thing to giue pre∣ceptes vnto such as meane to traueill: yet since traueiling consisteth of view∣ing & diligent consideratiō of things, and preceptes are lightned by exam∣ples: there is no iust impediment to the contrarie, but that I maye ioyne these twaine togither. And as I haue also admonished in the booke: I trust that this my labour will bee the more acceptable vnto some, for the same cause. For if they shall want preceptes they shall finde them heere in a readi∣nesse, and if they do require an exam∣ple agreeable to preceptes, they haue heere suche a one beefore their eyes which may both instruct their mindes
and also inflame them vnto the know¦ledge of most bewtifull sightes, and Antiquitie. Receiue in good parte, Right honorable and renoumed Ba∣rons, this simple gifte from mee, and therin my dutie and seruice towardes ye and your familie. Which if it shall please you to do: I wil do min indeuor to omit nothing which I may thinke to tende vnto the commendation and ornament of your house: and that my good will may be knowen vn∣to you hereafter, by some tra∣ueill of more graue ar∣gument. Fare yee well.
The Contentes of the Chapters contained in this present woorke. In the firste Booke. OF the Definition of Traueill, with a proposition thereto annexed. Chap. 1 What Persons are meete or vnmeete to traueil, and also of the causes of traueill. Chapter. 2. Howe a man ought to Traueill, and of the effect and commoditie of Traueill. Chap. 3 Of the properties of the foure principall Nacions of Europe, and how a man shall know, whether he haue profited by traueill, or not. Chap. 4 What thinges are to be considered in tra∣ueillinge. Chap. 5. How wee ought to make a choyce of suche thinges as wee see, or learne in traueil∣linge: and of the Traueillers Priui∣ledges. Chap. 6
Examples of notable men that haue tra∣ueilled. Chap. 7. Of such matter as is commonly obiected against traueillers, with a confutacion thereof. Chap 8 An answere to the principall Question, with a notable commendacion of Tra∣ueill thereto anexed. Chap. 9 ¶ In the second Booke. THe Argument and Contentes of the seconde Booke, with the intent, and de∣uise of the same breefly expressed. Chap. 1 Portus Baianus, commonly called La Pescina mirabile, a wounderfull Fishponde. Chap. 2 Centum cellae, commonly called Cento cam∣erelle, an hundred Chambers. Chap. 3 Mons Canita, the Hill Canita. Chap. 4 Lacus Auerni, the Lake Auernus. Chap. 5. Ciceroes Academie, Villedge, and hoat Bathes. Chap. 6 Cumae, the citie Cuma. Chap. 7 Baines. Chap. 8. A Well or Fowntaine in the Sea, and the way called Attellana. Chap. 9
Forum Vulcani, Vulcanes Merket place. Chap. 10 Puteolis, the Citie Puteolis. Chapt. 11 An Hill arisinge out of the grounde. Chap. 12. The Hill Pausilypus. Chap. 13. The Citie of Naples Chap. 14 Gardeines. Chap. 15. Welles, and Streetes. Chap. 16 The Merket place, and Churches. Chap. 17. Storehouses, Castles and Armories. Chap. 18. Antiquities, the Vniuersitie, and peculyar properties of the Citie, and People of Naples. Chap. 19. The Kinges Pittes or Pondes, and the Hill Vesuuius called now Summi, and of others. Chap. 20. FINIS.
¶ Names of the Auc∣thours and Bookes, that are cited in this Woorke. ANtonius de Ros∣sis, a Lawier. Athenaeus. Berosus. Bible. Blondus. Brissionius, a lawier. Cato de Originibus. Cicero. Ciriacus Anconitanus Claudianus. Clemens Alexandri∣nus. Copernicus. Dion Cassius Nicaeus. Dionisius Halicar∣nasseus. Erasmi adagia. Euripides. Festus Pomponius. Fort. quaestiones. Franciscus Senensis Furius Coriolanus. Homerus. Horatius. Ius Canonicum. Ius Ciuile. Iuuenalis. Landus Hortensius. Leander Bononien∣sis. Leges xii. tabula∣rum. Leuinus Lemnius. Liuius. Ouidius.
Plato. Plautus. Plinius secundus. Plinius nat. hist. scriptor. Plutarchus. Polibius. Pomponius Laetus. Propertius. Senecae. Seruius Sulpitius. Silius Italicus. Simon Portius. Strabo. Triumphus Neapo∣litanus. Thucydides. Varro de ling. La∣tina. Vegetius. Virgilius. Vorthusius. Vitruuius. Volaterranus. Xenophon.
¶ At Bononie, the firste Stone from the Citie, in the villedge of Marke Antonie de L'auolta, a Se∣natour, standeth this Monument to bee séene. Alia Loelia Crispis, neither Man, nor Wo∣man, nor Mungrell, neither Maide, nor younge Woman, nor old Wife, neither Chast, nor a Harlot, nor Honest, But all. Dyinge neither by Fa∣mine,
nor Sworde, nor Poyson, But by all. Lying neither in the open Ayre, nor in the Water, nor in the Earth, But euery where: Lucius Agatho Pris∣cius vnto her neyther Husband, nor Louer, nor Kinseman, neither Sorowfull, nor Glad, nor Weeping: this Mo∣nument beeyng neyther Heape, nor Piller, nor
Sepulcher, But all. He knoweth and yet hee cannot tell, for whom hee hath erected.
OF THE DEFI∣nition of Trauaile, with a proposition therto anex. ¶ The first Chapter. THis worde Pe∣regrinus which signifi∣eth a straunger or tra∣ueiler, in the Latine tongue in sundrye ages hath had sundry significations. For as Varro, and Festus Pomponius doe re∣port, ye auntient Romans called an ene∣mie by the name of Peregrinus a stran∣ger: and an enemie whom they cal now at this present Hostis, they tearmed thē Perduellis: in which significatiō it was thus written in the lawes of the xij ta∣bles: If you haue appoynted anye daie with a straunger you muste needes come. But that worde grewe out of the signi∣fication of a straunger, and continued so long in signifying one that was our ad∣uersarie, or tooke armes against vs, vn∣till it fell to a more gentle vse, the Ro∣manes
calling all such only by the name of Straungers as were not frée of the Citie of Rome, as beeing perhaps La∣tines borne, or altogither Aliens: and in this signification it is vsed at this pre∣sent. So that this worde Peregrinari to traueile, descendeth from the worde Pe∣ragrare to wander, which signifieth to traueyle in straunge and forreine Cun∣treyes, to wander in places aswell vn∣knowne as knowne out of a mans own Cuntrey, or Citie. Which may well be perceiued by the testimonie of Plautus, Plautus. where he sayth: I am a Straunger, that is to saye, borne in a forreine lande, I knowe not Sauria. &c. And likewise it appeareth in Cicero: which Citizens, (sayth hée) are better then Straungers, & Cicero. our owne Countreymen, then aliens, that is to saye, then those that come he∣ther to dwell, from other places. Here∣hence it commeth, that wée call strange trées, and straunge birdes, which eysher were brought vnto vs from other pla∣ces, or else were neuer seene amongst vs béefore. Likewise, straunge seruing of God with vnaccustomed rites and
maners which eyther wée haue boro∣wed frō other places for religions ake, or else are by vs lykewise celebrated & executed not after our owne custome, but after some rare and straunge order. After this maner that wee now speake of, the seruice and Sacrifice of the noble and great mother of ye Gods (who was called Cybala, and Rhea, and by many others names moe) also of Ceres, and Aesculapius, might well bée called of the Romans, straunge, eyther for that they were far set, namely out of Phrigia, Greece, and Epidaurus: eyther for that, looke howe they were vsed in those pla∣ces, euen so were they in Rome also. Moreouer, there is mencion made in the Ciuile lawe of a straunge Praetor, and likewise in ye Canon law of strange iudgementes. In Iustinians Code this The Code woorde Peregrinus a straunger, is som∣time takē for one that is brought away to another place, sometime for one that wandre abroade hauing no certeyne place of abode, wherein I haue noted this much, bicause I woulde gladly o∣mitte nothing that myght apperteyne
to the signification of that woord wherof wée presently entreate. All which mat∣ters béeing omitted, this is an auncient question, whether traueyling do a man  common uestion. more good or harme? which seeyng that it lieth more in the power of Fortune then in our owne good will and indus∣try, it may séeme that it is but a vayne matter to mooue any such question▪ But in very déede the truth of the thing stan∣deth otherwyse. For those that traueyl, all doo not commit thēselues to straunge and forreyne Cuntryes, to the entent E to consume there their time in idlenesse, to bée subiect as a mocking stocke vnto Fortune: but they haue sometimes iust causes that mooue them, and some pro∣posed C ende in respecte wherof they take in hande theyr traueyll. Wherefore, wée must distinguishe this kind of tra∣ueyll which hath some certeyne ende proposed, from that which is taken in hande onely for Idlenesse sake: Howbe∣it this last kinde cannot iustly bée called by the name of Idlenesse, since it hath some small delight, yet not tending at all to any ende, adioyning vnto it. For
true delight and pleasure, is sought for in respect of some ende, and whereas is no end, there also can bée no pleasure: for in all kinde of trauailing there is certen paine & labour contained, which repug∣neth against idlenesse tending vnto ver∣tue not to vice, insomuch that if wée doe vprightly weigh the thing: we shal then finde, that, Traueill is nothing else but a paine taking to see and searche forreine landes, not to bee taken in hande by all sorts of persons, or vnaduisedly, but such as are meete thereto, eyther to the ende that they may attayne to suche artes and knowledge as they are desirous to learne or exercise: or else to see, learne, and di∣ligently to marke suche things in strange Countries, as they shall haue neede to vse in the common trade of lyfe, wher∣by they maye profite themselues, their friendes, and Countrey if neede require. This definition who so marketh well, hée shall easely make answere to the question erewhile propounded. For hée shall not onelye discerne traueyll from sluggish Idlenesse, whilest he pla∣ceth
this worde, Payne, for the generall signification which the Logicians do cal Genus, but also comprehendeth manie other thinges, which the Rethoritians, and Logicians doe vsually handle by Thesis and Hipothesis, definite and in∣definite questions, whollye settinge downe béefore our eyes whatsoeuer ap∣perteineth to this present question. And whereas all kinde of paynes are not ta∣ken in traueilyng, therefore haue I cal∣led it, the payne to see and serch, wher∣to I adde these wordes, Foraine Lands, that I may distinguishe it from small and short iourneis, which enie man ta∣keth in hande for pleasures sake in his owne cuntrey. But let vs now procéede in order to the rest.
¶ What Persons are meete or vnmeete to Traueil, and also of the causes of Traueill. Chapter. 2. NAture teacheth vs, that Infants, A∣ged persons, & such as haue weake bodies, are of al others lesse meet to tra∣ueill. And although it oftentimes chan∣ceth through the iniquitie of the tyme, or some common calamitie thereto con∣straining, that persons of such age and condicion are enforced to traueill: yet are they vnméet for it, not being able to abide those paynes that accustomablye befal to traueillers. Like as Iacob mée∣tinge with his brother Esau, excuseth himselfe from traueylynge by reason of his young Children, who if they were weryed but with one dayes traueill, wold die wc the paines of so long a iour∣ney. And as touching old folke by proofe it is euident, that they are nothing méet to traueill: since ould age of it selfe is supposed to be an heuy burthen. Which the Poet Ouid hath done vs to vndeo∣stand
in the 4. Booke De Tristibus, th viii. Elege. And lykewise the noble Po∣et Homer, hath a notable sayinge of one sore laden with yéeres, which Verses may thus be englished. Such one art thou, who hauinge was he themselues, and fead their fill: Strait couch them downe to sleepe▪ this is the vse of Ouldmen still. Ther is also some difference to be had in ye sexe in respect of Decorum or cum∣lynes, & publique honesty: howbeit the same is not euery where accordinglye obserued. For the Dutch Wéemen, and Dutch wee∣men. those that inhabit the Ilands of Sealand, doe not only occupy buying & selling at home, more dilygently then yt men doe: but they traueil also vnto ye furthermost partes of the world to trafacque and oc∣cupy Merchaindize. And for so doynge they are neuer a whit the more discom∣mended, especially amonge their owne cuntrye folke. But in other regions of this our Europe, ye same custome is not obserued, as it was not also vsuall a∣mōgst our auntiēt fathers in foretime: as it playnely appeareth by example of
Medea, who when shée ascended into yt Castle and Temple of Corinthe, inde∣uoringe by all meanes to perswade the Matrones and kepers of the same tem∣ple, that they should suspect no éeuell, in that shee had bene so longe absent from her owne cuntrey, forsomuch as many haue cōmendably béehaued themselues being out of their owne natiue soyles: they gaue her no answer at all, that shée might vnderstand, that the wide wan∣dring of Wéemen cannot want suspiti∣on, Weeme Traueil. & bringeth some tokē of dishonestie. Whereupon the Tragicall and Comi∣call Poets, when they bringe in any far traueiling Woman, for the most parte they feine her to be incontinent. Sem∣blably, frantique and furious Persons are vnfit to traueill. For séeinge that they are distracte of their right wittes, they are accompted also vnméet to deale in all ciuile affaires. There bée lyke∣wise manie thinges moe, that stay sun∣drye from trauellinge, that whoso shall bée frée and voyd of them: then they are not forbidden to take ye labor in hand, es∣pecially in their youth, or at mans state
For these ages are not onely fit to en∣dure Labours, but those things whiche we sée, heare, and learne at those dayes are soonest fired in memory and longest continue. Which being so: it may then séeme straunge, that Plato, an excellent Mato. Philosopher, and a moste dyligent sear∣cher out of all thinges, hath especiallye apoynted that tearme of mans lyfe vnto traueill, whiche is betwéene fiftye and thréescore. For since at ye time al the strength of mans body beginneth to de∣creace, it séemeth very ridiculous for the age that then is weakned, and drawing apace to death to bée oppoynted vnto youthly labours, and as the cōmon say∣ing is, to heape one mischiefe vpon ano∣ther. But I lyke of Platoes opinion well enough. For hée forbiddeth not but that younger men also may traueill, being not otherwise possible but ye men wyll pas and repasse the seas, and other∣wise to, which he also affirmeth. Wher∣fore, such as haue time and leasure, and are desierous to sée the trades and ma∣ners of other peoples, bee wyll not haue prohibited by enie laws to the con∣trarie:
bicause that a desolate Citie, and such an one as knoweth not what is good or bad in forein countreys, is verie far from perfection. And whereas hee hath apointed that terme of yéeres to be emploid in traueill: the reason is this, for that hée would haue that time espe∣ciallye to bée béestowed in learninge of maners and searchinge other know∣ledge. For since at those yéeres mans iudgement is moste perfect: hée is the better able to discerne and iudge of mat∣ters, then in his youth, or old age, wher∣of the one is rather enclined to vice then vertue and is ruled by affection, the other beginneth to fail in memory, and cannot well vse the iudgement of the sences. And although hée forbidde not young men to traueill, wherby they al∣so may sumdeale profite in maners and knowledge: notwithstandinge foras∣much as that age is but of weake iudg∣ment, hee cōmitteth that care to men of ryper yéeres, not so much for priuat, as for common cōmodytie. For he willeth them at their retourne home, diligently to reporte vnto the Senate whatsoeuer
notable thing and worthy of memorye they haue séene in forreine cuntries, ei∣ther concerning lawes, or bringing vp, or appertaininge to knowledge, that if it might happen the same to be liked of, it might be receiued into the common wealth. And lyke as there bee many thinges that may hinder a man from traueiling although he woulde neuer so faine: so may there also bee diuers and sundry causes why a man ought to tra∣ueill, and those likewise sumtimes such whereof a man neuer thought before. For some men are naturally enforced to traueill, or rather to wander abroad after the maner of Cilenius, as those in whose natyuitie the moone is placed wt Mercurie in the nineth house, especially in a moouable signe, or soome other lyke iudgemente in this matter: and other some grow into that nature by custom. And others agayne traueill for gaines, and commoditie, as Merchantes: some for vertues sake, as those that apply the studie of good Arts: howbeit these also reape gayne and commoditie of traueill at their due time & season. For, Gain is
two fold, the one honest, which is ioyned vnto vertue and honor, & that which the students and professours of good arts do attayne. Likewise souldyeurs which a content with their pay, as S. Iohn saith: and Merchantes if they desire to waxe ritch after no dishonest sort. The other kind of gaine is dishonest, which repug∣neth wt nature and vertue, such as they do practize which giue themselus wholy to robbing and spoyling, who being vn∣mindfull of the law of armes, and of the Oth which souldiours take: do not spare nor abstaine from their friendes goods. That kind of gain also which is cōmon∣ly hatefull among men, as vsurers, and others that heap vp wealth by right or wrong with such gredines and auarice, that as the Poet saith, they run to the furthest Indians, and all to eschew po∣uertie, leauing nothing vnassaied wher∣of they may raise to themselues some gain. Which occasiō, as I suppose, mo∣ued Cicero, to distinguishe filthye artes from other, and to iudge nothing to bee profitable, which was not also honest. But principally wee must weigh and
examine vnto what ende wée take our traueill vpon vs. For since all thing is done for some ende, it were taken in hand in vaine, vnlesse it were also di∣rected vnto some certen scope. But as the Philosophers doe distinguishe, of endes & purposes: some bée séemely and lawful: other not séemely, or wandring. Moreouer, of those that bée séemely, one is tearmed principall and last of all, to whō when wée haue attained then wée at rest and séeke for none farther: an∣other is lesse principall or meane, which again is distinguished into subordinate, and not subordinate, but by any meanes hapning. Let this varietie of endes ther∣fore bee considered, and one of them seuerallye examyned from another, bycause this consideration bringeth great profite with it. For not onely na∣ture requireth vs so too doo, but also pro∣fit, and diligence, which are to bée sought in all things that wée do. For the princi∣pall ende is more profitable then the o∣ther, and there is more labour required in attaining him, then the residue. So then it is a thing importing more pro∣fit,
and it requireth also more traueill, to go into Italy, & to returne home againe passing well furnished with the know∣ledge of Phisicke or Lawe, then it dothe to vnderstande how the Venetians go∣uerne their common wealth, or what is done at Rome vppon their Saturnalia feast dayes. Fridericus Furius Coerio∣lanus whom I vsed familiarly during my continuance at Louane, telleth an excellent Historie in a certen Booke of his, and bicause it teacheth ye same which wee declare in this place: I will not Note. spare to recite it. A certen gentleman of Naples requested of his kinsman which was a noble man and had the tuition of him, that hée might haue licence to go sée forreine Cuntries, vnto whom hys kinsman promised hée shoulde, if first hée would traueill to Rome which was not farre of, and there abide a certeyne time. The younge gentleman obeying his commaundement went thither, and afterwarde returned home, still calling vpon his kinsman that he might goe a greater iourney. But whē his kinsman perceyued that hée had taken no profite
by that traueill: said vnto him, Sonne, The Sum of Trauei∣lynge. you haue séene Medowes, Plaines, Hilles, Valleis, Earables, Woods, Fo∣rests, Fields, Springs, Riuers, Trées, Thickets, Villages, Castles, Cities, Beastes, Bathes, Galleries, Colosseis, Churches, Pallaices, Pillers, Images, Buildinges, Downefalles, Towers, Amphitheatres, Triumphall Arches, Baines, Stéeples, Vniuersities, Schooles, Gardeins, Conduites, Good∣men and Knaues, Ritche and Poore, Learned and Ignoraunt, and whatso∣euer may else be found within the com∣passe of the whole world: abide therfore nowe henceforwarde at home, and con∣tent your selfe. Thus that most pru∣dente Prince, did briefly recite whatso∣euer might bée saide in such a matter, and wittely set downe the right order and rule to traueill ouer the worlde, wherby hée might reprooue the abuse of traueiling. Notwithstanding a man maye by one labour attaine to diuerse endes. As for example, by traueiling into Italy, he may get the knowledge of Phisicke or Lawe, and vnderstand also
the gouernment of the state of Venice. Which when it happeneth in this wise, certen also it is yt the commoditie which insueth theron must néedes be the grea∣ter. Wée must also take heede that the commoditie bee good and honest which wée receyue by our traueyll. For these two poyntes are not in vayne knit togyther by wyse men, and many tymes there is an ouersight éeuen in common wealthes, vnder couler of profite, and commoditie. And the ver∣tue of honestie is such, that it preser∣ueth the bewtie of profite. So that they which seperate honestie from profite: they alwayes obtayne not their true ende, nor yet reape that commoditie which they ought to doe. But for as∣muche as in all humane affayres, wée must consider to what ende, and for what commoditie they are taken in hande: then ought wée most especial∣ly too bée myndefull thereof in traueill. For who so traueyleth in any other re∣specte, hée spendeth his time in vayne, consumeth his goodes to no purpose, en∣damageth
the health of his bodye, and daungereth his life, casting himselfe in∣to a thousand perilles, nothing profiting himselfe or others. ¶ How a man ought to Traueill, and of the ef∣fect, and commoditie of Traueill. The. 3. Chapter. THe ende of our traueill being deter∣mined, and hauing in our minde the hope of great profite which shall ensue to vs thereby, a man must so prouide for euerie thynge, that aboue all hée haue regarde to hys health, whether it bée of bodye, or soule. For hée that doth not so, but dependeth al vpō Fortune, be shal make God his enemy, hurt his con∣science, and expose himself to a thousand daungers. For immediatly he hath ope∣ned, as it were, a window vnto infinite mischieues, & hath gotten a most large The feare of God. fielde to offend in. But who so commit∣teth
hymselselfe vnto Gods kéepyng, shall bée saued through his protection, as saith the Psalmiste. And although many éeuilles and daungers lye in his waye: notwythstanding hée shall not bée moo∣ued. Hée shall also brydle hys affec∣tions: since the cheifest meanes to a∣uoyde sinne, is to auoide the occasion of sinne, wherein hée must employ great diligence, and preuent many imminent daungers by hys wisedome. So Tobi∣as, whē hée sent his sunne forth into Ra∣ges, Tobias. exhorted hym aboue all thinge to feare God, as the chiefest guide of his iourney, and all his affaires. Poetes feygne, that Aeneas was couered in a cloude by Venus, and diuerse other men also by other Goddes, thereby esca∣pyng not onely the sight of men, and al∣so sundrye perilles that they might haue incurred, thereby to declare that they bée safe from daungers, that are coue∣red with the might and power of God. Which thing likewise ye holy scripture testifieth in many places saying: They wente foorthe and the Lorde was with
them: and againe, the Lorde dothe know thy iourney, and thy Lorde thy God hath remained with thee, and thou hast wanted nothinge. The nexte care is, that hée haue regarde of hys body, that  doely lth. is to saye, to kéepe it sounde and in good health. How this may hée doone, preceptes of Phisitious do declare, and as farre as I am able to say in the mat∣ter: it consisteth in the due vse of the sixe things not naturall, as they tearme them, that is to witte, the Aier, Meate and Drinke, Fulnesse and emptinesse, Exercise and reste, Sléepe and Wat∣ching, and finally, Accidentes and mo∣tions of the minde. For hée that is of a weake constitutiō of body, cannot wel entende those things for which hée hath traueiled. And therfore he ought to haue a more diligent regarde hereto, for that the chaunge of Ayer, of Diet, & custome, doth easely bring with it some sicknesse, although the payne and  of the iourney do supply no cause there∣to at all. There be also two other things to hée marked by a Traueiller, name∣lye
to applie himselfe to the manners of other, and also to looke to his owne businesse with diligence: whereof the one is very hard for him to doo that hath no rule of himselfe, the other requtreth rather iudgement then will. Howbeit hée must néedes doe them both if hée will do well. For who so meaneth to liue in a straunge lande after his owne fashion, maketh himselfe a mocking-stocke vnto other, and neuer amendeth his owne barbarous & corrupt maners, althoughe hée see daily innumerable ex∣amples of vertues. Hée shall soone sus∣taine losse of his businesse that dealeth therin necligētly. It is after one maner that wée liue at home, and another that wée line abroade, and some nations are more gyuen to craste and deceite then others, which many haue tryed to their great paine. Wherefore wée must lyue warely among forreine nations, and take hide wée offende them in no case, being mindfull of the Gréeke prouerbe, , meaning that we must Note. applye our selues to the Manner and
Cuntrie, and yet haue regarde to our owne affayres, hauing alwayes re∣spect vnto honestie. In Clemens Alex∣andrinus is cited this verse of Heracli∣tus, thus to bée Englished. Many Cuntries tis good to see, Preseruing still our honestie. In which, as the same Clemens saith, is proposed an example of a Philosophi∣call life, where he saith yt we shuld go sée manye forreine nacions for knowledge sake, but not to ensue ye vices of strange Cuntreyes, that is to saye, hée admo∣nisheth vs to vndertake many iournies for intent to learne, still retaynynge the integritie of our maners, and condi∣cions. eware rruption. For although some cuntries cary a certen suspicion of lust and licentious∣nes: yet neuer to haue beheld any parte therof, but alwaies continently to haue liued in the same, is no small praise and glory. Let vs not therfore leaue any to∣ken of our owne fylthines in Forreyne Regions, nor let vs learne there any vile crime to bring home with vs into our owne cuntrey, but let vs insue ver∣tue
and exercise godlynesse in all pla∣ces wheresoeuer wée béecome. Which who so doth, through the power of God shall not onely escape the cruell Scylla and Charybdis, and contemne the most swéete sower alluringe Songes of the Syrenes: but lyke a most experte Pilot Syrenes Songes. that passeth vnder Sayle in the midst of the sea, shall as much as may bée auoide all quicksandes and perillous Rockes, the sworne Enemies of them that passe by the déepe. Thys also a Traueiler muste diligentlye prouide for, that hée lacke not his chiefe necessaryes, which the Logicians terme, Destinata, thynges apperteyning to his purpose, as vnto studye béelonge Bookes, and Teachers: vnto Warfare, Harneys, Weapons, Horses, Captaines, wc suche other lyke. So then, lyke as a souldi∣our cannot attayne his ende if hée lacke hys Weapons: neyther can a student if hée lacke Bookes, & if other also lacke other thinges necessarye for their vse, accordynge to the diuersitie of theyr state, and callynge. Finallye, thou
must indeuour by all meanes possible, to attaine to thy purpose and ende the ryght waye and order, omitting all vnnecessarie circumstaunces. For so shalt thou take lesse paynes, and all thing shalbée doone wyth more ripe∣nesse and better iudgement. For the The great force of Or∣der in all things. same truely is of so great force in all worldly and humane affayres, that vnlesse a man vse some good and com∣mendable order in performyng them: hée laboureth in vayne, or to lyttle pro∣fite. Wherfore, some haue written how a man shall béehaue himselfe in War∣fare, & of the whole order of warfare, as hath Vegetius: some haue taught how we should béehaue our selues in the stu∣die of Phisick or Law, or in other artes and Sciences, whereby a man may in shorter time attaine vnto them, & reape fruite and commodie out of them. The commoditie and profit of trauei∣ling is dispersed throughout and in all things of the world, and there is no hu∣mane action or trade to be founde, but it may bée bettered and holpen by traueil.
And ye I may say nothing of vile artes, are not all artes and trades according to the diuersitie of them, better exercised in one place then another? is not this thinge best handled in such a place, and that in another? which if a man be de∣sirous to learne, it were best for him to traueill thither, rather then lerne them at home of others whiche haue not per∣fectly learned them themselues. So in Germanie, Italie, Fraunce and Spayne, the art of Printing is much vsed, but a∣mong the Getes it is not knowne. And not onely cuntreys far distant hence, do practize other artes: but also those that be néere vnto vs. As the Arte of Prin∣ting is as much frequented in England as in Germanie, and Fraunce: in Ire∣land it is nothing so, and yet Ireland ly∣eth néere vnto England, and vnder obe∣diēce to ye same Quéene. The English∣men ar excellent archers, but the Irish∣men bee better, and more experte in swimming, excellinge all other nacions of Europe in running and diuing vnder water. How much good, traueill doth
to a Carpenter, Vitruuius teacheth: how much to a Souldiour Vegetius sheweth: how much to a Paynter or Keruer, the horses made by Fideas and Praxiteles, standing yet at this present in the Church of Romulus at Rome do testifie, with other Collossi, Statues, I∣mages, and Pictures, which there is no woorkeman beholdeth, but he wondreth at them, and departeth away more cun∣ning thē he came. I wil speake nothing of Merchandize, which is altogether, as it were nourished by traueill, and not occupyed somuch for honesty sake: as for commodytie and lucre. Let vs sur∣uey the studies of humanyty which are comprehended vnder the name of Phi∣losophy, & wée shall finde that in aunti∣ent times they were partly inuented & deriued from ye Egiptians vnto other na¦tiōs, & afterward brought into Europe, continuing also along while in Greece, from whence they arriued in Italy, and from thence were dispearsed abroad in∣to other Regions of Europe, as it were into Colonies, & places of lyberties wtin themselues. And who wyldeny yt there
is enie profite receyued by Philosophy, or that sumtime it flourished in Greece in such sort: that from al places men tra∣ueilled into that cuntry to be instructed therein, as it had bene to some faier, or mercate? which Plutarch wel signified, saying, that there were no men at all, if there wer not a sea wherby they might passe into Greece. For that graue & wise Philosopher, iudged that none could bée Philoso∣phers are onely men. called by the name of men, vnlesse they were instructed in Philosophye, for as much as wyt, and verteous furniture of the minde, maketh men, not the forme or figure of the Body. But now this in∣struction of wittes is quite taken away from Greece together with the empire, and it is to be feared, lest shortly also it be taken from other places whether as ye study of lyberall Arts are extended, & in stéed therof ye old barbarousnes come in place after awhile. Touchīg historis, & yt woorks of Poets, what shall I néede to giue any admoniciō? In whose books there be some suchthinge, which nether by eloquence of words, or construction
can bee expressed, neithe by dilygence of interpretours expounded, but that ra∣ther they require to bée séene with the eye. As when in Virgill mencion is made of certayne pictures, very lyuely expressinge the lineamentes of nature, which Aeneas béeheld in Didos Temple séeming to containe in them verye mo∣tions of mind, affections, and true teares indéede: the Poet therupon sayinge: Great grief bringes teares, and mor∣tal haps, make mortal harts to rue. That is to say, a man wold suppose, that those Images and Pictures had wept indéed, and that those paincted and counterfei∣ted bodies, were mooued with compasti∣on one of them towards another. Histo∣ries reporte, that Zensis & Parrasius the Painters, fell in contention for the ex∣cellencie, at what time the one of them painted Grapes so liuely that hee decei∣ned Birdes with them: the other pain∣ted a Shéet so woorkemanly that be de∣ceaued him that had deceaued the birds. So lykewise Prothogenes, and Apelles lines deserned to bee looked vpon, and
Cicero so highly commended the coun∣terfeite of Ephigenia drawne by the Painter Timantes yt he supposed that one example to bée sufficient frō which all Oratours and Poetes might take a president and patern to obserue Deco∣rum, and cumlynesse in expressinge af∣fections. The lyke is to bee iudged of Antiquitie. For what description of a∣ny place can bée so euident, or what in∣terpretacion so plaine and perspicuous, but ye béeholding of the thing it self doth far excéede it? And lyke as if wée reade enie thing that is obscure and intricate, wée vnderstande it muche better if wee béeholde some tokens and remnauntes of it, then wée can conceiue by the tra∣ueill of interpretours, or learne by a∣nye semblable coniecture: so lykewise the knowledge of the Antiquitie there∣of, is no lesse pleasant and profitable, which of it self is able alone to stirre vp honest wittes, and nourisheth the slu∣dies of good learning. Tullie glorieth in a certen place, that he founde out ye Se∣pulcher of Archimedes the Geometri∣cian,
by the engrauing of a Sphere an a Cylinder, which he sayeth hée shewed vnto his cuntrimen of Arpinum, which sepulcher was ouergrowē with bushes and briars, and much defaced, for that it was long since he died. And nothing in∣ferrior vnto these, haue bin founde also not much before our age, at which a mā may no lesse wonder. Hereof a suffici∣ent witnes is Raphaell Volaterranus, writing, that in his time in the way cal∣led Via Appia nigh Rome, there was A noble buriall. digged vp the body of a womā, embaul∣med wc precious oyntmēts, whole, vn∣corrupted, layd vp in a Coffin, and coue∣red with a Marble Stone, hauinge bée∣twéene her féete (as he sayth) a burning Candle whom the liquor of the oynt∣ment nourished, but suddenly went out as soone as the Marble coueringe was remooued: adding moreouer, that diuers supposed that it was the body of Tullio∣la, Tullies Daughter whom he loued Culliola. dearely. Witnesseth also the lyberalitie of Pope Nicholas the fift, at whose time lyued one Cyriacus Anconitanus, a
wonderfull searcher of Antiquities, not only concerning his owne cuntrey of I∣talie, but almost of all Europe, and of a great part of Asia and Africa, whereby hée tooke ye name of an Antiquarie, leau∣inge an euerlastinge renowme of his name vnto posteritie. Who vpon a time, when one demaunded of hym, why hee bestowed so muche labour in search of such matters: answered, that he would gladly raise some dead man to lyfe: rightly weighing how that many things are decaid and forgotten through proces of time, which might be restored by dyligence of traueilynge, and by in∣dustrie of learned men, preserued from iniurie of obliuion. Yea, what shall we say more, yt we shuld now haue no Cos∣mography at all, which contayneth the discription of yt whole world, nor Topo∣graphy, which cōprehendeth ye descripti∣on of certē priuate places: vnles it were graunted vnto vs through ye benefite of trauelinge? The auntient Cosmogra∣phers were of opinion, yt the earth was vnhabitable vnder the Equinoctiall,
as also that part of the worlde, whiche stretcheth out beyond the polare circles towards ye Poles. Which two positiō of theirs to be false: partly ye Nauigaci∣ons The proe of Nauiga∣tions. of the Portingales, do teach vs: and partly also those Regions whom the e∣leuation of the North Pole argueth to to lye without the arcticke circle, as are Gronlādia and Willappia, with other Ilandes lying neere to the frosen Sea, Wherin the Portingall Nauigacions haue not alonely done much good, but in other thinges also. For where as the auncient Writers by the difference of Noonetide shadowes, haue called some men Periscij that is to saye, tourninge shadowed, some Amphiscij double sha∣dowed, some Heteroscij single shadow∣ed: this haue they founde by their Na∣uigations to be true, and vnto the thrée partes of the world, haue found out and adioyned a fourth, namelye America, merica. which for the vnknowne bignesse ther∣of, they think to be an other world, bée∣sides many moe Ilandes vnknowne béefore. Whereby we are the lesse mo∣ued
to wounder at the Antipodes, or Antichthones, that is to say, those who, as Cicero hath interpreted, doo tread step for step directly against vs. For the Geometricall reason, sayth Coperni∣cus, proueth that America lyeth directly on the othersyde agaynst India Gange∣tica: the lyke iudgement is also to bee giuen of other regions of the Worlde. Likewise, there is no man doubteth but that traueill was the firste cause of the findinge out of Astronomie, since by it, firste of all the eleuation of the Poles was found out, and by that varietie of Horizons, & by them both the differen∣ces of ye dayes and nightes. But al these thinges beinge omitted, let vs retourne to nature, & vnto grauer studies. There is no man, I thinke that wyl deny, but that the searchinge out of the nature of The studye of Nature. thinges is most profitable, the same is performed by no meanes more effectu∣ally, then by traueill. As for example sake, Peaches which grow in that cun∣trey from which they tooke their name, are Poyson: but in Germanie they
are accoumpted amonge delicates and banqueting dishes, which ar both found by traueill. So likewise the Hemlocke that groweth in Germanie, hath not the same force which that hath that grow∣eth in Italie. Our Cuntrye of Germa∣nie knoweth not the Date Tree: The Date tree. howbeit it groweth in Italie, but for the moste parte withoute frute: and in Africa they abounde in such sort: that they make both meat and drink of the fruit. And to be short, other thīgs grow in other places, which in one place are of more force & vertue then in another, and they also of sundry and dy∣uers kindes, whose properties and qua∣lyties who so is ignoraunt of: is not worthy the name of a Phylosopher, much lesse of a Physicion, who ought to be vnskilfull of nothinge appertayning to the nature and diuersitie of thinges, places, and men. Yea, there bée fruits of sundrye Trées, who amonge the aunti∣ent writters are called after the names of them that founde them, that is to saye, of those that firste brought them
out of forreine lands and planted them in their owne. As ar Manlians of Man∣lius, Macians of Macius, Claudians of Claudius, as Plinie hath noted, and also Appians or Melapians in smell and bignes lyke Quins, because Appi∣us of the House of Claudia. graffed the same firste vpon a Quince. In lyke maner saieth Plinie, Decumian Peares and Dobellian, and Pompeian called teat or Dugge Peares, haue en∣nobeled their founders and firste plan∣ters, with many other fruites moe well nigh innumrable. So Lucius vitellius béeing Censor, brought the Nut Pistick first into Italy, and by the aucthoritie of Athenaeus and Plinie, wée know that Lucullus being generall of the Romane Armye, after that hée had vanquished Mithridates and obtayned the vpper∣hande: was the firrst that euer brought The Che¦rie tree. the Cherietree out of Cerasus a certen place and libertie of Pontus called nowe Zephano, into Italy, cal∣lynge also the Fruite thereof Cera∣sus a Cherie, although some bee of
another opinion. It is also euydent out of ye same Athenaeus, that Citrions wer neuer séene nor tasted of within the re∣membraunce of Plutarches Grandfa∣thers. Neither yet were they common∣lye eat in Plinies and Theophrastus time, but onely estéemed and regarded for teir pleasant smell. Traueill is also profitable vnto the tudy of e Law. studie of the Lawe, for that the lawe is more dilygently reade in one place then in another, wherin also are some things of such sorte, that eyther for the ouldnes of them, or for lack of vsing of them: are almost vnknowne how they were vsed in foretimes, vnlesse a man sée them practized before his face. For so haue I my selfe séene in Padua in the Praetors Pallace, the handlinge of these two poynts, Lapis turpitudinis, and Cessio bonorum, whereof mencion is made in the glosse vpon the Ciuille Lawe: with sundry other of that kinde, which Bris∣sionius hath noted in his books which he wroate of antiquitie of the lawe. It is also a great parte of wisdome, to know
the nature and maners of men, & how to liue with with euery body. Therfore whoso traueilleth with discretion, and conferreth strange kingdomes with his owne natiue soyle, béesides the many∣folde commodities which I haue hether∣to recited: hée shall moreouer bringe a∣way this with him, the better to be able to discerne what is good and bad in his owne Cuntrey, he shall also know how to correct and amend eeuel maners, and to furnish himself and others with bet∣ter. Hée shall also haue more skyll how to entertain strangers, and vnderstand the maners of men more perfectly, and according to his affayres and dealinges with them, applie himself vnto them ac∣cording as the circumstance of time and place shal require. He shal know more∣ouer the easines or hardnesse of oportu∣nytie touchinge the méetest times, and fittest places, wherein to say or to doo a∣nything, none shall deceiue him in mis∣reporting of any thing, neither shall hée depende vpon other mens iudgement. For in that respect there be many very
bolde and importunate, especially if ther be none to controulle them: as there be lykewise some Aucthours to be founde, who ether for the great loue they bare to their cuntrye, or for goodwyll and af∣fection of them to whom they write, ei∣ther doo aduaunce or extenuate some thinges, that they excéede the credite of an history, and are altogether vnmind∣full of their duty. So that none can bet∣ter reprehende such then they, whiche haue séene the thinges whereof they in∣treate. It is profitable also to traueill a broade into strange Regions, were it but to saue charges of Houshoulde at Charge of houshould. home. For many there bée whiche vse sundry meanes and waies to increase their wealth. And if there be any thinge in the world that wyll bring a man in∣to consideration of his owne state: sure∣ly traueill wyll do it, wherein hée shall se all chaunces that maye happen to man, and the mutabilitye of fickle For∣tune.
¶ Of the Properties of the foure principal Na∣tions of Europe, and how a man shall know whether he haue profited by traueill or not. The 4. Chapter. BVt forasmuch as wee are fallen into discourse of the varietie of maners, and diuersitie of natures in men: I sup∣pose it were not done a mis, to declare the properties of some nacions. Not of all, for ye were a great labour & peculy∣arly béelonginge vnto them that haue written of the situation of the Worlde: or of the lyfe and maners of sundry na∣cions, as Strabo, Bohemus with others: but only of those ye are chief in Europe, that is to say, Germans, Frenchmen, Italians, and Spaniardes. These na∣cions differ sundrye wayes one from another, as, in gesture, gate, voyce, singinge, talke, meanynge, humanytie, conuersation, loue, hatred, affaires,
warfare, and other things. Wherefore, breifly to set down the effect of the mat∣ter, and to come to the purpose: the Germane hath ye gesture of a Cutter or The Ger∣mane. Ruffian, the gate of ye cock, a firce looke, a manlyvoyce, rude behauiour, variable apparell, and nothinge hansome. The Frenchman hath a soft gate, a moderate The Frēch man. pace, a milde countenaunce, a pleasaunt voyce, a redy toongue, modest demea∣nure, immoderate apparell. The Ita∣lian hath a slow gate, a graue gesture, The Ita∣lian. an inconstance countenaunce, a lowe voyce, an hasty speache, magnificall bée∣hauiour, vndecent and vnséemlye ap∣parell. The Spaniard, a commenda∣ble The Spa∣iard. gate, maners, and gesture, a proude looke, a flexible voyce, a fine speach, ex∣quisite apparel. The Germans howle in their singinge except the Dutchmen, who of them all doo singe indede, the Frenchmen doo recorde, the Spani∣ardes grone, and the Italians bleat lyke shéep. The Germans are harshe and harde in their speach, and simple. The Frenchmen, quicke, and proude: the
Spaniardes fine and glorious, the Ita∣lians graue, and craftie: the Germans are coumpted good in counsel, ye French∣men rashe, Spaniardes crafty, and Ita∣lians clenly. Towardes straungers the Germans are roughe and inhospitable, the Frenchmen gentle, the Spaniardes curteous, and the Italians diligent. In conuersation the Germanes are impe∣rious and intollerable, the Frenchmen milde, the Spaniardes warie, the Itali∣ans prudent. In loue the Germanes be ambitious, the Frenchmen inconstant, the Spaniardes impacient, the Italians ielous. In hatred the Germans are re∣uengers, the Frenchmen threatners, the Spanyardes continuing in their purpose, and the Italians secret. In af∣faires the Germanes are painefull, the Frenchmen carefull, the Spanyardes wakefull, the Italians circumspect. In Religion and handicraftes the Ger∣manes are excellent aboue other, the Frenchmen in ciuilitie, the Spaniardes in Nauigation, and ye Italians in lear∣ning. And to bée short, and not to touche
euerie perticular poynte in these Nati∣ons, the Italians and Spanyardes are wyse béefore the déede, French∣men in the déede, and Germans after the déede. There is also great difference béetwéene these Nations in the loue of wéemen, for: The Frenchman loues the nimble wenche▪ that trippes and treades apace, And aptly footes the measures fine, to daunce with comly grace. The Spaniarde doth more his minde in bewtie braue delight, And ioyes withall to please his lust euen with his ladies sight. Th' Italian, with a fearfull wen∣ches loue is best content, That often shunnes the pleasant game of loue, least shee be shent. But shee that with a brasen face her maister can prouoke: Shee is the loue that in the Ger∣mans hart beares greatest stroke. These properties, as they are by iudg∣ment of many ascribed vnto the men of he pro∣ties of weemē. those nations, so are there also peculiar qualities in the wéemen wherein they
differ one from another, whether you speake of their stature and forme of bo∣die, gesture, courage, gate, diuerse stu∣dies, loue, faith towards their husbands, diligence towardes theyr Children, hu∣manitie towardes all men: or whether you talke of theyr wittes and vnder∣standing. For the Italian wéemen for the more parte apply the studye of good learning, especially if they bée of any noble familie, which the Spanish wéemen doe not, and the Frenchwée∣men doe more studye the knowledge of forreyne toongues, then of learnyng. The Germane wéemen doe scarce knowe anye other language then their owne whiche they sucked from theyr mothers breastes, much lesse any good learnyng. So the Spanish wéemen are proude in theyr apparell and goyng, the Italian wéemen graue and neate, the Frenchwéemen lyght, the Germane∣wéemē variable and foolish. And vnder∣stand, that I speake héere of the higher Germanie, for the Dutche wéemen are more ciuile, more graue in goyng, and
more giuen to learne straunge tongues then of any other nation, by reason of the traficque of Merchādize which much flourisheth among them, hauing Eng∣land, Scotland, Fraunce, and the higher Germany neare neighbors vnto them, and are gouerned by ye King of Spaine. The Italian wéemen are passing wise, the Spanish wéemen for the more part are dull of wit and vnderstanding, the Frenchwéemen are simple rather by nature then custome, the German wée∣men aplie all their wittes rather vppon houshould affaires, then any thing else. The Spanishe wéemen vse painting to excessiuely to commende their beautie with all, the Italian wéemen vse the same somewhat lesse, the Frenchwée∣men verie little, and the Germane wée∣men painte their faces béefore they bée maried onely, but not all of them, & that which they doe is the to th' intent to de∣ceiue their louers. But as touchinge their honestie: that I commit to other mens iudgement. There is moreouer a certen difference béetwene these Nati∣ons
and all other, in those things which wée haue béefore specified, wherby they are discerned from all other Nations, which profiteth very muche to the fra∣ming of a mans iudgement, as the sun∣dry nations of Italians are: Ligurians, Tuscanes, Spoletanes, Latines, Cam∣panians, Lucans, Calabrians, Salentines Apuliās, Samnites, Marca Anconitans, Flaminians, Aemilians, Lumbards, Ve∣netians, Forli, and Slauonians, & these differ al not only in spéech, proprietie of language, & pronunciacion: but in ma∣ners also, & many other wayes. Which thing, how true it is: Fortian questions Fortian questions. do declare, whervnto whoso ioyneth the booke that was written by one Landus Hortēsius, set foorth without any name, hée may bée conuersant among the Ita∣lians with great profit and honour. Hetherto haue I shewen the causes and effectes of Traueill, and noted the diuersitie of the principall Nations of Europe. Hereafter I meane to declare how to know whether a man haue got∣ten any profit by his traueill or not. And
although it bée harde to iudge of euery perticular, since diuerse traueill for di∣uerse causes, & some studie one art some another: neuerthelesse who so weigheth diligently the meanes whereby euerie Art is learned, hee may gather it, by ve∣rie playne and euident argumentes. For as no man accoumpteth hym to bée experte in Physicke that hath no know∣ledge in simples: or that hée is a good Carpenter or Caruer, that cannot dis∣cerne a Doricke Picture or statue, frō a Corinthiā: so nether can it be thought that hée hath well employed hys tyme and labour in traueill which hath not a∣mended and encreased by his traueill, the knowledge and skill which hee had béefore. As for example, if there bée Preceptes to be obser∣ued. one that is a politicke person, and bée a Counseller to any Prince, or in some frée state, and say that hée hath continued some space in Fraunce: & it bée demaū∣ded of him how many miles Fraunce, or Spaine is in length or breadth? what fortifications it hath? At what syde it is easie or harde to bée assaulted? Howe
manie great Riuers it hath that cannot bee waded? What is the chiefe force and vertue of the Spanyardes, and what of the Frenchmen? what is the greatest vice in both nacions? wherin doth the one or the other moste repast themselues, or take greatest delight? In what thinge the nobilitie of Fraunce doth differ from the nobilitie of Spain? wherein also the commons doe dif∣fer of both nacions, what are theire studies, and maners? what diuersitie is béetwéene the buildinges of both those cuntreys? which kinge of ether cuntrie is of greater power? After what maner the subiectes in both cuntreies shewe their obedience to their prince, or oppose themselues against him? How mutch the bondage of Fraunce is vnlike to the bondage of Spaine? How in those re∣gions the scarcitie of corne and vitaill maye bée eschued? what is the guise of Court in doth Realmes? and what prouision is made that in time of warre the Husbandmen sustaine no iniurie? If therfore hée can sufficiently
answere these demaūdes, then it is wel: if not, it is a great presumption that hée hath bestowed his time in other mat∣ters rather then by his traueill to know these things which it héehooueth a poli∣ticke person, or a Counseller to vnder∣stand, although ther withall he know al∣so what kind of Dauncing the French∣men, or Spaniardes do vse. For those things are chiefly to bée obserued which tende to the principall ende, not toyes and trifles or such things as appertaine not to the direct ende, although we may also haue some vse of them in other af∣faires. In fine, to conclude much matter in fewe woordes, the most certeine rule to knowe whether a man haue profited by traueiling, is, whether besides the things that I haue recited in this presēt Chapter, you diligently obserue what hée iudgeth in his familiar talke of the landes wherin hée hath traueiled. For hée that vnaduisedly derogateth anye thing from the dignitie and excellencie of forreine regions, without iust cause preferring his natiue Cuntrey béefore
those places: the same is ether ruled by affection, or of himself rude and foolishe, not beinge able to iudge of thinges ac∣cordingly. And where discretion lacketh there wanteth also choice: and where choice wanteth there wisdome is foorth a towne, wherwith all other thinges faill, and waxe woorth nothinge. ¶ What thinges are to be considered in tra∣ueilinge. The. 5. Chapter. ALthough it may bée sufficiently con∣ceiued by those thinges which wee haue set downe in the Chapters goyng béefore, what it béehooueth him to ob∣serue that meaneth to Traueyll with profite: notwithstanding I purpose to prosecute euerie thing more exactlye, imitating the example of Moyses, who most diligentlye discerned the differen∣ces
béetwéene Mountaynes, Hilles, Landes, Peoples, Townes, fieldes and Forestes, adding moreouer what is to bée considered in them all. For thus hee sayde to them whom hee sent to viewe the lande of Chanaan. When yée shall come vnto the Hilles, consi∣der the lande what maner one it is, and consyder the people that dwell there∣in, whether they bée stronge or weake: manye or fewe: the Lande good or bad: what Cyties there bee? Walled or not Walled: the soyle fertile or bar∣reine: wooddie or champion? So that there bee fiue principall poyntes too Fiue poīts o be consi∣dered. bee considered in euerie Cuntrey: the Name, Figure, Bignesse, Iurisdiction, and situation. To the Name belongeth The Nmae howe it was called of olde, and howe at this present, for oftentimes the names of Regions ar changed according to va∣rietie of time, and inhabitauntes. So Italy was first called Ianicula of Ianus, or of Noa who was called Oenotrius wherof the same was also called Oeno∣tria: after that it was named Camesena,
Saturnia, Appennina, Taurina, & Vi∣tullia, Hesperia also, and Ausonia, vntil at length it was tearmed by the name of Italia, Italie, whych remayneth to this presente, the occasions of all which names are partlye noted by Cato, and Berosus, and partly by suche as haue written the Historie, and described the antiquityes of the same Cuntrey, as Polybius, Halicarnasseus, and others. By the Figure I meane the fourme The Fi∣gure. and fashion of the Cuntry. So Sicile, is sayde to bée of a three square fourme and Critias in Plato reporteth of a certeyne Egiptian Priest, of whom So∣lon demaunded certeine questions con∣cernyng antiquitie, to whom hée an∣swered, that Countrey to bée of a thrée square fourme, out of whose toppe the Streames of Nilus are deuided. &c. There is also another distinction of Cuntries, and places. For euery lande, is eyther an Ilande, as Sicile: or Pe∣ninsula, that is to say, almost an Ilande called also Chersonesus, as Taurica Chersonesus, now called the lesse Tar∣taria
or Isthmus, that is to say, a narow land béetwéene two Seas, as Isthmus Corinthiacus, Corinthe in Greece, or else a mayne and continent lande, s Saxonie, Misnia, Thuring, as Cosmo∣graphers teache. By Bignesse I vn∣derstande Signes. the capacitie and widenesse, which is discerned in length and bredth of a Cuntrey: likewise in the compasse, boundes, and buttes, wherwith it is en∣uironed in respect of the Coastes of the world, and Peoples, Riuers, or Hilles wherevpon it bordereth. By Iuris∣diction Iurisdic∣ion. vnderstande, the rule, and maner of gouernment which is in that Lande which being diuerse amōg diuerse peo∣ples, and belonging rather to euery pri∣uate prouince or peculiar citie, then vn∣to whole regions: I meane to entreate of the differences of them hereafter in this Chapter. The situation of a Coun∣trey is eyther hillie or plaine, and the same againe either coasting, or inlande. Which diuersitie tooke beginning euen from verie nature, and bringeth with it sundry great commodities. For as the
same Priest in Plato teacheth: they that dwell vppon the toppes of the hilles are safe from fluddes, and drowning: and there is also an auncient conten∣tion béetwéene the Aegyptians, and Scythians concerning antiquitie, for that the Scythians saye they were first made, who dwelling in the higher places: are best able to abide the Colde, and stande not in feare that the Sunne set them on fiere, nor dreade the brea∣kyng in of the Sea vppon them, bée∣ing neuer able to rise vp vnto them to theyr anoyance. In the former Bookes De Republica, a certen Athenian asked a man of Crete (who had saide that the greater parte of the Cretens, had de∣termyned to make a Colonie abroade, and had commited the charge thereof to the Gnosij) whether that Colonie shoulde lye vpon the Sea side, or not. &c. There bée also other diuersyties bée∣twéene Regions, or soyle, and earth, all whyche Leuinus Lemnius the Dutch∣man, Leuinus Lemnius hath lately vttred in his woorke which he hath set foorth of the secret mi∣racles
of nature. And those thynges whiche wée haue hetherto admoni∣shed in this Chapter to bée obserued by Traueilers, hath Franciscus Patri∣tius Senensis also noted in his woorke, of the Institution of a Kinge and a Kingdome. But wée must vnderstand, that it is not sufficient to haue mar∣ked the differences of the letters, and woordes: vnlesse wée note also the ground or soile, Hilles, Riuers, Lakes, Ponds, woods, & the cities also in them. For some ground is barrein some fruit∣ful, which Moses willed his Surueiers to marke, which also the Athenian in Plato teacheth. So likewise some hilles brynge foorthe trees and some doe not, some ryuers abounde with fishe & some not. And most sure it is, that the Ge∣noans are muche destitute of these two thinges. The like also is to bée iud∣ged of wooddes, Lakes, and standyng Pondes, who for the diuersitie of trées and fyshes that are in them: are accu∣stomably praysed or dispraysed of Rhe∣tricians. The viewing of Cityes re∣quyreth
muche more diligence, for in them there are both publique, and pri∣nate woorkes to bée séene. Publique woorkes bée eyther holye, or profane. The holye woorkes are Cathedrall Churches, Minsters, Abbeis, and o∣ther Churches, wherof althoughe there bée some founde verye fayre manye tymes out of Cities: yet are they more commonlye in Cyties then in Vil∣lagies. The profane workes are pallai∣ces, Market places, fieldes, Theaters, Courtes, Schooles, Hospitals, Spittles for sick & diseased persons, Castles, Ar∣maries, bulwarkes, turrets, & all kinde of municion. Priuate woorkes I call such notable thinges as are séene in the houses of priuate men, and citizens, as Pictures, Gardaines, Fountaynes, or whatsoeuer else is worth ye seing, wher∣vnto also maye Potecaties Shoppes bée anexed, since for the most part they are priuate mens goods, as lybraries are the common wealthes, Howbeit it maye bee, that they may bothe bée∣long to the Princes reuenue, as bathes
doe, wyth many other things moe. And like as when we enter into considerati∣on of any Cuntrey, aboue althing it be∣hooueth vs to know the name thereof, & the cause of the name if it bée possible to knowe it: so muste wée doe also in the viewe of any Citie. So at Ianua in a certen Citizens house, these verses fol∣lowing are written vpon the name, and founder of that Citie. I Ianus, of religion, of peace, and God of right, Am he of old that built this citie braue that standes in sight. These three shall keepe the towne and (nephues) keepe these three in hand, Beleeue mee where these three shalbe exild, no towne can stand. And immediatly after: Phetiton ne∣phue to Ianus, father to Ligurius, who brought ye Egiptiā Colonies frō Attica to ye citie of Ianua, in the yeare after the fludde 450. Thus when wee haue vn∣derstoode the name and founder of ye Ci∣tie, wee must next haue regarde to the maner of gouernment. For there is one
maner of lyuing vnder a Monarchie, as Diuersitie of gouer∣ment. in Spayne, and in Fraunce: another in Aristocratie, as now in Venice, and in old time in Sparta: another in Demo∣cratie, wherwith ye Switchers preserue their lybertie and cuntrey at this daye. And although all Philosophers and stu∣dients of pollice, suppose that al kinds of gouerment may bee comprehended vn∣der one of these thrée, if the abuse as well as the right vse of them be weigh∣ed: yet experience teacheth it to be o∣therwise. For there be certen cuntries, Realmes, and Cities at this present, whiche are gouerned by the Kinge and the Nobillitie together, as Denmarke: and as it was likewise at Rome in the time of the Kings vnto the Tarquines: some by the King and commonaltie, as Persia: some by the Nobilitie and com∣monalty, as Florence, Siene, and diuers other Cities of Italie, the lyke whereof was practized at Rome after the expul∣sion of the Kinges, at Lacedaemon, and Athens: finally, some are gouerned by the Kinge, Nobylitie, and cōmonaltye,
as Germanie, and Polande. Which be∣ing knowne: wée must marke how in euery kinde of gouerment, the Empire is ether continued, or increased, or lost: and with what new lawes, officers, and Maiestrates, they vse to furnishe them∣selues when they perceaue their state to bée in perill. Which poyncte how full of difficultie it is: euery one knoweth, séeing as Cicero saith, it is the part of a straunger not to bee inquisitiue in a strange place, and not to be curious in a forraine common wealth. But truly he that studieth to doo his Cuntrey good, must néedes doo so. Last of all he muste bée very well acquainted with the ma∣ners The ma∣ners. and conditions of the men with whom he lyueth: not to the intent onely to aplye himselfe vnto them in that re∣specte: but also in diet and apparell, and all their maner of lyuing, or whatsoeuer perticular thinge there be that may in∣struct him in language, or behauiour, or help his iudgment, or serue him enie way yt may be profitable vnto mākind. I knowe there bée some that wyll
say that these thinges whiche I gyue in precept, are for the more part friuolous, since there is no one man that can ob∣serue all thinges, muchlesse he that ge∣ueth himselfe wholy to some profession, or studieth some other thing, for whiche he hath traueiled. I graunt it is true, nether writte I this to the ende that I woulde haue all men to obserue all of them, for a man must spende more time in one thing then in another, whiche I haue noted also before: notwithstand∣inge, whosoeuer hath traueiled for stu∣dies sake or for any other cause, maye somtime be so much at leasure, as to ob∣serue some other thinges that are profi∣table, and commodius for the societie of men. And albeit diuers things may bée necessary for diuers persōs, according to ye end which euery one proposeth to him self, & ye frute which he hopeth to reap of his traueil: notwtstanding I thinke this our writing wilbe vnto some right pro∣fitable. For why? our precepts ar gene∣ral, & may be applied vnto al trauel, whe thersoeuer, but chefly to ye which is takē
in hande for matter of state and polli∣cie, and which maketh men méete and fit to geue counsell, and to gouerne the common wealth. Who so hath propo∣sed himselfe any other ende, as a Phy∣sition, a Souldiour, or Merchant: hee may omit certen of these, & place other in theyr stéede. And it shalbe more pro∣fitable, that euery one weigh with him∣selfe the knowledge of what things wil most farther hym towardes the attayn∣ment of that for whiche hee traueileth. For hee that so doth, shall receiue largest commoditie thereof, and soo∣nest hit the marke whereat he shooteth, what euer trade of lyfe hée foloweth.
¶ How wee ought to make a Choyce of suche thinges as wee see or learne in traueilling: and of the Tra∣ueillers Priuileges. The 6. Chapter. YOungemen that traueill, muste bée admonished of this one thinge, that whilst they bée viewing althing, search∣inge, and learninge, they bée also mind∣full of their retourninge into their owne Cuntreye. For they that doo not so, they liue but for one daye, as the Prouerbe sayeth, and are but litle prouident for their owne welfare. For since in all places of the Worlde there are found both good and éeuell men, and there is no Nation so relygious and ci∣uile but hath some vices also adioyned vnto the vertues wherewith it is indu∣ed: so are the greatest and most hainous ownde amongest them that abounde
with most commendable vertues. For séeinge that good and éeuell stande in op∣position and contrarietie one to the o∣ther: it followeth yt one of them holde vp and sustayne another, and that the one cannot bee without the other, as what place were there for Iustice if there were no iniuries? for Magnanimitie if there were no fainthartinesse? for con∣tinencie if there were no lustinge nor intemperauncie? for health, if ther were no sickly persons? for truth if ther wer no lyes? for felicytie if there were no miserie? That Socrates in Plato sayde very well, how he much marueiled that Esope deuised neuer a fable, wherein God ioined the extremities of these con∣traries together in such maner that one touched the other, and the ende of one were the beginning of another. Wher∣fore, it behoueth a traueiller to bee cir∣cumspect that hée embrace not vices in stéede of vertues, not onely in that wée bée all more prone by Nature to vice then vertue: but bicause vices are often couered with names of the nearest ver∣tues,
and vertues also stayned with title of next vices. As for example, when wée call a man that vseth his ly∣bertie arregant: a modest man simple, one of fewe wordes ignoraunt: a good man wicked: a wise man craftye: the lyke whereof happeneth also in o∣ther thinges. And manytimes plea∣sures make a man not thinke on hys returne, wherewith mannie are tought as Fishes with a hooke, vnto whiche effecte those Meremaides are of much force, by whose swéete songes sundrye are intrapped vnlesse they stop their eares well againste their hermo∣nie: there bée also infinite other allure∣mentes accordinge to the diuersitie of the Cuntrey. To these also this often happneth, that there are some forreine People so craftie and suttle, that when they perceaue a man to bée enamoured with their pleasures, they leaue no meanes vnassaid to detaine him lenger with them: chaunginge themselues into all fourmes and figures after the maner of Protheus, both to cosin hym
of his money, and as Circe did to Vlis∣ses mates, transforme him from a man to a beast. Wherefore, if therebe neede of wisdome in any thing: surely it née∣deth in this, which Homere also signy∣sieth in many places in the Odissea vn∣der the person of Vlisses. For such is the ignorance of mans vnderstandinge, the vntowardnes of his corrupt nature so great: that hée cannot discerne good from éeuel, vertue from vice, with out difficultie. And although wée graunt, that some offend wittingly, and deceiue themselues with the couloure of true pleasure or payne, as those doo that bée incontinent, whose minde and reason Incontinēt persons. while it striueth with desire iudgeth that to bée éeuell, which in trueth is ée∣uell: howbeit they want the perfecte knowledge, not iudginge so exquisitely as they ought, and indéede are caryed a∣way rather with opinion then iudge∣ment, so sufferinge their reasons to bee ruled by affection. For doubtlesse if they knewe the trueth as it is: they should not erre. Thus desire ouercum∣meth
reason with ignoraunce, and true knowledge is neuer ouercum by affec∣tion. But howsoeuer the case standeth, there is nothing better for a Traueiler then to bridle his lustes and affection himself, if hée be able. If not, the nexte is to vse the meanes and help of others, followinge the precepte of Hesiodus. Which Homere lykewise expresseth in the example of Vlisses, feininge that hee stopped his mates eares with waxe, that they shuld not be entised with sing∣ing of the Sirenes. But hée that will doo nether of these twayne, hee voluntarely séeketh his owne harme, & casteth him∣selfe headlong into all kind of lewdnes. And as touching repressinge his affecti∣ons: he shall doo it more easely and wil∣lingly, if hée think often of returning in∣to his cuntrey: as Homere writeth V∣lisses dyd, & by this meanes through his owne discretion he may withstande the allurements of sundry pleasures, & get the victory ouer all kind of naughtiues. There is an auntient complaint made by many that our cuntreymen vsually
bringe thrée thinges with them out of Italye: a naughty conscience, an empty Three hinges out f Italie. Purse, and a weake stomacke: and many times it chaunceth so indéede. But what is the cause thereof? for in those places of Italie where the studye of good Artes doth moste flourishe, the Aire is not vnholsome, the dyet such as euery man doth require, the men godly and vngodly, good and bad. There are séene also dayly many examples of ver∣tues and vices, in all sortes of men. It remayneth therfore, that the same hap∣neth by our owne voluntarye will and méere motion, that we liue so yt béeinge snared in ye toyles of vices wée sustaine los of godlynesse, health, & monie, that it is growen into a prouerbe amonge the Italians, Thedesco Italionato, Diabo∣lo incarnato: that is to saye, a Dutch∣man become in maners lyke an Italian putteth on the nature of the Deuill, and is apt vnto all kinde of wickednesse. Euerye Nation hath his peculiare vi∣ces which it béehooueth vs to know, but not to followe. To conclude we must so
line among forrein Nacions that when we returne home wée may frequent our owne Cuntrey guise if it bée good, not bringe home with vs vices for ver∣tues, ignorance for knowledge, naugh∣tines for goodnes, opinion for certentie, sicknes for health, or whatsoeuer els is wicked & execrable, both wt losse of time, and expense of money, and so to returne home with shame, and shame enough. And forasmuch as there bée manye and diuers anoiāces, wherat traueilers must make small curtesie: therfore are there many benefits and priuiledges by both lawes graunted vnto them. For strangers and traueilers acompted in the number of the Church and spiratu∣altie, and whoso hurteth them or their goods: are excomunicated, vnlesse when they be admonished thereof they make satisfaction. Likewise they that traueill Priuiled∣g for Tr¦ueilers. for religions sake are frée from payinge skot or lot. And all traueilers and stran∣gers haue frée lybertye to béequeath their goodes at their pleasure: and if a∣ny chaunce to die intestate, their goodes
which they haue brought wt them shall not appertayne to hym in whose house they lie, but they come to the Byshop of the same diocesse, either to bée deliuered vnto the next hèires, or to bée employd to godlye purposes. But if it chaunce that the Host detayne any of these goods ertune of ods pro∣ibited. in his handes fraudulentlye, he is com∣pelled to restore thréefold so much to the Byshop, enie custome to the contrarye notwithstandinge, or else he eseth the lybertie to make a testament, yea, who soeuer kéepeth away any parte of the straungers goodes that die, hée sinneth mortally, vnlesse he doo it to th' intent to deliuer them to the true heire, and is not to be excused by any statute, custome, or commaundement, as Hostiensis proo∣ueth at large. Moreouer, such as traueil for relligiōs sake, ought not to be trou∣bled or std for det in any place through which they traueil, nor to bée takē by oc∣casion or meanes of yt which Lawiers call stoppinge or reraih. Likewise, along iourny, takē in hand for matter of cessitie, may defer mariage. Last of all,
ye law hath also prouided for those ye tra∣ueil for studie sake. There is extant al∣so a constitution made by Frederick the Emperour, in Iustinians Code, where∣in hée graunteth vnto all that traueill to study: safecondit to traueill, and frée ly∣bertie to tary in any place, forbiddinge that in no wise they be troubled for the offence or det of another: permittinge them to choose béefore what iudge they wilbée conuented, shewing also the cau∣ses why it ought to be so. Wee must al∣so Friendly Priuileges. vnderstand that Schollars goods are exempted frō payments and exactions. Which point although it bée not expres∣sed in this constitution: yet by these words (Let them freely come and dwell) and by many other argumentes moe interpretours do gather the same. And this whole constitution is to bee vnder∣stoode of such Scholers as studye, and not of those whose skill and minde is more on their dishes then their Books, although their names be written in the Matricular bookes of studients, as they tearme it, by the testimony of publique
Notaries, and Apparitours. But this constitution is not written concerninge all Schooles, but only of such as are ap∣proued by thaucthoritie of great Prin∣ces, or longe continuance, as Baolus hath noted. There are extant also many titles of priuiledges belonging to Scol∣lars in ye Code writen in the time of the auntient Lawiers, as of the Priuiled∣ges of Schooles in the x. Booke. Like∣wise, of the professours of the Citie of Constantinople: in the xii. Booke. And at this present there bée sundrye noble Vniuersities of studentes, endued with many goodly Priuiledges giuen by the Byshoppes of Rome, Emperours and other Princes, with Franciscus Bolog∣ninus hath gathered together.
¶ Examples of Nota∣ble men that haue traueilled. The 7. Chapter. HEtherto wée haue sufficientlye in∣treated of such things as apperteine to the declaration of ye definition of Tra¦ueill: let vs nowe therefore recite some examples of such men, as haue gotten themselues great commendacion & glo∣rie by traueill. And although this place bée more copious then that it may bee comprised in fewe wordes, for who is able to examine all men of all states and condicion whatsoeuer? not withstanding I wyll bringe foorth the most notable examples of the most ex∣cellēt men in sundrie kinds of life. And Philoso∣shers. to begin with Philosophers, it is well knowne, ye Pythagoras went first into Egipt, there to learne of the priestes of that cuntry the vertu of numbers, & the
moste exquisite figures of Geometrie. From thence to Babilon, where of the Chaldes hée learned the course of the Planets, their stations, circuit, and ef∣fects, ouer these inferiour bodies. Then goynge backe into Crete how he came to Lacedaemon, to vnderstand the most famous lawes which flourished at that time, made by Lycurgus and Minos. Lastlye, arriuinge in Italie: how hee remayned at the citie of Croton the space of twenty yéeres, where by hys aucthoryty he reclaymed the people that were woont to lyue in all dissolutnesse, bringing them to a frugale trade of life the Matrones to chastitie, the youth to modesty, insomuch ye the wéemen being mooued with his holynesse and vertue: left of their golden Garmentes, & other excesse of furniture and Ornamentes which they were woont to were conse∣crating thē vnto Iuno. At the lēgth how hée sayled to Metapentū, and there died where hee was had in such admiration: that they made a Church of his house, and offered Diuine Sacrifice vnto
him. And whether traueiled not also A∣pollonius his Scholer? Beyng a Ma∣giciā, and a Philosopher? he passed ouer Caucasus, he went through the Albani, Scythians, Massagetes the most weal∣thiest Realmes of India, and passyng ouer the broade ryuer Phison, came to the Brachmannj to heare Hiarchas sit∣ting in his throne of Golde, and drin∣king of Tantalus well, amonge a few Schollers, dispute of the Nature and motions of the Planetes, and of the in∣equalitie of the dayes. From thēce how hée traueiling by the Elamites, Babilo∣nians, Chaldees, Medes, Assyrians, Parthians, Syrians, Phoenicians, Ara∣bians, Iewes, returning to Alexandria: departed into Aethiopia to heare the Gymnosophistes, and to béehold yt most renoumed table of the Sunne, standing The tab of ye Su vppon the Sea beache rightly being of opinion, yt a man may learne somwhat in euery place, and better himself wher∣soeuer he becommeth. So likewise, Pla∣to hearde Architas Tarentinus in the same part of Italy which once was cal∣led
Crateres Aetnae, nowe common∣ly tearmed Mongibello, notwithstan∣dynge that amonge the Athenians it was forbydden by lawe vppon paine of death, that no Grecian shuld go into that Ilande. Moreouer hée traueilled into Aegypt, to learne antiquities of the wise men of that lande: from whence there is no doubt, but hée brought all the wis∣dome and knowledge which hée lefte to posteritie, & in which he excelled in such fort, that in respect therof he was called Diuine, & Prince of Philosophers. It is not necessarye to recyte manye moe of this sort, eyther more auncient thē these or of latter yéeres, béeyng euident that all they haue done the lyke whosoeuer are commended for renowne, and lear∣ning. And vnlesse they had done so: they could not haue drawne vnto them∣selues such flockes of schollers, nor haue raysed so many Sctes, as Socrates the Socraticke, Plato the Academick, Ari∣stotle the Peripateticke, Zeno the Stoicke, Pythagoras the Pythagorick, Antistenes the Cynicke, Aristippus
the Cyrenaicke, and other lykewyse others. The lyke is also in Phisitions, whether wée speake of Greekes or A∣rabicks. For that I may say nothing of Aesculapius, whom in the old tyme they feygned to bée God of Physick: it is cer∣teyne that Hyppocrates dyd not onely Hypocra∣tes. practyze his arte at home: but also in forreyne Cuntryes For hée dwelt ma∣nie yéeres in Thessalia, being borne in Coos, & being sent for to Abdera, draue away the pestilence from that city. And although for y• great loue he bare to his own Cuntrey he wold not go visite Ar∣texerxes, being therto prouoked wt gret rewardes: yet was he naturally deligh∣ted to traueill, and therfore it is written that hée woare euermore a cloake. Galē Galen. the best learned of all Phisitions, hearde Pelops and Satyrus teach at Smyrna, and Numesianus at Corinthe, and after∣ward traueiled through other partes of the world. And first he went to Alexan∣dria, where when hee had stayed some space, and wandred ouer all the lande of Egypt lying round about: hee departed
vnto Palaestina in Syria. Hée sayled to Lemnos and Cyprus, to th'intent to bring sundrie thinges from thence ser∣uing to the vse of Phisicke, to doe hys Cuntreymen of Pergamum pleasure withall. Notwithstanding hée stayd not long at home, but vpon occasion of a se∣dition rising: hée departed to Rome. From whence be returned home again after that ye sedicion was quieted, where hée continued so long: vntill after a long time hée was sent for to Rome agayne by Marcus Aurelius, and Lucius, Em∣perours of Rome. But at the last he re∣turned againe into his Cuntrey, & there ended his life. The Arabian Phisitions also were no lesse giuen to traueile, as Auicen witnesseth of himselfe, that hée had welnigh traueiled ouer all ye world. What shall I speake of Oratours and Poetes? whose nature is properly, to traueill as Plato beareth recorde: and their duetie requireth them to doe so, to maintaine common tranquilitie, or for any other cause, which poinct is also cō∣man vnto all ciuill and politicke persons
with Oratours. For while they traueil abroade, and looke diligently to their du∣tie, other Citizens may tarie at home, and the common wealth be in quietnes: which innumerable examples bothe of Greeke, and Latine Histories do teach, both in Thucidides, and Liuie. Howbeit now at the last, let vs exa∣mine the auncient lawe makers & first founders of ceremonies, as Moyses that brought lawes vnto the Iewes written in tables of stone with Gods owne fin∣ger: lykewise Orpheus which dyd the like vnto the Thracians: Minos, & Rha∣damantus to the Cretens: Zamolx is to the Scythians: Lycurgus to the Lacedae∣monians: and Draco, with Solon, who prescribed lawes and order of liuing to the people of Athens. Surely wee shall finde that they had all traueiled. But if wée will weigh the Lawgiuers of one common wealth onely, as namely of the Citie of Rome, they will bring vs forth example enoughe who haue described their liues at large: wherein the presi∣dent of one onely shall suffice vs in the
stéede of many, & that is of P. Seruilius Sulpitius Ruffus. For it is wel known, Ser. Sul∣pitius. how hée accōpanied Cicero into Rhodes there to apply the studie of Eloquence and Philosophie, and afterwarde lyued at Rome to the great commoditie of the commonwealth, so longe, vntyll Caesar ouerthrewe Pompei in the Pharsali∣call batteil, and obteined the superiority. For in those troublesome dayes hée a∣bode som space at Samos, & in other pla∣ces, disputing in the Schooles, of the Pontificial lawe. But when Caesar re∣turned into Italie, hée was not onely re∣stored into ye Citie, but also made Liue∣tenaunt of Greece as long as Caesar ly∣ued: but when he was slain, he returned to Rome. Finally, if wée peruse ye lyues of interpretours of the Law, both new and olde, wée shall finde that there haue bin manie moe strangers haue taught, and professed the Civile Lawe in anye place, thē of them that were borne there in the same Cuntrey. The truth wher∣of is yet to bée séene in Italie, Germa∣nie, and Fraunce, where the Ciuile law
is in price. For there bee many Real∣mes that vse theyr owne Municipall or Countrie lawes onely, not the Ro∣mane, as England, Scotland, Polande, and Sueueland: which lawes, none can interprete better then hée that is borne and bred vnder them. Yea, noble mē likewise, & such as haue done worthy and valient déedes, haue also bin addicted to trauel. For it is wri∣tē, that Iupiter Cretaeus traueiled ouer Iup. Cre∣taeus. the whole world fiuetimes. Which al∣though it may haply séeme fabulous vn∣to some: yet it importeth thus muche, wherby we may vnderstand that at his time he left no part of ye world vnsought The like whereof also was done by his two Sunnes, that is to wit, Dionisius surnamed Bacchus, and yt most valient Hercules, the one of them profiring the whole worlde by his inuention, tea∣ching men how to plant vines: ye other deliuering the earth from all kinde of wicked men, and tyrannie. For what other were Procustes, Scyron, Cacus, Diomedes, Antaeus, & Geryō: but cruel
and wicked tyrantes, who euermore in all places were encountred by Hercu∣les, Theseus, and other valiant persona∣ges? It is no vnknowne howe Iason, with other maies of that famous expe∣dition, called Argonautae, sayled into Colchos, of purpose to fetch from thence the Golden fleese: which in déede he at∣chiued, getting vnto himself therby im∣mortall glory. Like as Vlisses, when he had bin twentie yeares away from his Realme of Ithaca, it is no merueill if Homere tearme him  that is to say, one that knoweth many mennes maners, and extoll him with wounder∣full commendation. Virgill likewise ve∣rie much praiseth his traueiling Aene∣as: who both, might well haue lyued in rest and quietnesse, Vlisses with his lo∣uers Calypso and Circes, and Aeneas with his Dido: if they had bin contented alwayes to haue liued obscurely. How∣beit the excellencie of their courage, and the desire of greater glory, pricked them for the to forsake no paynes nor daun∣gers so that they might obtayne that
which they sought for. Let vs moreouer consider al the Mo∣narchies of the world, and wée shal per∣ceaue that the Princes that ruled in them, atchieued most excellent exployts by traueilling, as Ninus & Nabucadne∣zer in the first Monarchie: Cyrus, Da∣rius and xerxes in the second: and A∣lexander the great in the thirde, with whom also that Monarchie began and ended. For after his death, the king∣domes which hée left were gouerned by many, howbeit they also maintayned great warres in sundry places. In the fouerth, Iulius Caesar, Octauianus Au∣gustus, Constantines, Charleses, O∣thoes, Conrades, Henries, Fredericks and other moe, vnto whom all, Lorde Charles the fifth was inferiour in no respect, ether for trauellynge, or glo∣rye in chiuaulrie. For how often hath he gone to visite the Realmes that came to hym by discent from his auncetours, lying wide among many Nacions, and as it were dispersed? How often hath he returned conquerour out of France,
and gone to his owne realmes? Did not hée, leauing the most flourishinge real∣mes Prayse of Charles the fyfth. of Spaine, appeace all Italy with his presence, that had bin manye yéeres vexed with ciuile war, and also preser∣ued Germanie beinge sick almost of the same disease? when hée came towardes Pannonia, did not Solyman emperour of the Turkes, immediatly run away? Did not hée, beinge present in person, recouer the kingdome of Tunetz, a re∣alme in Africa, which Ariadenus Bar∣barossa had inuaded by commaunde∣ment, and with the power of Solyman? went not hee to Aphrodisium in hope to succour yt Christian commonwealth. To be short, to what kingdomes or pla∣ces went not hée? what dangers, what labours sustayned he not? wherby as I haue shewed, hee might purchase peace and tranquilytie to the Empire yt was committed to his charge, a most excel∣lent prince, and as Voerthusius sayth, in al poynts lyke to Charles the maine. Histories much commende of Mithri∣dates Kinge of Pontus, for that hée
coulde speake fiftie seuerall toongues: but who supposeth that hee learned so many for any other intent, but that hee might be able himself to talk wt the na∣cions with whō he had dealings, as al∣so to be conuersant amonge straungers with lesse enuie? So likewise An∣tiochus the great, was well traueiled, and Hannibal, Pompeius, the Scipios, the Marij, Lentuli, with other Kinges, Princes, & noble men innumerable of al cuntries: whose vertues & most vali∣ent déedes, shal neuer any obliuion put out of memorie: like as there is no age ye will cōmend of those that lye sleaping at home, giuen to slouth and idlenes, ne∣uer doing any thing at home or abroad, worthy of praise or speach of posteritie, according to the example of Ninias, sun to Ninus and Semiramis, Sardanapalus with others. But let vs nowe peruse the holye Scriptures, and in them we shal finde infinite examples of godlie men that haue traueilled, partly of their owne ac∣cord, partly at yt cōmandement of God.
For in the xii. of Genesis, God expresly commaundeth Abraham, that leauyng the Cuntrey where he dwelt, he should go to an other place: and shortly after, hée promyseth to the same Abraham, the land of his traueill, and to geue hym al the land of Chanaan for an euerlas∣ting inheritance. Likewise Isaac, after the death of his father departed into Pa∣lestine and dwelt there, being comaun∣ded by God so to doe. Iacob, his father being a liue: traueiled into Mesopota∣mia, and after many yéeres returned thence into his natiue cuntrey. And be∣yng well stroken in yéeres, he traueiled into Aegipt to sée his sunne Ioseph: and in sundry places of the Scripture wee reade, how the holy Patriarches, Pro∣phetes, and other godly men, tooke long viogies in hand, namely, Moyses, Aa∣ron and Iosua. Yea, our sauiour Christ himselfe, traueilled abroade very often, appearyng many times in semblant of a Pilgrim and Traueiller, to th'intent hée might gather his Churche from e∣uery place. The lyke whereof hee
wrought also by his Apostles, whom he sent ouer the whole worlde to preache the Gospell. To whiche purpose it is writen, that Thomas traueilled into Parthia and preached vnto the inhaby∣tants there, also to the Medes, Persians, Hircanes, Bactrianes, and other nacions of the inner India Mathew, to the Ma∣cedonians, and Thracians. Bartelmew, to the Lycaonians & those that inhabite the farther India. Andrew, to the Acha∣ians, and Scythians. Iohn after the death of Mary, to the people of Asia. Iames the elder, to the Spaniards. Phillip to the Frenchmen. Simon Zelotes to the Egiptians. Peter into Pontus, Gallicia, Bythinia, Cappadocia, Italye, and at length preached Christ at Rome. Saint Paules peregrinacions are knowne out of the Actes of the Apostles, and out of his owne writinges. Hée declareth how after that hee was conuerted vnto the faith, hée traueiled into Arabia, & from thence returned to Damascus, and went to Ierusalem to sée Peter. After that, hée departed into Syria, and Cilicia,
and when fourtéene yéeres were expy∣red: went agayne to Hierusalem to preach the Gospell. It is well knowne moreouer that hee was in Spaine, and in Hispania Narbonensis conuerted many soules to the faith of Christ, as he also did in other places, vntill at last hee was beheaded at Rome vnder the Em∣perour Nero. Duringe all this time of traueill, the Euangelist S. Luke, was companion to Paule, a Syrian borne, in the Citie of Antioche, and wrat his Gospell in Achaia, and died in the same cuntry. Likewise S. Marke the Euan∣gelist was borne in the citie of Antioch sayled to Rome, from whence traueil∣lyng to Alexandria to teach the gospell there: hée conuerted the inhabitantes of Aquileia now called Algar neare bor∣derers, vnto the faith of Christ, and was enstauled their Byshop. Touchinge the other two Euangelists, the matter is e∣uident enough to bée séene in the liues of the Apostles. No les also the fathers, that is to saye, the interpretours of the holy Scripture, were affectioned to tra∣ueill
as well as other men, which is al∣so apparant by their liues, as in ye liues of Ierome, and Augustine. For Ierome being borne at Stridon a Citie in Pan∣nonia, learned straunge toongues at Rome: and went afterward into Syria, and from thence to Bethlaëm, wher hée died in the 91. yeare of his age, as some haue writen. To conclude, it is most certenlye knowne, that all that euer were of any great aucthoritie, know∣lege, learning, or wisedom since the be∣ginning of the world vnto this present: haue geuen themselues to traueill, and that there was neuer man that perfor∣med any great thinge, or atchieued any notable exploit, vnlesse hée had traueil∣led.
¶ Of such matter as is commonly obiected a∣gainst Traueilers, with a confutation thereof. The. 8. Chapter. BUt there are some yt much embase traueilling, deterring men frō it ma∣ny waies. These holde opinion that the name of Traueillyng is not only infa∣mous, but also the thing it selfe: which they proue out of certen places of Tully, and of Vlpian the Lawyer. For in the Thusculane Questions, Tullie compareth banishment with Traueill, and in an Epistle to Caelius, hée emba∣seth Traueill, terminge it reprochfull, and filthy. And Vlpain calleth it Depor¦tation, a tearme of the law, being a pu∣nishmēt, wherin a man both looseth his goodes, is disfrauched his citie, and is a∣pointed certen limits within which hée shall dwell and abide. After this maner
the Poet Ouid, was exiled vnto the ci∣tie of Tomos in Pontus, léesing the be∣nefit of the citie, and all his goods being excheated. Quer this, they obiect that Traueillers are in hatred amonge good men, reguarded none otherwise but as Rogues and Vacaboundes that can ta∣rie in no place, although indéede they haue verie iust cause to goe abroad. And therfore they call them wandring Pla∣nets and Vacaboundes, as if they were forced thereto for some punishment, or were in such wise by God punished. And yt by ye example of Cain whō God cursed, saying that he should be a Vaca∣bounde vpon the earth: béeinge also an accustomable maner of cursing among the ancient people in foretime, as Odei∣pus did among the Tragidies writers. Whervpon hath growne the Prouerbe Oedipus curse, & Laertius writeth that Diogenis the Ethnick was wont to say that he had met wt some tragicall curse. For hee (saide he) was without house, without Citie, depriued of his cuntrey, hauinge no certentie of his lyfe.
Thirdly, they crie out against trauei∣lers as iniurious to their Parentes, friendes, wyues, and children, whylst they seperate thēselues after a maner, voluntarely from them. Like as Pro∣pertius inueieth against one Posthu∣mus, that through an vnsatiable desire of warfare: suffred himselfe to be caried away from the most pleasaunt compa∣nie of his wife, whose curse is this. If I may wishe: would God yee gree∣die wretches all were dead, Or who so else loues warres aboue his faithfull spouses bed. And no lesse they wish vnto him com∣mōly, who hath more delight to wāder abrood, and neuer bide in one place, thē tariyng in their owne natiue cuntrey, enioy the most acceptable companie & conuersatiō of their friends & kinsfolks, whervpō it was written by the Poet. Him I accuse, and much accompt vnwise, Abandoning his natiue Cuntrey soile: Who so the same so lightly doth dispise, And loues abrod in foreine land to toile. Fourthly, they complaine that Tra∣ueilers must indure infinite labours
and troubles, & not only stand in daun∣ger of their goods: but often of their life also. Which thing surely cānot be deni∣ed, as it is prooued by the examples of Vlisses, and Aeneas. Fifthly, this saying is vsually obiec∣ted against them, that is to say: They which run ouersea, chaunge the aire & not their minde, and reprochfully they allege those verses which are written against such, who, traueiling abroad to studie: returne home againe neuer a whit better learned then when they went foorth. Whoso to Paris to his booke doth send a foolish Asse: Shall there be made no horse, but bide as erst before he was. By these & such like prouerbes, & say∣ings, they séeme to auouch thrée things. First yt the exchaunge of place doth not change the persons nature. Secondly, yt vertues & vices, are borne wt vs, and not first grow in vs. Thirdly, that ver∣tues cannot bée learned, nor vices for∣gottē. Al which allegaciōs of theirs are false, as hereafter we meane to declare.
Sixtly, the cite Lycurgus lawe out of Plato, wherein hée forbad his Citizens the Lacedaemonians to traueill, alledg∣inge for a cause, that then they shall not bring straunge orders and fashions into the Commonwealth, which is a reason verie plausible, and alledged also by Plato. Seuenthly, they bring foorth Claudia∣nus verses against them. O happie hee that spent his daies in natiue Soyles delight, Whom one self house hath seene a child, and eke an aged wight. Who limping with his staffe wher once he playd the litle Mouse: Can count the manie yeeres which hee hath past in one poore house. And also the verses of Horace writen in the ij Ode, with Ouid likewise wher he sayth. Who least hath liu'd in light: beleeue mee best his dayes hath spent, And eche man ought to liue within his boundes, and be content. Al which testimonies iinctly confirm,
that the happie lyfe consisteth in Idle∣nesse. But Traueilers may not liue idly if they be carefull of their affaires, and meane to looke well to their busi∣nesse: wherby they cannot bée thought to leade the happy lyfe, since they mete with so many mischeifes, and dangers, with sundrye casualities of Fortune that béefall in traueillinge. Let vs ther∣fore examine these argumentes, and answer to these obiections, being mind∣full of ye same definition which we haue set downe at the béeginning, and of such matter as we haue declared in the for∣mer chapter touching ye declaraciō of it. And as touchinge the first two argu∣ments. For that which they call De∣portation or exile is one thing, and tra∣ueill an other, and that by consent of all Gramarianes. And although the antique Writers haue frequented one of these wordes for an other: notwith∣standing ech of them haue begon now to haue their proper and distinct sig∣nification which the custume of such as speake properly hath obtayned. And
therefore, although Cicero do compare exile wc traueill: yet is exile one thing, and traueill another. Againe, it is one thing perpetually to traueill, of which kind of trauel Cicero speketh in ye place alledged: another thing to traueill for a time, wherof we intreate in this place: and therfore it is no merueill if Cicero terme the first, filthie, and much emba∣seth it. For he that traueyleth perpetu∣ally, and neuer returneth into his cun∣trey from which hée hath been long ab∣sent, or séeketh not some other place where to abide there to enioy the com∣modities which he hath gathered by his long traueill: nothing differeth from a banished mā. And in yt he sheweth him∣self iniurious to his Cuntrey and kins∣folkes, whō he might helpe wt his coun∣sell and aduise, or otherwise: he is wor∣thely accoumpted an infamous person. So Vlpian likewise speaketh of perpe∣tuall traueil, which is resēbled to death. For hée that is punished with Depor∣tation, looseth the benefite of the Citie, and his fréedome, as is accoumpted a
dead person. And truly the word Tra∣ueiler or Straunger, signified by the Latine Peregrinus in many places in the law is taken in the better part, and vsed in the proper signification, as I haue béefore declared where I spake of traueillers Priuiledges, highly com∣mending yt traueiling of Cicero, Plato, and Pythagoras. And by this distinction also wée may shape an answer to ye third argument. For like as we speake not of perpetual traueiling: so doe we not excuse them that traueill for intent to bée frée from such burdens & charges, as they shoulde beare at home: or yt they might loose the reines vnto al licentiousnes which they might not be suffred to doe at home: or else by right or wrong by false merchā∣dize, or other sinister meanes: purloyne mony frō the strange nations, béeyng ignorant of their deceitful dealing. And like as the lawes haue prouided y• there shall none such bée suffred in any place, yea, if there bée any that selleth vnlaw∣full Wares for lawfull is not put
to his fine nor amersed, but ether is ba∣nished or put to death: so they that doo altogether mislyke of traueill agrée with vs in this poynct: that wée wish such dissemblers and vacabundes shuld not only not be suffred in eny place, but also vtterly bée rooted out, and expelled from euery place. Vnto the third argument it may bée answered out of the second, and third chapters. For there wée haue put a dis∣tinction béetwéene those that are méete to traueill, & those yt ar not méete. Like∣wise béetwéene them that traueill with frute and such as take that labour vpon them for pleasure only, if so it bée, that labour may bee called a pleasure. But perhaps some man wil demaund, whe∣ther such as be maried bée méete to tra∣ueill? For ouer that, that wéemen are forbidden, as it were of honestie and womanhoode, not to take long or often iourneis in hand: it is the lawe of ma∣trimonie that those whiche bee coupled therin shall dwell euermore together, and the one to bée a comforte vnto the
other. Howbéeit this matter, as ap∣perteyning to ye wéemē, dependeth vpō the custome of the Cuntrey, as I haue touched before, in respect whereof Ma∣trimonie is not hindred. Yea, what if a man take such a viage in hand whiche would be profitable to thē both, y• wife and all the houshold affaires, such as are the iourneis of Merchants, & other that traueil for vertue sake? Moreouer, ther may be mutuall frindship and affection shewed euē in traueiling, & one minde, and one soule remaine in two bodies, although the two bodies be distant far a sunder. And the Ciuile lawes also per∣mitte men to traueill after they haue contracted mariage, if they haue a law∣full cause: wherefore it suffreth them lykewise that are maryed, since agrée∣ing together, not lying together, ma∣keth the Maryage. And so farre of are traueylers from hurting their parents, and friendes: that if they had stayde at home oftentimes they helpe them but little, but hauing traueyled, doe aduan∣tage them very much.
Fourthly, that which they alledge cannot bée denied, as I haue shewed. But there hence it followeth not that traueill is to be neglected, since there be other meanes also wherby a man may come to casualtie and losse of goods, or bée in daunger of his lyfe. And payne which is annexed vnto traueill, is lyke∣wise common vnto all other affayres that are of any accoumpt, and whereof wée séeke praise and renoume, that I may speake nothing of the commoditie that ensueth theron. To thinke on this may pleasure bée perhaps another day. As Aeneas sayde in Virgill: and manie moe such morall sentences Vlisses reciteth in Homere, for that ye remembrance of paines past, is woont to be pleasant vnto vs. Wher∣fore, how much the more praise, cōmo∣ditie, or honour groweth to a mā by his traueill: so much y• more is ye same plea∣sant and acceptable, and yt which is at∣tained without sweate, labour, or daun∣ger, is not so much estéemed of vs, as y• which wée obtaine with great labour,
and daunger, wherevppon sprange the prouerb among the Gréekes: : that is to say: Euery notable thing, is hard and pain∣full to be attained. The fifth argument is plausible, bea∣ring experience wt it for witnesse. For we sée manie returne home, no lesse gi∣uen to vice then they were before they traueiled, in so muche as it is growen into a prouerbe among Dutch folk, No mā was euer the better after a long sick∣nes, or a long traueill. And although it fall out so: yet is not traueill in ye fault, but the men themselues. For béesides that mans nature is corrupt through yt offence of our first grādfather Adam, & some ar so prone vnto al kind of vice, as though thei were borne to exercise thē: notwithstanding euil bringing vp, and conuersacion wt euil men, augmenteth this naughty dispositiō in them, & of mē maketh thē beasts. Hereunto also come the snares and temptacions of the Di∣uel, enemy vnto al vertue, euil nurture of the minde, & negligence of deuocion &
godlynesse, which ought aboue althing to bée frequented. Wherefore, it is no merueill at all, if such men continue al∣waies like themselues, nothing amen∣ding their manners: for they neuer set∣led thēselues therto. But if they would diligently obserue those thinges which we haue noted before in ye third Chap∣ter they shuld become the better, & haue a more ernest care to furnish, and decke their minde. This discommoditie also ensueth, yt returning frō strang lands: they ioyne thēselues to the same or like companions as they were delighted wt all before, or else forgetting al daūgers, giue thēselues ouer vnto all leudnesse, and sensualitie. For so then: Kinde once corrupt, to wonted maners vile doth run and raunge, Though much misliked, and deepely fixt in fleshe: will neuer chaunge. As saith ye Satyrical Poet. Otherwise their saying is false, ye affirme how the chāging of ye place, changeth not a mās nature. Since experience vppon which they reason, teacheth the contrarie, and
therfore many are sēt into forrein cun∣trys, yt by their conuersation & training there, they myght confirme their man∣ners neglecting vices: and learne to ap∣ply themselues to other mens maners, which no man will deny but that they may do. For if fields by diligēt husban∣ding maye bee amended: what impedi∣mēt is there, but a rude person & prone to vice may bee made better by dayly cōuersation wt good men? For: Wrath may be aswaged by persuasiō, saith Plu∣tarch: so great is the force of company, and dayly conuersation. And like as hearbes & fruites planted in one groūd, if they be remooued into another or that is of some other qualitie, they grow out of kind, in so much that they léese either their colour, or taste, and naturall qua∣litie, by reason of the nature of the soile, influence of the heauens, and goodnesse of the aire, and yt diuerse maner of nou∣rishment: so hapneth also yt like in men according to yt conditiō of nourishment, and the aire that compasseth them chan∣ging them into another constitutiō and
temperature of body, & enclining them to ensue other maners, and studies. By this means a Dane is transformed into a Spaniard a Germane into a french∣man or Italian, namely by dayly con∣uersation, vse of life, & custome. Wher∣fore, we must diligently take héede that we imitate the vertues and not ye vices of other, of which point I haue admoni∣shed before. For this which thei affirm, that vertues cannot bée learned nor vi∣ces forgotten: is false, for there is lefte vnto man a free will in suche externall matters, and there are séene euerie day examples of vertues and vices, which a man, if hée liste, may no lesse imitate then he maye the woorke of some cun∣ning woorkman, so yt he haue some na∣tural inclination to that art and knowe the principles of it, as of Painting, or grauing. Nether is that absolutely true which they thinke to bée, that vertues and vices are borne wyth vs, not grow in vs: but of vertues, some be na∣turall, some moral. And these last may be learned, which the lawes do declare,
which punish not offenders for faultes that are already doone and past, being a thing impossible y• that which is doone, shoulde bée vndoone againe: but they haue respecte to the time to come, and that he that hath once offended, offende no more, nor giue others occasion to of∣fend by his exāple. And truly men wer very vnfortunate and in euil case, if ha∣uing found a meanes whereby to tame wild beasts, & so to instruct the sauadge disposition of Beares, Lions, Wolfes, and to teache the little birdes to flie at their pleasure, to returne home from the woods, and from their natural liber∣tie to come into theyr prison and bon∣dage, to hoppe into the cage, of theyr owne accorde: they coulde not lyke∣wyse deuyse some art whereby to bet∣ter themselues, and through labor and diligence to furnishe, and adorne their owne mindes. Concerning that which they alledge out of Plato, of Lycurgus lawes: it maye bée aunswered by a rule of the lawiers, which saith, that the abuse of
a thing ought not to take away ye vse of the same. And Plato teacheth in that place, that diligent héede must be taken in a common wealth, that there bée no euill tatches nor vices brought into it, he disputeth not whether a man ought to traueill or not. For what if a man profite the common wealth by hys tra∣ueyling as Timaeus dyd in Plato, and Plato hymselfe with other innumera∣ble of whom I haue made mention be∣fore? Moreouer, who so peruseth the hi∣stories of Thucydides and xenophon, shall perceaue that the Lacedemoni∣ans were verie ciuile men of béehaui∣our, better liking of simple then subtile vertue, for the more parte borowing all their lawes of the Cretens by mea∣nes of Lycurgus. The Athenians, were very famous for varietie of doc∣trine and learning, by meanes wherof were verie more diligent in searche of such thinges as were apperteining to the weale publiques commoditie, and not leauing them vpon any abuse. And moste sure it is, that aswell the Lace∣demonians
as Athenians, borrowed their lawes of ye Egiptians. For Lycur∣gus had bene in Aegipt: and the Egip∣tians tooke their lawes of the Hebrues if wée credit Eusebius, and it is well knowne, that they receaued their laws from God himselfe. And God lykewise hath bin cause vnto manie that they should take far iournies in hand, which wée haue declared in the chapter goynge next béefore: and Poets feigne, that A∣neas was mooued to traueill by Mercu∣rie. Vlisses by Somnus, and other noble and valyent men by other Gods also, And Plato also doth the lyke. For in his booke De vniuersitate translated (as I suppose) by Tully, vnder the person of of the Egiptian Prieste, hee sharply re∣proouethe the Greekes for neglectinge antiquitie, and for lingringe idlely at home, and calleth them Children, cas∣tinge them in the téeth with their igno∣raunce. For to bée ignoraunt of such thinges as are done béefore our tyme, whereof there are markes and tokens to this day remayning: what is it other
(as the same Cicero saith) then alwaies to be a childe. Last of all, the assertions whiche are alledged out of the Poetes of the happie lyfe, ought to bée no impediment or hindrance to traueillers, or what soeuer lyke thinge there is that may deterre a man from traueillynge, if hée bée other∣wise disposed thereto of himselfe. For Ouid had iuste cause to complayne of Fortune, which hée abused, so that hée was against his wyll constrayned to go into banishment among the Getes, and not to traueill. And as for Claudianus, hée spake in the person of another, as it appeareth by the tytle of that Epi∣gramme, which was an ould man and wealthy, and (as the frugalytie of the auncient time required) content with his owne estate, mistykyng superfluitie and varietie in all thinges. Moreouer both of them in those their verses, com∣mende the rurall and Cuntrey lyfe, preferringe it before all affaires & dea∣lings in the citie, and cases of iudgment and businesse in manie matters. How∣beit,
it appeareth also by their wri∣tinges, that the same men doe not con∣demne traueill and experience gotten that way, but in sundrie places deteste sluggish idlenesse, especiallye beinge e∣uident that they themselues haue tra∣ueilled. For Horace beynge an A∣pulian by birth, studied Philosophye at Athens: and Claudianus lyued vn∣der the Emperour Theodosius, beinge borne in Alexandria a Citie in Egipt. And if wée should graunt that they had an éeuell opinion of traueillinge, which indéede is otherwise: truely they had erred in this respect, since most euident it is, yt ther was yet neuer any mā that atchiued any singular and notable thing vnlesse hee had traueilled, as wee haue prooued by example of sundrye in the former Chapter. For great and no∣table déedes, are not perfourmed but through wisdome and skyll of thinges and men: whiche beinge not shut vp in some one corner of the Worlde, but dispersed ouer the whole earth, it is no marueill, if to the attaynmente
thereof, it bée necessarye to traueill into sundrye Landes, and ouer manie parts of the Worlde. The laste Argument, and quite bée∣side the matter, is alledged by some man of his owne experience or opinion againste Traueile. For such prf are seldome commended, and manie tymes it engendreth Parares, and straunge positions, from whence spring Schismes and Heresies in religion, dis∣sentions in Commonwealthes, opini∣ons in Philosophie and Physick, with other mischeiues and discommodities in other Artes and thinges, nourishyng a certen selfe loue in all men, and som∣time bringinge destruction vnto whole Commonwealthes.
¶ An Answere to the principall question, with a notable commendati∣on of Traueill therto annexed. The. 9. Chapter NOw therfore it is no hard matter, to answer vnto the question which wée mooued at the beginninge, and to determine, whether Traueill do a man more good or éeuell. For who so dily∣gently weigheth what so euer wée haue sayde hetherto: shall perceaue that in time of peace or War, it is most profi∣table vnto all that are desirous to attain vnto vertue, or take any great matter in hand. Neither is their opinion and iudgement to bée liked of, which desire rather to liue obscurelye at home then with commendacion, as the Clowne in Claudianus and Polyphemus in Ho∣mere.
And what other doo the Poetes meane by the Goddesses Calipso and Circe, whom I haue meirned, then to reprehende the desire of filthy lustes and obscure Idlenesse, and to shew how Vlisses, and whosoeuer else is desirous of praise and glorye: is nothinge de∣lighted in idlenesse and pleasures, but by all meanes endeuoureth to attaine to vertu, although he must endure  M. dangers. So haue Christophorus Co∣lumbarius, and Vespusius, assaid infinit perilles, who were the finders out of that part of the World whiche they call America. Howbeit they haue thereby purchased to themselues euerlastinge memorie, leauing behind them to poste∣ritie the trueth of such matter, whereof ther was neuer thought to be any such. These Philosophers, Phisicions, Law∣iers, Iuristes, Kinges, warriours, and Diuines, what praise haue thei not got∣ten by traueillyng? That whoso is not cōtented with these: let hym adde more∣ouer vnto them sundrye other excellent mē, whō Franciscus Senensis reporteth
to haue taken often and longe traueilles in hande, whiche they accomplished for vertue, and glory sake. There haue bene some also, whom not so much their owne as others vertue, power, & wise∣dome, hath moued to traueill. Like as the holy Scripture witnesseth, yt the po∣wer, and wisdome of Salomon was so great: that the kinges of Tharsus, and Quéenes of Arabia, came thither to sée and heare hym, and wée reade also, how certen noble men came from ye further∣most partes of France and Spaine, to Titus Liuius yt fownteine of eloquēce, not mooued so muche with the power & same of the Citie of Rome: as with the report of that one man. I my selfe haue séene a Moonke in Bononie, who in tra∣ueilling ouer his owne cuntrey of Italy spent 9. whole yéeres: so surueyinge and discribing it, that no man coulde set it foorth more lyuely with pen, or ex∣presse it wc pensill, insomuch that there is not the least thing left out vntouched And yet he was but a Monk, whose life ought to be solitarie, & as Gratian saith,
none vnles it bée in Cloister, as nether the Fishes out of the Water. Wherefore, neither hypocrisie, nor any holynesse of lyfe, forbiddeth a man to Traueill, so that hée doe it to any ho∣nest vse, or commoditie, redoundinge to himselfe or others. Neither are they to bée lyked of, who if they would: might traueill, but had rather liue at home lea∣dinge an obscure lyfe, then to wynne praise by traueilyng. For such not on∣ly, offend against their friends, and the whole commonwealth: but also against thēselues. For it is the peculier nature of mankind to be euermore desirous of knowlege, and neuer to bée contented wt one thing only, whether that know∣ledge come by hearinge or séeinge, for man hath these sences whereby he at∣tayneth skill, as sayth Aristotle. But as Horace witnesseth: The things we heare, les cause the minde and sences to arise: Then doe the thinges in presence whiche are subiect to the eies. Yea they are of greater force and effi∣cacie,
and are more firmely reteyned in memorie which wée se before our eies: then the report or only hearesay of any thinge, although there come of it no pro∣fite, no pleasure, nor honestye. And I haue shewed that by traueilynge there ensueth verie great commoditie in eue∣rie kind of lyfe, and as for the honestie thereof: no man can doubt, being enfor∣med by many examples. And if wée measure honestie by paines, not rashly but vpon iust cause taken in hand: then truely traueill, of whiche wée intreat in this place, shall yéeld to none. For tra∣ueillers are enforced to abyde all labors and susteine al troubles. Moreouer, like as these men whiche may and ought to traueill and yet doo not traueill, commit a shamefull deede: so they that are giuen to traueilling, perfourme a most honest exployt. For these doo rightly vse their féet, the other abuse them. For nature & God the maker of all thinge, hath not giuen vs féete for tent wee shoulde walke vp and downe in our owne Ci∣tie or Cuntrey only, but that if occasion
serue wée shuld also go sée and frequent forreine nacions also: for else doubtlesse God and Nature woulde haue shut vp the wayes and forbidden the passedge to straunge Cuntries. And what can be more delectable, then to béeholde the things wherof thou hast read sumthing or heard of other, and againe to béeholde in minde and contemplatiō those things which thou hast somtime séene, and to applie them to thy vse. Wherein I wyl speake nothinge of the profite or com∣moditie? For it much aueileth vnto the getting of perfect and sownd know∣ledge, or learninge of any Art, to trauell vnto such places where such Artes doe most flourish, and are faithfully taught. So yt they deserue none excuse, whose lyfe is only to think, as Cicero writeth of certen Philosophers, and such as get all their wisdome at home, being much affeard lest if they traueilled: the skie woulde fall on their heades, or the earth sinke vnder them: when as they might learne that which they séeke for, better and with greater profite of straungers,
and alliens, especiallye if they haue money to beare their charges abroade as well as at home. And it hapneth manie times, that they that kéepe themselues at home vpon this persua∣sion, that there is no lyfe pleasant out of a mans owne Cuntrey, or else do feare that by change of place they shoulde al∣so change their maners: let them then be wyfe only in theyr owne conceites, and contempne others in respecte of themselues, beynge puffed vp with an opinion of knowledge, a thinge so éeuell, that a more woorse or more daungerous in all the Worlde can bée none deuised. Eche Land vnto a valient man his cuntrey is, right so As is eche sea vnto the sellie fish where ere shee go. A man shall euerie where finde sum∣thinge that hee may learne, and that another time may doe hym good. Su∣rely the knowledge & search of forrein Realmes, hath alwaies bin accompted
so pleasant profitable and glorious that certen it is, that many for none other se then a loue and desire thereof, and that they might sée experience of things haue forsaken their natiue Cuntreys, deare Parentes, Wiues, Children, Freindes, and that more is, leauynge the reguarde of their owne health, haue sumtimes vndertakē very far ies with great difficultie, perill, care, and anguishe. Since therefore, traueill is honeste, pleasant, profitable, and commodious: what man withée ashamed to take it in hand, that is prouided, and méet thereto and that by example of so many Empe∣rours, kings, wisemen, warriours, and other worthy personages that haue tra∣ueilled, to sée straunge and far Coun∣treys, & to wander wide abroad? wher∣by are knowne the peculyar behauiors of euery cuntrey, their disposition, diet, appareill, maner of buildinge, situation of places, tillage, moreouer Lawes, all doctrines & opinious, holy and profane, and finally the nature of all things. But
I  before admonished: it beh∣ueth him that shal dose, to be wary, and to expresse the person of Vlisses or Ane∣as: or if hée cannot so doo, haue Achates and Nestors with him, that is to say, faithfull and louing companions, whose counsel hée may follow, liue wel and re∣turne safe into his cuntrey: vnto which wée all are bound, and borne, and which wée may and ought also to gouerne and that with praise, after the knowledge and experience of so many thinges: so that wee follow godlynesse, ensue vert and neuer waxe wéerie, whatsoeuer paines or difficultie of perils affault vs. Thus endeth the first Booke.
The second Booke o the Traueiller of Ierome Turler, of compre hending an excellent description of the moste delicious Realme of Naples. The. 1. Chapter. IN the firste Booke I haue answered to the question which was pro∣poūded in the beginning by suche preceptes as I haue thought sufficient towardes the at∣tayninge of a well ordred, happie, and prosperous traueill. Whiche if they bee dilligently obserued and in such or∣der as wee haue delyuered them doe shewe that what soeuer straunge or dangerous accidēts befall vs in traueil∣lynge, it chaunceth not so much by hu∣mane negligence, as it is to bee ascri∣bed vnto to the prouidence of eternall
God For the condicion of our lyfe is suche, that it is exposed, and lyeth open vnto infinite miseries, and there was yet neuer man blessed in all respectes, or that could escape death. Whereby all changes and chaunces of Fortune, are more indifferently to be borne, and wee must suppose that nothinge can be∣fall vnto vs, that hath not also hapned vnto others. And for as much as ex∣amples bringe lyght to preceptes, ma∣king ye matter more euide. it, as the La∣wier sayth: I thinke it worthe the tra∣ueill, to declare that by some example, whiche I admonished generally to bée considered in all traueill. Whiche thinge that I shoulde more wyllyngly accomplishe, partlye the remembrance of suche thinges as ether I my selfe haue séene in sundrie places, or haue heard of others, hath mooued mee part∣ly the very maiestie of Antiquitie and knowledge, whiche is woont of it selfe to delight, and is exceptable vnto all men. Beesides the profite which it bringeth vnto the exposition of good Aucthours,
whether wée speake of Poetrie, or of Histories. Wherfore I meane to touch in this second Bke such thinges as are in the Realme of Naples worthy to bee séene, since there is scarce no other place in all Christendome, in my opinion, ly∣ing within the compasse of Europe, for holsomnesse of aire, situation, pleasant∣nesse, abundance, or ciuilitie, match vn∣to it. Moreouer it is very famous by the writinges of excellent Aucthours, Vir∣gill, and Liuie: besides that, perhaps I think I may doe pleasure ereby vnto them that meane heareafter themseues to traueill in that part of Italie. For when they shal haue read this discourse being put in minde they may more ex∣quisitely, and dylygently searche eue∣rie thinge, and they shall finde them to bee soe. Howbeit I purpose not by this demonstration, as it were by  most certen discription of the place, to set foorth at full the whole Countrey of Naples, which by ye proper name is ter∣med Happy Campania, for that belon∣geth to the dutie of a Cosmographer:
but such thinges will I note onely, as tast of Antiquitie, and are woorthie ad∣myration aboue the rest. Wherefore I will not deuide them into anye pre∣cyse order of recytall, but for the plea∣saunt renuyng of the aunciente re∣membraunce of them, I will declare them in suche order as I sawe them, without all glose of woordes, or falsefy∣ing the trueth in anye thing: both for that it behooueth the disputation of ve∣ritie and trueth to bée simple, and also the manner of telling requireth the same, and trueth is the foundation of an Historie.
¶ Portus Baianus, com∣monly called La Pesci∣na Mirabile, A wonderfull Fisheponde. The. 2. Chapter. WHen therfore wée had taken our iourney, comming out of ye fron∣tirs and lybertie of Rome, and were approched vnto the fixte stone from the Citie of Naples: wee sawe a place whiche the Italians tearme La Pesci∣na Mirabile, wee passed throughe an hugie and waste place into a greate buildyng, long, fouresquare, and as a man shoulde say made vault wise, re∣semblyng the shewe of a Churche. Longewyse it contayned foure cour∣ses of square Pillers, whereby the Archeis were borne vp, euery course conteyning. xij. Pillers, so that in all
there were in number. xlviii. of diuerse bygnesse, and fourme. Which when it seemed straunge vnto those that bée∣héelde these antiquities with mée: this is no straunge thinge, quod I, since most graue authours haue writtē, that the Temple of Diana at Ephesus had in it Cxxiii. Pyllers, whereof euery one was lx. foote longe. Then wée stepte downe three steppes on eue∣rye syde. But there were no wyn∣dowes nor tooken of any, howbeit the Sunne shyned in in sundrye places by chinkes and riftes, otherwyse the buil∣dyng was whole and sounde enoughe. So that a man cannot well ghesse, to what purpose it was in olde time buil∣ded, muchlesse pronounce any certen∣tie thereof. Some are of opinion that it was a fisheponde, whyche they gather bothe by the lykelyhoode of the place, and also out of Plinie, who wryteth, that Hortensius the Ora∣tour had a Ponde for Lampreis a∣mong the Bauli in the coast of Baie, of whych hys Lampreis, hée loued one so
entirely: that as it is reported, hi wepte for her when hee was deade, Blondus iudgeth that this place was Lucullus house. Others affirme that Antonia wyse to Drusus buylded that place to kéepe Lampreis in. And in what pryce fishepondes, and chiefely of Lampreis were had in olde tyme: maye well bée gathered out of appr∣ued wryters, wherein this increased my coniecture, that vppon that moun∣tayne or rather hill, those thinges are yet to bee séene which are reade in Plinie where hée sayth: that the people in olde tyme as Lucullus and Hor∣tensius, bestowed muche  to  channelles through Hilles and Moun∣taines, to bring in the Sea.
¶ Centum Cellae, com∣monly called Cento Camerelle, an hundred Chambers. The. 3. Chapter. WHen wée were departed forthe of this hugie and waste mole and building: we came to Alle Cento ca∣merelle, lying directly oueragainst the other, beyng so called for that it contei∣neth nothing but Chambers and Cel∣les, leadyng one to another. At this present it is situate vppon a Hill, but whether it were so in olde tyme or not. I doubt, by reason of downefalles and valtes, whereof some and deuided from the residew of the buildyng, whereby it should séeme that it had bin sumtime yder and trimmer. When we were entred into these ruines, wée came a∣gain vnto a great building foursquare, standing vpon fouresquare pillers, and
beyng of a fouresquare forme: nears vnto one of which pillers there was a hole, into which our hoste that conduc∣ted vs to the sighte of thse antiquities, descended to receaue vs, and helpe vs as wée went downe. Then came wée into a great wyde place full of Celles and little rowmes, euerie one foure∣square, but some bygger then other. From thence there laye open a waye to other wyde places and Celles, for the whole buildyng was deuided by sundrye crookes and turnynges. And it was so intricate and diffuse, by rea∣son of the lykenesse of the Celles, that some not without cause iudged that it had béene sometyme a Labyrinthe, a∣monge whom is Antonius de Russis a Calabrian, whom I suppose rather to haue thoughte so in respecte of the fourme, then for anye other circum∣stances. Leander of Bononie, thyn∣keth that it was a Cesterne, or place wherein water was kepte in the olde tyme. But I coulde sée no tooken or argument whereby I mighte coniec∣ture
the vse thereof, no signes of hookes or imes in the Celle doores, which are narowe and lowe, there were no win∣dowes any where, nor anye thinge in stéede of them. Within euery place glistered white with plaister of Paris, and in sundrye places the earthe lay to∣gether in heapes the hight of halfe a cubit, as in Sibylles den, whereof wée will speake hereafter. ¶ Mons Canita, the Hill Canita. The. 4. Chapter. THus leauyng the forenamed place, wee entred into a boate which wée had there in a redinesse for y• purpose & wée shared alonge by an hill which the Italians terme Canita, neare vnto which vpon a rocke lying not far of as big as the Hill, whyche notwythstan∣dynge was deuided from it: stoode a castle wonderfull strangely builded, of
a rare kynde of situation, at the foote whereof were séene verie ample and large buildinges, but for the more part fallen downe wyth age. The reporte goeth that Tullia sometime dwelte in the same place. Lacus Auerni, the lake Auernus. The. 5. Chapter. FRom thence wée arriued at the Ba∣ian shoare, and goyng out of ye boate, wée walked along the ruines & down∣falles of houses, which were there thick to bée séene, ouergrowne wyth bram∣bles and bryars, vnto the Laque Auer∣nus. The same lyeth, as it were, in a blynde corner out of the way, enuiro∣ned rounde wyth certeine ridges and bankes rather then hilles, béeynge in fourme perfecte roune as any circles, wherin Maryners say, can bée founde no bottome. It was so called by reason
of a most stronge and lothsome smell of exhalations, risinge out of it, and is most pernicious vnto birdes, as Vir∣gill hath noted, saying: Then when against Auerna mouth they came, that stinking lake, They lift themselues aloft. &c. And shortly after he addeth, A Dungeon darke there is that e∣uermore wide open gapes, Full rough of rockie stones, and loth∣some lake there flowes about: Therouer dare no birde attempt to flie, for deadly doubt, Such poisō breath out breaks, & through the throat with stifling stink, Such smolthring vapour smokes, and vp to skies is borne from brinke. Wherby the Greekes by name Auer∣na mouth that place do call. Vpon the hilles lying thereby, stand certein buildinges almost of our tyme faire, and pleasant, but they are almost hoat Bathes. Plinie hath noted that ye towne of Cimmerij stoode néere to this Laque, whose labour was to dig Met∣tall
out of caues and mines in the earth and neuer to bée séene of the Sunne, as witnesseth Homer: I dare not pre∣cisely anouch that the ruines which are séene to remaine vpon thys shoare are anye parte of that, althoughe no man doubteth, but that somtime there stoode a towne in that place. There is neare to Auernus, and as Virgill sayeth, at the left hand of those ruines neare vn∣to the Lake: A ue there is cut out in rocke, euen through the Temple walles' Both huge and broade at mouth, a hun∣dred vautes, a hundred doores, A hundred roarings sound, when Si∣byls answeres beates the floores. We must goe downe to the foote of ye hill, whereas there is a darke entraunce into the caue, into which we went with Torchelight, following our guid. The entraunce at the first was broade and high enough, waxing afterward naro∣wer & narower, and at length openeth it selfe into a plaine in length almost lx. paces, &. x. in breadth. From thēce there
was a way which lead into certein chā∣bers, straunge to beholde, and altoge∣ther vnlike to those hundred aboue mē∣cioned. For they be larger, and higher. Moreouer they stand in another order, & they differ in y• inequalitie of ye floores one frō another, the goings in are som∣time vphill sometime downe, ye walles are foule & defaced with age, so ye all the place is lothsom, to behold. Amōg these celles or chambers, there is one wher∣in they say, Sibilla dwelt, in form four∣square somtime adorned with point de∣uise & checker worke like to ye temple of Bacchus nigh Rome. And althoughe the carued pieces of the stories be al ta∣ken away for the more part, by such as haue traueyled thither vppon desire to knowe and see antiquities: notwyth∣standyng are séene there in sundry pla∣ces certeine tookens and monumentes of the auncient furniture, which argu∣ment hath mooued some to thinke, yt Si∣billa dwelt there, for yt it is ye hansomst of all the other and nearest vnto Auer∣nus ioyning to ye other Celles, hauing but one doore only. Directly ouer agaīst
the doore is an Arch in the wall like vn∣to a chimney, & yet there could be none in that place. Moreouer, foorthe of this chamber wée go into another parlour, or as it were into some hall, in breadth viij. paces, and in length about. xxij. In which finding such a number of flinder∣mise or Rattelmise that they stucke in heapes vpon the walles, and by reason of the torchlight much troubled vs: we were enforced to retire, and to go foorth through the same Celles or chambers that wee came in at. It is straunge to heare, howe much those Celles do con∣found the iudgement of the beholders, yt a man is not able to conceaue or ima∣gine any forme or representatiō of this building in his minde. In some places you shall finde in them, middle walles, open aboue and not closed to the rough, and within some of them somewhere, there is found earth cast vp on a heape, like as in ye Hundred Celles wherof I spake before. I noted also, howe this way where as we entred in into these celles, and chambers, was but lately
found out, yet could I sée none other yt had bin vsed before, and al these Celles were builded in the midst of the hill, & haue no light from heauen. Wherefore we could not ghesse by any coniecture, or by any arguments, what all yt buil∣ding had bin heretofore, or to what pur∣pose it was first deuised. ¶ Ciceroes Academie, Village, and hoat Bathes. The. 6. Chapter. WIthout the compasse of these hils, whiche enuiron the place called Auernus roūd about, towards Puteoli, there stādeth Tullies Academie, which was sometime his village, a place for yt galleries & thicknes of shadowed wal∣kes very famous, where nowe are cer∣ten hoat Bathes, called by name of Ci∣ceroes Bathes. These Bathes béegan first tospring vp after his death, in the dayes of one Antistius which was hys
successour in ye same vilage: which Lau∣rea, one whō Tullie had made frée hath celebrated in verses in the honor of his maister, as Plinie writeth. The Itali∣ans call that place Ibagni di Tritoli. The situation of them is most pleasant and at the foote of the hill stand certeyn houses, some faierer then other, builded but lowe and after a simple maner, and for the more part forlorne. Howbeit in the moneth of May they bée all inhabi∣ted, bycause at ye time of the yéere there resort great multitudes of peoples vn∣to the Baines, some to preserue, some to recouer health, being very holsome and aueilable thereto by reason of the varietie of Metalles in them, as Brim∣stone, Nitre, Salt, and Bitumen, in which respect Plinie cōmendeth them, adding moreouer that some of them do much good only by their vapour.
¶ Cumae, The Citie Cumae. The. 7. Chapter. CVmae standeth welnigh at ye thirde stone from these Bathes, of which Citie the prouerbe is truely verified, Cuma hath bin. For of so great and re∣nowmed a Citie as this hath bin, there remaineth now almost nothing, besides a fewe ruines and downfalles, wher∣in a few poore fishermē are now dwel∣ling, with certeine Monumentes very auncient, and worthy to bée considered, especially in ye place which they tearme Locauallo. There is also yet remay∣ning there, a Triumphant Ark, whole and sound, and the Temple of Apollo, wherof Virgill writeth in this maner. But good Aeneas to Apollos Church, and temple towers, Hee went to seeke the secrete caue of sibyls dread full howers &c. Liuius writeth yt this citie was builded by the Cumaei, a people of Euo, & by
the Chalcidenses. Strabo commendeth it not so much for the time wherein it was builded, or for those that built it as he doth for the monuments & antiqui∣ties. For he writeth, how that for their sumptuousnes & store thereof, they sur∣passed al the other Cities of Italy So yt it is lesse false which Blōdus reporteth, yt in no place in all Europe are so many downfals & ruines of most sumptuous buildings to be séene (Rome onely ex∣cepted) as are betwéene Cuma & Baias: being no doubt therof, but that this Ci∣tie hath bin in foretimes most wealthy and populous. For it is certein, yt the ci∣tie of Naples called in old time Parthe∣nope, The olde ame of aples, was arthenope. tooke beginning of that: the inha∣bitants being sent from Cuma thither. Which afterward was ouerthrown by ye sam people of Cuma, bicause thei saw ye wealth therof dayly increase. Which being done, some write yt there befell a fore plague of pestilence throughout ye whole territory and confines of Cuma, wherof whē there was no end neyther could ye inhabitantes finde any remedie
to driue away that mischiefe: report go∣eth that they asked counsel of the Oria∣cle, which answered, that Naples was the cause of that plague, and that it should neuer cease vnlesse they buylded that citie agayne, and restored it to the former state. Whiche when they had done: the plague immediatly ceased, but the Citie afterwarde beinge troubled with sedition of the people, and manye Earthquakes, lost the naturall strength like an olde mother, leauing behinde her a daughter, to wit, the Citie of Naples, which indéede lyueth and flourishe that this day. Now were wée come to the Hauen Baianum, which was made by Agrip∣pa, as Dion Cassius writeth, where wée forsooke our Boat, and prepared to sayle to Puteoli. And as we were say∣lyng, wée behéelde alonge in our course sundry high Hilles and Mountaynes, at the féete of whiche were continuall rankes of downe fallen Houses, wher∣by we might easly coniecture that there stoode some great Towne in ould time,
but that it was cast downe by Earth∣quaks that often times are séene there, and for that cause were forsaken of the inhabitants. For ther appéere ye expres tokens of a wasted citie or towne now all ouer growne with bushes & briers, and a few houses are inhabited by pore Mariners and Fishermen, because the harbor is indifferent safe. Which whē I béeheld: it came into my minde what Seruius Sulpitius wrate vnto Cicero in a certen place, how when hée retourned vpon a time out of Asia, and was say∣lynge from Aegina towardes Megara, hée was incompassed round about (as he sayde) with carcases of townes. For be∣fore vs there lay the remnauntes of the Citie whereof wée spake euen now, be∣hind vs Cuma, on ye one side Baiae, and on the other Puteoli was not farre of, which townes hauing bin in ould times most flourishing, now they lie aground flat before our eies. Wherfore I fel into wondring at the state and fortune of all worldly thinges, and thus I thought within my self, good Lord, what shal on
day become of our cuntreis whiche are neither so pleasant, nether so well tilled, nether so wealthy, nether so famous as these haue bin in times past? & therefore doubtles thei shal yt sooner decay. I called to minde also that I had séene beefore a∣monge the Hollenders in the German Ocean, and in the Ilandes of Selande, that there are certen whole villages and townes drowned, whereof the sléeples, towers, and highest buildings, stand vp and are séene in the Sea, like as they were certen wachtowers & spying pla∣ces, an euident argument of the frailtie of earthly things, and yt there is nothing stable or permanent in this life. In lyke sort the Sea carried away the cities of Pyrrha and Antissa about Meotis, and lykewise Elice & Buris in the Corinthi∣an bosome, called Sinus Corinthiacus, yt tokens wherof apeare aboue the water at this day as Plinie writeth: & the ver∣ses of Ouid are well knowne, where he writeth of them saying. If yee goe to seeke for Helicee And Burie which were cities of Achaia you shal see
Them hidden vnder water, and the Shipmen yet do show: The walles and Steeples of the to wes drownd vnder as they row. Baines. The 8 Chapter THus forsakinge these downefalles, followinge the Coast alonge in the Shoare of those hilles, continually kée∣pyng on our course: wée came to a hyll where agayne were Baynes. The same beynge doubtlesse burninge heat within, yet it resembleth no such things in apparance. At the first entrance we came into a large and high chamber, whose wals and vault of the gate were sumtime finely trimmed with checke∣red poynct deuise, which the retes that yet remain do sufficiently witnes. The entrance into this chamber is in∣different wide, and within by the side of ech wall stand bedstedes made of stone
walled about, whereon are Beddes and Pyllowes caste, where they that haue washed themselues may lye downe and take their rest. Moreouer, at the fyrste comming in, stande two Lauers foure∣square, two foote déepe, directlye ouer a∣gainst the Baynes, which ar very tem∣perate, retayning no strong smell at all, neither of Brimstone or any thing else, but consisting only of Niter and Alume. But the hole where out the water issu∣eth is wide and large, and so hansomely hollowed: that many may wash them∣selues in it together, but the farther that a man goeth into it, the hotter is the water. They say that these Baynes are verie healthsome, béesids yt they be also passing pleasant, by reason of the Sea which is nigh at hand, whose waues in tossinge and woorkynge, doo engender a delectable noyse and murmuringe. Without the Caue there standeth Lad∣der conteininge about twenty stales, by whiche wée ascend sopewise into Heat∣house, commonly tearmed a sweatynge House. The way which lyeth open in∣to,
it is high enough for any man, made lyke the entrance of a Den, but scarce wide enough receiuinge into it the light at certen Chinkes and creeses, so that a man may goe in a pretie way with∣out Torch or fire light. Then come we vnto two wayes, whereof that whiche lyeth on the left hand leadeth to a great many of Bedstéedes stonewalled about seruing to the purpose of the aboue na∣med, stretchinge ouer all the side of the hyll, and endinge at certen broken and cragged places of the same. The other inclineth towards the hart of ye Hill, and it is lyke enough that it endeth in the most hottest and burninge hollow caues thereof. Into whiche wée entred with Torche light, and went so far vntill we coulde abide to goo no farther for heate. And at our first entrance wée felt onely a litle warmth, and procéedinge a litle farther wee felte a great heate, whiche alwayes striking vpwarde: did woun∣derfully annoy our heades, and ye more, the farther wée went, so that wee were sūtimes enforced for a while to créep on
the ground. Thus being almost milted with sweat, although wée had put of all our clothes beefore, and our Torche beinge dissolued with heate: wée were constrained to tourne back agayne, and comminge foorth the same way that wée went in, wee washed our selues in the bathes whiche were in the lower∣most part of the Hill, whereof we spake a litle before. A Well or Fowntaine in the Sea, and the way called At∣tellana. The 9. Chapter. MOreouer, betwéene this place and ye citi Puteoli (now called Pozolo) we saw two other things worth the no∣ting. The one is a fowntaine or well in yt sea, ye other, ye way which they cōmon∣ly cal Attellana. Ther ariseth out of the
Sea a passing running cléere, and swéet Fowntayne of fresh water, pleasant in taste two foote déepe, as big as a mans head. I suppose the causes thereof are certen secret passages vnder the ground, which conueie the water thyther from the shoare adioining, where it breaketh foorth. Of the same opinion is Lean∣der Bononiensis a Moonke very well learned, who hath described Italy, no man more dilligently in my iudgment. Howbeit it mai be, that when this place was the maine land: the Inhabitantes had conueied the fresh water by conduit pipes through the ruines and Ashes of the citie Puteoli, which thei vsed in stéed of a Well or Fowntayne, and that af∣terward the sea brake in and ouerflow∣ed all that land, wheras yt spring yet re∣mayneth. It yéeldeth foorth water so a∣bundantly, that a man may discerne the streame thereof agreat way runninge along, from the sea water, being cleerer & more lyke to wel water. But I remē∣ber that I haue séene the lyke of this béefore at Dordracū a Towne in Hol∣land,
where the riuer Mosa called the Maze (vnlesse I bee deceaued) floweth with no lesse force into the Germane O∣ceane in a streame almoste thrée Pear∣ches or Poles broade. Plinie hath noted that in the shoare Baian, in some places there riseth hoat runninge water out of the Sea, whereof I am able to saye nothing. And as touchinge the way called At∣tellana, you must vnderstande, that the same on both sides lyeth thick of Cotta∣ges and small houses fallen downe, the fourme of which are some rounde, some fouresquare: and in these litle tabernes, are certen vautes and arches, in whiche are séene Coffins and Pottes with the bones and ashes of dead men in them, whereby wée coniectured that the same was apointed in ould time for a place of buriall. Howbeit, they whiche dwell neare vnto it, say that it was builded for a place to kéepe wares in to bée soulde, and vpon that perswasion they call it in the vulgare toongue, Il mercato di Sa∣bato. Sure it is, that in the ould time
the bodies of dead men were wnte to be brent, and the ashes layd vp in pts. This is moreouer to bee wondered at that one of our companions tooke out of one of ye pots a péece of ye skull of a mans heade of a wonderful thicknes. For this is an argument, y• not only the ashes of dead men were inclosed in these pottes: but also the bones after that the fleshe was consumed away in the Cofines. This piece of skull, at the first was hard to féele to, but so soone as it had lien a∣while in the open aier it waxed ote, and at length fell to ponder. But let vs now leane the dead, and not fight with bones. Beefore wée came to Puteoli, wee chaunced to light vpon them that make Alume. These he winge litle stones out of the hilles harde by, burne them in a Kill, then layinge them on heapes the space of certen dayes: cast water vpon them whith they draw out of Pittes, that they may sake in it after the maier of lime, and fall the more easely into ponder. Then make they lye of these
ashes, whiche they powre into tubbes and vessels of woode, and there gathe∣reth to an hardinesse in the toppe about the brimme of the vessell, sticking faste and congeling to the sides after the ma∣ner of yse: then gather they it out with certen instruments made for the nonce, & kéepe it to their vse. Not far from that place are certen hoat Baines, which the Italians tearme Ibagni di agnano, which although they haue very simple and lowe cottagies: notwithstandinge they are much commended for holsom∣nesse: and sure it is, that the Vicere of Naples, with all the residue of the nobi∣litie of that Realme, doo vse customably once euery yéere at the Spring time, to goe thither. In the same hilles and shore nere vnto these baines, is a place which the Italians call La grotta del can, wee may very well turne it Dogges Den, a Caue replenished with filthye deadlye aire, wherein no lyuinge thinge may abide aliue. The deapth thereof is eight or nine foote, the breadeth aboute sixe and reacheth into the Hyll not
paste foure paces longe, and bendeth downe sumwhat sopewise, breathinge foorth an hoat and moiste breath, whiche a man may soone perceaue by puttinge in his hand. It tooke the name hereof in that such as come thither for trials sake are woont to thrust in some Dog: whom when they drawe foorth, immediatelye for dead: presently they cast some of the water of the lake there by vpon hym, and so restore him to his former cou∣rage and lyfe agayne. We, besids a dog, threw in many very great frogs, which because they leaped not foorth presently agayne, were killed with that pestilent breath. Plinie saith, that the territorie of Suessum and Puteoli, are certen Caues and hollow places vnder ground, which they call Spiracula, breathing places, o∣thers terme them Cheroneae pits, ex∣halynge foorth a mortall and deadly spirite, whereof this may be one.
Forum Vulcani. Vul∣canes Market place. The. 10. Chapter. NOt farre from this place is séene a great plain, of figure rounde, al ye∣lowe with Brimstone, hauinge also a peculier lake belonging vnto it which is not great. And for as much as the sub∣stance of that ground consisteth of mere Sulfur or Brimstō, which being set on fire, boyleth vp, therefore Strabo calleth that place Vulcanes Court: others haue tearmed it the féeld of Phlegrus, as doth Virgill. Neere to the lake are seene a fewe litle Cottages made of boughes, and néere to them are Killes wherein they boyle Brimston. From these who∣so walketh alonge by the small guttes, (for they deserue scarce to bée called by the name of Lakes) hée shall perceiue that they send foorth a very thick smoke, and yt the water boileth very hoat. The
report goeth, and it is lyke enough to be true, that if a man cast any lyuing thing into them, and after a litle while pluck it foorth agayne, hée shall finde nothinge left but bare bones: the lyke they re∣port also of egges, I wot not what. A∣boute these small guttes, whereof wee nowe speake, are founde litle wodden crosses innuerable, which some bold and ventrous fellowes haue stucke into the brinks, as it were, for certen bowndes and tokens, after the maner of Hercules pillers, for as much as the passedge vnto them is very daungerous. For whiche way soeuer you goe, you may perceiue by the sownd that the ground is hollow vnderneth, out of whiche somtimes so∣denly breake vp flames of Brimstone, and pay home these venterous fellowes with deserued punishment for their fol∣lie. For why, the vppermost part of the ground is light, and drie, neither may a man walk ouer eueri part of it. I know it well that Plinie ye writer of the natu∣ral historie, is suspected of many to haue intermedled lies with trueth, after the
maner of the Grecians. Howbeit wee our selues haue séene these things also, and therfore credit him the rather when hée writeth of these things, or of such o∣ther lyke. For it is most true which hée saith very woorthely in some place, that nature which is diffused throughout all earthlye thinges, breaketh foorth often shewinge it selfe diuerslye, as it were some God, or celestiall power. Puteoli, the Citie of Pozolo. The 11. Chapter. WHen from this large and lowe plaine we returne vnto the Hill, you shall see at the foote thereof a moste plesant place, at the shoare of ye Puteolā sea. It is thought, yt the name Puteolis was deriued of this woorde Puteus, which signifieth a Well or sole, because in oulde time there was woonte to bee great store in that place, if yée lyste therein to followe the deriuacion
of the Latine or of ye Italyan, wherin the Italians cal a pit or Sole by the name of Poreo: or else that it is so called of the horible sauour and stench whiche brea∣theth out of the nigh Mines, to wyt, of Brimstone and Alume. The aun∣cient writers doe call this Towne Di∣caearchium. And although there bee many that cannot agrée aboute the si∣tuation thereof, supposinge that it stood sometime in the place where those ru∣ines and downefalles are séene, namely at the Hilles Foote or somewhat far∣ther of: notwithstandinge the descrip∣tion whiche is set downe by the ould writers, declareth yt to be false: & more credible it is, that it stood vpon the litle Hill in whiche place at this tyme there stande certen principall Buildinges: how bee it, it maye bée also, that all those other ruines might be part therof, as the Suburbes, or some other place adioyninge to the Suburbes. In the Towne it selfe is nothinge almoste woorthe the sight, béesides the Churche
which is very auncient, and buylded af∣ter such maner and fashion, that a man may easely perceaue that it was some∣time an Heathenish or Ethnick Tem∣ple. Moreouer, there are ingrauen vp∣on it the names of the workemen that builded it, and his name also, in honour of whom it was buylded. There are also to bée séene the bones of a mans bo∣dyes of monstrous bygnesse, vppon which Pomponius Laetus a most dili∣gent searcher out of Antiquities, wrote this inscription: Who so thou art that heere amazd dost stand, To see the hugie bones of Giantes fell: Come vnderstand why in Hetrurie lande They do abide. This doth the storie tell, When in this place Alcides once did dwell, And from th'Iberi, conquerour came away, His beasts he draue along these fields, they say. Then from this hill that Dicarchëum hight, With bended Bow & weightie Club in hand: These Typhons tall, & Giants maine of might He draue away, & quite expulst the lād, This wicked broode could not the God with∣stād. But part anon to Hydrus forth them sped, And part for succour to the Tuskans fled.
Howbeit yet this cause of wofull dread, That might vnto ech place by them ensue: Was sone extinct whē all these sends wer dead, Whose blood the ground in ech place did im∣brue. Posteritie, to shew that this was true: Their bodies keepe of mighty im & bones. To shew the world such mē there liued ones. The inhabitantes of this towne are all for the more parte Fishermen, and they rayse a great gayne yéerely, of sutche as traueyll thither of purpose to see these Antiquities. For they em∣ploy theyr traueyll and diligence in gi∣uyng theyr attdance vpon them, and in shewynge them the Antiquities all alonge that Seacaoste. Without the Towne are certeine Monasteries and houses of Religion, and manye sumptuous Pallaices béelongyng vn∣to noble men. There are also séene the Monumentes and Fowndacions of verye auncient Romane buildyngs, béeynge a thynge moste certeyne, that the Senatours and Noblemen of Rome, had all theyr delyght and pla∣ces
of pleasure there, and in the bor∣ders there to neare adioyning, wher∣of I haue hetherto intreated, whych maye bée gathered as well oute of Tullies Epystles, as out of Poly∣bius, Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, and Liuie. In the Garden of the Frée∣ars Franciscanes, there is a lymite or bounde▪ woorthie to bee viewed: and harde by the Towne are certeyne Vaultes, and Chambers standynge togyther, whiche men thinke were sometyme Bathes. In goyng vp to the Monasterie you shall see three ve∣rye beawtyfull Pyllers: and in go∣yng downe from it you shall see a passynge large and wyde Amphitea∣ter, buylded wyde in the myddle and narrower towarde eche ende, to the representacion of an Egge, on the outsyde more decayed and defa∣ced then the Amphiteater of Rome is, but wythinsyde more tyghte and whole. For it is full of Seates, and all benched about, although in some places
the seates bée couered with earthe and ouergrowne with bushes, and ye com∣passe of the wall is whole and sounde which reacheth vp a great height. In my iudgemēt this Amphithetre is one of the most auncient Romane Antiqui∣ties that remayne at this day. Not far from this standeth another building ful of chambers, of a wounderful & strange Arte and Workemanship, diuided in∣to many Celles, the one leadyng vnto the other. Euerie Cell hath four doores to passe through to the next adioyning, whereby I suspecte that it was some∣time a Labyrinth, the Italians call it, Le Camerelle. Moreouer in the hauen and Bosome, wherin Puteoli standeth are séene hugie Pyles and Péeres in the maine Sea, builded a longe crosse the Sea from the shoare of Puteoli, vn∣to the lande on the other side, by Cali∣gula the Emperour, as Suetonius, and Dion Cassius do write. Likwise there lyeth the Ilande Crape, or rather as Dion tearmeth it Caprea, into which, Tiberius the Emperour withdrewe
himselfe, when hée soughte a solitarie place, auoiding the sight of the people. ¶ An hill arising out of the grounde. The. 12. Chapter. THis thing moreouer is not to bée o∣uerpassed with silence, that in the same place of the Realme of Naples, which they call Tripergula, and neare vnto the village which wée shewed be∣fore was somtime Ciceroes Academie: not many yéeres agoe, that is to say, in the yéere of our Lorde. M. D. xxxviij. there suddeinly arose an hill out of the grounde, which remaineth vnto thys day, conteining in compasse about foure myles. Béefore this Hill arose, there were continually Earthquakes in that place the space of certein dayes without intermission, and fiers of Brimstonie substaunce, and of that liquour whych commonlye is called Oleum Petrae,
Oyle of the Rocke. But anone, when thys fier béegan to growe to a great flame, and when the matter of the fyer was some deale spent, there insued suche tumbling out of stones, and such flying vp of Ashes, fierce windes, and horrible perturbacion of the ayre: that it was feared that all the whole frame of the worlde would fall. All whyche accidentes Leander Bononiensis hath diligently noted, and béefore him a cer∣teyne Salernitane wryting in the Ita∣lian tongue, one that béehelde that wo∣full and terrible Tragedie. Simon Portius lykewyse wroate of the same matter, in a Booke intituled, Of the burnyng of the Realme of Naples. And although thys wonderfull and strange spectacle, was the handye woorke of God, who ruleth the inferiour course of Nature: yet are the causes there∣of to bée weyghed, if there bée any to bée founde to depende vppon naturall reason. It is lyke, that the causes ther∣of procéeded from spirites, and exha∣lacions of qualitie fierce and sharpe,
and verie myghtye, included in the Earthe, so that it was able to lift it vp, and when the Earthe by reason of the weyght thereof stoutely resisted he ex∣halacions: it was by yt great force ther∣of mightily driuen out of ye place where it was before. For the flying out of so great abundance of stones and ashes: declareth that there was great abun∣dance of such exhalacions, shewing that the earthe was for the more part con∣sumed, and resolued into ayre. After this maner, and by eruption of spirites out of the earthe, the Poet Ouid wyt∣nesseth that there rise an Hillocke out of a plain field, néere to the Citie Troi∣zena, in these wordes: Not far from Pythei Troizene is a certen high ground found All voyd of trees, which heretofore was plain and leuell ground, But now a mountaine. It is possible also, yt there may bée new Ilandes found in waters, howbeit not insuing vpō yt same cause which Seue∣ra allegeth to haue hapned in his time,
when the Ilands Theron and Therea grewe in the Sea, not by any allunion or breaking in, as in times past the I∣landes Echinades came, of whom Pli∣nie hath noted somewhat, or else as Ae∣gypt, which Herodotus tearmeth the gifte of the Ryuer: but by abreaking foorth and rising vp of the Earth, whilst many men looked vpon it. For the ex∣halations and windes are many times so vehement and sharpe: that they lifte vp the Earth quight aboue the water. Semblably Ouid writeth, that by cas∣ting of twigges and boughes into the water, there grew an Iland in the ry∣uer Tyber. And verely all this change and alteration is not deuoyd of naturall reason, howbeit no man hath euer de∣clared the causes of them more sub∣stancially then hath Strabo, where hée sayth: Forasmuch as all things do conti∣nually mooue and are chaunged, we must suppose that the earth remaineth not al∣wayes one, so that nothing is put to it, or taken from it: nor yet the water: whose transmutacion & alteration is naturall
and well knowne. This much Strabo. But let vs nowe come to the Citie of Naples. The hill Pausilypus. The. 13. Chapter. THus traueiling from the Countrey and Territoryes of Puteolis to∣wards the Citie of Naples, at the laste stone from the Citie wée passe ouer an hill which they call Pausilypus. The same being hollowed through at y• foot, hath a plaine & a direct passage through it: in length béeynge halfe an Italian myle or somewhat more, and so wyde: that two Cartes ladē may easely passe one by an other, but in height it is al∣together vnéeuen. For at the entrance at both ends (which are like two great gates) it is so wyde that a man on hors∣backe holdyng vp a speare in his hande may enter into it, & not touch yt top: but within, the height diminisheth by litle
litle, and in no place excéedeth ye height of three men. This Hill was in thys sorte by great industrie made hollow, and leuelled, and made smoothe on both sides, méeting togither vatwise in the top. At eche entrance at both sides are holes, at eche hande one, wherby there commeth in the Sun light, but in the mydle it hath no lyght at al. By reason whereof it commeth to passe, that when two horses, or Cartes, or mo, do méete in that place: then they cry aloude alla Montagna, or, alla Marina, that is to say, hold of to the hilward, or to the sea∣ward, that therby ech of thē may know on which side hee shall goe. And it is thought among the common people, yt if any kill a man in this caue: he can by no meanes get out of it, & this they say, is found to be true by experience. Now when you passe foorthe of this caue to∣wardes the Citie of Naples: there of∣fer themselues to bée séene two Chur∣ches dedicated vnto our Lady, whereof the one, yt is new & lately built, begyn∣neth to be inritched & largely indowed,
by reason of Notable miracles which, they saye, the Virgin Mary, hath doone there: the other is almost desolate and forlorne, which in times past was very famous. Which thing, as I was infor∣med, cam to passe vpō this occasion, by∣cause the staires wherby folkes vsed to goe vp to the hill neare by, are at this present brokē away beneath, which in foretime were wont to bée cōmodious vnto manye Matrones and auncient Dames, in this respect, that by meanes of them they might step aside into the thickets and bushes which growe vpon the hill, where vnder colour of religi∣on thei worshipped Venus rather, then the Virgin Marie. Néere vnto the first Chappell or Church, wherof wée now speake, is séene the graue of Virgill Maro, but some say that it lyeth in the Gardein of the Monasterie vppon the hill, hauing this superscription: Mee Mantua bred, Calabres tooke, Parthenop now doth hold, Of pastures I haue sung, of fieldes, likewise of captaines bold.
Howbeit it is credible enough, ye Vir∣gill was buried there in a certen Chap∣pell which is yet remaining, but ye ver∣ses are so defaced: y• here and there a mā can scarce discerne one whole letter, & ther is no Monumēt to be séen wherby a man may vnderstand the truth. The Munks y• are there, say, that there was an I mage of Brasse vpon the Tumbe, which ye citizens of Mantua tooke away by stealth, and diligētly kéepe it to this present day. Which thyng whether it be true or no, I knowe not. But I my selfe among many things mo, saw in ye same Citie a very auntient statu or I∣mage, vnder which ye aboue write ver∣ses were ingrauē: but whether ye same were brought frō any other place thy∣ther or not: y• could we not vnderstand. Likewise some doe write that the Poet Ennius had a picture or Image laid vpō his tumbe by the Scipioes. And not far frō this place wher is said to be Maroes graue, lieth also the Tumbe of Iacobus Sannazarius, whose learned works are abroade in the world, vpon which these
verses following are ingrauen, made, as it is iudged, by Bembus. Cast flowers on this sacred dust, as next to Maroes schrine: So next this Poet comes in gol∣den gift, and veine diuine. ¶ The Citie of Naples. The. 14. Chapter. ANd now when we haue passed frō the hill Pausilypus, the noble citie of Naples aduaunceth it selfe to sight, yt kynges Sea, & the Metropolitane citie of all that Realme. The same was first named Parthenope when the Citizens of Cumae builded it, after the accidents which befell there, wherof we haue dis∣coursed more at large in conuenient place béefore. Of the beginning and foundatiō of this Citie, Silius the Poet hath thus written: One of the Sirenes first did giue to thee thy noble name,
And to thy walles, that Achelo∣ia hight, of worthy fame, O Naples braue, whose dulcet songes woont on the seas to ring, And long ere that her hearers to their fatall end to bring. While on the waues shee sate, and charmd her tunes of woful lay: And to the haples Seamen sange their greeuous great decay. ¶ Gardeines. The. 15. Chapter. FRom the hill towards the Citie, are fermes & cuntrey houses belonging vnto Noble men, whose Gardeins are surpassing and most excellent. First and foremost, they abound with plentie of water, deuised to runne by sutche workmanship, industrie and cunning: that in many places you shall sée wa∣ter run out of a tree, and to fall down into certeyne vesselles of Marble. In
which vesselles, you may perceaue by cūning wrought, how Neptune swim∣meth vpon the water beating the wa∣ter wyth his thréeforked scepter, as it were the waues of the Sea. In ano∣ther place you shall sée the Naiades and Nymphes of the Sea, or Aeolus Kinge of the wyndes. There maye you also béeholde the Faunes, and Sa∣tyres, made of certein shelles that are gathered in the Sea, framed so feately: that they séeme rather to be grauen or painted, then to bée set together of litle small péeces, they do so liuely resemble a naturall and lyuing colour. There bee moreouer Labirinthes, throughe which there runneth water wc sundrie crokes & windings, turning sometime this way, somtime that. There be also Springes and Welles in these Gar∣deines, fashioned like caues hellow vn∣der the grounde, builded with stones y• are eaten and fretten by salnesse of the Sea water, so that the water drop∣peth through them, which is very plea∣sant to behold. For the stones resemble
the colour of  or Yee, then are thei also  with other fine carued and Checkered péeces set in, as Cor∣rall, Moother of Pearle, and certeyne Herbes whose séedes béeyng prycked in, and nourished by the moysture: doe spryng and burgein vp in the midst of the stones. The water also runneth out of the Welles into the Gardeines, by certen pypes and gutters in yt paue∣ment, whiche pauement for the moste part, is made of Marble, or else of faire pauynge tiles, and neuer hurteth the pauement. These pypes and gutters are large and wide, seruyng as well to kéepe fishe in, as to le their drink béeynge set into them. Neare vn∣to these welles or fountaine bries, stand Cagies of Birds, into which out of the pypes there leapeth water ve∣rie arteficially, and the birdes receaue it verye commodiouslye. In the Ca∣gies are merueilous faire and goodly singing birdes, brought out of straunge Countreyes. Nexte vnto these wée passe into very pleasant and delectable
walks, wherin these ar, Arbours, ships, Houses, Centaures, with many other likenesses of sundrye straunge beastes, & lyuing creatures. And when ye go out of these: there be diuers sorts of herbs set many times after the maner of La∣brinth or Maze, with thickets of Bay-trées, of Cipres trées, and of Vines. And many times there are séene Labi∣rinthes and Mazes of Box trée, Iui, and Mirtles, moreouer there grow in these Gardens Palme trées, the fruite wherof are Dates, with other straung and rare Trées And to be short, (for I wyll now speake nothinge of Images, and Monuments) there is such plentie of most delicate and choice fruites, such swéet smelles, and such pleasure: that it is not possible ther shuld be any greater or more delectable in the Gardens of Hesperides, that are termed the Gar∣deins of all delight. Thus from the Monasterie of Munks whereof I spake a litle before, vnto the Citie all the way alonge, are nothinge els but Noble mens Fermes, and gar∣deiues.
The Citie  in a reache or crooke of the Sea called Mare Tyr∣rhenum, beinge builded in thrée square fourme, whereof two corners looke to∣wardes the Sea, and the thirde to∣wardes the Hilles whiche are not ve∣rye farre of from it. It standeth vpon a ground or foundacion not equall or le∣uell, but as it were forked, and risinge vp on both sides. The Merchantes and common multitude for the moste part, inhabite the lower parte of the Citie, and the Noble men the higher. Where∣fore, there are séene moste sumptious and bewtifull Pallaces, amonge whiche as chiefe is the Pallace of Vrsine prince of Salerne, of the Prince of Sulmo, and Thomas Cambius, adorned & set forth with many pictures and Statues,  Lionesse standinge ouer the gate with this inscription. To Iubiter xenius.
¶ Welles and Streetes. The 16. Chapter. MOreouer, I suppose y• this is to bée reckned among the principall com∣modities of this Citie, that euery house, almost, hath a Well or twayne aboun∣dantly flowing with most holsome wa∣ter, nether is there any other citie in all Italy (as concerning store of water) that may be compared with this. The strets of the citie are narow, except thrée only, which as they are sufficient broade e∣nough: so are they of a merueilous length. The higher Stréete of these is called La vicaria, another Capuana, the thirde lyeth right againste the Castle, and stretcheth open alonge to the Mer∣ket place. The Stréet Capuana leadeth towardes Capua, whiche Citie is very famous & renowmed for ye Ciuile law, especially in mater of contracte. For the firste Prator or Maiour thereof was
a straunger, and in oulde time it muche flourished with trade of Merchandize. Wherby returnes of paymentes vpon billes, and exchaunges, were woonte to bée discharged ether there or at Rome, or at Bithynia, a citie of Asia. Vpon the Gate of this Stréete are manie Monu∣ments to be séene. whiche was made at what time Charles the fift Emperours of Rome, and King of Naples, first of a creatures entred in at the same, the like wherof also the Citizens of Andwarpe did imitate in a gate of theirs afterward Beefore the Gate  the Images of Oceanus, and Tethis, and also in the tréete in conuenient places, were er∣rected the Statues of Hercules, Athlas, Perpetuitie, Religion,  other , whiche re set  in he Tri∣umph of Naples.
¶ The Merket place, and Churches. The 17. Chapter. THe chiefest Merket place of the Ci∣tie is foursquare, and verye broade, and large, but not paued, in the midste wherof stande a paire of Gallowes, and a scaffold set vp for the nonce to put tres∣passers to death vpon: also a Chappell, rightouer againste whiche, is a Well with a very large Cesterne or Lauer. In the Merket place are many Innes, but they bée of the meane and common sorte, and the greatest want in Naples, is of clenly and soote lodgings, although that be an infinite number of Tauerns and vittling houses in it. It hath not manie Churches, but those whiche it hath are verye faier, a∣mongst which the Cathedrall Churche of Sainct Clare is passing bewtyfull, and so is yt also which is dedicated vnto
Sainct Luio, sauing that it is ouer dark. Sainct Maries of the Preachinge Fri∣ers, is a verie proper Churche, for it standeth vpon one of the moste pleasant and loftyest places of the Citie, and within, it is almoste made al of Marble without any periettinge or plastering: but it is sumwhat of the narowest. Sainct Marie Churche Di Carbona, is very mutch frequented for deuocion sake, whiche is a House of Religion not farre from the Merket place, by reason whereof it hath in it a number of vo∣wed Tables, and two Chappels all of Marble faste béeside the higher Altare. Within the Altare is a Tumbe, wher∣in reste the bodies of Robert Kinge of Naples and his Wyfe, verye sump∣tuous: insomutch that the report goeth, that there is neuer a péece of woorke to be found in all Europe, of greater ma∣iestie then that is. Howbeit, if not fai∣erer then this, yet in my opinion, match vnto it is that, wherein lyeth the bodie of William Croius and his Wife
in Belgicum or Dutchlande, not farre from Louane; at the Castle of Heffria. Likewise the Tumbe of Mauritius of Saxonie one of the Dukes Electours, at Friburge in Hermonduris, and that also wherein his Wyfe lieth at Vima∣ria, in Thuringe, and moreouer the same which is builded at Heidelburge, in the memorie of Duke Palatine, Duke Electour. Truly these 4. Tūbes whiche I haue nowe named, are the most principall of all that euer I sawe, ether in Italye, or Fraunce, or Germa∣nie, or in England, for, as for Spayne: I was neuer there. But amongst al that are séene in any of these aboue named Regions, made of Brasse or Copper, in my iudgement, the Tumbe of Kinge Henrie the seuenth King of Englande, surpasseth the residew, whiche standeth in the Abbey of Westminster nigh to the Citie of London, with an inscripti∣on in Latine verses, which may thus bée Englished.
Kinge Henrie the seuenth heere lieth in this place, The glorie of all Kinges that liued at his age In wit, and wealth, and deedes of noble grace. To whom befell the gifts of nature for vauntage. A princelie countenaunce, a fauour graue and sage A comly personage, and bewtie heroicall: And ech poinct of venustie ioyned therwithall. Vnto him was coupled in wedlocks pleasant band An amiable Spouse in beautie right diuine, Bashfull and verteous, and like a frutefull land Plentifull of children, sprong forth of princely line. Right happie parentes their issue so doth shine. To whō, o Englād, these thāks thou owest of right That euer Henrie the 8. was borne into thy sight. All the whole Toumbe is gilten ouer, and it shineth faire, being round beset with precious Stones but of the meanest sorte, it hath in it also many turned and carued pillers, and very lyke vnto this: are the mounmentes of the Kinges of Fraunce in Sainct Denise Churche.
¶ Granetes and Stoare Houses, Castles, and Armaries. The 18. Chapter. MOreouer, there are at Naples foure Storehouses, and as the Grecians term them , euery one foursquare benched rounde aboute mutch lyke the place at Andwarp whiche they call the Burse, or at London the Roiall Ex∣change, and at Venice la piazza del ri∣uo alto. In these Store houses at certen times of the yéere are generall assem∣blies, and counselles holden. And Mer∣chauntes also méete dayly in them, to bargein and deale in Merchandize. There are thrée Castles, whereof twayne stande faste by the Sea side, to wit: the new and the ould, the thirde is situate vppon the high Hill that lyeth ouer the Towne. And it is so stronge,
and so well fortified: that hée that hast possession of that Castle may easely ma∣ster the Citi, yea although it were sur∣prised by the enemie. A litle beneth this castle is a house of Carthusians, wherof the Church is dedicated to Sainct Mar∣tine, from whence there is a merueil∣lous pleasaunt prospect, both ouer the Citie, and the sea. But in the ould Cas∣tle which standeth by the way Capuana are very auntient buildinges and Ima∣gerie to bée séene, and there is also an Armarie wherein is kept the complete armour of Fraunces Kinge of France, whiche hée woare vpon hym when hee was taken prisoner at the Citie Tici∣num now termed Pauia in Lumbardie very faire, made of pure stéel, and with∣out any furniture of Golde. Foorth of the Castle you may goe into excéedinge large, and goodly Gardeines: and within the Castle is an hangynge Gardeine, but the same, besids a pleasant prospect, hath nothinge else in it. The newe Castle is builded at the entrance into ye citie of Tiburtine stone
fouresquare. In the same place in ould time stoode a Religious House of prea∣ching Friers, whiche is now conuerted to another vse. It is fortified on that side whiche lyeth to the Citie with a verie déepe ditch, lyke as it were double tren∣ched. For when you be past the firste Ditch: anone you shall sée the Castle, which lykewise is fenced with a trench, Walles, and Turretes, and it standeth vpon a stéepe downefall of an hyll. It hath a verie faire gate in the innersyde made all of Marble, openinge vpon a large Courte fouresquare, sumewhat long. At the left hande when you enter in, there is is a litle Hal likewise foure∣square, wherein the méetinges and as∣semblies of the Estates of the whole Realme, are kept euery yéere: & the Vi∣cere of the cuntrey vseth to kéepe court, and sit in iudgment there euery wéeke. But not far from this Hall in a verye great Tower, ar kept these ornaments of the kings. A Scepter of gold beset wt veryie great Pearles at the toppe. A Sword with the Hilt and scabbarde of
Golde very ritchly garnished with pre∣cious Stones. A Crowne or Diademe for a Kinge, glittringe with precious and orient Stones of incredible big∣nesse. A Crosse of cleane Golde, one spanne longe. A mightye Pot of Gold rounde aboute adorned with precious Stones of great valew, mightye bigge Pearles called Vniones, and principall sorts of most precious Stones, in great number. To bée shorte, there is a Treasure whose estimation and price is inestimable.
¶ Antiquities, the Vni∣uersitie, and peculiar properties of the Citie and People of Naples. The 19. Chapter. IT is wounderfull to sée, what plentie of most auntient Images are to bee séene in the Citie of Naples, yea in pri∣uate mens houses, namely of Bacchus, Mercurie, Hercules, Brutus, and the whole patterne of the auntient maner of warfare. There bée also Statues made wearinge on them gownes, and a mightye horsehead made of Bras very cunningly wrought, the lyke wherof is séene at Rome in the pallace of the Car∣dinall De valle. Howbeit one Cyriacus Anconitanus, hath writen verye dilly∣gentlye of all these matters, for that which Apianus and Amantius haue set
foorth in this argument touchinge an∣tiquities: is for the more part taken out of him. Fredirick the seconde Emperoure of Rome, founded the Vniuersitie in this Citie, whiche flourisheth at this daye. While I abode there, Simon Portus, a famous Philosopher and Physition, departed this lyfe. The same, béesides the Booke whiche hée wroat of the bur∣ninge of the cuntrie of, Puteolis, wher∣of I made mencion béefore, wroat a Booke of the Soule, of the Senses, of Coulers, of the Germain Mayden, and many other moe. One Mercellus of Siene was of great renowme amonge the Icti, a man very well learned and eloquent: as for Diuinitie that was in those daies sent to the Monasteries and Abbeies, as it was likewise in the more part of all Italie. Naples féeleth winter scarselye the space of two Monthes, to wit, Ianuarie & Februarie. They haue raine often, but without snowe, and in Summer season extreame heat, by rea∣son whereof they seldome haue anye
stéepe couerings and rouffes vpon their Housen as are in other Cuntries, that in the night time they may walke vpon the top of the Houses in the Leades, to coole their bodies. In the vulgare toonge this Citie is termed by the name of Gentiles, which is to say Noble, lyke as Rome is called Great, Venice Ritch, Florence Faire, as I coniecture to the imitation of the Gréekes, whiche vsed also to commende their chiefe Cities by some notable Title. For Athenaeus comparinge certen Cities together: cal∣leth it Golden Alexandria, Bewtifull Antiochia, very bewtifull Nicomedia, and the Citie of Athens most glorious, the mightie Citie, and Breuiarie, as it were, of al the whole Worlde. And I think, that Naples was called Noble by reason of the great number of Noble men that dwell in it, & the ecesse which is vsed there. And a man shall not finde in any other place of all Italie, so great plenty of most excellent and couragious Horses, as hée shall there: But if a man would bringe a Horse of that Cuntrey
out of the Realme: hée must pay some custome or tolledge for hym, and they sell there not only Horses, and all other kindes of Merchandize: but also slaues, as wel men as women. There are ma∣ny Théeues, and in sundrye places the Neapolitanes are euill spoken of, not so mutch for that themselues be of an euill Nature: but bicause they harbour ma∣ne naughty persons, and haue naughtie neighbours. Those are the Apuli∣ans, and Calabrians, and Sicilians, of whom, that is to saye, the laste, that may truely bée sayde whiche Cicero wroat of them: All Iland dwellers are naught, but the Sicilians are woorst of all. But now, as concerninge the proper∣ties of the the People of Naples: they are not so mutche delighted with the Gréeke: and Latine: as with the He∣truscan tongue, and they mocke the Ca∣labrians with their language, and lyke∣wise the Calabrians scorne at the Apu∣lians. Their talke is full of brag∣ginge and boastinge, insomutche that
they despise the counsell of othermen, and prefer their owne wittes before al others. It sufficeth their merchantes if you giue them your woorde, but if you breake promise, they be very sharp re∣uengers of the iniurie done vnto them, like as they be very mindfull of a good turne receaued. They fare passing sūp∣tuously, and sometime they spend more Sugar at a meale then they do breade, imitating therein the Sicilians. In ap∣pairell they bée proude, and therin they bestow ouer much cost both in tyme of Warre, and Peace. They assault their enemy with notable courage and opor∣tunitie, & they haue horses verie méete for the warres, wheron they be erpert in riding, and guide thē with meruey∣lous dexteritie of body. They are too too much giuen to loue and ouer amarous, but especially of suche wéemen as are painted in face, and proud of hart, vnto which two thinges their wéemen doe principally apply themselues. Other∣wise they bee very good huswyues, and bée most precise, and as it were, religi∣ous
in honouring their louers. To con∣clude, the people of Naples are verye curteous and friendly to straungers, and loue them in whom they sée anye notable or singular qualitie, but if they sée no such thing: they litle estéeme thē. And this much of the Citie of Naples. ¶ The Kings Pittes or Pondes, and the hill Ʋe∣suuius called nowe Summi, and of others. The. 20. Chapter. WIthout the Citie, on ye side which is contrarie or oueragainst yt hill Pausilipus: are séene the kinges Pittes or Pondes commonly called Pozzi reali, truely verie fayre, and worthie to bée throughly viewed. And vnlesse I bée deceaued, there is the lyke place at Rome, and at Ferraria Ilbel Veder, which is to saye, as I interprete it, A
place for Summer consisting of hou∣ses, Gardeines, and Riuers: likewyse most excellent for prospecte, and plea∣sant situation. This goodly building or rather Pallaice, was erected by Ferdi∣nand of Arragō yt first, king of Naples in fourme fouresquare, but somewhat long, in whose walles stand very aun∣cient Pictures to be séene. The middle court was made to washe in, wythout couert in the open aire, from whence we mount vp thrée steppes into a place lyke a Lauer or Cesterne, into which you may let in the water at your plea∣sure, and that great Courte is round a∣boute compassed with a beautifull, and verie gorgeous gallerie. But in ye last siege of the Citie of Naples, yt French∣men spoyled not onely this Gallerie: but welnighe all the whole Pallaice. While this washing place was whole, I suppose there was none more mag∣nificall or pleasaunter in al Italy. Ouer against this Pallaice, standeth another Princely buildynge, or Pallaice, and a place also from whence Water is
conueid in pypes vnto the citie. From thēce wée passe into Gardeins in which there is another gallerie, before whom lieth a large and wide plot, but waste and forlorne, alouergrowne wc réedes, bushes, and briars. From hence againe wée goe into other gardeines: at length wée come vnto a fountaine or conduite head passing faire and cleare, and full of holsome swéete water. Hard by this conduite head stoode certen Cagies and Couppes, wherein were kepte sundry kindes of beasts, and liuing things, but they were also broken by the French∣men. Thē from this place we may re∣turne again to the first, through offices and places apperteining to ye houshold, where are many spoutes and Welles, and many pleasant murmurings cau∣sed by falling and flowing of the water, likewise groues, and the pleasant fight of varitie of fruites. From this place wée maye goo too sée the remainder and monumentes of the citie Palaeopolis, whereof Liuius ma∣keth mencion. There is also another
place not far from Naples of nolesse de∣light then anye of the aboue recited, at the fourthe stone from the Citie, at the foote of the hill Vesuuius or Summi, in which hill Plinius the writer of the na∣turall historie, and Lieutenant ouer the fléete to Augustus: perished among the ashes, which Plinius the second testifi∣eth in an Epistle, and the same hil not long before had burned lyke the hill of Aetna in Sicil. At the foote of this Hill ther groweth Greekish wine or Sack, which some call Vinum Pompeianum or Pompeius wine, which is very good and perfecte, and much commended of by the writings of sundry men. The Pallace whiche standeth there taketh name of the village which is néere vn∣to it, and is called Pietra biancha, wee may call it in Englishe White stone, or whiterocke, builded all within of white Marble, and bewtified in the lodgings with checkred work of point deuise. In this Pallace is made the Image of a Nymphe sléeping, and leaning vppon a water vessell, out of which there run∣neth
abundance of pure cristall water, which afterward passeth along in trou∣ghes or gutters of Marble stone, & hur∣teth no part of the pauement, the same gutters seruing also to kéepe fishe in, like as it were little fishpondes. Sure∣ly, I am of opinion, that aswell the auncient Romanes as Greekes, tear∣med in oulde time sutche buildinges Nymphaea, howbéeit this is but newe, and builded by one that was a councel∣ler vnto ye Emperour Charles the fifte, about the yéere of our Lorde, as some say, 1530. It hath on the one side the sea harde by, rounde aboute on the other∣sides a goodly plaine and open cuntrey, the plentifulnesse wherof is wounder∣full both of Corne, Oile, Wine, and all maner other good fruites. This which I will speake is hard to bée credited, & yet it is true, that there bée some Vines found there the grapes whereof beyng pressed doo yéelde x. or xij. measures of wine, euerie measure contayning iiij. gallons and a halfe or rather more of oure Measures. And thys thynge
also may séeme straunge, which one hath reported in writing for a trueth, yt when the Northeast wind bloweth, there are brought into the Cuntrey of Naples out of Africa sutche abundance of Quailes, that they fall by heapes vp∣pon houses that bée néere to the Sea side, that men may easely take them in their hands. Yea, while they be in their course of flying, and bée wéeryed either wyth contrarie wyndes, or tempeste, or lengthe of the iourney, they lyght many times vpō some shippe, or gally. And laste of all to conclude, suche is the deliciousnes of the Realme of Naples, suche the magnificencie of ye buildings, sutche the holsomenesse of the welles and water, sutche plentie of all thinges whiche nature bryngeth foorthe into the worlde myraculous and straunge, sutche Monuments of Antiquities, and finally suche store of fruites, and other things wherwith mans life is sustai∣ned: it is that not only truly named to bee aa parte of the happye Campania, but is indéede the Wombe, as they saye, of fertilitie, and the fatte of
Italie and the verie horne of plentie, as is in the prouerbe. All which thinges when wée had viewed verie diligently, béeing not so muche wéeried with our labour and traueyll, as that wee iudged it time to retourne to our studies: (for the desire whiche wée had to sée these things, and the most delectable behol∣ding of them tooke away all wéerisom∣nesse) we departed from Naples, & pas∣sing along by the most auncient Citie Caieta: wee came to Rome, and from thence we traueiled by the Tuskans to Padua. And when I had there arriued, I soiourned there a season, and afterwarde de∣parted into my natiue Cuntrey. FINIS. Imprinted at London by VVilliam How, for Abraham Veale dwelling in Paules Church-yarde at the signe of the La.
