3196 99838615 3000
AN EPI∣tome of the title that the kynges Maiestie of Englande, hath to the souereigntie of Scotlande, continued vpon the aunci∣ent writers of both na∣cions, from the beginnyng. M. D. XLVIII. CVM PRIVILEGIO AD IMPRIMEN∣DVM SOLVM
To the moste noble▪ and excellent prince, Edward the vi▪ by the grace of GOD kng of Englande, Fraunce, and Irelande, defendor of the  and vpon yearth supreme hed, of the Churche of Englande, and Irelande▪ your humble and obediēt subiecte Nicholas Bo∣drugan otherwise Adams, wis∣sheth lōg life, and the same prosperous and happie. ALthough I knowe right well (mooste noble Prince) that ther be diuerse whi¦che bothe by their coūsaill and writyng, do to their vttermoste powers swade the v∣nion of Scotlande vnto youre highnes, by the mariage of their Quene, a meane thereunto bothe honourable and Godly: Yet ne∣uertheles, the same study and fur¦der declaraciō of your maiesties
title to the superioritie thereof, semeth vnto me to bee so indiffe∣rently perteinyng to all menne, whiche doo professe obedience to youre highnes, that no mannes studie ought to be taken as vain or vnthankefull, whiche humbly bryngeth furthe to that common vse, whatsoeuer iudgement, pro∣fite, or knowlege, he supposeth to haue founde, either by studie, or inquisiciō: foreseyng that in tem∣pestious vpswellynges of water or shipwracke, fire, or other like calamities of men, right accepta¦ble vnto vs is the labor of those and thankes worthie, which wil∣lyngly do runne to helpe vs, al∣though in the meane tyme there be other sufficient nombre, to de∣liuer vs from the perill obiected. Herefore moste noble prince, per∣ceiuyng
the auncient  this greate Britaigne, and ∣ding suche plentie of writers cō∣fessyng your superioritie of Scot∣land, as could not by any enten∣dement so fully consent vpō any vntruth, I thought it my deutie to offre vp thesame vnto youre highnes▪ whiche histories like as almightie God hath from tyme to time, in fauor of the truth and of your title preserued: So hath his Godhed signified no lesse fa∣uour to your highnes, vouchesa∣uyng to nobilitate thesame, in the persone of your maiestie con∣serued vnto this youre tyme, the noble house of Seymour, whose auncester Eldulph de Samour beeyng then Erle of Gloucester, many hundreth yeres a gone, in the tyme of Kyng Aurelie Am∣brose
lewe Hengest the Saxon, capitall enemy of the Briton na∣cion: y whiche noble seruice like as this Realme was deliuered from the tyrany of Saxons, and restored to the whole Empire & name of greate Briteigne: so we youre obedient and louyng sub∣iectes truste, that the right noble duke of Somerset, and the lorde Seimour of Sudeley, your gra¦ces high Admirall, youre Maie∣sties dere vncles, shall in the ser∣uice of your highnes, for the like restitucion of the name and Em∣pire of greate Briteigne vnto your highnes, shew thēselfes the worthie successors of such an aū∣cester. Neither haue I purposed herin with opprobrious wordes to skolde with the Scottes, and thereby to wipe of one durt with
another. Neither  builde vpon our awne Eng auethors, but all my purpo , by indifferent writers, with plain and euident truth (whiche thyng bothe time and maners do euer∣more require) to publishe youre maiesties right and their defence folowyng therein for the more part Veremūd, Camphil, Corne∣lius de Hibernia, and Boecius their awne auethors: whiche pei∣nes because I haue assumed ra∣ther as a necessarie seruice to my coūtrey, then for mine awne glo∣ry, I truste I shall offende none but suche, whom it should bee a∣shame to please. Myne inclina∣ciō is to haue the good worde of euery mā, but the diseased malice of some cannot saie well of any. Albeit, touchyng the phrase and
stile of this my writyng, if the∣same to any man shall not satis∣fie his expectacion, let hym con∣sider that in parte it behoueth to vse the wordes of the historie, in whiche I am restrained by pro∣mise of an Epitome: and that in the residue it was not my mynde to trisle with the fiue flowers of Rethorike, but to bryng rather faithfull, then painted gliteryng ouerture, vnto thinges afflicted. The veritie of the Histories I trust shall so hereby appere, that both the good men of Scotlāde, by reason, and thenemies (if any suche bee) by their awne shame shalbe driuē, to cōfesse this myne assercion to be true, and thesame suche as thoug the mariage by the iniquitie of some take not ef∣fecte, yet to publishe to the world
sufficient cause, for the  naunce of your majestie  against them, wherein the honor of a kyng may not geue place to their wilfull rebellion. And for recouery whereof, vndoubtedly almightie God for your syncere fauor to the auauncement of his holy woorde, will by his promise as he hath begon, continue your highnes in felicitie and vi∣ctory, ouer all his and your enemies, wher vnto all youre true subiec∣tes doo saie. AMEN.
IF the veritie which auncient and indif∣ferent writers haue made commō to all nacions, might as∣well perswade the Nobles and Commons of Scotlande, as it hath reason, bothe to charge thē and disproue all their obiecciōs, thei would right sone laie doune their weapons, thus rashely re∣ceiued, to fight against the mo∣ther of their awne naciō: I mean this realme now called Englāde the onely supreme seat of thēpire of greate Briteigne. In whose bosome cast with vs, as bothe in one moulde, thei haue receiued the same toungue, lawe, and lan∣guage: for asmuche therefore, as nowe touchyng the mariage of their Quene, there is nothyng of
our part left vndoen, that ought to perswade theim to concorde, and thesame by diuerse of theim hetherto wholy neglected, thei shall of my parte easely perceiue that to increase their errour, ap∣proue their folly, or allowe their obstinacie, I am not disposed: but contrarily by ye veritie (wher in their awne writers shalbee no defence to theim, but meere con∣dempnacion) to publishe to the world the state of these contenci∣ons, our title & their defēce: pur∣suyng the which, I will folowe ye wordes of thistorie as foloweth. THE auncient writers of the Histories of this whole Isle of greate Briteigne, cōfesse that af∣ter our firste progenitor Brutus, the yere from the beginnyng of the worlde .iiii. M. xxvii. had ar∣riued
in this Isle, and after his awne name had called it Britei∣gne, he had issue thre sonnes, Lo∣cryne, Albanactus, and Camber, betwene whom, after his deathe thei agreed in this particiō, that Locryne had this first and wor∣thiest part, whiche now is called England, Albanactus the second part, now by the Scottes posses∣sed by hym called Albania, whi∣che their awne writers confesse: and to Camber chaūced the third part now called Wales: the two better partes to be holden of the firste, as of the worthiest of the bloud, accordyng to the Troyan lawe, from whence thei were di∣scended, whiche superiorite also by their different bearyng of the Armes of the father, leuyng the entier cote in the eldest brother,
is sufficiētly testified vntill this daie. The particion in this wise established, Albanactus posses∣syng Albania was by Humbre, his subiect miserably slam, with out issue of his body: to punishe whiche traitery, Locrine and his brother Camber assembled their power and entered Albania, and there slewe this Humber, whose body thei threwe into a great ri∣uer. Some write that this Hum∣ber beyng desperate, threw hym∣self into this Riuer, but all con∣fesse, that in this riuer his bodie was drouned, and that hereof toke the name of Humber, which it kepeth to this daie. This Lo∣crine herupon seazed Albania in∣to his awne hādes, as excheated wholy to hymself, not yeldyng a∣ny part therof vnto Camber his
brother, whereby also euidently appereth the entier seigniory o∣uer it to consist in hymself, accor∣dyng to whiche exāple, like lawe emong brethren euer since hath continued, preferryng the eldest brother to the onely benefite, of the collateral assencion from the youngest, aswell in Scotlande as in Englande vnto this daie. Locryne reigned in this state o∣uer them .xvii. yeres. Ebrāke the lineall heire frō the bodie of this Locryne, that is to saie the sonne of Mempris, soonne of Madan, sonne of the same Locryne, buyl∣ded in Albania the castle of Mai∣dens, nowe called Edenbrough: and the Castle of Alcluth or Al∣clude, now called Dunbriton, as the Scottishe Hector Boecius confesseth: wherby moste euidēt∣ly
appered: that this Ebranke was then therof seazed. This E∣branke reigned in this state ouer them .lx. yeres, after whose death this Albania as annexed to the Empire of Briteigne, discended to the onely kyng of Britōs, vn∣til the discent to the twoo sisters sonnes, Morgan and Conedage, lineall heires from thesaied E∣branke, who brotherly vpon the first example deuided the realme Morgan had Logres, and Cone∣dage had Albania: but shortly af¦ter Morgan thelder brother pon∣deryng in his hed, the loue to his brother, with the loue to a kyng∣dome, excluded nature and gaue place to ambicion, and therupon denounced warr to his brother: in whiche warre as the rereward of his vntruthe, death miserably
ended his life: wherby Condage obteined the whole Empire of al Briteigne, in whiche state he re∣mained .xxxiii. yeres. APTER whose time thesame lineally descēded to thonly kyng of Britōs, vntill after the reigne of Gorbodian, who had issue two sonnes, Ferres, and Porres, whi∣che Porres requiryng like par∣ticion of the land, affirmyng the former particions to bee rather of lawe then fauour, was by the handes of his elder brother, both of his life and hoped kyngdome bereued at once: but their vnna∣turall mother vsyng her natural malice, that for the deathe of her one sonne, would bee reuenged by the losyng of bothe, miserably slewe the other. Cloten by all writers aswell
Scottishe as other, was the next inheritor to the whole Empire, but lackyng power, the meane in those daies to obteyne right, he was contēted to deuide the same emong .iii. of his kinsmen, so that Scater had Albania. But after the death of this Clotē his sonne Dunuallo Moluncius made warr vpon these three Kynges, and at last ouercame them, and so reco∣uered the whole dominion, in to∣ken of whiche victorie, he cau∣sed hymself to be crouned with a croune of gold, the first that was worne emong kinges of this na∣cion. This Dunuallo erected tem¦ples wherein the people should assemble for Praier, to which tē∣ples he gaue benefit of Sanctu∣arie: he made the lawe for wager of battaill, in cases of murder
and felonie, whereby a thefe that liued and made his arte of figh∣tyng, should for his purgacion fight with the true man whiche he had robbed: but he beleued that the Goddes (for then thei supposed many) would by mira∣cle assigne victorie to the inno∣cent partie, the priuilege of whi∣che first lawe and benefite of the latter, aswel in Scotlande as in Englāde, be enioyed to this daie fewe causes by late positiue la∣wes emong vs excepted, where∣in the benefite of wager o bat∣taill is expelled: by whiche obe∣dience to his lawes, it dooth ma∣nifestly appere, that this Dun∣uallo was then seazed of Albania now called Scotland: this Dū∣uallo reigned in this state ouer them .xl. yeres. Beline and Brenne
the sonnes of this Dunuallo, did after their fathers death, fauou∣rably deuide the lande betwene them: so that Belyne had Logres, and Brenne had Albania: but for that this Brenne a subiect, with∣out the consent of his eldre bro∣ther and lorde, auētured to mary with the daughter of the kyng of Denmarke. Belyne seazed Alba∣nia into his awne handes, and thereupon caused the notable wayes priuileged by Dunuallos, Lawes to be newly wrought by mennes handes, whiche for the lēgth was from the urder parte of Cornewall, vnto the Sea by Northe Cathnes in Scotlande. For Religion in those daies, he constituted ministers called Ar∣cheflamines in their funccions moste like the aucthoritie of Bi∣shoppes
of all their awne writers, is sixe hundred yeres lackyng .x. yeres. After that Brutus had reigned ouer the whole Islande, beeyng the same lande enioyed by hym and his posteritie before their commyng, duryng discentes of kinges of this Briteigne, and this intrusion into a land so ma∣ny hundred yeres before inhabi∣ted, and by so many discentes of Kynges quietly enioyed, is the best tule that all their awne wri∣ters allege for theim. This Fer∣gus hereupon immediatly did deuide al Albania emong his ca∣pitaines and their people: wher∣by also moste euidently appereth that there were no people of that nacion inhabityng there before, in prosse whereof, the same parti∣cion shall folowe.
THE landes of Cathnes li∣yng agaynste Orknay, betwene Dummesbey and the Water of Thane, was geuē vnto one Cor∣nath a Capitaine & his people. The landes betwene the Water of Thane and Nes nowe called Rosse, liyng in bredth from Cro∣mart to the mouthe of the water of Lochte, wer geuen to Lutorke another Capitain & his people. The landes betwene Spay and Nes, from the Almayne seas to the Irelande Seas nowe called Murray land, wet geuen to one Vvarroche and his people. The lād of Thalia now called Boyn Aynze, Bogewall, Garyot, For∣martyne, and Bowguhan, were geuen to one Thalis and his peo∣ple. The landes of Matr▪ Bade∣zenoche, and Lochquhaber, were
geuen to Martache and his peo∣ple. The landes of Lorne and Kyntier, with the hilles & moun∣taynes thereof, liyng from Mar to the Irelande seas, wer geuen to capitain Nonaunce & his peo∣ple. The landes of Athole were geuen to Atholus, another capi∣tain & his people. The landes of Strabraun, and Brawdawane liyng West from Dunkell, were geuē to Creones and Epidithes. ii Capitaines. The landes of Ar∣gile, were geuen to Argathelus a capitain. The landes of Linnox and Clidisdale, were allotted to Lolgona a capitain. The landes of Siluria now called Kile, Car rike and Cunyngham, wer geuē to Silurche another Capitayne. The landes of Brigance nowe called Gallowaie, were geuen to
the compaignie called Brigandes whiche as their best menne, were appointed to dwell next the Bri∣tōs, who afterward expulsed the Britons from Annandale in Al∣bany, wherby is confessed it to be before enhabited by Britōs. The residue of the lande nowe called Scotland, that is to saie: Meir∣nis, Angus, Steremōde, Gowry Strahern, Pirth, Fiffe, Striue∣lyng, Callender, Calderwoode, Lougthian, Mers Teuedale, with other the remēt Dales, and the Sherifdōe, of Berwicke wer then enioyed by a nacion myn∣geled in mariage with Britons, and in their obedience whose ca∣pitain called Berynger, buylded the castle and toune of Berwicke vpon Twede, and these people were called Pightes, vpō whom
by the death of this Coell, these Scottes had oportunitie to vse warre, whereof thei ceassed not, vntill suche tyme as it pleased God to appoynt another Coell Kyng of Britons, against whose name, albeit thei hoped a like vi¦ctorie to the firste, yet he preuai∣led, and ceassed not his warr, vn∣til these Scottes wer vtterly ex∣pulsed out of all the boundes of Briteigne, in whiche thei neuer dared to reētre, vntill the raigne of Scicill Kyng of Britons, whi∣che was the .xiii. Kyng after this Coell. Duryng all whiche tyme thesame countrey was reenhabi∣ted by the Britons. And then the Scottes turnyng to Ciuil dis∣cord of this realme, betwene this Sycill and his brother Blede to their best auauntage, newly ar∣riued
in Albania, & thereof made one Reuther their king: from the beginnyng of the worlde .iiii. M ix. C. lxxxxv. yeres, whiche from their first entry was .iii. Clxxiiii. yeres, vpon this their newe arri∣uall, newe warre was made vpō them, by this Sicill Kyng of Bri∣tons, in whiche warre Reuther their newe Kyng died, to whom Thereus succeded, against whom the warr of Britons ceassed not, vntil he frely submitted hymself vnto ye said Sicill kyng of Britōs at Ebranke that is Yorke, where shortly after the tenth yere of his reigne he died. Fynnne brother of Iosine succeded by their elec∣cion to the kyngdom of Scottes who shortly after compelled by the warres of thesame Sicill, de∣clared hymself subiecte, and for
the better assurance of his faithe and obeisaunce to the Kyng of Britōs, deliuered his sonne Dur¦stus, into the handes of this Si∣cill: who phantesiyng the childe and hopyng by his awne succes∣sion to alter the subtilitie (I will not say duplicitie) maried to him Agasia his awne daughter, this Sicill reigned in this state ouer theim twoo and twentie yeres. THIS Durstus was their next kyng, but for y• he had maried a Britō woman, though she a kyn∣ges daughter, the Scottes hated him for ye same cause ye thei ought to haue liked hym the better, and therefore not onely traiteroussy slewe hym, but further to declare thende of their malice, dishenhe∣rited asmuche as in thē was, the issues of thesame Durstus and A¦gasia,
wherupon newe war sprōg betwene theim and vs: whiche ceassed not vntill thei were con∣tented to receiue Edeir to their kyng, the next in bloudde then li∣uyng, discended frō Durstus and Agasia, and thereby the bloud of Britons of the parte of the mo∣ther, was restored to the croune of Albania: nature whose lawe is immutable, caused this bande of loue to holde. For shortly after this Eder attended vpon Cassi∣belane kyng of Britons, for the repulse of Iulius Caesar, as their awne aucthor Boecius cōfesseth cōmaunded thesame as his sub∣iecte, but Iulius Caesar after his third arriuall by treason of An∣drogeus, preuailed against the Britons: and therupon pursued this Eder into Scotlande, and
as hymself saith in his Commē∣taries, subdued all the Isse of Briteigne: whiche, though the li∣uyng Scottes deny it, their ded writers confesse that he came be∣yond Callender woode, and cast downe Camelon the principall citee of Pichtes, and in token of this victory not farre from Car∣ron, buylded a round Temple of stone, whiche remaigned in some perfecciō vnto the reigne of our Kyng Edwarde called the firste since the supposed Conquest, by whom it was subuerted, but the monument thereof remaineth to this daie. This Cassibelane rei∣gned in this state▪ xvi yeres. Aruiragus Kyng of Wales, brother of Guyder .c. is and sonne of Kymbalyne, descended from Androgeus the sonne of Lud, an
auncient kyng of Britons, was by iusse succession shortely after kyng of Britons, against whom Claudius then emperor made war but this Claudius at last gaue his daughter Genuissa or Genissa in mariage to this Aruiragus. This Claudius subdued Orknay, and all the remanent Isles aboute Briteigne, whiche he gaue to his sonne Aruiragus, and so left hym kyng of the whole Islande: this Aruiragus reigned in this state ouer them .xxiiii. yeres. Marrius the soonne of Aruira∣gus and Genissa, was nexte kyng of all Briteigne, in his tyme one Roderycke a Scythian with a greate rable of vacabōdes, came to the water of Frithe in Scot∣lande, whiche is an arme of the sea, deuidyng Pentlande from
Fiffe, against whom this Mar∣rius assembled a power, by which he slewe this Rodericke, and dis∣cōfited his people in Westmer∣lande, of whiche victorie he was also after written, by the name of Westmer, but to those that re∣mained in life, he gaue to bee en∣habited, the Countrey of Cathe∣nes in Scotlande: whiche pro∣ueth it to be within his domintō, this Marrius reigned in this state ouer theim .xxv. yeres. Coell the sonne of this Marri∣us had issue Lucius, coumpted the first Christian Kyng of this na∣cion: he created three Archefla∣mines, whose office is before de∣clared, the first remained at Lō∣don, and his power extended frō the farthest parte of Cornewall to Humber water, the second re∣mained
at Yorke, and his power stretched frō Humber to the far∣dest part of all Scotlande. The third remained at Careleon vpō the riuer of Oose in Glamorgan in Wales, and his power exten∣ded from Seuerne through all Wales. Some write yt he made but two Archeflamyns, and tur∣ned their names to Archbishop∣pes, the one to remaigne at Can∣torbury, the other at Yorke: but thei cōfesse that he of Yorke had iurisdiccion through all Scot∣lande, either of whiche is suffici∣ent to proue Scotlande, to bee then vnder his dominion: This Coill reigned in this state ouer theim .xi. yeres. Seuerus, by birthe a Romayne but in bloudde a Briton, and the lineall heire of the body of An∣drogius,
sonne of Lud & nephew of Cassibelaine, was shortly after Emperor and kyng of Britons, in whose tyme the people to whō his auncester Marrius gaue the lande of Cathenes in Scotland, conspired with the Scottes and receiued them from the Isles in∣to Scotland: but hereupon this Seuerus came into Scotlande, & meting with their faith and false hartes together, droue theim all out of the mayne lande into isles the vttermost bondes of al great Briteigne, but notwithstandyng this glorious victorie, the Bri∣tons consideryng their seruitude to ye Romaines, imposed by trea∣son of Androgius, auncester to this Seuerus began to hate hym, whom, yet thei had not tyme to loue, whereupō beside Yorke thei
suffered hym to bee slain: After that he had for their defence and suretie, slain of the Scottes and their confederates in one battail xxx. thousandes: but suche was the consideracion of the vulger sorte in those daies, whose malice no tyme could deminishe, nor de∣sert appease. Anthonius Bassianus borne of a Britō woman, and Gera borne on a Romayne woman, were the sonnes of this Seuerus, who after the death of their father, by the contrary voyces of their people, contended for the Croune, fewe Britons helde with Bassianus, fe∣wer Romaynes held with Geta: but the greater nombre with nei∣ther: thei fought, Geta was slain, and Bassianus made Kyng, but hetherto the dayly memorie of
perpetuall seruitude in the Bru∣tus, thought the death of the fa∣ther no sufficient reuenge, to the iniury dooen by the graundefa∣ther: and therefore thei deposed this Bassianus, and made Carassi∣us a Briton their kyng, who vpō victory had against this Bassia∣nus, gaue vnto ye Scottes, Pich∣tes, and Scithians, the countrey of Cathenes in Scotlande, whi∣che thei after inhabited, whereby appereth his season thereof. Coill discended of the bloudde of auncient kynges of Briteigne was shortly after kyng of Bri∣tons, whose onely daughter and heire called Helen, was maried vnto Constācius a Romayn, who daunted the rebellion of all par∣tes of greate Briteigne, and af∣ter the death of this Coil, was in
the right of his wife kyng therof and reigned in his state ouer thē xv. yeres. Constantyne the sonne of this Constance and Helen, was nexte kyng of Britons, he passyng to Rome to receiue the Empire ther¦of, deputed one Octauius king of Wales, and Duke of Gwisscop, which some expoūde to be West sex, some Cornewall, and some Windsore, to haue the gouerne∣ment of this dominion, but abu∣syng this kynges innocent goo∣dnes, this Octauius defrauded this trust, and toke vpon himself the Croune, for whiche traytorie albeit he was once vanquished by Leonyne Traherons, vncle to Constantyne: yet after the death of this Traherons, he preuailed again and reigned ouer all Bri∣teigne.
Constantyne beyng nowe Emperor, sent to Maximius his kynseman hether to destroy the∣same Octauius, whom in singuler battaill discomfited this Octaui∣us, whereupon this Maximius, as well by the consent of great Cō∣stantyne, as by the eleccion of all the Britons, for that he was a Britō in bloud, was made kyng of this Briteigne. This Maxi∣mius made war vpon the Scot∣tes and Scythians within all Briteigne, & ceassed not vntill he had slain Eugenius their Kyng, expulsed and driuen them out of the whole boundes of Briteigne and newly inhabited all Scot∣land with Britons, no man wo∣man or childe of the Scottishe naciō, suffered to remain within it, whiche as their Hector Boe∣cius
saith: was for their rebelliō and rebellion properly could it not be, excepte thei had been sub∣iectes, he suffered the Pychtes to remain his subiectes, who made solempne othes to hym after, ne∣uer to erect any peculiar kyng of their awne nacion, but to remain vnder the old Empire, of thone∣ly kyng of Britons: He reigned in the whole state of this Bri∣teigne .xxxiiii. yeres. ABOVT. xlv. yeres after this, beyng long tyme after the death of this Maximius, with the helpe of Gouuan or Gonan and Melga, the Scottes newly arriued in Albania, and thereof created one Fergus the seconde of that name to be their kyng, but because thei wer before banished the continēt lande, thei crouned hym kyng of
their auenture in Argile, in the fatall chater of Merble, the yere of our Lorde .CCCC. xxii. Maximian soonne of Leonyne Traherons, brother to kyng Coill and vncle to the holy Helen, was by liniall succession next kyng of Britons: but to appease the ma∣lice of Dyonothus kyng of Wa∣les, who also claimed the kyng∣dome, he maried Othilia eldest daughter of this Dyonothus and afterward assembled a great po∣wer of Britons, and entered Al∣bania, and inuaded Gallowaie, Mers, Annandale, Pentlande, Carrike, Kyll, and Cunyngham and in battaill slewe bothe this Fergus then kyng of Scottes, & Durstus the king of Pichtes, and exiled all their people, out of the continent lande: whereupon the
few nombre of Scottes then re∣mainyng on liue, went to Argila and made Eugenius their kyng. VVHEN this Maximian had thus obteigned quietnes in Bri∣teigne, he departed with his co∣syn Conan Meredecke into Ar∣morica where thei subdued the kyng, & did depopulate the coun¦trey, which he gaue to Conan his cosyn, to be afterward inhabited by Britons, by the name of Bri∣teigne the lesse: and hereof this realme tooke name of Briteigne the greate, whiche name by con∣sent of forein writers, it kepeth vnto this daie. AFTER the death of this Maximian, dissencion beeyng be∣twene the nobles of greate Bri∣teigne, the Scottes swarmed to∣gether again, & came to the wall
of Adrian, where this realme be∣yng deuided in many fashions, thei ouer came one: and hereupō their Hector Boecius, as an hēne that for laiyng of one egge, will make a great cakelyng, solemp∣ly triumphyng of a conquest be∣fore the victorie, & allegeth that hereby the Britons were made tributaries to the Scottes, and yet he confesseth that thei wonne no more lande, by that supposed cōquest, but the samle porciō be∣twene theim and Humber, which in the old particions before, was annexed to Albania, it is hard to bee beleued, that suche a broken nacion as the Scottes at that tyme were returnyng from ba∣nishment within foure yeres be∣fore, & since in battaill lost bothe their kynges, and the greate nō∣ber
of their best men, to bee thus sodenly able to make a conquest of greate Briteigne, verie vnli∣kely if thei had conquered it, thei would haue left the whote sonne of the Easte partes, to dwell in the cold Snowe of Scotlande. Incredible it is, that if thei had cōquered it, thei would not haue deputed offices in it, as in cases of conquest behoueth. And it is beyond all belefe that great Bri∣teigne or any other Countrey, should be wonne without the cō∣myng of any enemie into it, as thei did not, but taried at ye same wall of Adryan: But what nede I speake of these defences when thesame Boecius scātly trusteth his awne belife in this tale. For he saieth that Galfride and sun∣dery other Autentique writers,
sōderly vary frō this part of his story, wherein his awne thought accuseth his cōsciēce of vntruth: Wherein he furder forgettyng, howe it behoueth a lyer to bee myndefull of his assercion in the fourth Chapiter next folowyng, wholy bewraieth hymself, saiyng that the, confederate Kynges of Scottes and Pychtes, vpon ci∣uil warres betwene the Britons whiche then was folowyng, ho∣ped shortly to enioy all the land of great Briteigne, from beyond Humber vnto the fresh sea, whi∣che hope had been vain, and not lesse then voyde, if it had been their awne by ye conquest before. Constantine of litle Briteigne descended frō Conan kyng ther∣of, cosyn of Brutes bloud to this Maximiā, and his next heire was
next kyng of great Briteigne, he immediatly pursued the Scot∣tes with warres, and shortely in battaill slewe their Kyng Dou∣gard, the firste yere of his reigne, and so recouered Scotlande out of their handes, and toke all the holdes therof into his awne cu∣stodie. Vortiger shortly after obtey∣ned the Croune of Briteigne, a∣gainst whom the Scottes newly rebelled, for repressyng whereof, he mistrustyng the Britons, to hate him for ye treasonable death of Kyng Constance, sonne of this Constantyne: as one that to a∣uoyde the smoke, dooth fall into the fire, receiued Hengest a Sa∣xon, with a greate nombre of his nacion into this Realme, with whom and a few Britons, he en∣tred
Scotlande and ouer came theim, whereupon thei tooke the Isles their common refuge, he gaue muche of Scotlande, as Galloway, Pentlāde. Mers and Annandale, with sundery other landes to this Hengest & his peo¦ple to inhabite, whiche thei did accordyngly: but when this Hē∣gest afterward thursted after the Kyngdom he was banished, and yet afterward beyng restored, he conspired with ye Scottes agaist Aurilambrose the sonne of Con∣stantyne, the iust inheritor of this whole dominiō, but his vntruth and theirs bothe wer recompen∣sed together, for he was takē pri¦soner by Eldulph de Samor then Erle of Gloucester, and his hed for his traitory, striken of by the same Erle, by commaundemente
of the same kyng Aurilambros, in this felde the Scottes wer van∣quished: but Octa the soonne of Hengest was receiued to mercie, to whom and his people this Au¦rilambros gaue the countrey of Galloway in Scotlād, for whi∣che thei became his Subiectes: And hereby appereth that Scot¦lande was then agayne in his handes. Vter called also Pendragon, brother to this Aurilambros was nexte Kyng of Britons, agaynst whom, these sworne Saxōs new forsworne subiectes, confederate with the Scottes, newly rebelled: but by his power assembled a∣gainst thē in Galloway in Scot¦lande, thei were discomfited, and all Albania recouered into his handes. This Vter reigned in
this state ouer them .xviii. yeres. Arthur ye sonne of this Vter be∣gotten before ye mariage, but law¦fully borne, after succeded next to the croune of greate Briteigne, whose notable actes though ma∣ny vulger fables haue rather wondered at, then credited: yet all the Scottishe writers con∣fesse that he subdued all greate Briteigne, and made it tributo∣ry to hym, and subdued the Sa∣xons then scatered as farre as Cathenes in Scotlande, and in all his warres against theim, he had the seruice and obeisaunce of Scottes and Pightes: but at the last settyng their feete in the guyle of their predecessours, thei newly rebelled, in the repressyng whereof he deposed their Kyng, and conquered al the countreys,
of Scotlande, Islande and Or∣knay, and made one Angusiā his kynseman kyng of Scottes, V∣rian kyng of Islāde, & Murefrēce kyng of Orknay, he made one Pyramium Archbishop of Yorke, whose auctoritie extēded through all Scotlāde: Thus Arthur rei∣gned in this state .xxii. yeres. Malgo shortly after succeded, to the whole kyngdom of greate Briteigne vpō new resistaunce, he newly subdued Irelād, Islād Orkades, Norway & Dēmarke, & made Ethelfrede a Saxō kyng of Bernicia, that is: Northūber∣lād, Louthiā, & muche other lāde of Scotland, whiche Ethelfrede by the sworde obteined at the hā∣des of the wilfull inhabitauntes and was true Subiecte to this Malgo.
Cadvvā succeded to the kyng∣dom of greate Briteigne, who in defence of his subiectes the Scot∣tes, made warre vpon this Ethel¦frede, but at the laste thei agreed and Cadvvan vpon their rebelliō gaue all Scotlande vnto this Ethelfrede, whiche he thereupon subdued and enioyed: but after∣ward in the reigne of Cadvvallo, that next succeded in great Bri∣teigne he rebelled, wherupon the same Cadvvallo came into Scot¦lande, and vpon his treason re∣seazed the coūtrey into his awne hādes, and hauyng with hym all the viceroys of Saxons whiche thē inhabited here his subiectes, in synguler battaill slewe the∣same Ethelfrede. Osvvald was shortly after by Cadvvallos gifte made Kyng of
Bernicia, and he as subiect to Cad¦vvallo, and by his commaunde∣ment discōfited the Scottes and Pightes, and subdued al Scot∣lande. Osvvy the brother of this Osvvald was by the like gifte of Cadvvallo, made nexte Kyng of Bernicia, and he by like cōmaun∣demēt newly subdued the Scot∣tes & Pightes, & held thē in that obeysaūce to this Cadvvallo du∣ryng .xxviii. yeres. Thus Cad∣vvallo reigned in the whole Mo∣narchie or great Briteign xlviii yeres, hauyng al the vii. kynges therof, aswel Saxons as others his subiectes: for albeit the nō∣ber of Saxons frō tyme to tyme greatly increased, yet were thei alwaies either expulsed, or els made tributory to the onely kyn∣ges of Britons, for the tyme be∣yng
all their awne writers con∣fesse, & he died in the yere of our Lorde. 676. And so reigned in this state ouer thē .xxviii. yeres. Cadvvallader was nexte kyng of the whole greate Briteigne, he reigned .xii. yeres ouer all the Kynges thereof in greate peace and tranquilitie: and then vpon the lamentable death of his sub∣iectes, which died in sundery de∣ceasses innumerably, he depar∣ted into litle Briteigne, whose sonne and cosyn Iuor and Iue be∣yng repulsed frō this Englande by the Saxsons, went into Wa∣les, where emong the Britons thei and their posteritie remay∣ned Princes: vpon this greate alteraciō, warres being through the whole dominiō betwene Bri∣tons and Saxons, the Scottes
thought tyme to slip ye collor of obedience, & therupon entered in league with Charles then Kyng of Fraunce, in this wise. 1 The iniurie of Englishemen doen to any of these people, shal∣bee perpetually holden commen to bothe. 2 When Frenchemen be inua∣ded by Englishmen, ye Scottes shal send their army in defēce of Fraūce, so that thei be supported wt money & victailes of Fraūce. 3 When Scottes bee inuaded by Englishemen, the Frenchmen shall come vpon their awne ex∣pences, to their supporte. 4 None of these people shall take peace or truce wt Englishe∣mē, wtout the aduise of other. &c. MANY sufferable opinions maie be had of warr, without the
praisyng of it, as onely admitti∣ble by inforced necessitie, and to be vsed for peace his sake onely, where here the Scottes soughte warre for the loue of warre one∣ly, for their league geueth no be∣nefite to themselfes, either in fre trafique of their awne commo∣dities, or benefite of the Frēche, or other priuilege to the people of both: what discommoditie lo∣fyng the entercourse & exchaūge of our cōmodities, beeyng in ne∣cessaries more abundaunt then Fraunce, the Scottes feele and we perfectly know. What rewyn of their Tounes, destruccion of Countreys, slaughter of bothe our people, haue by reasō of this bloudy league chaunced, the Hi∣stories bee so lamentable, as bee to hortible emong christian men
to be remembred: but God gaue the increase accordyng to their seede, for as thei did hereby sowe discencion, so did thei shortly af∣ter repe slaughter. For Alpyne their Kyng possessyng a lighte mynde, that would be a loft with a litle wynd, hoped by this league shortly to subdue all greate Bri∣teigne, and to that ende not one∣ly rebelled in his awne kyngdō, but also vsurped the kyngdome of Pightes, whereupon Edvvyn kyng of Englāde, made one Bru∣deus Kyng of Pightes, whom he sent into Scotlāde with a great power, where in battaill he toke this Alpyne Kyng of Scottes prisoner, & discōfited his people: and beeyng this Alpyne their kyng founde subiecte and rebel, his hed was striken of at a place
in Scotlande, whiche thereof is to this day called Pasalpyne, that is to saie, the hedde of Alpyne, & this was the firste Cropes of their Frenche league. Osbright Kyng of Englande, with Ella his subiect, and a great nomber of Britons and Saxōs shortly after for yt the Scottes had of theimselfes elected a new kyng, shortly after entered Scot lande, and ceassed not his warre against them vntill their kyng & people fled into the Isles, Wt whō at the last vpō their submission, peace was made in this wise. THE water of Fryth shalbe Marche betwene Scottes and Englishmen in the Est partes, & shalbe named the Scottishe sea. THE water of Clide to Dū briton, shalbee Marche in the
West partes betwenethe Scot∣tes and Britons, this castle was before called Alclude, and nowe Dunbriton, that is to saie: the castle of Britons, so the Britons had all landes from Sterlyng to the Irelande seas, and from the water of Fryth and Clide to Cumber, with all the strengthes thereof. The Englishemen had the landes betwene Sterlyng & Nothūberland: thus was Clide Marche, betwene Scottes and Britons on the one side, and the water of Fryth named the Scot¦tishe sea, Marche betwene theim and Englishemen on the other side, & Sterlyng cōmon March to thre people, Britons, English men, & Scottes. Kyng Osbright had the castle of Sterlyng, wher firste he caused to bee Coyned
Sterlyng money. The English men buylded a bridge of stone, for passage ouer▪ the Water of Frythe, in the middes whereof thei made a crosse, vnder whiche wer written these verses. I am free Marche, as passengers maie ken. To Scotes, to Britons, and to Englishemen. ABOVTE xvi. yeres after this, Hūger and Hubba Danes, with a great nōbre of people, ar∣riued in Scotlande and slewe Constantine, whom Osbright had before made kyng: wherupon E∣dulffe or Ethelvvulph then Kyng of Englande, assembled his po∣wer against Hunger and Hubba and in one battaill slewe theim both, but suche of their people as would remain and become chri∣stians he suffered to tary, the rest be banished or put to death.
THIS Ethelvvulph graun∣ted the Peter pence, to which al∣beeit, Peter and Paule had litle mede and lesse right: yet the pai∣ment thereof continued in this realme euer after vntill now of late yeres, but the Scottes euer since vnto this day, haue, and yet dooe paie it, by reason of that graunt, whiche proueth theim to be then vnder his obeisaunce. Alurede or Alfrede succeded to the kyngdome of England, he reigned peacebly ouer the whole Monarchie of great Briteigne: He made Lawes that persones excomunicated, should bee disa∣bled to sewe or claime any pro∣pertie, whiche Lawe Gregour whom this Alurede had made kyng of Scottes obeyed, & the same law aswel in Scotlād as in
England is holden to this daie, whiche also proueth hym to bee high lorde of Scotlande. THIS Alurede constreined this Gregour Kyng of Scottes, to breake is league with Fraūce for generally he concluded with hym, and serued hym in all his warres, aswell against Danes as others, not reseruyng the for∣mer league with Fraunce. THIS Alurede after ye death of Gregour, had the like seruice and obeisaunce of Donald Kyng of Scottes, with fiue thousande footemen, and twoo thousande horsemen, against one Gurmond a Dane that then infested this realme, and this Donald died at this faithe and obeisaunce with Alurede: This Alurede reigned in this state ouer thē .xviii. yeres
Edvvard the first of that name called Louyll, sonne of this A∣lurede succeded nexte kyng of Englād, against whom with Ci∣trike a Dane the Scottes con∣spired, but thei wer subdued, and Constantyne their kyng brought to obeisaūce, and held the realme of Scotlande of this Kyng Ed∣vvard, this dooth Marion their awne countrey manne a Scotte, confesse: this Edvvard reigned in this seigniorie ouer thē, and thei in his obeisaunce .xxiii. yeres. Athelstane soonne of this Ed∣vvard was next kyng of Englād against whom Constantine kyng of Scottes, beyng as their wri∣ters confesse corrupted with mo∣ney, sold his faith and falce hart together to the Danes, and ay∣ded theim against this kyng A∣thelstane,
but he met with al their vntruthes together at Bronyng feld in Scotlande, where he dis∣comfited the Danes, and flewe Malcolme depute in that behalfe to the kyng of Scottes, with .xx. thousande Scottes: in whiche battaill the Scottes confesse to haue lost more people, then were remembered in any age before: this Athelstane folowed this his good lucke, throughout al Scot¦land and wholy subdued it, and beeyng in possession of it, gaue lande there liyng in Annandale by his dede, the copie wherof fo∣loweth. I kyng Athelstane, geues vnto Paulan, Oddam and Rddam, as good and as faire, as euer thei mine vvre, and thereto vvitnes Maulde my vvife.
BY whiche course wordes, not onely appereth the plain simpli∣citie of mennes doynges in those daies: but also full proue that he was then seazed of Scotlande. THIS Athelstane at the last receiued homage of this Mal∣colme king of Scottes, but this Malcolme for yt he could not bee restored to his whole kyngdome entered into Religion, and there shortly after died. This Athelstane for his better assuraunce of that coūtrey there after, thought best to haue two stringes to the bowe of their obe∣dience, & therfore notonely cōsti∣tuted one Malcolme to bee their kyng, but also appointed one In∣dulph, sonne of Constantyne the third, to be called prince of Scot¦lande, to whō he gaue muche of
Scotland: This Malcolme did homage to Athelstane, & then did this Athelstane Reigne in this state ouer them .xxv. yeres. Edmūd brother of Athelstane succeded next Kyng of England to whom this Indulph then king of Scottes, not onely did ho∣mage but also serued hym with ten thousande Scottes, for the expulsion of the Danes out of this realme, this Edmūd reigned in this state .vii. yeres. Edred or Eldred brother to this Edmunde succeded nexte kyng of Englande, he not onely receiued ye homage of Irise then kyng of Scottes, but also the homage of all the Barons of Scotland, this Eldred reigned in this state .x. yeres. Edgar the sonne of Edmund
brother of Athelstane beyng now of ful age, was next king of En∣gland: he reigned onely ouer the whole Monarchie of great Bri∣teigne, he receiued homage of Ke¦neth or Kynald kyng of Scot∣land for the kyngdome of Scot∣land, and made Malcolme prince therof. This Edgar gaue vnto the same Keneth the coūtrey of Lou∣thian in Scotlande, whiche was before seazed into the handes of Osbright kyng of England for their rebellion as is before decla∣red. This Edgar enioyned this Keneth there kyng ones in euery yere, to repaire vnto him into En¦gland for the makyng of lawes, whiche in those daies was by the noble men or piers accordyng to the order of Fraūce at this daie:
to whiche ende this Edgar gaue him a piece of grounde liyng be∣side the new palace of Westmin∣ster, vpon whiche this Keneth builded a house, whiche by him and his posteritie was enioyed vntill the reigne of kyng Henry the seconde, in whose tyme vpon rebelliō by Willyam then kyng of Scottes, it was resumed into the kyng of Englādes handes, ye house is decayed, but the ground where it stode is called Scotlād to this day. This Edgar made this lawe, that no mā should succede to his patrimony or inheritaunce hol∣den by the seruice of a mā called knightes seruice, vntil he accom∣plished the age of .xxi. yeres, be∣cause by intendement vnder that age, he should be hable in person
to serue his kyng & countrey ac∣cording to the tenour of his dede and the cōdicion of his purchase. This lawe was receiued by the same Keneth in Scotlande, and aswell there as in Englande is obserued to this daie, whiche pro¦ueth also that Scotlande was then vnder his obeisaūce. This Edgar reigned in this state. xxvi yeres. Edward the sonne of this Ed∣gar was next kyng of England, in whose tyme this Keneth kyng of Scottes, caused Malcolme prince of Scotland to be treaso∣nably poysoned; whervpon this Edwarde made warre vpō him, whiche ceassed not vntil this Ke∣neth submitted himself, & offered to receiue prince of Scotlande whom king Edward would ap∣point,
where vpon this Edward proclaymed one Malcolme to be prince of Scotlande, who imme∣diatly came into England & here did homage to the same Kyng Edwarde. This Edwarde reig∣ned in this state by some writers xii. yeres, and by some others but ii. yeres. Etheldred brother of this Ed∣warde succeded next king of En∣glande, against whom Swayn kyng of Dēmarke cōspired with this last Malcolme then kyng of Scottes: But shortly after this Malcolme sorowfully submitted himselfe into the defēce of Ethel∣dred, who consideryng that that whiche could not be amended must onely be repēted, benignely receiued him, by helpe of whose seruice at last Etheldred recoue∣red
his realme againe out of the hā∣des of Swayn, & reigned ouer ye whole Monarchy xxxviii. yeres. Edmund surnamed Ironside sonne of this Etheldred was next kyng of England, in whose tyme Canut a Dane inuaded ye realme with warres, but at last Canut maried with Eme somtyme wife of Etheldred and mother of this Edmund: this Eme as arbitrice betwene her naturall loue to the one & matrimoniall duetie to the other, procured suche amitee be∣twene theim, that Edmund was contented to deuide the realme with Canut & kepyng to himselfe all England on thisside Humber gaue al the rest beyond Humber with the seignorie of Scotland to this Canut: wherevpon Mal∣colme then kyng of Scottes af∣ter
a litle customable resistence, did homage to ye same Canut for the kyngdom of Scotlād, & this Canut held the same ouer of this Edmund kyng of Englande by the like seruices. This Canut in memory of his victory & glorye of his seignorie ouer the Scottes, commaunded this Malcolme their kyng, to builde a churche in Buchquhan in Scotlande (where a fielde be∣twene him & theim was fought) to be dedicate to Olanus patron of Norway & Denmarke, which Churche was by the same Mal∣colme builded accordyngly. Edward called the confessourAn. M. lvi. soonne of Etheldred and brother to Edmund Ironside was nexte kyng of al England, he receiued the homage of the same Malcolm
kyng of Scottes for the kyng∣dome of Scotlande. This Edwarde perused the olde lawes of the realme, & some∣what added to some of theim, as to the law of Edgar for ye ward∣ship of the landes vntil the heire should accōplishe the age of .xxi. yeres, he added that the mariage of suche heire, shuld also belong to the lord of whom the same lād should be holden. Also that euery woman mari∣yng a freman, should notwithstā¦dyng she had no children by that husband, enioy the third parte of his inheritaunce duryng her life, with many other lawes whiche ye same Malcolme king of Scottes obeyed, & whiche aswell by theim in Scotlande as by vs in Eng∣lande be obserued to this daie,
whiche directly proueth ye whole to be then vnder his obeysaūce. But here to make some digressiō, though ye more parte of these El∣dredes lawes be both godly & po∣litique, yet this addicion to Ed∣gars law touchyng the mariage of the heire, except in cases of prī∣ces, in whose persons the commō weale of people and countreys depende, among men either ciuil or politique, semeth to depende more of lucre then godlynes: for that thereby, he to whose yeres nature doeth not geue discrecion to refuse, must take & that a wife and she peraduenture of the like age or vnder, in whiche choise e∣uery of them must iudge by ano∣ther mans affeccion, see with an∣other mans iye, say yea with an∣other mans tong, and finally cō∣sent
with another mans heart, for none of these senses be pertited to the parties in that minoritie, and so the eleccion beyng vnfree and the yeres vnripe, eche of thē almost of necessitee must hate o∣ther, whom yet they haue had no iudgement to loue. To declare what innumerable inconuenien∣ces, deuorces, yea and some mur¦ders haue of these vngodly ma∣riages, or rather no mariages at all, proceded, the present tyme sheweth so many examples as we may see sufficient cause to be∣waile the tyme present▪ but the greatest iniury is to God, the re∣dresse onely belongeth to a kyng in whom like as the same God hath caused more vertues to mete, then in any other kyng or creature at those yeres, so we
doubt not but that his Godhed wyll vouchesafe to preserue his highnes with then crease of know¦lege to ye godly redresse of these and all other enormities and a∣buses, to the comfort and reioyse of vs his louyng and happye o∣bedient subiectes: But I wil re∣turne to the Scot. By reason of this lawe Mal∣colme the sonne of Dunkayn next inheritor to the croune of Scot∣lande beyng within age, was by the nobles of Scotlād deliuered as warde to the custodie of this kyng Edwarde, duryng whose minoritie one Makebeth a Scot trayterously vsurped the croune of Scotlād, against whom this kyng Edwarde made warre, in whiche the same Makebeth was ouercome and slayne, and there∣vpon
this Malcolme was crouned kyng of Scottes at Stone, in the .viii. yere of ye reigne of this kyng Edwarde. This Malcolme by tenor of the sayd newe lawe of wardship was maried vnto Margaret, by the disposicion of the same kyng Edwarde, and at his ful age didAn. M. lxi. homage to this kyng Edwarde for the kyngdome of Scotland. This Edwarde hauyng no issue of his bodye, & mistrustyng that Harold ye sōne of Goodwyn discended of the doughter of Ha∣rold Harefoote the Dane would vsurp the croune if he should leaue it to his cosyn Edgar Ed∣ling, beyng then within age, and partly by ye peticiō of his subie∣ctes, who before had sworne ne∣uer to receiue any kynges ouer
theim of the Danes nacion, did by his substanciall wyll in wri∣tyng, deuise the croune of great Briteigne vnto Willyam then duke of Normandye and to his heires, cōstitutyng him his heire testamentary. Also there was proximitee in bloud betwene thē for Eme doughter of Richarde duke of Normādy was wife vn∣to Etheldred, on whom he begat Alured and this Edward, & this Willyam was sonne of Robert, sonne of Richarde brother of the whole bloud to the same Eme: by this appeareth that this Willyā was heire by title and not by cō∣quest. Albeit partely to extin∣guishe ye mistrust of other titles, partely for the glory of his vic∣tory, he chalēged ye name of a co∣queror, & hath bene so written.
This kyng Willyam called the cōqueror, to bring the Scot∣tes to iust obeisaunce after his coronacion as heire testamētary to Edwarde the confessor entred Scotland, where after a litle re∣sistēce made by the Scottes, the sayd Malcolme then their kyng did homage to him at Abirnethy in Scotlande for the kyngdome of Scotlande: This Willyam reigned in this state .xxii. yeres. Willyam surnamed Rufus sōne of this Willyam called the conqueror, succeded nexte to the croune of England, to whom the sayd Malcolme kyng of Scottes did like homage for ye kingdome of Scotland, but afterwarde he rebelled & was by this William Rufus slaine in the fielde, where vpō the Scottishmen did chose
one Donal or Dunvval to be their kyng, but this Willyam Rufus deposed him and created Dunkā soonne of Malcolme to bee their kyng, who did lyke homage to him: but this Dunkan was slaine by the Scottes and Dunvvall re∣stitute, which ones again by this Willyam Rufus was deposed, & Edgar soonne of Malcolme was by him made their king, who did like homage for Scotlād to this Willyam Rufus: This Willyā reigned in this state ouer theim xiii. yeres. Henry called Beauclerke the sonne of Willyam called the cō∣queror, after ye death of his bro∣ther Willyam Rufus, succeded to the croune of England to whō the same Edgar kyng of Scot∣tes did homage for Scotlande,
This Hēry Beauclerke maried Mawde the doughter of Mal∣colme kyng of Scottes, and by her had issue Mawde afterward emprice. Alexandre the sonne of Malcolme brother to this Mawd was nexte kyng of Scottes, he did like homage for ye kyngdome of Scotland to this Henry the first, This Henry reigned in this state ouer them .xxxv. yeres. Mawde called the empriceAn. M. C. xxxvii. doughter and heire to this Hēry Beauclerke & Mawde his wife, receiued homage of Dauid bro∣ther to her and to this Alexandre next kyng of Scottes for ye king¦dome of Scotlande. This Mawde the emprice gaue vnto this Dauid in mariage, Mawde the doughter and heire of Voldosius earle of Huntyng∣don
and Northunberlande, and herein their euasion appeareth, by whiche they allege that their kynges homages wer made for the erledome of Huntingdon, for this Dauid was the first that of their kinges was erle of Hūtyng¦don, whiche was since all the ho∣mages of their kinges before re∣cited, and at the tyme of whiche mariage and long after the sayd Alexander his brother was king of Scottes doyng the homage aforesayd to Henry Bewclerke. Henry called Fitz Emprice the soonne of Mawde the emprice doughter of Mawde, doughter of Malcolme kyng of Scottes was next kyng of Englande, he receiued homage for Scotlande of Malcolme soonne of Henrye, soonne of the sayd Dauid their
last king, whiche Malcolme after this homage, attended vpon the same kyng Henry in his warres against Lewes then kyng of Fraunce: whereby appereth that their Frenche league was neuer renued after the last deuision of their coūtrey by Osbright kyng of Englād. But after these war∣res fynyshed with the Frenche kyng, this Malcolme beyng a∣gain in Scotlād rebelled, wher∣vpon this kyng Henry immedi∣atly scazed Huntyngdon & Nor∣thumberland into his owne hā∣des by confiscacion, and made warre vpon him in Scotland, in whiche thesame Malcolme dyed without issue of his body. Willyam brother of this Mal∣colme was next king of Scottes he wt al the nobles of Scotland
which could not be for any erle∣dome did homage to the sonne of this king Henry the second with a reseruacion of ye duetie to kyng Hēry the second, his father: also therldome of Huntyngdon was as ye haue hearde before this, forfaited by Malcolme his bro∣ther, & neuer after restored to the croune of Scotland. This Willyā kyng of Scot∣tes did afterwarde attende vpō the same kyng Henry the seconde in his warres in Normandy a∣gainst the Frenche king, notwith¦standyng their Frenche league, & then did him homage for Scot¦land, and thervpon was licensed to depart home into Scotlande, where immediatly he moued war against the same kyng Henry be∣yng yet in Normandy: but God
toke the defence on kyng Hēries part, & deliuered the same Williā kyng of Scottes into the hādes of a fewe Englishemenne, who brought him prisoner to this kyng Henry into Normandy the x. yere of his reigne, but at ye last at the suit of Dauid his brother, he was at this fine for the amen∣dement of his trespas, to paye .x. M. pounde sterlyng▪ and to sur∣rendre al his title of the erledom of Huntyngdon Cumberland, & Northumberlād, into the hādes of this kyng Henry, which he did in all thynges accordyngly, and here vpon he ones againe did ho∣mage to the same kyng Henrye whiche now could not be for the earledome of Huntyngdon, the right wherof was alredy by him surrendred, and for the better as∣suraunce
of this fayth the strēg∣thes of Berwicke, Edenbrough, Roxbrough & Striuelyng were deliuered into the handes of this kyng Henry of England whiche their owne writters confesse: but Hector Boecius sayeth that this trespas was amended by fyne of xx. M. poundes sterlyng & that therldome of Huntyngdon, Cū∣berland, and Northumberlande were deliuered as Morgage in∣to the handes of this kyng Hēry vntill other .x. M. poundes ster∣lyng should be to him payed, but though that were true, yet pro∣ueth he not that that money was payed, nor the land otherwyse re∣demed, or euer after came to any Scottishe kynges handes. And this it appeareth yt therldome of Hūtyngdon was neuer occasion
of the homages of the Scottishe kynges to ye kinges of England either before this tyme or after. At this tyme Alexander bishop of Rome supposed to haue gene∣rall iurisdiccion ecclesiasticall through christendome, conferred the whole clergye of Scotlande accordyng to the olde lawes, vn∣der the iurisdiccion of the Arche∣bishop of Yorke. This Henrye reigned in this state ouer theim xxxv. yeres. Richarde surnamed Cure de Lyon soonne of this Henry was next kyng of England, to whom the same Willyā kyng of Scot∣tes did homage at Cantorburye for the kyngdome of Scotland, and in the nde of the warres of this king Richard, did send Da∣uid his brother with .v. M. Scot
tishemen. This kyng Richarde was ta∣ken prisoner by the duke of O∣striche, for whose redempcion the whole realme was taxed to great summes of money vnto the whi∣che this Willyā kyng of Scot∣tes as a subiecte was contribu∣tory, and paied two M. markes sterlyng, This Richard reigned in this ate ix. yeres. John the brother of this Ri∣chard was next king of Englād, to whom the same Willyā kyng of Scottes did like homage for the kyngdome of Scotland vpō a hill beside Lyncolne, takyng his faith therfore vpon the crosse of Hubert then ArchebishoppeAnno M. CC. iiii. of Cantorburye, a great nomber of people beyng there assembled for ye purpose. This Ihon reig∣ned
in this state ouer them .xvii. yeres. Henry the third of that name soonne of this kyng Ihon succe∣ded nexte to the croune of Eng∣lande, to whom Alexandre kyng of Scottes did homage for Scotland at Yorke. This Alex∣andre dyed at this fayth wt this kyng Henry. After the death of this Alexan¦der kyng of Scottes, Alexander his soonne beyng of .ix. yeres of age, was by the lawes of Edgar in ward to this king Henry, & by the nobles of Scotland brought to Yorke, and there deliuered to this kyng Henry, duryng whose minoritie this kyng Henrye go∣uerned Scotland, and to subdue a cōmocion in this realme, vsed the aide of .v. M. Scottishmen,
but kyng Henry dyed duryng ye nonage of this Alexander, wher∣by he receiued not his homage whiche by reason and lawe was respited vntyl his ful age of .xxi. yeres: this Henry reigned in this state .lvii. yeres. Edwarde the first synce the supposed conquest sonne of this Hēry was next kyng of Englād, immediatly after whose corona∣cion this Alexander kyng of Scottes beyng then of full age did homage to him for Scotlād at Westminster. This Alexāder kyng of Scot∣ies died, leuing one only dough∣ter called Margarete his heire, who before had maried Hanygo soonne to Magnus kyng of Nor∣way, whiche doughter also short¦ly after dyed, leauyng one onely
doughter her heire, of thage of .ii yeres whose custodie & mariage by the lawes of king Edgar and Edward the cōfessour, belonged to this kyng Edwarde, whervpō the nobles of Scotland wer cō∣maunded by this king Edward, to sende to Normandy to conuey this yong quene into Englande to him, whom he entēded to haue maried to his soonne Edwarde: as our kyng in his owne person entēdeth with their Quene now. Their nobles at that tyme con∣sideryng thesame tranquilitie, y• many of them now refuse, stoode not vpon shiftes and delayes of minoritie nor cōtempt, but most gladly consented, and thervpon sent twoo noble menne of Scot∣lande into Norway for her to be brought to this kyng Edward,
but she died before their cōming thether, they required nothyng but to enioy the lawfull liberties that they had in the last kyng A∣lexander his tyme: I beleue that the deade bodyes of these noble men & of all the kynges of Scot¦land would rise from their sepul∣tures against the enemies of this godly vnion▪ if they knewe with what wilfull contempte they de∣face their doynges, & with what wicked obstinacy thei deteigne ye people of Britaigne in perpetu∣al warre, enmitie and discorde. After the death of this Mar∣garet, the Scottes wer destitute of any heire to ye croune frō this Alexāder there last kyng, at whi∣che tyme this Edwarde discēded frō the body of Mawde dough∣ter of Malcolme sometyme kyng
of Scottes beyng then in the greatest broil of his warres with Fraunce, mynded not to take the possession of that kyngdome in his awne right, but was conten∣ted to establish Balioll to be king thereof, the weake title betwene him Bruse & Hastynges beeyng by the humble peticion of all the realme of Scotland cōmitted to the determinacion of this kyng Edwarde, as by autentique wri∣tyng therof cōfessyng within the superioritie of Scotlande to re∣maine in this kyng Edwarde, sealed with the seales of .iiii. bi∣shoppes .vii. Earles and .xi. Ba∣rons of Scotlande, and whiche shortely after was by the whole assent of the thre estates of Scot¦land in their solemne Parliamēt cōfessed & enacted accordīgly as
most euidently doeth appeare. This Baliol in this wise made kyng of Scotlād, did immediat∣ly make his homage and fealtie, to this kyng Edwarde for the kyngdome of Scotlande: but shortly after defraudyng the be∣nigne goodnes of this king Ed∣ward he rebelled, whervpon this king Edward inuaded Scotlād, seazed into his hādes the greater part of the countrey, and toke al the strengthes therof, wherupon this Baliol king of Scottes came vnto this kyng Edwarde at Muntrosse in Scotland with a white wande in his hand, & there resigned the croune of Scotland with all his right, title, & entrest to the same, into the hādes of this kyng Edwarde, & therfore made his Charter in writyng dated &
sealed ye fourth yere of his reign, whervpon all the nobles & gētle∣men of Scotlande repaired to Berwicke, and there did homage and fealtie to this king Edward becōmyng his subiectes. For the better assuraunce of whose othes this Edwarde kept all the strēg∣thes and holdes of Scotland in his owne handes, and herevpon all their lawes, proces, al iudge∣ment, all giftes of offices and o∣thers, passed vnder the name of authoritie of this king Edward, he reigned in this state ouer thē xxx. yeres. Edward borne at Carnaruan sonne of this Edward was nexte kyng of England, who from the beginnyng of his reigne enioyed Scotland peaceably, dooyng in all thynges as is aboue sayd of
kyng Edward his father, vntyll towarde the latter ende of his reigne, about whiche Bruse con∣spired agaīst this kyng Edward and with the helpe of a fewe for∣sworne Scottes, forswore him selfe kyng of Scottes, whervpō this Edward made warre vpon him, but beyng infortunate in his first warres against him, he suffered Edwarde the soonne of Baliol to proclaime himself kyng of Scottes, & neuerthelesse held foorth his warres against Bruse, before the endyng of whiche he dyed. Edwarde borne at Wyndsore soonne of this Edward was next king of Scotlande at the age of xv. yeres, in whose minoritie the Scottes practised with Isabell mother to this Edwarde & with
Roger Mortymer Earle of the Marche to haue their homages released, whose good wyll therin thei obteined, so y• for the same re∣lease they shuld pay to this king Edward .xxx. thousand poundes sterlyng in thre yeres nexte folo∣wing, that is to say .x. thousande pounde sterlyng yerely: but be∣cause the nobilitie and cōmons of this realme would not by par∣liament cōsent vnto it, their king beyng within age, ye same release proceded not, albeit the Scottes ceased not their practises with this Quene and Erle, but before those thre yeres in whiche their money (if that money had taken place) shuld haue been paied wer exspired, this kyng Edward in∣uaded Scotland and ceased not warre vntill Dauid the sonne of
Robert le Bruse then by their elec¦cion kyng of Scotlād absolute∣ly submitted himselfe vnto this kyng Edwarde, but for that this Dauid Bruse had before by prac∣tise of the Quene and the Erle of Marche, maried Jane the sister of this kyng Edward, he moued by natural zeale to his sister, was contented to geue the realme of Scotlande to this Dauid Bruse, & to theires that he should begette of the body of the sayd Jane, sa∣uyng the reuersion and meane homages to this kyng Edward and to his owne children, where∣with thesame Dauid Bruse was right well cōtented, & thervpon immediatly made his homage for Scotlande vnto this kyng Edward, but shortly after cause∣lesse, cōceiuyng cause of displea∣sure,
this Dauid procured to di∣solue this same estate taily, and therevpon not onely rebelled in Scotland, but also inuaded En∣glād, this kyng Edward beyng then in his warres in Fraunce. But this Dauid was not onely expulsed Englād, but also suspe∣cting no place sufficient defēce to his vntruth, fled out of Scotlād: & the coūtreys of Annādale, Gal∣lovvay, Mars, Teuydale, Twe∣dale, and Ethrike wer seased in∣to the king of England his han∣des, & new Marches set betwene England & Scotlād at Cocke∣burnes pathe & Sowtry hedge, whiche when this Dauid went about to recouer againe his po∣wer, was discōfited, and himself by a fewe Englishemen taken & brought into England, where he
remained prisoner .xi. yeres: du∣ring whiche tyme, this king Ed∣ward enioyed Scotland peacea∣bly, & then at the cōtēplacion of ye wery suite of his sorowfull sister wife of this Dauid, he was con∣tented ones again to restore this Dauid to ye kyngdome of Scot∣land, whervpō it was cōcluded, that for this rebellion Dauid should pay to this king Edward the summe of one C. M. markes sterlyng, and should also destroy all his holdes and fortresses stā∣dyng against the Englishe bor∣ders, and further should assure the crowne of Scotlande to the childer of this kyng Edward for lacke of heire of his owne bodye, all whiche thynges he did accor∣dyngly: and for the better assu∣raunce of his obeisaunce after∣ward
he deliuered into the hādes of this kyng Edward sondry no∣ble men of Scotlād his pledges: this Edwarde reigned in this state ouer theim .li. yeres. Richard the sonne of Edward called the blacke prince soonne of this Edwarde kyng, was nexte kyng of Englande, who for that the sayd Jane, ye wife of the sayd kyng Dauid of Scotlande was deceassed without issue, & beyng enformed howe the Scottes de∣uised to their vttermost power to breake the limitacion of this inheritaunce touchyng ye croune of Scotlande, made foorthwith warre against theim, he brent E∣denbrough, spoiled all their coū∣trey, toke al their holdes & main∣tained cōtinually warre against them vnto his death, whiche was
Anno domini. M. CCC. xcix. Henry the fourth of that nameHector Bo, lib. xvi. cap. xv. was next kyngof Englād, he cō∣tinued these warresbegon agaīst them by kyng Richard, & ceassed not vntil Robert kyng of Scot∣tes the third of that name, resig∣ned his croune by appointment of this king Henrye, and deliue∣red his sonne James beyng then of thage of .ix. yeres, into the hā∣des of this king Hēry to remaine to his custodie, wardship and dis¦posicion, as of his superior lord accordyng to the olde lawes of kyng Edwarde the confessor, all this was done Anno domini M. CCCC. iiii. which was within v. yeres after the death of king Ri∣chard: This Henry the fourth reigned in this state ouer theim xiiii. yeres.
Henrye the fift of that name soonne of this kyng Henrye the forth was next king of England he had warres against the Frēch kyng, in all whiche, this James then kyng of Scottes attended vpon him as vpon his superior lorde, with a conuenient nomber of Scottes, notwithstandyng their league with Fraunce, but this Henry reigned but .ix. yeres whereby the homage of this Ja∣mes their king hauyng not fully accomplished ye age of .xxi. yeres was by reason & lawe respited. Henry the sixt the sonne of this Henrye the .v. was nexte kyng of England in whō the seignorie of Scotlande and custodie of this James beyng by law and reason discēded, he maried the same Ja∣mes kyng of Scottes to the
doughter of Hēry Beauford then Earle of Somerset, and toke for the value of this mariage the summe of one hundreth thousād markes sterlyng. This James kyng of Scot∣tes at his ful age did homage to thesame kyng Henry the sixt for the kyngdome of Scotlande at Wyndsore. This Henry the sixt reigned in this state quietly sea∣zed of this seignorie ouer the Scottes without any chalenge or interrupcion by them .xlix. ye∣res, and so thereof quietly dyed seazed. Synce whiche tyme vnto the daies of Kyng Henrye the .vii. graundfather to our soueraigne lorde that nowe is, albeit this realme hath been molested with diuersitie of titles, in whiche vn∣mete
time neither law nor reason admit prescripcion to the preiu∣dice of any right: yet did kyng Edwarde the forth next kyng of England by preparacion of war against the Scottes in the latter ende of his reigne sufficiently by al lawes induce the cōtinuaunce of his claime to thesame superio∣ritie ouer theim. After whose death, vnto the be¦ginnyng of the reigne of our late soueraigne lord kyng Henry the viii. exceded not the nomber of xxvii. yeres, aboute whiche tyme the impediment of our clayme chaunced of the Scottes part by the nonage of James their last kyng, whiche so continued the space of .xxi. yeres, lyke as whose minoritie was by all lawe & rea∣son impediment to him selfe to
make homage, so was thesame by like reason impediment to the kyng of this realme to demaund any, so that the whole time of in∣termissiō of our claime in ye tyme of the sayd kyng Henry the viii. is deduced vnto the nomber of xiii. yeres. But what nede I to examyne the intermission of our claime by any length of tyme, since this su∣perioritte passed the consentes of all Scotlande by their solempne acte of Parliament, against whi∣che neither lawe nor reason can enhable theim to prescribe. This haue I declared & pro∣ued vnto you how Brute our first progenitr, ohis people and their posteritie enioyed the whole Isle of great Britaigne in .xlii. discen¦tes of kynges almost .vi. c. yeres
before any Scottisheman came within it. I haue also proued vn to you how after their commyng into it, immediat war was made vpō theim by the kynges of this Briteigne, whiche ceased not vn∣till they wer expulsed, all the bon¦des of it, and albeit at diuers ty∣mes they entred it again, yet did these warres neuer ceasse agaīst them vntil they became subiectes in whiche state they haue remai∣ned about, xvi. C. yeres. I haue also proued vnto you how from tyme to tyme synce ye beginnyng the Scottes receiued and obeyed the olde lawes and customes of this realme, mooste of whiche re∣maine among theim to this day. I haue further proued how their kynges haue been contributorye to the redempcion of kynges of
this realme, whiche is the duetie of onely subiectes. I haue also proued vnto you howe the gene∣rall iurisdiccion ecclesiastical of Scotland many hundreth yeres after ye beginnyng was subiected to ye dioses and rule of tharche∣bishoppe of Yorke in Englande, whereby also appeareth the same to be then vnder this dominion. I haue likwise proued vnto you that Willyā called the Conque∣ror, of whom our king is linially discended, was heire testamētary of the whole dominion by the te∣stament of kyng Edward the cō∣fessor, & though whiche were not true, yet was ye obediēce of Scot¦lād from the beginnyng insepe∣rably appendaunt to the croune of this realme, and folowed the possession of ye seignorie as thyn∣ges
annexed, lyke as the digni∣ties of the Roman Empier fo∣low the state of Rome, according to whiche their homages and oure claymes haue been conti∣nued to this day. I haue proued vnto you also howe thearldome of Huntyngdon was only attei∣ned but by one of their kynges, and that at the latter ende of his tyme long after ye kyng his bro∣thers homage, done for ye croune of Scotland, and fortified & sur∣rendred by the next, synce whiche time it neuer was restored again into any of their kynges hādes: and yet to satisfie theim further therin, the tenor of all their kyn∣ges homages doeth folowe. I D. N. kyng of Scottes shalbe true and faythfull vnto you lorde E. by the grace of God kyng of
Englande, the noble and superior lord of the kyngdome of Scotland and vnto you I make my fidelitie for the same kingdome, the vvhich I hold and claime to holde of you, and I shall beare you my fayth and fidelitie of life and lymme and vvorldly honor against all menne, faythfully I shall knovvledge and shall do you seruice due vnto you of the kyngdome of Scotlād afore sayd as God so help and these holy euangelies. I wyl not here plede the seue∣ral resignacions and surrenders of the mere possession of ye kyng∣dome of Scotland made by their lawfull kynges, to our kynges Edwarde the first and Edwarde the third: nor yet allege our kyn∣ges pedugre from Mawde the the doughter of Malcolme their
kyng, nor yet argue the right of remainder of the kyngdome of Scotland in our kyng for lacke of issue of the bodyes of Dauid and Jane so entailed by the same Dauid then kyng thereof as is before declared: nor yet obeicet a forfaiture vpō their rebelliō, for our kinges maiestie that now is doth farre otherwise by mariage require it at their handes. Now, because some of the Scottes al∣ledge that they disagre to this mariage fearyng the seueritie of our lawes, I haue thought good to remember in this place one or two of theirs, sufficient example wherby to iudge the nature of al the rest. They haue a lawe that if the father (though by the kynges li∣cence) infeffe or geue lādes to his
sonne, yet if afterwarde the same father trespas the law, his offēce shall forfeite this land, notwith∣standyng that the sonne was by all solemne lawe assured of it be∣fore the offence of the father. Another, that if any man dye onely suspected of treason wtout any other fact done, yet may this cause be examined after his deth and he somoned at his graue, & vpon condempnacion, his lādes and goodes cōfiscat as if he wer yet liuyng, of bothe these lawes innocentes haue no lesse cause to feare the malice, then trespassors haue to drede the paine. I haue studied a great while the lawes of this realme, & beit sayd without arrogancie, haue red theim all bothe old and new and therfore I dare affirme that the moost wicked lawe that euer
was geuen in this realme, cōtei∣neth not halfe somuche iniquitie as the best of bothe these do. Wherfore if they mistrust the seueritie of our lawes, chiefly as they bee mitigated at this day, none can better trust, then they yt so do mistrust: but the likyng of their lawes standeth to thē selfes in them there is none alteracion sought: for policie in sondry pla∣ces must of necessitie require son∣dry lawes, like as in diuers pla∣ces of Englande to this daye be enioyed diuersitie in customes & haue been wtout alteraciō offred since their beginnyng. Our title in this wise published, & their ob∣ieccions as ye haue heard answe∣red, I will with your fauor in this wise turne my tale vnto the Scottishman. It wer an infinite worke (nobles and commons of
Scotlande) nor the tale should euer haue an ende to declare what an inestimable euill cōcord is, as that wherby all thinges in the world, yea and also the world it selfe standeth and agreeth to∣gether, & wherby as the famous Salust sayeth, small thynges growe to ye greatest welth: wher∣by discorde her cōtrary, all grea∣test and best thynges come to di∣struccion and desolaciō, as by the ciuill warres betwene Silla and Marius, ye ruine of Rome is suffi∣cient example to all the worlde. Wherfore I would nowe wishe & desire, whiche is all that I am able to dooe, that these cruel and bloudy watres betwene vs may shortly cease, which shal much ye soner come to passe if ye trust not your owne wilful affecciō, which
beyng blynder then blyndnes it selfe hath closed vppe the lyes of your reason, and ledd your selfes into yt desert of obstinacie, wher∣in as your waye lyeth, so hath your foly extended. Nature the wise mother of all thynges, when she ordeined all beastes with some natural muni¦cion, as horne, spurre, tothe or naile: she wold not create mā ei∣ther cruel or vengeable by any of this outward thinges, but gaue him reason, & so to rule without angre or armour: she endowed you wt giftes to the maintenaūce of concorde, & will you vse theim to discorde? is it warre that you thinke profitable? is it discorde & mischiefe that beyng hatefull to other menne semeth to you plea∣saunt? what differeth warre from all
commeth thende that it is mente for, but to the contrary, and that like as a while their fayth hath deceiued vs, so will it shortly be∣guile theim selfes, for nature ne∣uer gaue like vertue to thinges counterfeicte, as to true in dede: all the wise writers of your owne nacion lament the wickednes of your clergie and condemne their vicious and prophane liues, but by hypocrisy thei alway had this gifte to shewe their vertue to the vttermost and hide their faultes to ye secretest, so that their vertue appeareth more then it is, & their vice lesse: well, God is the onely wreker of secret iniuries, whom no mā may doubt shortely to o∣pen all your eyes, and he in the meane tyme I trust will make your gouernor (beyng naturally
discended of an Englishe house in kyng Edwarde the second his dayes as your owne writers cō∣fesse) againe to become a good Englishmā, which vndoubtedly he shalbe, & a true Scottishmā also, whensoeuer he shall depely cōsider the iustnes of our cause, his fayth, and your affliccion by the miserye of this present warre betwene vs, to compare▪ whiche with a greater euiil, possibilitie suffereth not, to matche him with a like eiuil, his owne nature ab∣horreth to shew what is in degre of euils, vnder him should seme sufficient dispraise, if ambicion, if malice, if glory, if enuy, do on∣ly driue thether men to warres, whether wyl temperaunce, god∣lynes, honestie, & wisedome draw a christian manne? And nowe me
thinketh I here our countrey the cōmon parent to vs all, say vnto you in this wyse. An Scottishemen, how long shall I beare your vnnaturall cruelties, howe long will ye re∣maine rebellious children, when shal there be end of your malice? Alas what wickednes is it amōg christen men, and those the neigh¦bors in one kyngdome, that the greatter part cannot be cōtented with the best thyng, but by the light argument of euil, leaue the waye that leadeth to perpetuall tranquilitie. Al men would liue in beatitude, but to foresee ye way how they may so do: ye goe farre awry. Knowe ye not how euil a maister he serueth of the twayne, discorde, or misery of the whiche euermore the one foloweth the o∣ther,
be not discorde and miserye of the same nature that other vi∣ces be? alway at discēcion within themselfes, makyng the man vn¦mete for all other thynges, and at last vnmete for discord it self, though nature to the obtainyng of foly gaue euery man to many giftes, and to the folowyng of vertue to fewe, yet she neuer bet∣ter deserued towarde mankynd, then knowyng how many mise∣ries she ordained him to dwel a∣mong, to teache him by reason remedy against them al, & wher∣by thei may receiue no lesse able∣nes to do well then before they had redynes to do euil: be not all men that be born to dye, the same also ordained to liue by reason? & who of you by reason or other∣wise is able to desist my persua∣sion
of this vnion, except he will say that the worst warre is better then the best peace, malice meter for Christian men then loue, and generally al discorde better then concorde, whiche thynges how different they be, God knoweth and I perfitely fele. Can Englād offre you more reasonable, more honorable, more godly condici∣ons of peace then she doeth? ex∣cept she had that frō God which maketh all his Godhedde called perfeccion? can menne offre more then your lawfull libertie, peace, tranquilitie and amitie? do not these bryng forth wealth, securi∣tie, and perpetual concorde? and do not all thinges in the worlde, yea, and the worlde it selfe stand and agree together by concorde? where is your reason, where is ye
loue that Plato & Cicero require in you to be borne to me your countrey? Finally, where is the right knowledge of loue that ye ought to haue to your selues? is not my trāquilitie thassuraunce of your wealth, and my trouble thassuraūce of you miserie? The wicked moath bred in the clothe destroyeth the same. The cruel Vipar in procreacion killeth his mother, and yet he that beleueth their ciuilitie to be lesse then yours, litle cōsidereth their cause to be of nature, and yours of wilfull disposicion. I did sowe you the good seedes of concorde but there is sprong vp among you cockle and fatche, the wedes of discorde, and thus your cor∣rupcion of a good thyng hath en¦gendred an euil, whervpon your
infelicitie is ye more, because you see it not▪ but if you sawe it with reason aswell as reasō seeth you, you would consider the peril, for I say it is your owne cause, ther∣fore neglect not my monicion. Spurne not against knowlege, rebell not against your wealth, more honor is offered vnto you then euer chaunced to the Scot∣tishe nacion, the tyme serueth it, reason requireth it, the consent of all good men desire it, and God pitiyng my long affliccion hath offred the occasion, which beyng of your partes thankefully re∣ceiued, bringeth wealthful secu∣ritie to your selfes, your wyues, children, your goodes▪ & all your posteritie▪ and wherby you shall auoid calamitie, misery, exilemēt or death, whiche otherwise by the
iniustice of your cause, will vn∣doubtedly folow: therfore in this choise, let it be no harde thyng to make you consent to your owne wealth. And on that condicion I do require the whole membres of all great Briteigne, that like as these many hundreth yeres ye haue prosecuted eche other with fyre, sworde and slaughter, that so ye do frō hensfourth prosecute eche other with amitie▪ loue, and frendship, all olde and newe dis∣pleasures betwene you to be here after none otherwyse considered then if your hand offend the eye, or the to the the tong, in whiche case to punish, the reuenge shuld be against your selues. And fi∣nally, let your whole contencion hereafter be, whiche of you bothe shall with better wyll deserue ye
frendshippe of the other, to the glorye of God, the tranquilitie and wealth of your selues, and vtter discorage of my com∣mon enemies. FINIS.
EXCVSVM LONDINI, IN AE DIBVS RI∣CHARDI GRAF∣TONI, TYPOGRA∣PHI REGII. M. D. XLVIII. CVM PRIVILEGIO AD IMPRIMEN∣DVM SOLVM
