4471 S117072 99852287 17603
Cambium Regis: OR, THE OFFICE OF HIS MAIESTIES EXCHANGE ROYALL. Declaring and iustifying his Maie∣sties Right; and the Conveniencie thereof. Published by Authoritie. printer's device of Bernard Alsop, featuring a griffon seated on a stone or book, resting on a ball or globe with wings (McKerrow 339) LONDON. Printed for B.F. 1628.
To the Reader. INtending to set downe in a summary way, the grounds of the Office of Exchange, and the causes of the late revi∣ving the execution thereof. I found it would be necessary by way of preface to levell and prepare the mindes of such who perhaps haue bin attempted to be prepossessed with many vntrue and scandalous rumors touching the same, since in a thing although not new, yet by rea∣son of disvsage to some seeming as new, it may prevaile much in prejudice of a cause, that men haue false ap∣prehensions or conceipts of that which is pro∣pounded or done; to the end therefore that the mind freed of these, may be placed in that even and cleere as∣pect as may be fit, for the right vnderstanding and judging of what shall bee represented vnto it, I must from such as may pervse this short Treatise, desire by way of postulation or request. First,§. 1. that notwithstanding what they may haue heard, they doe not conceiue, that the Office, or graunt
thereof in the Letters Patents intends or actually re∣straines the libertie of the subiect in generall, but that he is free, (as before the Patent.) 1. To sell his plate vessell, or other manufactures, or other gold or siluer whatsoeuer, to any Goldsmith, or other person whomsoeuer to his best advantage. 2 That he is free to carry his gold and silver immedi∣atly to the mint there to haue the same coyned, whether he be a Merchant that imports the same from beyond the feas: Or other subiect, hauing the same from his Mines, of his Plate, receipts or monyes comming of his wares, or other commodities. Nor doth it restraine the Goldsmith, or other Trades∣man in particular. 1. They may vse their trade of Goldsmithrey, and o∣ther Trades as fully and amply as heretofore they law∣fully might or could doe. 2. They may vse and enioy, all such franchises and other liberties and graunts which they lawfully haue or hold from the Charters of his Maiestie or any his Pre∣decessors. 3. They may buy and Plate vessell, burnt silver, broken silver or other in fashion or out of fashion, or any other manufacture to be imployed in their Trades or resold, as they might doe before the Patent. 4. They may buy any gold or silver whatsoeuer or of whomsoeuer to make plate of, or to be vsed in the seue∣all manufactures of their trades. Secondly,§. 2. I should desire, no man should conceiue of this as grounded vpon the absolute power and preroga∣tiue royall of the King, But as the premption of Bullion, or Materials of mintage, is a right inherent and in∣trusted
trusted to the Crowne; so alwaies haue the Kings of this Realme exercised this office by their Farmers and Patentees as belonging to them by right and prerogatiue legall, A Right of such nature, as that by which Royall mynes, Treasure troue, and such like doe belong vnto the Crowne, And as it is not raised, so is it not intended to be enlarged, or extended beyond the bounds and limitts set to it by the Law: or vpheld by any other means, then the ordinarie courses of Iustice, free to all in his Maie∣sties Courts of Iudicature, to which euery man justly grieued by the Patent, or the execution thereof, is left to obtaine his lawfull rights and amends. Thirdly,§. 3. that the office may no way bee taken as to sauour of Monopolie; this including a restraint of what was lawfull; and a setting of a price vpon a free merchan∣dise, at the pleasure of private persons to their owne gaine, in prejudice of the publike: But the office is and ought to be acquited of both these Challenges, and most justly: For although the mettals of gold and silver (as things many waies vsefull) haue bin and are the mar∣ter of Trade, yet when they are considered as Bullion, and as the materials of Coine with reference to the Mint: In this relation, they become the sole preragatiue and right of Princes who haue power to enstampe them with their Image and superscription, thereby giuing them curran∣cie amongst their people, and appointing them publique measures for the valuing and gouerning the estates and contracts of their subiects, whereupon it hath neuer bin lawfull heere, nor (in any well gouerned forreine slate) was there euer permitted a promiscuous buying of Bullion, to buy, sell or traffique gold or silver merchantwise, or to driue any Trade vpon the profit thereof, and so to come
betwixt the Merchant, or other iubject, and the Mint, but to such as were authorised and appointed by the State herevnto: This being the full proper and adaquate subiect of the Office of Exchange, The soueraignty of the Prince and State, hauing beene euer esteemed faint and vaine in the forme and valuation of monyes; if the materials, and the supply thereof should bee at the pleasure of others; As heere it hath lately beene at the pleasure of some few Goldsmiths, and accidentally brought to the Mint, when no offer of gaine did with∣drawe their supplie. And for the price; that is alwaies cer∣taine, though dependent vpon the Prince his standard Bullion not like other merchandise, according to more or few buyers, plentie or scarcity, or the vse or disuse thereof, or other accidents rising or falling in price; but alwaies hauing one certaine and vnchoengeable value and rate: according to the weight and finenesse thereof, viz. That for gold and silver Bullion in forreine species or other, there be giuen a like, and the same quantity of gold or silver Corned equiualent weight for weight. The seller onely aba∣ting the Coinage and price of Exchange, Both which are to be taxed by the authoritie of the Prince, or lawes of the State, as in this particular they are by his Maiesties In∣dentures of the Mint: And of the Exchange, And the last being likewise according to Act of Parliament there∣of made with much temper thereunto.ix. H. v. c. Fourthly,§. 4. Nor will any I hope be much prejudiced with the murmures and complaints of some few exchan∣ging Goldsmiths, whose vsurped and abused Trade is here∣by cut off, since (the premises considered) this will appeare to all to be but the power and practise of those few (not many more then ten persons) and their pre∣vailement
with the rest of the company, vpon false sug∣gestions of prejudices, neither granted nor claimed; Because it wilbe impossible to assigne, or shew, how or wherein the true Goldsmith receiues prejudice, when he is not barred from buying, selling, or doing any thing that euer did or doth belong to their trades, or euer was vsed or practised but by those few, who leauing off their proper trade of Goldsmithrie, and contrary to their Charter, are vnduely become Exchangers, Interlopers betwixt the Merchant and the Mint, And Intruders hereby vpon his Maiesties Regalities, to the losse of his Maiestie in the profit of his Coynage, and Exchange; And generall prejudice of the Realme, by the opportunity they haue had and practised from hence, of being the sole instruments of exportation of gold and silver to the strangers, The sorters and cullors out of all the weighti∣est of his Maiesties coine, which they haue transported or moulten downe, occasioning hereby the great scarcity of silver monyes, and the standing still of the Mint for sil∣ver monyes euer since xjmo of the late King, and by both a decrease of the trade and imployment of the sub∣ject, And by all an impouerishment and destruction of the Realme. And now presuming the indifferent and vnpartiall will (at least) withhold his censures, vntill euery alle∣gation against the office shall be vpon particular exa∣mination, cleered and resolued; I desiring, their like pati∣ence of perufall, proceed to make manifest. First, His Maiesties legall right thereunto. Secondly, the causes of his Maiesties, now resuming the
same and therein the conuenience thereof, and then to touch the forme of proceeding and debatements had in bringing the same to resolution, from all which, satisfaction is hum∣bly presented, vpon what iust, weighty, and considerable reasons his Maiestie hath restored to his Crowne, and resumed CAMBIVM REGIS, or his Office of Exchange Royall.
Cambium Regis. THe right and Prerogatiue of Exchange of Bullion, hath alwaies beene a flower of the Crowne, and part of his Maiesties anci∣ent Reuenue, A maine part of Regalty, and mark of Soueraignty, For the power of Mintage or Coynage, being as it were but nomen mane, an emptie and vaine title when the Materials as Bullion was ministred and brought thether onely at the curtesie of others. The Kings of this Realme haue therefore alwaies enioyed, and continued this prero∣gatiue of Exchange, as from the vtmost Extancie of Record, may appeare. Henry the first therefore made a Law, Quod nullus sit ausus cambire denarios nisi Monetarius Regis, conioy∣ning in one person both the offices of Exchanger: and Master worker of his Moneys, which the excellent Kings succeeding preserued, as a flower of the Crowne, though in distinct and deuided Offices, vntill that about the beginning of Henry the 6. they came againe to bee conioyned. In the raigne of Richard the first, Guido de Voe. had and exercised the office of Exchange.
King Iohn in Anno primo, for the consideration of 1700l. cōmitted to Hugo Cycell, Cambium totius Angliae: And in Anno 6. per Communem Consilium, Ordinances being made an expresse Article was prohibiting all o∣ther to make any exchange of money or siluer, but at the Kings Exchange. Henry the third in the Sixt yeare of his Raigne wrote to the Seabins and men of Ipree, That he Assensu Consilij had made proclamation, That no English man or o∣ther should make Exchange but onely at his Exchange at London and Canterbury. According whereunto for the sum of 5000. Marks, he farmed out his Exchange; Anno 6. to Andrew Buc∣kerill, Anno 9. to Euerard, Anno 35. to Bartholmew Castilion. The place where the Kings Exchange was kept at this time, was by Paules, and gaue name to the street called the Old change, but in euidence the Old Exchange. Edward the first had his Exchanger with Prohibition that none else should vse it, Gregory Rock had it anno 8. And for ease of Merchants that imported Bullion, he caused tables of Exchanges to be set vp at seueral places. The Goldsmiths Charter; Anno 1. Edw: the first, makes mention that the Goldsmiths then by their peti∣tion declared; That whereas heretofore no Merchant English or Stranger hath vsed to bring into this Land no manner of money forged, but onely Plate of Silver to make Esxchange with our Coyne. By which of the Goldsmiths owing shewing appeares. 1. That all im∣ported Silver (which then of right was onely Plate of
Silver) was to be carried to the Kings Exchange; And neither the Goldsmiths nor the Goldsmithrie heere is mentioned for Silver imported. Secondly, it is to bee obserned; That the Exchange was to be made with his Maiesties Coyne, viz. by giving currant Coyne pre∣sently for it. When divers Goldsmiths about 7. Edw: the second, intruded vpon the Kings Officers, and would buy Gold and Siluer for the Mint, A Proclamation was made to the Contrarie, Commanding all sellers to goe ad Cam∣bium Regis. In his time, anno 5. William Hansteed was Echanger, and anno 18. Roger de Frowick. The like Prohibition was assensu Consilij by Procla∣mation vpon paine of imprisonment and forfeiture of all Anno xxv. Ed. the third, vpon like preiudice offered to the Kings profit then, hauing farmed out his Ex∣changes, as Anno xxviij. to wickingham: Anno 35. to Guidon: Anno 40. to St. Iue. And Tables of Exchanges were erected at Douer, Canterbury and other Ports of the Kingdome. Rex per Assensum Consilij sui Ordinanvit Quod Excam∣biam Monetae suae tam auri quam argenti penes ipsum rema∣neant vnde proclamari fecit quod nullus Ex cambium aut venditionē monetaefaciat clam vel palam nisi per ipsum re∣gem ad illum Deputatū sub paena imprisonamenti & Amis∣sionis Monetae predictae. Claus de Anno xxv. Quod nullus Commune Cambium teneat, nec aliquod pro∣ficuum de eodem percipiat sub paena faris facturae, monetae sic Cambiata Excepto Cambiataere Regis iuxta formam Statuti Anno xxv. Ed: 3. Claus de An xxix. indorso. vid. similiter. Statutes of money made at York. ix. Ed. 3. Cap. 2. Item, that no false money bee brought into our Realme or
elsewhere within our power vpon paine of forfeiture of such money, Prouided alwayes, That all manner of people of what Realme or Dominion they bee of, may safely bring to the Exchange and to no place else, Bulli∣on, Siluer in plate, vessell of Siluer, and all manner money of siluer, of what value soeuer it be, so that it be no false mo∣ney and sterling counterfeit, and there they shall receive good and conuenient Exchange. Cap. 7. Item That the Tables of Exchange, shalbe at Dover, and in other places, where and when it shall please vs, and your Counsell to make Exchanges; And that the Wardens of such Tables, shall make such Ex∣changes, by the Testimony of Controuler, which wee shall put to them. Money, Plate, or vessell, intended or purpo∣sed to bee exported, or Counterfeit sterling imported, being to be by that State, forfeited, The forfeitures were to be deliuered to the Exchanges by Indenture whereby the Wardens may be charged. Cap 9. Exchanges shalbe ordained in good Townes, accor∣ding as shall seeme best to our soveraigne Lord the King, for the profit of him and his people. And that it shalbe ordained in certaintie, what shalbe giuen in Ex∣change for euery peece of gold. xviij. Edw. 3. It shall be lawfull for euery man to Exchange gold for siluer, or siluer for gold, or for gold and siluer gold, so that no man hold no Exchange, nor take no profit, for ma∣king such Exchange vpon payne of forfeiture of the money so exchanged; Except the Kings Exchanger, who takes profit, according to the Ordinance before made. Anno 25. Cap. 12.
All Merchants priuie and Strangers, may safely bring within your said Realme and lands. Plate of sil∣ver, and Billets of gold, And all other manner of gold, or all money of Gold or silver to our Bullion or to our Exchanges which wee shall doe ordaine at our Sta∣ples and elsewhere. Taking there money of our Coyne of gold or siluer Couenable to the value, xxvij. Ed. 3. Cap. 14. Richard the III. continued the farme of Bullion as ap∣peareth by his graunt toRoc. Fin. an 11. Ric. 2. Salisbury and others; with Proclamation vpon paine of forfeiture, that none else should vse it. Henry the IIII. granted out the Office of Exchange, anno 1. And anno ix. prohibited all other but his owne Exchanger. Henry the Vth graunted out this Office, anno 11. toRet. Pat. de anno 2. pars a mem. 34. Lodowick Iohn; with Prohibition of allPatent. de anno 2. pars 2. m. 23. Et om. 5. m. 1. others: And by Indenture, anno ix. ConstitutedClaus. de an∣no ix. Dors. m. 1. Iohn Patesley Citizen and Goldsmith his Exchanger with seve∣rall Covenants; And for the Out-Ports, and other parts of the Realme from London; There was Com∣missu directa iusticiarijs de Assisa per Totam Angli∣am
ad Communìcandum & tractandum cum quibus Cur que legijs qui officium Cam∣bij Mometae Regis habere & occupare voluerit. Patent. de anno 19. part. 2. mem. 8.
Statut. ix. H. v. c. 2. The King shall doe to bee or∣dayned his Exchanges of Gold and Silver in the Citie of Lon∣don and elsewhere, in the Realms for the ease of his peo∣ple, Which shall bee holden in open places in high Streets; And that all they which will come to the Tower of London, there to haue money new Coy∣ned, they shall haue money of new Coyne, and thereof shall bee deliuered within Eight dayes according to the true va∣lue paying the Coynage. And that they which will not goc to
the Tower but thereof bee deli∣uered at the Exchanges, shall pay for the Exchange after the rate of Penny for the Noble, with the Seignorage and Coy∣nage. Cap. 4. Item, That they which shall bee wardens, Surveyors, and ministers of Exchanges out of the Tower, shall bee holden and bounden to bring all their Gold and Silver, which they shall receiue by way of Ex∣change, or Buy, by colour of their Office vnto the Tow∣er, there to be moulten and made into Coyne, in aug∣mentation & increase of the money for the profit of the Realme and ease of the people, without being sould, a∣liened, or put to any other vse. Bartholmew Goldbeater was Exchanger by Indenture at the time of the Demise of Hen. 5th, whoRot. Parl. an. H. vj nostr. 35. was com∣maunded notwithstanding the voydance of his Inden∣ture, by the Kings death to continue the Exercise of that office (as the Record saith) to the Profit of the King and people; and vpon supplication of allowance for waste, was allowed for Exchange Penie halfe-penie per Noble. After whose death the said Office by Letters Patents and Indenture, was grannted vntoPatent. ann. x. pars 1. mem. 29. William Russe Citizen and Ieweller, to haue Iuxta formā & effe∣ctum Indenturarū. Anno xxiiij.Dors. Claus. de. cod. anno memb. 30. Robert Mansfield was made Exchanger by Letters Patents and Indenture. Anno xxvij.Claus. de codem 23. in. dors. Vid.: stat. 1. H. vj cap. 1. & 2. H. vj. cap. 10. Richard Tunstall. In all which Inden∣tures, the Covenants are gr̄onnded vpon, and pursue
the Provisions of the Acts aboue mentioned of anno ix. Hen. v. Capit. 2. & 4. Edward the IIII. in the viij.th of his Raigne, did ordaynePatent. de eod. an. pars. 3. m. 2. William Lord Hastings, Master and wor∣ker of his money, &c. And Keeper of all manner of Changes and Outchanges in the Tower of London, Realme of England, towne of Callis and marches of the same, to haue to himselfe and De∣puties according to his let∣ters Patents and Inden∣tures. In anno xxij.Pat. de eod. an. pars. 3. m. 8. Bar∣tholmew Read Citizen and Goldsmith of London, had the same office by let∣ters Patents and Inden∣ture. Richard the III. granted this Office to Iohn Kendall his Secretary, with Procla∣mation, anno 1. And thus all the reigne of Hen. the vij.Man. Cotten. it was conti∣nued, and so along vntill
the loose times of Henry the viij. vpon occasion of his base moneys (whereupon no constant Exchanges could be made) made way to the Enchrochment of the Goldsmiths who (as the right worthy Sir Robert Cot∣ton hath obserued) hauing of late in our times cast off their proper Trade of Gould∣smithery, are become vnduly to the Kings preiudice the Masters and Commanders hereby of the Kings Mint. And so by setting themselues in the soueraignes dignitie, bring the King to be waged and set on worke by his owne subiects, Contrary to the vse of the former best times in this state. And to the practise of the wisest and grea test Princes in forreine parts. The Exchange of Coine or emption of Bullion being almost in all neighboring states Officium publicum, And in the power and do∣nation of Princes none be∣ing at liberty to exercise
lestat. de Changeiur, but by facultie from the Prince, And with Relation to his Mynts.
Statut. 4. Hen. vij. cap. 5. No fine siluer to be allayed or sold to any but to officers of Mints, Changes, or Gold∣smiths, for augmentation and amending of Coine or Plate: &c. But not to sell to any per∣son Siluer allayed. And that no Goldsmith sell no fine siluer nor any siluer allayed to any per∣son whatsoeuer, nor one Gold∣smith to another. By Proclamation 5. Ed. vj. this statute of 3. Hen. vij. (which expresly ratifies and confirmes the Act. of 25. Ed. 3. orderned for Exchanges su∣pra) is commanded to be put in Execution. And in the Act of 18. E∣liz. 15. for reformation of a∣buses in Goldsmiths, her Maie∣sties Mints and Changes are nominated disiunctiuely and by Proclamation of 43. Eliz. this Act of 25. Ed. 3. Concerning Exchanges is enioyned to bee duyly obserued.
Note that this Act. of 25. Ed. 3. made for Exchanges, is mentioned in the Indentures of the Kings, with their Exchan∣gers: as an. 28. Ed. 3. Wicking∣ham, ix. H. v. to Patesly, x. Hen. 6. to Wilitam Rus. xxiiij. to Mansfield, xxxvj. to Ton∣stall viij. Ed. 4. to M. L. Ha∣stirgs, xxij. to Reed. In all which and in all other Juden∣tures of this Office the King ex∣presly couenants to Proclaime: That none other hold any com∣mon Exchange or take profit. This Stat. being also Proclai∣med ix. H. v. mem. 6.
By all which Acts of Parliament, Charters Procla∣mations cleered and interpreted by the Letters Patents, and Indentures, and the vninterrupted practise and ex∣ercise of that Office for many hundred of yeares, Is made most euident. 1. That the Exchange or buying of Bullion belongs to his Maiestie Iure successionis, by right deri∣ued from his Ancestors Kings of England: as part of his ancient Right and Reuenue: And likewise Iure concessionis, by Grants and Esta∣blishments of seuerall Acts of Parliament. 2. That it is no part of the Goldsmiths trade to buy or exchange Bullion; or lawfull to any other to trade Gold or siluer Merchantwise, to make profit thereof, saue onely to his Maiesties Exchanger. 3. That the Exchange was deuided and seuered from the Mynt, or Bullion: And that diuers places of Exchange were both in London and elsewhere out of the Tower. And to conclude the point of his Maiesties legall inter∣est in the Exchange of Bullion, the Charter of the Goldsmiths expressely both warrants his Maiesties Right, and shewes that they had no libertie to buy a∣any Gold or Siluer, but with reference to be made and conuerted into Plate. As more particularly will
be explained in Answeare to some legall pointes of their petition made to the Lords of his Maiesties most Honorable Priuy Councell. By all which, though it doth euidently appeare, That the Exchange of Bullon neither euer was, nor now is, any part or branch of the goldsmiths trade; to which by his service and freedome he is entituled. Neverthe∣lesse it may not seeme altogether vnusefull to Collect the same likewise from the points ensuing. That this is intimated in the very name of Gold∣smithrie,§. 1. importing a manufactury or handy craft: they being Auri-fabri, not Auri-emptores, or Auri-ven∣ditores. That by the old Orders of the Companie of Gold∣smiths.§. 2. It was required as a proofe of his skill and suf∣ficiencie, That euery one before hee was made free was to make a peece of Plate or other worke called his Ma∣ster-peece, without which hee was refusable: but it was neuer heard they were examined vpon their skill in for∣reine Coynes or seuerall goodnesses of Gold or Sil∣ver. That within these 60.§. 3. yeares last past; The Gold∣smith-row in Cheape or Goldsmithrie, was all inhabited by the working-Goldsmiths, euery Shop hauing his worke-houses necessary for the seuerall vse of their Trades.
That the commonaltie or generalitie of the Com∣pany,§. 4. doth neither pretend vnto, nor know what be∣longs to the skill or cunning of the Exchanges, nor are acquainted or practised in the values or finenesses of for∣reine Species: And as within these 30. yeares last past there were few or none: So at this time there are not many more then tenne persons who to any purpose are skilfull or traders in forreine Coynes. That it is lawfull, for any Book-binder,§. 5. Merchants man or other person whatsoeuer, being free of any other Company: To set vp as an Exchanging Goldsmith; which shewes that to bee no part of the Trade: And vpon some remonstrances vnder the hands of the Com∣monaltie, it will bee made appeare, that they haue dis∣claymed this Exchanging mistery eyther to bee part of the ir trade; or the Exchangers of right to haue any thing to doe in their Company. And lastly,§. 6. if this Exchanging had been part of the Goldsmiths true and ancient Trade, it would haue bin vsed by them time out of minde as appertayning to their Trade; Whereas contrariwise it most evidently appeares, That many Goldsmiths in the Raignes of se∣verall Kings did exercise this businesse of Exchange, and buying and selling of Bullion, Not by reason of their trades, but by vertue of Letters Patents from the Kings of this Realme, and that without opposition or pretention of any other of their Company thereunto. Thus William Salisbury Goldsmith was Exchanger, 1.
Ric. 1. Iohn Patesley ix. Hen. v. William Russe 2. Hen. vi. Bartholmew Read, xxij. Edw. the 4. and others. By all which is apparently shewed. The exchanging of gold and siluer to be no part of the Goldsmiths trade or to belong vnto them. And by consequence that by the Of∣fice they are not restrained or debarred from any lawfull benefit or vse of their Trades. CHAP. 2. The Causes of his Maiesties now resuming the Ex∣change of Bullion. Besides the more generall Cause moving his Maiesty to resume the Exchange of Bullion, which was,Ad jura regni ne depereant seu per aliquorum vsurpationes in∣debitas aliquatinus substrahantur quatenus iuste poterimus manu te∣nendum substracta{que} & occupata si quae suerint ad Statum debitum re∣uocanda nec, non ad impugnatores eorundam iurium nostrorum refrae∣nandos, Et prout convenit juxta eorundam demerita puniendos co studiosius nos decet operam adhi∣beri & solicitius extendere manum nostram quod ad hoc vinculo iura∣menti teneri dignoscimur & astrin∣gi pluresque conspicimus iurà illa pro viribus impugnare. Regist brevium. Ad iura Regia. fol. 61.6. to preserue the rights of his Crowne and revenue, Some speciall Motiues seeme to haue beene raised, from those Abuses and errors, which such of the Goldsmiths as became Exchangers haeue practised, whereby they haue greatly exhausted the Mo∣ney of the Realme, and depraved and enfeebled the residue. And as the Procla∣mation not colourably but truely speakes, These Exchan∣gers aue from hence growne vnto that licentiousnes, That they haue for divers yeares presumed for their priuate
Lucar and gaine, and daily doe presume to sort and weigh all sorts of moneyes currant within our Realme, to the end to Call out all the Old and new moneyes which eyther by not wearing or any other accident are weightier then the rest, which weightiest and best monyes haue not onely him molten downe, for the making of Plate vessell and other manufa∣ctures, but even Traded and sould to Merchant stran∣gers and others who haue transported the same, whereby the Consumption of our Coynes hath bin greatly occasioned. Not onely to the scarcitie of Currant moneyes, especially of Siluer Coyne, but also to the great depravation and enfee∣bling of the Remainder of our Silver moneyes not exported or consumed by the abuses and practises aforesayd. And to the Raising of the Silver even of our owne Moneyes to a Rate and price aboue our Mynt, and aboue what they are truely Currant for. By reason whereof no Silver can bee brought thither but to the losse of such as bring the same, Contrary to the Lawes and Policie of our Realme, and of di∣vers acts of Parliament, and of late Proclamation in that case provided and published. The longer permission of all which would not onely redound to the impeachment of our Prerogatiue Royall: but doth directly tend to the impove∣rishment and destruction of our Realmes. Now that the Exchanging Goldsmiths haue had by the Advantage of their Exchanging, the Opportunitie of being the maine Sorters and Cullers of the weigh∣tiest moneyes, and haue sold and moulten downe the same, is convinced;
1. From the Conviction of the Merchant-Stran∣gers and others in the Scar-chamber; The Exa∣mination of the Gold smiths, and their Bookes being the maine proofe against them: Since all or the greatest part they exported, was bought of the Exchanging Goldsmith. 2 That his Maiestie found this vpon Examination, as is Expressed and declared in the Proclama∣tion of ix. King IAMES made against Melting or Conveying out of the Kings Dominions of Gold or Silver coyned or currant in the same. 3 That it is notorionsly knowne that it hath for this 30. yeares and opwards bin the vsuall course of Exchanging Goldsmiths, to make their prentises and seruants, euery morning to runne from shop to shop, to enquire after and buy vp all weighty and heauy Gold at any ouer price, all which they haue sold to Dutchmen & others to be transported to their Mints: And euer since the Proclamation of the xj. of the said King (which enhansed the gold, whereby the profit was turned vpon the siluer.) They haue practised and still doe practise to cull and sort out all weighty and heauy moneys which they haue sold for furnishing the Mynts of Holland, and of the East-countries: witnesse the pieces of Thirteene-pence halfepenies, Old shillings of Elizabeth, Nine-pence and foure∣pence
halfepeny pieces being weighty monies, whereof none are now to be met withall. 4. That hereby they haue raised the price of siluer by degrees, to 2.d per ounce aboue the value of the Mint, the immediate consequence whereof hath bin the standing still of the Mint for siluer Moneyes euer since the xj. of King Iames, to the great scarcity of siluer Monies; the decrease of trade and imployment of the subiect both which are moued by plentie of money. 5. That it is notoriously knowne, that siluer weighty moneys are by certaine persons that run vp, & downe to shopkeepers and others, vnder pre∣tence of Exchanging gold gathered and sor∣ted together; And sold by the Ounce to bee moulten downe to make plate off. All which praemises considered, It is a thing of no great maruaile though Melchior wink late Mynt∣master of Amsterdam, amongst many other of his services to that state gaue in a memoriall of his gai∣ning them, LX. M.l. per annum, by melting downe En∣glish Coine which gaine Argues an immense summe to haue bin moulten downe. For restitution of which Right to the Crowne, and to reforme and stop the further continuance of these and such like abuses, tending to the dimunition and depra∣ving of English Coyne, and procuring the scarcitie of
money especially of Silver hath his Maiesty beene plea∣sed to Resume and Re-establish, the Office of his Ex∣change Royall. CHAP. 3. Of the Conveniences of the Office of Exchange. The Policie and Lawes of this Realme, haue alwaies aymed at and intended The increase and augmentation of Money; most especially that of Silver: And this di∣uers wayes. 1. First, by procuring the Importation of Bullion, and to this end haue enforced the Exporter of Staple Commodities, to returne some proportio∣nall part of Bullion; as 14. Edw. 3. cap. 21. Two markes silver for euery Sacke of Wooll: or that Wooll, woolfels and Tynne should bee sould for ready money. Euery Sarpler of Wooll of the va∣lue of 12. Markes, to make good to the Mynt sixe pound of Bullion. 2. Secondly, by preseruing it aswell in i'ts kinde by prouiding against Exportation20. Ed. 1.9. Ed. 3.2. H. 6. Proct. 9. Iac. o∣thers. and the mel∣ting it downe to make Plate or other Manufa∣ctures of9 Ed. 3. ca. 3.17. R. 2. ca. 2.17. Ed. 4. ca. 1.: And if any monies thorough time or or other practise, became vncurrant, then the same to be converted into Money againe, and not bee diverted from Coyne.Ed. 1. Statut. de moneta por∣tuum Rastall titul. money 2.. 3. Lastly, by providing,2. H. 6. ca. 13. 18. Eliz. cap. 15.5. Ed. 6. Tit. Exchange Rastall 25. Ed. 3. Procl. 43. E∣liz. 10. Iac. 61. & 16. That none should giue a price for Bullion aboue the Rate of the Mynt:
For it is not to be expected that any Bullion either of Gold or silver shal euer be brought to the Mint, when the Owner may haue a greater price, then at the Mynt, eyther to be transported, or to be Con∣verted to make Plate or other things of. This a∣greeing likewise with the Policie of Spaine, which though it bee the Spring and fountaine from whence the greatest streames of filuer haue beene derived into other parts, yet an ounce of silver there will alwaies yeeld the seller six pence or one Reall more at the Mint, then to be sold to any o∣ther for any purpose whatsoeuer, concurring likewise with the practise of other States. Plentie of Money being then the Marke or Ayme by approachment wherevnto, or declination from whence the conveniencie or inconueniencie of the office of Ex∣change must be judged. And these the subordinate meanes to obtaine the same, directed and leuelled to that end by diuers acts of Parliament. The next En∣quirie is, whether these ends may not more probably beattained by the due exercise of the Office, Then by still permitting the promiscuous buying and felling of Bullion, and a common Trade and Trassiquing in it, And this by way of comparison. 1. The Goldsmiths haue beene found to be the sole in∣struments of Exportation, and a most necessarie and effectuall meanes thereunto, without whose mi∣nistery the weightiest or best moneys, or Bullion of gold and siluer could not bee got togetherProcla. r. feb. 16. Iac. to fit the opportunity of transportation, But these Ex∣changing
Goldsmiths being taken away, the trans∣porters cannot be fitted, or their turnes serued, and so the transportation will decrease: But the Office of his Maiesties Exchange, is to assemble and ga∣ther together the materials of Myntage, & the same to deliuer to the Mynt, there to bee coyned for in∣crease of money, and this by the testimony9. Ed. 3. c. 7. & 9. H. 5. c. 2. of a Controuler of the Exchange appointed thereunto by his Marestie. 2. The Goldsmiths culls and sorts likewise out, the weighty Monies from time to time, and melts them downe, or sels them to bee moulten downe to be conuerted to Plate, and for diuers other vses. The Exchanger neither Culls nor sorts, nor will permit any such culling or sorting, but will haue an eye hereunto, as well because it occasions the overpri∣ses of Silver: as also because they hereby continue an vnlawfull trading of Coyne to his preiudice. 3. The Goldsmith hath hereby occasioned the price of siluer to rise by degrees to 2d per ounce aboue the value of the Mynt: The effect whereof hath beene the standing still of the Mynt: And the raising of the price of Plate from time to time; And the cul∣ling and melting downe of his Maiesties Coine, But the Exchanger neither can nor will doe any of these, And all these abuses, proceeding onely from the Exchanging Goldsmiths will cease, when their v∣surped Trade shall be taken from them, and they no longer permitted their Exchanging without which they wil not be accommodated for these pra∣ctises.
Now though the auoydance of these pernitious courses, tending to the impouerishment and destruction of the Realme, be a good and conueniencie sufficient to perswade and maintaine the resumption of this start-vp trade, and the vsefulnes of the Office: Yet the due ex∣ecution of the office, and the parts incident therevnto will be further beneficiall to the Realme. 1.1. Importation advanced. By publike Tables to be set vpp by the Exchanger wil be made knowne, the right valuation of For∣reine Coynes to ours. And this will direct the mer∣chant to sell our cōmodities to the just price, which will advance the stocke of the Kingdome, and cause importation of Coyne and Bullion. 2. By the true and certaine value and tate set vppon all forreine Coines and Bullion, the Merchant will driue a more certaine trade then heretofore; For being sure to receiue his ready mony for his Bullion at his returne, and being before informed of the true rates, this cannot. likewise but incourage and aduance the Importation. 3. The traueller inwards, or whosoeuer is owner of a∣ny forreine Coines in any the out part or place of landing, hauing occasion of currant moneys, must take the pleasure of the buyer to his exceeding great losse, for particuler men will not deale with vn∣knowne Coynes but vpon certainty of exceeding gaine; But the deputies here must gine the full va∣lue, which will likewise further the Importation.
1.3. Exportation hindered. The Exchanging Goldsmith being put by, by the Execution of this Office, the instruments and meanes of Exportation being cutt off, The Export it selfe will cease, or be much diminished. 2. Moneyes promiscuously currant are not Expor∣table, but the weighty and culled moneyes: But the Exchanging Goldsmith, the Culler and Sor∣ter of these being cut off. The Export will like∣wise thus be diminished. 3. The Exchanger and his Deputies in all the Ports will haue an eye to the execution of the Lawes and Ordinances against Exportation, whose better ex∣ecution will much prevent carrying out of Bullion. 4. Forreyne Coynes in the out Ports and heere, are kept and preserued to serue the occasion of the Travailer, or Merchant outwards, but bought by the Exchanger, are forthwith cutt in peices. And cannot bee exported but are Conuerted into his Maiesties Coynes. 5. Lightned and vncurrant Coynes of Gold bought by the Goldsmith, are eyther sold to be transported or moulten downe, being the best moneyes for these purposes: (As those wherein the Coynage is saued) But sold to the Exchanger, are in the pre∣sence of the seller cut in pieces, And re-conuerted into Coyne, whereby the stocke of money doth not decrease.
The Advancement of his Maiesties profit in the Mynt is a consequent to all:2. Aduance his Maies∣ties profit in the Mint. For all Bullion comming to the Exchanges, is by Covenant and Compulsarily carried to the Exchanges; and this by the testimony of a Controuler appointed to oversee the same, and to Charge the Exchanger with the Bullion bought by him, and must not bee sold or aliened to any other vse; Vn∣lesse his Maiestie or the State shall thinke fit to license some determinate quantitie to be sold vpon promise to prouide the like quantitie againe from the parts be∣yond the Seas, vpon the immediate contract of the Ex∣changer for the same. In which case the Money of the Realme is not diminished. But the Goldsmiths carry∣ing Bullion to the Mynt is but accidentall and at their pleasures, and onely then when the price of the Mynt exceeds the rate of any other for the same. This was the reason why before Gold was enhansed 9. Iacob. they sel∣dome or neuer carried any to the Mynt, the Merchant giuing them a greater price for the same. And euer since that time, the profit falling vpon Silver, They haue not carried into the Mynt any considerable quantitie of Sil∣ver, by which the Mynt hath not only stood still for sil∣uer monyes, but by this and the exportation and mel∣ting downe the Silver monyes, there is scarce siluer e∣nough seft to driue the Trade of the Countrey, to the great hinderance and decay of Trade, to the lessening the imployment and setting on worke of the Subiect. To omit that the remnant of the money of Silver are so by lightning depraued. That these which Run in pro∣miscuous payments wants neare ix.l. tayle per centum of their just weight.
Besides these, wee may herein further consider, That it is a point of Honour and Iustice in the State: That there should be a certayne and invariable price set vpon Bul∣lion, forreyne or other vncurrant Coynes, whereby they may neither be ouerprised to the detriment of the Cō∣mon-wealth, and all such as haue occasion to vse any manisacture made of them: As likewise, that the Sub∣iect be seured, that neither his Ignorance nor necessity, should betray him to Deceit; But that there should bee ordayned ser and fired to the Ignorant, as well as the skilfull, to him that is vrged by his occasions, as well as to him that may forbeare; a loyall and legall price of Coyne or Bullion, which can bee ascertayned no other way but by Re-erecting Cambium Regis. But these Considerations will perhaps with some bee more prevalent, when they shall reciue full satis∣faction in the cleere solution of those Difficulties, which by the Goldsmiths and others, both before his Maiestie and the Lords of the Priuie Counsell, and else-where haue beene obiected, and opposed to the sayd Office, in charging the same with pub∣lique preiudices, Which were these: Artic. 1.Petition Goldsmiths. Obiect. That the Office sought to bee renewed, hath beene so long out of vse. That the sudden al∣teration will bee a great hindering to the Trade and vent of Cloath, which if it proue so, will not easily bee restored though the Patent bee layd downe. And therefore without good
assurance of the Event inconuenient to be put in Execution. Artic. 2. It will be a great meanes o hinder Impor∣tation of Bullion. And by consequence will cause Exportation of Gold and Silver, where∣by both his Maiestie will be much prejudiced in the profits of his Mynt, and trade and con∣merce much hindered. Artic. 5. By the Indenture betwixt the Kings Maiestie and the Earle, it is mentioned, that the Exchan∣ger shall take onely for the Exchange so much as shall be agreed betwixt him and the bringer in of Bullion. So that it be not aboue the rate of jd for the Noble of Gold or siluer which is a great burrhen to the Importers, and will be losse to the people in euery ounce of gold xd. which is in money in the pound weight of gold x s. And the like prejudice will ensue in siluer, whereas the Goldsmith doth ordinarily make his Exchange for 2. s. and lesse in the pound weight. Artic. 6. It will be dangerous to the liues and States of Merchants that import Bullion, to be enfor∣ced to bring it to one hand onelyl by which meanes their importation of Bullion of forreine Countries may be reuealed. It being in most kindomes Capitall or confiscation of goods to Export Bullion.
These are the Obiect ons which haue bcene made a∣gainst the Office as publikely inconuenient aswell by the Goldsmiths in their Petition to the Lords as others. To which though euery one from the Precedent decla∣tions many make cleere answere: And that it ought to suffice that hauing bin solemnely debated before his Maiestie, vpon a long and full hearing they haue beene resolued: yet for the generall satisfaction, some part of what was answered to them may be repeated. To the first; That it was not imaginable how the Office could stop the vent of Cloth: Nor could bee assigned how or wherein this trade should here∣by be endangered. And his Maiestie propo∣sing to this obiection, it should be declared in Indiuiduo how or wherein this hinderance should be occafioned. Vpon Nihil dicit the obiection vanished, and was discharged. And since experience hath taught that the same was but as a phansie presented to a muse, such as could be disturbed by generalites and con∣clusions. To the second. That being onely generall, it fell off like∣wise vpon the same reason, for want of their shewing how or which way the execution of the Office should either hinder the Import, or aduance the export of Bullion, or decrease his Maiesties profit in the Mint, otherwise or in o∣ther manner then as this followed from the en∣suing Articles.
Wherefore to the 5. Art. Containing the burthen of the jd in the Noble to the Importer whence (say they) he wil be discouraged, is answered diuers wayes. 1. The Importer being neither by the Letters Patents nor the Proclamation restrained but at liberty to goe eyther to the Mynt or to the Exchanges at his election, doth not pretend himselfe grieued or at all discouraged And for the jd in the Noble, so long as he receiues bene∣fit and accommodation by the Exchange, the price of the Exchange, is due of Iustice Qui sentit commodum sen∣tire debet & onus: The benefits he receiues thereby are 1. The Importers occasion in the vse and imployment of ready money for paying of customes wages and other necessaries is serued: 2. Hee obtaines a more certaine course of trade, when by the Rates set and taxed hee knowes certainly what his forreine Species will yeeld him instantly vpon his arriuall without delay or diffi∣cultie. And since for these intents the Exchanger main∣taines stocke-seruants and other incident charges, Dig∣nus est over arius mercede sua. Et qui sentit onus sentire debet & commodum. Secondly, The taking of the jd per noble is not gran∣ted (though warranted by jx. H. 5. cap. 2. (as jd ob. per noble by 1. H. 6. cap 4.) but the exceeding thereof only restrayned: And in the Extent or Latitude allowed (of 3d per pound exchanged) The Exchanger (since the Im∣porter is free to goe to the Mynt,) must guide himselfe
and driue his Exchanges vpon such reasonable rates and prices as may inuite the Merchant vnto him. It being certaine that he will not come to the Exchanger but go to the Mynt: vnlesse his benefit and accommodation by the Exchange be made answerable to the price he giues for the same. Thirdly, His late Maiestie hauing abated his Coyne∣nage of gold by proclamation 4. May xmo published a valuation of forreine Coine and Bullion. And this was made by the aduice and with the godd consent of Mer∣chants called therevnto. And according as the same Species were by the said Merchants accepted of abroad, Intending as is likewise expressed in the same Procla∣mation, that these prices would inuite the Merchants to bring in great store of forreine Coyne and Bullion to the Mynt. With expresse prohibition, that none should exceede these rates. The office notwithstanding giues greater rates for euery ounce of Crowne gold or of 22. Carotts fine, which is there set at 3l. 6s. the Ounce, There is giuen for it in Ingot at the Office 3l. 6s. 8d. the Ounce. And in species 3l. 6s. 6d. For Angels, and Spurrials in species 3l. 12s. the ounce though these are one quarter of a graine worse then Standard: And so the office gets not ijd. per xxs. exchanged. And stay often a moneth for the returne. And since that Proclamation, seconded by that of the 5th February 16. Iacobi, There hath bin no cause by alteration of the monyes, why the prices well liked of then should not please now. And it is most vntrue that the Goldsmiths doe constantly exchange for 2s. per pound weight of gold. For that could not returne him the vse of the stocke: And he must needes
then be a loose by his trade: When hee doth soe, hee makes vse of the Merchants stocke, and payes him on∣ly with his owne at the deliuery our of the Tower: But the Goldsmiths rates are, according to the skilfulnes or necessity of the seller, vpon which he will be sure to make his aduantage, to sarr greater profit. And as to the losse supposed to the people in generall of x. s. per pound of Gold. It will easily bee maintayned, that the subiect in generall, recemes more at the Office, then from the Goldsmiths; besices that, neyther his ignorance nor wants can there be wrought vpon: but shall certainly and at first there receiue the full value of his Coyne or Bullion. Which thing how advantagious it is to the simple or necessitous, may easily be apprehended. And to the 6. Article; Implying matter of danger to be raised to the Importer by discovery from the Office. Though it bee grounded vpon a false suppofall, that hee is constrained to carry his Bullicn into one mans hand, whereas he is free to carry the same to the Mynt at his Election: Yet for further answere, It is plaine: 1. The Merchant is more secured by a sworne Of∣fice then by any Goldsmiths Servant who manageth the businesse for his Master. And the discoverie thence is more easie as the Discouerers more, of lesse trust and a∣bilitie and not so readily found out; Nor can this bee presumed since no Experience shewes, that euer from his Maiesties ministers when they executed this Office any danger arriued, though at those times Penalties
from forreine parts for Exportation were as severe and strict as at this present. 2. No man can say, that a Merchant or his Factor bringing Species to the Exchanger was the Importer; since heere they may vse one anothers name & servants: No more then it cna be concluded, That pieces of viij. Reals, or French Crownes, or Fistolets imported, came from Spaine or France, since these may and doe come from diuers other parts where these Species are Currant, and traded as Merchandize, as in Holland, divers parts of Italie and elsewhere. 3. No Register is to bee kept of the name of the per∣son to the danger of the Merchant: but of the thing onely for the securitie of his Maiestie, to charge the Ex∣changer to carry the same to his Maiesties mynt for in∣crease of Coyne. The issue of all which precedent Discoure is: That since the Exchange of Bullion is now cleerely his Maiesties Right, and no part of the Goldsmiths trade: And that the due Exercise thereof cannot bee but with good likelyhood of advantages to the King and Common∣wealth; aswell by preventing the Abuses and Errors aboue-mentioned, as by obtayning those benefits a∣boue likewise in part intimated; That the true State of the question betwixt his Maiestie and the Gold∣smiths is, Not that there should bee showne of his Maiesties behalfe, eyther reasons to mooue his Re∣sumption, or declarations to perswade the Conveni∣encies therefo; for his Matie hauing in Law alwayes bin in possession thereof And now being so de facto,
It rests vpon the part of such as Petition for his Ma∣iesties laying downe, this auncient Right and Flowre of the Crowne; To propound, some most just eui∣dent and necessary reasons and motiues, vpon which his Maiestie should bee moued to remit and quite∣claime eyther to the Goldsmiths in particular, or o∣ther subiects in generall this so Royall and legall pre∣rogatiue. Vpon consideration whereof (being humbly presented to his Maiesty) such resolution no question will be taken as shall best stand with his Maiesties Ho∣nour and the good of his Realmes. CHAP. 4. The proceedings and debatements had in bringing the same to Resolution. THe Proposition for Reviuing the Office of Ex∣change, was presented to the Earle of Holland about the beginning of Summer, 1626. And a Reference was made to Mr. Attorney and others, who reported the Legalitie, and that it was his Maiesties Right, leauing the point of Conueniencie. About Christmas after, the first Letters Patents and Indenture were passed, and a Proclamation according to the vsuall forme of such like graunts was to follow. The Lord Treasurer was ac∣quainted with the Proclamation, Letters Patents and Indenture; who thereupon ordered the Officers of the Mynt should attend him therein. And they then deli∣uered
in some exceptions to the same, partly clayming the place to bee in graunt to the Warden of the Mynt, partly vrging inconveniencies, which because they were the same with the first, 4.5. and sixt Article of the Gold∣smiths Petition aboue recited, are heere omitted. Du∣ring the stay of the businesse heere, the Goldsmiths ob∣tayned the Citie to joyne with them in Petitioning the Counsell Table against the Office. The Earle of Holland answered this generall Petiti∣on, praying that the Goldsmiths might in particular set downe their grieuances, and the inconveniences, whereunto a certaine Answer might bee made; And whereupon a certaine issue might bee taken to preserue the businesse from confusion in the hearing, which be∣ing Ordered, the Goldsmiths herevpon exhibited to their Lordships, another Petition declaring at large all their Reasons against the Patent, as well in respect of their pretence and clayme to the same; as also, what preiudice did thereby acrue to their Company in parti∣cular; And likewise, how inconvenient the same was to the Realme. To which his Lordship answered a∣gaine; and so the Cause came to a hearing before his Maiestie and some sixe and twenty Lords and others of his Priuie Counsell, vpon Wednesday 25. Aprill, 1627. and receiued Determination according to the Order hereafter following conceiued vpon the same. Wednesday the 25. Aprill, 1627. THis day the Kings Majesty being present in Counsell,Order of the Coun∣sell. the reasons presented by the Petitioners of the Citie, and of the Goldswiths; as likewise, such other Exceptions as by diver,
Marchants and others, then present in persen and by  Counsell learned, were made against the Office of Exchange and the Patent Indenture and Proclamation, for the Regula∣ting and the better Execution thereof were taken into Debate and Cor sideration. And vpon full hearing of all the said par∣ties and their Counsell at large, and particular Debate of all the Reasons in the said Petitions alledged, and others then made, it appeared plainly to his Maiestie and the Board; That no∣thing was innovated but the right of an ancient Office, Re∣viued; And regusated by the said Jndenture and Procla∣mation. Neuerthelesse his Maiestie gratiously inclining to giue com∣fort to the Goldsmiths, in any thing properly belonging to their trade, and to free the Merchant from any inconuenience or losse that might arise by the Patent, was pleased, and by the ad∣vise of his Councell did ordaine these things following to be thus explained and declared. First, that they of the mystery of the Goldsmiths haue free li∣berty to buy any plate, or gold and siluer, which in the vse of their trade or mystery they conuerted into made wares, or other works of, Goldmithry as fully and amply as heretofore they might or could doe, but not to by any manner of gold or siluer to fell againe, or to serue to the Mynt, or which now are or haue beene, or which hereafter shall be his Maiesties Coynes of Gold or Sil∣ner. Secondly, that all plate wrought, where the fashion is valuable should be left free to be bought sold or pawned, by or to any persons whatsoeuer. Thirdly, that euery one of his Maiesties louing subiects should be at liberty to carry their Bullien to the Mint, without being inforced to goe to his Maiesties Exchanges, But none are to buy Bullion Merchantwise, thereof to make profit by carrying the same to his Maiesties Mynt, there to be coined in damage or defraud of his Maiesties Exchange. Fourthly, where it was alledged, that the Penie in the Noble
to be paid to the Exchanger, might occasion the higher rates of Bullion and Species, and so hinder the Importatin thereof: It is declared that the Penny in the Noble is not set as a rate certaine, which the Exchanger is to take, but such onely which the Ex∣changer is not to exceede, but may take lesse as the Exchanger and seller shall agree, which if they cannot, the seller is at liber∣tie to goe to the Mynt, where nothing is to be taken but for the coynage of the said Bullion. These explanations are to bee made in the Proclamation to be published for he execution of the said Office, and new Let∣ters Patents are to passe, omitting the graunt of any part of for∣feitures of penall Lawes and Clauses of Assistaxce touching the same. According to this Order the Proclamation was pub∣lished 25. May, next ensuing, And the Office was opened the 25. of Iune next after. And yet the Goldsmiths (notwithstanding all their reasons were particularly heard stated & debated before his Maiestie and the Board: And after againe, read oner point by point, And they and their Councell were heard to whatsoeuer that they could say) did (the same Progresse) againe petition his Maiestie herein, which by his Maiestie being referred to the end of his Progresse, They for that time pursued the same no further, but since the sommons of Parliament did againe petition his Maiestie vpon the former pretentions and allegations, to which his Maiestie was most gracionsly pleased to giue this fauourable answere.
To the Kings most Excellent Maiestie. The humble Petition of the Company of Goldsmiths. MOst humbly shewing,Petition of the Gold∣smiths. That whereas your Maiestie hath beene lately pleased to grant a Patent for your Maiesties sole Exchanger of Gold and silue Bulli∣on within your Highnes Dominions, which Office ha∣uing beene long out of vse and aboshlied, and now put in practise, appeares to bee very inconuenient and pre∣iudiciall, not onely to your Maiestie and the Common∣wealth, and in more particular to your subiects, for that it tends to the vtter subuersion and destruction of the Company of Goldsmiths, consisting of at least 900. families of thousand of your Highnes people, for although your Maiestie was graciously pleased by your Proclamation to declare, that it was not your Highnes meaning to take from your Suppliants any thing that of right belongeth vnto them in their lawfull trades, yet they be restrained from buying and carrying any Bulloin at all to his Maiesties Mynt, when all other your Sub∣iects and strangers are left at liberty, it hauing bin the practise of all ages, to inuite all to come to the Mint, yet now the Goldsmiths are accepted and forbidden to buy any Bullion except it be old Plate, or such as is manu∣facture alreadie to make plate of, which is the standing of the Kingdome: So that they be depriued of their maintainance and liuelyhood by the said Office; And yet the seruice of your Maiestie and the common∣wealth,
vnder pretext whereof this Office was obtained, is no way advanced, but contrariwise much hindered and impaired thereby, And whereas it was pretended, that it should be a reformation of abuses by restraint of Transportation, it is plaine it rather incourages and make more Transporters then haue beene, And there∣fore because it is a great detriment to your Maiesties profit in the Mynt, and to the whole Land being a hin∣derance to the bringing of treasure into the Kingdome, both which may bee very plainely made to appeare by diuers reasons. Your Suppliants most humbly beseeches, you wilbe pleased to take into consideration their grieuances, and to compassionate them that they may haue the freedome of their trades formerly they haue vsed, that they may be enabled to doe your Maiestie ser∣vice, as heretofore they haue done, which they haue expressed by their readinesse in all obedi∣ence to your Maiestie vpon all occasions, And your supplyants according to their bounden dutie shall pray for your Maiesties most prosperous Raigne in this world, and eternall happinesse in the world to come.
White-hall. March, 1627. Forasmuch as this Petition of the Company of Goldsmiths containeth the same matter in effect which was heretofore taken into consideration and debated before his Maiestie and the Lords (with Counsell on both sides) and finally Ordered and that their right is reserued vnto them by the said Proclamation, And that contrary to their suggestion they haue as great libertie (by his Maiesties meere grace and fauour) to goe to his Mynt, as any other his Subiects haue, but not to make a trade and gatne betwixt any other his Matesties subiects and the Mynt, contrary to the policy of all ages, And if they are hindered or restrained in any thing belonging of right to their Trades (without vsurpation vpon his Maiesties Regalties) they are free to vse the bene∣fit of his Maiesties Lawes for reliefe therein, his Maie∣stie willeth that the Petitioners trouble him no further herein without particular matter of wrong, or new grieuance done vnto them by the Execution of the said Patent, whereupon his Maiestie will take such further consideration as bee fit∣ting.
