4626.3 33151175 28976
A wonder¦full Prophecye contynuyng tyll the yere of our Lorde. M.D.LX. Made by the Famous and excellente Clerke▪ Master Iohn Caryon. Astro∣nomer of the prince Electour of Bran∣denborgh. For a glasse or example to them that vnderstand and are wyse: and for a disday¦ne and reprofe to them that are folysh. ¶ Translated out of Doutch into I¦glysh by Anthony Scoloker. IMPRINTED At London / by Anthony Scoloker and Wyllyam Seres Dwelling in the Sauoyrētes. Wythout Tem¦ple barre. Cum Gratia et priuilegio ad Imp
To the reader. MAster Iohn Cariō wry∣teth / that he hath been a long season in mynde to set furth some good thīg wherby the iust ād good people might be warned, and the wycked feared and threatened. Item Iames Lichtemberger and Pa¦racelsus haue in lyke case much writtē after the same maner. But verely there was ner none yt at anye tyme hath set urth ye Armes of Emperour / kīgs / prī∣es and Lordes / as Caryon hath. And his prophecy shal continue almoost tyll he yeare of our Lorde. m.d.lx. And to he intent that all men maye the better nderstande or perceyue the same / her∣fter followeth the exposytyon of the me Prophetye. For it is not geuen to uery man to vnderstand the same / but nto such as haue laboured many con∣eys or they that haue red much. Iohn Cariō sayth furthermore, that e time to come will extēd or reach no rther thē almost tyll the yeare of our
A wonderfull prophecy con∣tinuing tyll the yeare of our lorde .m.dlx. Made by the Famous and excellent Clerke, Master Iohn Caryon. Astro∣nomer of the prince Electour of Bran∣denborgh. For a glasse or example to them that vnderstande and are wyse: & for a disdayne and reprofe to them that are folysh. The prophecy. A Sorrowfull Ea∣gle dyd flye a longe sea∣son, with great disquiet∣nes and labour. The exposicion. By this / ye shal vnderstād Maximilia
Aboue that Reghensburgh and the bo∣hemians were sore beaten. And Maxi∣milian hym selfe set first vppon them: in the which warre / the prayseworthye prince Duke Erich of Brūswyke was wounded to death. Thys Emperoure Maximilian had to do wyth the Bys∣shop of Rome and with the worlde. He had warre .viij. yeares agaynst the Ve∣netians / he dyed whan he was old .lxiij. yere. He was a louer of stories / of all artes and of all learned men. The prophecye. He did set the nest of his yong ones vppon a golden steple. The Exposicion. That is, Maximilian did bring Phyl∣lyp his sōne in the kingdom of Catylle who maried the doughter there. And .
For his lyniall garmentes were with .iij. partes whyte wt ouerth∣warte strykes and reade. The exposition. That is Austrych which hath a shylde, or armes whyte ouerthwarte strypes and reade. The prophecy. The Eagle plucked flouredelyce / and marred hyr leaues▪ The exposition. That is / Maximilian dyd vexe the frenchmen / as namelye. Anno. M.D. xiiij. Henrye the .viij. king of Inglande went ouer the sea to Calais with great power for to warre agaynst the french men. And Maximilian did bring with  of Braband▪ Flaundres
the frenchmē with also .iij.c. and .L. of the chefest of fraunce which he toke pri∣soners / and the frenchmen left .ix. Ban¦ners / and al their prouand and wagōs. In this yere / was Duke hēry / ye duke of Broūswykes father / shotte to death / at the orte in Fryselande in the warre of the price of Saxon, in the ende of the sayde warre. The prophecy. And destroyed his owne fe∣thers whiche glyttered of blackenes, ād much cattell susteyned damage ād hurt with him. The exposicion. Agayne / It dyd also chaunce wonders euell vnto this faythfull prince Maxi∣milian. He was taken prisoner at Bru∣ges in Flandres / in the yere of our lord
∣terly forsoke him in these affayres / and in other warres as in the warres of low doutchlād / Celtica Fraunce, Zwit¦serlād and Venice. And the princes sus¦teyned damage and hurte with him / as the Marquis of Castmir / the Duke of browneswyke / the Earle of Mans∣felde wt many other whych serued hym faythfully. The prophecye. He did byte the serpent / a  was byten of hyr agayne. Thexposition. By this / I vnderstand  the which / the French kyn  a saying. Ann  ¦milian take
was he bytē of ye Venetiās And ye duke of Mylan (in the cōfederacy promised / but lytle kepte) wolde betraye the Em∣perour / so that he was fayne to wyth∣draw himselfe / but afterwarde he recō∣pensed them well therfore. The prophecy. nd after much disquietnes / gaue him selfe to rest. The exposition. he departed from this vale  nno .m.d and .xix. and was  estad. And it was good  here euen as it was whē  Frederycke hys father  death, there  kinsmē ye du¦ .
the prophecy. His yong ones vppon the golden steple lyued not longe. The exposition. That is to be vnderstand of king Phil¦lip whome the fortune of this worlde hath not muche fauoured / and he came skant to the age of .xxx. yeres For he be∣yng abrode a huntinge / did drinke a so∣den draught by the which he hurted his lyghtes and lyuer / and dyed of the same. The prophecy. How beit he left other yong ones. The exposition
¦gary, who, Anno .m.d.xxvi. after tun∣té and insurrection of the rusticalle Soliman the Turkysh Emperour b∣yng come with great power into Ho¦gary, And came by Belgrado / and th sayde good Kyng Lodowyke, being l helplease and comfortles of all Chri princes, concluded with hī selfe to dr towardes y• sayd Turkish Emperou So it chaunced / that the sayd Turk did set harde vppon the Hongaria nd slewe Tomorrius, bysshoppe  Strigonia, The bysshop also of V¦radin, with other mo. And after th Kyng Lodowyke was set amonge horsemen in fleyng and withdrawin backe / was cast from his horses bac and was troden of the other horses  so kylled. Thus miserably ended th noble prynce his lyfe, in the defence  his owne natyue contreye, so that h  it semeth. Honestum bellu turpi pace melius.
rought vp in their youth in great qui∣nes. the exposicion. By this vnderstand Charles and Fer∣inand. the prophecy. But whan they cam to their eares, they weried their winges. The exposition. As by experience we haue sene / and et do daylye see / by greate warres as in Fraunce / in Affryke and in the land of Gulyke and other, I holde my peace of the insufferable diete or holding of a counsell / wherewith the Emprs maistie hath bene ful sore burthened / besydes that the Turke caseth not re∣rely to haue to do with the king / by rea¦son wherof although their wīgs were stron  become feble and weake.
yalow lyon in the blewe felde. the exposition. That is / the Duke of Gelder. Which came to passe whan the Emperour gat Gelder and Gulick and compelled the Duke to make contract with him. the prophecy. He shall breake out the ser∣pents teth / that he shall not byte. the exposicion. That cam to passe with the citie of My∣lan / whan Pope clement the .vij. (that spirituall man) wolde haue an occasion to warre, forsoke the Emperour. In the castel of the sayde cytie of Mylan / was Franciscus Sfortia beseged. And the cesarians wanne the cytie, & playde many a prowd and arrogāt parte, whe¦with they taught the inhabitauntes o Mylan maners / in vyolatinge of their wyues / doughters and maydens / an spoyled them of their goods and riche¦ses / and so that they were whole and al vndone: And were compelled / through famyne and lacke of sustenaūce / to yeld  the sayed castell.
