5128 99852037 17337
Votiuae Lachrymae. A VOVV OF TEARES, For the losse of Prince HENRY. IN A SERMON PREACHED in the Citie of Bristol Decem∣ber 7. 1612. being the day of his Funerall. By E. C. Batchelar in Diuinitie, and publike Preacher to that Citie. 2. Chron. 35. 25.And Ieremiah lamen∣ted Iosiah, and all Singing men and Singing wo¦men mourned for Iosiah in their Lamentations to this day, and made the same for an ordinance vnto Israel: and behold they are written in the LAMENTATIONS. AT LONDON, Printed by W. H. for William Welby, and are to be sold at his shop in Pauls Church yard at the signe of the Swanne.
TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCES; The most illustrious and hopefull Prince CHARLES, Duke of Yorke; the most renowned and vertuous Prin∣cesse the Lady ELIZABETH her Grace; together with her espou∣sed happy Husband, the thrice-noble and worthy Prince FRE∣DERIKE, Count Palatine of Rheine, and Prince Elector. TO whom, vnder God, should these vowed teares hum∣bly addresse them∣selues? but vnto you three (thrice excellēt Prin¦ces)
the neerest partakers, and most hopefull repairers of the great and common losse that caused them. A losse indeed, common to vs the members of this State and Church, with all the faith∣full inhabitants of the Christi∣an world: But to expresse the greatnesse of it, What shall wee take to witnesse for it? what shall wee compare to it?Lamen. 2. 13 Whereto shall wee liken it? A breach great like the sea: who can heale it? who can comfort vs in it? But blessed bee the Father of mercies, and God of all comfort, that hath not onely preserued vnto vs of this age, the royall
root and stemme: but also in you the princely branches, reserued a treasury of hope & comfort for the generations ensuing. Only, being taught by so heauy an hand,Ierem. 3 23 that the hope of the hils, and multitude of moun∣taines is but vaine, except the Lord be sought vnto as the on∣ly health of Israel. What shall we say? but the Lord giue vs hearts so to repay vnto your Excellen∣cies, the arrerages of praiers and thanks, wherein wee are behind hand to your Princely Brother; that God may be plea∣sed to repaire by you, the losse that in him we haue sustained. So may wee hope, that the
God of mercy the strength of Israel will answer vs with words of peace and truth,Ester 9. 30 saying: Vnto our Soueraigne your royal father,Psal. 89. 19. I haue laid help vpō one that is mighty: I haue exalted one chosen out of the people, &c. Vnto you illustrious Prince Charles,2. Sam. 23. 3 Thou sbalt beare rule ouer men, being iust and ruling in the feare of God. Vnto you gracious Lady, I will blesse thee,Gen. 17. 16 and thou shalt bee the mother of Nations, Kings also of people shall come of thee. Finally, vnto you happie Prince, and sent of God to in∣crease our happinesse, Come in thou blessed of the Lord,Gen. 24. 31 for whom
the choisest pearle in the Chri∣stian world is by God himself prepared.Ruth. 4. 11 The Lord make her like Leah and like Rahel, which two builded the house of Israel. Let her grow into thousand thou∣sands,Gen. 24. 60 and let her seed possesse the gate of his Enemies. What remaineth, most gra∣cious Princes? but that, with humble suite, for pardon of this boldnes, and acceptance of this poore seruice, offred (in the name of this famous and loiall Citie) vnto the ho∣norable memory of your tri∣umphant Brother, and patro∣nage of your Princely Graces: I tender vnto your Highnesses
two requests, of an heart zea∣lously deuoted, both to your present honour, and euerla∣sting blisse. The first, that you would al∣waies set before your eies, the Princely patterne of vertue and pietie, so happily expres∣sed in the example of that bles∣sod Soule, whom the world was no longer worthy to enioy: who beginning as Iosiah did,2. Chro. 34. 3. from his tender yeeres, to seeke after the God of his fathers, hath now left a sweet (though mourne∣full) memory, of his graces a∣mongst vs,(Ecclus 49. 1) like the composition of the perfume made by the art of the Apothecary.
The second, that you would often and seriously meditate vpon that hoauenly counsel, giuen by the holiest King that euer raigned, that man after Gods own heart, vnto his sonne the wisest Prince that euer li∣ued; and therefore well be fit∣ting your graces Greatnesse: And thou Solomon,1. Chro. 28. 9 my sonne, know thou the God of thy Father, & serue him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind: for the Lord searcheth all hearts, and vnderstandeth all the imagina∣tions of thoughts: if thou seeke him, he will be found of thee, but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for euer.
Which, if your Graces shall please to apply, as spoken by God himselfe to each of you, I haue all which my soule herein affecteth; which shall neuer cease to call vpon the Lord for the continuance of the sure mercies of Dauid, vpon our dread Soueraigne with our gracious Queene your roiall Parents, and vpon your ex∣cellent Highnesses, that you may long remaine the com∣fort of their roial Maiesties, and crowne of vs their well affe∣cted subiects. Your excellent Graces in all Christian seruice, most humbly deuoted, EDVVARD CHETVVIND.
¶To the Christian Reader. IT was an old complaint vttered by a Prophet, Thou haste smitten them,Ierem. 5. 3. but they haue not lorrowed: would to God it were not verified in vs, or that wee had lear∣ned, to listen to that other Prophets counsell,Mica. 6. 9. Heare yee the rod, and who hath appointed it. Then, might our endeauour for re∣uiuing sorrow, seeme at this present needlesse and impertinent; were our hearts wrought to awfull feare at the lions roaring, and not rather hardned as the Adamant stone, against both the voice and rod of the Almightie.
But as on the one side, the terrours of the Lord inforce; so on the other side, the loue of Christ and of his Church, constraineth vs to be instant in season and out of season, vpon this secure and sencelesse generation.Amos 3. 8. The Lord hath spoken; who can but prophecie? yea the Lord hath begun to strike, who when hee beginneth, will make an end,1. Sam 3. 12. and bring forth iudgement vnto victory; whose eares can now but tingle? or whose heart but tremble? This may bee defence inough for a man, otherwise well pleased to liue a∣mongst his owne people,2 King. 4. 13. to put the trumpet to his mouth, & (if it may be) to awaken such as sleepe secure in Sion, of whom it cannot now bee said, because they haue no changes,Psal. 55. 19. therefore they feare not God: but rather, as of the desperate Iewes, in vaine, saith God, haue I smitten your children,Ierem. 2. 30. they haue receiued no correction.
To speake plainely, an heauie stroake of Gods hand is now vpon vs for our sinnes: but that which giueth cause to feare, that the same hand is stretched out still, is, that to our many other sins, we adde this aboue all, not to take to heart so grieuous a visitation. A maine proppe and limme is rent from the body of this Church and state: who considereth it? Our sinnes haue vndoubtedly brought this maime vp∣on vs: who, finding the plague in his owne heart acknowledgeth it? that which the Lord seeketh at our hands, is, that we come downe, and humble our selues at his footstoole: who goeth about it? The only remedy of our woūd, is our true repentance and conuersion to him that hath smitten vs: how few that mind it? To reduce to feeling our benummed hearts, God alone is able: but to shew the only good and right way, I haue endeauoured, as by preaching at first to those that heard it, so now by writing
to so many as God shal direct to read it. The Lord grant, that the wofull effect, may addresse vs to the wo-worthy cause, and both of them to the sowre, but soueraigne medicine of repen∣tance not to be repented of. ISAI. 57. 1 The righteous perisheth, and no man considereth it in heart: and mer∣cifull men are taken away, and no man vnderstandeth that the righteous is ta∣ken away from the cuill to come.
VOTIVAE LACHRIMAE A VOVVE OF TEARES, For the losse of Prince HENRY. LAMENTAT. 5. vers. 15. 16. The ioy of our heart is gone: our dance is turned into mourning. The crowne of our head is fallen: woe now vnto vs that we haue sinned. What was, vowed in se∣cret before the Lord, in the day when first ill tydings, as a wing∣ed: messenger, came with the sharpe sword
of sorrow, to pearce through our soules [The publike bewailing, namely of our so great and generall Losse] that, now at length through Gods ouer-ru∣ling prouidence, in the most fitting oportunity, are we mette in this holy and great assembly, purposely gathe∣red, on this day of solemne sorrow, re¦ligiously to performe. And for this purpose, to mooue our hearts, (otherwise inclinable inough to follow the fashion of the Court,) to ioine at this time in this occasion of publike sorrow: behold, what choise it pleased God, at that very first, to suggest vnto mine heart, that, and none other, make I bold to offer. A text indeed befitting, as I con∣ceiue it, if any other, this mournefull accident, and which I doubt not but you also, Fathers and Brethren, all heere present, will so esteeme; shall ye not onely marke the wordes, like to Ezekiels role,Ezek. 2. 10. all full of Lamentati∣ons, Mourning, and Woe: but withall, take notice of the speciall cause moo¦uing that holy Prophet Ieremy (a man
liuing if euer any of the Prophets, in times of misery) so to complaine. For howsoeuer it be manifest, that in this booke hee more generally la∣menteth the distressed state of the Church of God, the ouerthrow of the City Ierusalem, and burning of the Temple, the spoile and slauery of the whole nation; al which he liued to be∣hold: yet that this his so bitter wailing was in part at least, and that a chiefe part, for the death of that Prince of so great proofe and hopes, Iosiah; witnes what is recorded.verse 25. 2. Chron. 35. And Ieremiah lamented Iosiah, and all sing∣ing men and singing women mourned for Iosiah, in their Lamentations, to this day, and made the same for an ordinance vnto Israel, and behold they are written in the Lamentations: that is, in this booke; which howsoeuer in the He∣brew original, it be without any name, saue onely that it is stiled, by the first word of the booke (as are also the 5. Bookes of Moses) yet is it in the He∣brew Cōmentaries, as Ierome noteth, so called, and accordingly by the 70. Interpreters;. Lamentations. The
Lamentations of Ieremy. Wherein, as it is generally agreed, that hee expresly mourneth for King Iosiahs losse, (that being the begin∣ning and presage of all their ensuing sorrowes) the best Expositors hereto referring, that complaint, Chap. 4. 20. The breath of our nostrels, the annointed of the Lord, was taken: of whom we said, vnder his shaddow we shall bee preserued aliue, among the heathen. So, in more particular, touching the very words of my text, I see not, why wee should not take them also, as a part of the La∣mentation, if not wholly, yet chiefely, for that losse; the phrase of the falling downe of the Crowne, so rightly fit∣ting. Since, howsoeuer I am not igno∣rant, that some Interpreters vnder∣stand to bee meant heereby, the defa∣cing and decay of the Temple, and ser∣uice of God, with other things where∣in that people gloried, as in their crowne; and others, as if hereby were signified onely, that the garlands, and other ornaments of delight, vsed in their nuptials, and other times of ioy,
were now laid aside; as if the Prophets purpose were hereby only to expresse their wailing and wofull state: yet is there no interpretation that can bee giuen, comming neerer to the nature of the Metaphor heere vsed, then to vnderstand it of that, which hee had before vnder other termes lamented, the fall of their Soueraigne Prince wearing the Diademe; according as of the setting vp of such an one, is else where spoken in the like phrase:Psal. 21. 3. Thou didst preuent him with liberall bles∣sings, and didst set a crowne of pure gold vpon his head. Against which Exposition if any shal except, that heere the Prophet spea∣keth of the fall, not of the Kings crowne, but of the peoples rather; The Crowne of our head is falne; which may seeme more generally to signi¦fie, the decay and fall of all their ho∣nour, wealth, and beauty, all the glory of both their Church and Common∣wealth: wee will not sticke to grant that more generall extent, so this par∣ticular of the Princes fall bee therein especially conceiued; As it needes
must bee,Prou. 14. 28. since as the wise Salomon hath told vs, that in the multitude of the people is the honour of a King: so is it certaine on the other side, that the peoples crowne and honour is in their Prince or King, especi∣ally if a good Prince, such as Iosiah was. For the sal of whom therefore, how well might they lament, as for the fal∣ling downe of their crowne vnto the ground, crying out, as heere, in bitter griefe, The crowne of our head is fallen: especially, since this fall of the Prince did presage (if they did not with speed preuent it) Gods farther iudgement vpon the people, whose sinnes had doubtlesse prouoked him thus farre already: as therefore the humbled Prophet in their name acknowledgeth with a prefixed note of sorrow in the last words, Woe now vnto vs that wee haue sinned. Vpon which subordinate causes of sinne and iudgement, depend those two consequents mentioned in the former verse; First the inward sorrow affecting their hearts whereof hee
complaineth, The ioy of our heart is gone, or [ceased.] Secondly, their Lamentation or humiliation outwardly expressing that inward sorrow, and vsed for re∣medy to preuent farther iudgements, which hee thus Emphatically expres∣seth, Our daunce is turned into Mour∣ning. And in this order, obseruing first the causes, and then the conse∣quents; The meaning of the whole complaint being a part of the Pro∣phets praier in the behalfe of the Church afflicted, and by affliction now humbled, what is it in effect and summe, but this briefly, That alasse! now they see by lamētable proofe, by the fall of their Crowne, the taking away of their Prince, that they haue by sinning procured their own woe, and moued God to wrath and indignation against them: and therefore how can it be but that their ioy should bee quite gone, and insteede thereof bitter griefe possesse their soules; yea therefore high time for them to exile and put a∣way
their mirth and dauncings, and on the contrary betake themselues with speed to mourning and repen∣tant praier, thereby to stay Gods an∣ger, and so to keepe off from their heads all farther euill. And this being, so farre as I can reach, the true sence and substance of these words; wee see, not onely the sorrowfull estate of those distressed people therein expressed, but also our owne present condition plainely ex∣emplified, and our solues for an holy vse thereof directed, to a sourefold consideration. First, what hath been our losse: Secondly, what we may rec∣kon the cause of this losse: Thirdly, how we should bee affected with this losse: Fourthly and finally, how wee may best preuent all farther losse. The first and second are offered from verse 16. for, the crawne of our head is falne, there is our losse; and, Woe vnto vs that we haue sinned, that is the cause. To the other two we are pointed var. 15. The ioy of our heart is gone, thus should we be heere with affected: yea farther, Our daunce is turned in to nigur∣ning,
loe this the meanes to haue all feares for the future preuented. Of which therefore in order, beginning with the consideration of our losse, from the first branch of the latter vers. The Crowne of our head is fallen. What the speciall crowne of their heads was, from whom wee borrow this complaint, you haue already heard, to wit, their worthy and good King Iosiah; and whose death no mar∣uell if they reckoned none other, then the falling of their Crowne downe from their head, the losse and spoile to them of all their glory, with presage of farther woe and ensuing misery. But what? is our Crowne (to make application) so fallen from our heades vnto the ground? Oh, God forbid; No, blessed be the God of Iaacob, the royall Crowne, and Diademe Imperi∣all, set by God vpon our heads, it still remaineth flowrishing, Great Britains glory. And long, and long, so may our Hezekiah liue and raigne, and wretched, thrice wretched may they be, that euer so much as wish in heart, to see his fall.
But it is the Princely Coronet of hope and future expectation, onely looked on, and with the lustre daze ling our sight, that we haue lost; our good Iosiah, herein onely differing, in that before we needed to haue him set as a crowne vpon our head, it hath pleased his God and ours, to take him hence, to crowne him with an euerlasting diademe in heauen. How∣beit though hee haue thereby gained rather, yet wee haue lost, alas, farre more then euer we enioied, except in hopes, and downe our crowne is fal∣len, as well wee may complaine with mournefull hearts, before that euer by Gods hand it was fastned on our heads. Our Crowne, our Diademe. Oh, why should wee not so reckon him? who was not onely borne a Prince, but created also our Prince, and ac∣knowledged to the world by his roiall Father, long agone (as the beginning of his might,Gen 49. 3. the excellencie of dignitie, and the excellency of power) to be his dearest sonne,Basilic dor. in epistola nun∣cupstor. and naturall successour; the right∣full heire to the imperiall crowne and
diademe of all his kingdomes. In whose vntimely losse (as we may count it, but that God the king of Kings, who reserueth times to his owne pre∣rogatiue, was pleased so to order it) be∣hold, what wee haue suffered, all the true subiects of this Realme, the fall of our very Crowne; our second diademe now in present, and chiefest in future hope: a losse inualuable nor of a Prince onely, but of such a Prince, adorned with so rich graces, in tender yeeres yeelding such hopes; that (excepting onely that paragon of, otherwise matchlesse, price, Edward the sixth) I presume wee may without wrong to any speak it, neuer yet had this Realme euery way the like. Touching whom, if any yet shall doubt, whether we haue reason to rec∣kon him so, as to esteeme his losse the downe-falling of our Crowne: let vs for proofe first consider, whether hee were not as the people sometimes spake of Dauid,2. Sam. 18. 3 worth ten thousand of vs. Surely if but in regard of his blood and place, which made vs in reason to conceiue of him, as of an Izhak, an
heire of promise, in whome we hoped for a blessing: or as of a Noah borne in an happy houre to be our comfort; on whome, howsoeuer not for the pre∣sent, yet for the hopes of future gene∣rations, was set, as Samuel sometimes spake,1. Sam. 9. 20. all the desire of Israel, as on a ri∣sing sunne, hoped to be hereafter, what Dauid is intituled,2. Sam. 21. 17. The light of Is∣rael. Neither was this the hope of vs subiects onely, but the endeauour and expectation also of his Royall Father, whose Princely care (no way better approued to God and his Church) for the welfare of more then one genera∣tion; as it made him more then a Ke∣nophon,In Cyro. paed. euen a Dauid, labouring the religious institution of this Solomon, both by his owne treasury of Kingly counsels,In Basilic. dor. and the emploiment for that seruice of men of cheefest ability and trust: so would it no doubt haue been fully satisfied, had God so pleased, that hee might haue left the fruit of these hopefull seedes, as a ioifull har∣uest to bee reaped by the ensuing ages.
For our parts, we saw the blooming, and reioiced in the sweet sent of this goodly growing plant; yea not wee onely, but Strangers also were so af∣fected with the fragrant odour of the same, that it was doubtfull, whether our hope in him, or their admiration of him, were the greater. They, like to Hiram, such as did but heare of him, with reioicing blessed God for him,1. King. 5. 7. as for a Wise sonne, appointed to succeed his victorious father ouer this mighty nation: and how much more with the Queene of Sheba,2. Chron. 9. 3. such as came to be∣hold and see his religious cariage in the worship of God, both in publike and priuate; his prudent care for the well ordering of his Court, and that rare temper of magnificence and fru∣gality, in the managing of his Prince∣ly estate. But as for vs, whome the hopefull appearances of his piety and vertue did more neerely and properly con∣cerne, how could we, as many as are true hearted to the Religion and state; but seriously reioice, to foresee an English Iosiah, beginning in his ten∣der
yeeres to seeke after the God of his Fathers?2. Chro. 34. 3. Insomuch that now, looking backe to that hope we had too confi∣dently embraced, we may euen seeme to speake (borrowing to an inferiour sence that phrase of the two Disciples trauailing to Emaus) but wee trusted,Luke 24 21. that it had beene hee, that should haue deliuered Israel. One, who we hoped, and wished, as Dauid in his praier for Solomon,Psal. 72. 6 might come downe like the raine vpon the mowen grasse,vers. 7. and as the showers that water the earth: in whose daies the righteous should flourish and aboun∣dance of peace be happily established: of whom, we promised our selues, that he should be Isaiahs good King,Isai. 32. 2. reig∣ning in iustice, and ruling in iudgement, as an hiding place from the winde, and as a refuge for the tempest, as riuers of wa∣ter in a drie place, and as the shadow of a great Rocke in a weary land: finally, one of whom wee hoped (what the Aduersary more then feared) that, treading in the steps of his religious Father, our present gratious Soue∣raigne, and going on where he should
leaue (as Ioshuah after Moses in subdu∣ing of the Canaanites) he would Iosiah like compell all that were found in Israel to serue the Lord.2. Chro. 34. 33 Behold, beloued, these, and many more not mentioned, the conceiued hopes that we had in him, who was expected in the succeeding age, not without iust reason, to become our Crowne. The vnexpected losse of whom so suddenly (Oh that wee should need so lamentable a docu∣ment; to make vs giue care to the Psalmists counsell,Psal. 146. 3. Not to put trust in Princes &c.) Alas! how hath it cast vs downe from the hopes, which in him we conceiued, and forcibly brought vs to acknowledge, as in our text, The crowne of our head to be fallen? Surely not a great man onely in Israel,2. Sam. 3. 38. as Dauid sometimes spake of Abner, but the very crowne and glorie of our Israel; who, howsoeuer hee be taken away in Gods great mercy and loue to him (no doubt,) as Enoch, of whom is chronicled,Gen. 5. 24. that hee walked with God, and was no more seene; for God tooke him away; or as Iosiah, to
Whom was promised as a speciall fa∣uour from the Lord, that he should be: gathered to his fathers, and be put into the graue in peace,2. Chro. 34. 28 that his eies might not see the euils, which God pur∣posed to bring vpon that place and people: yet for ourselues, well may wee dread, lest this his taking away, hath beene in Gods displeasure rather towards vs, who were neither worthy of, nor yet truly thankfull for, such and so great a blessing. Whom therefore God, according to that threat in Ezelkiel, of taking away the Diademe and the Crowne,Ezek. 21. 26. hath taken away from vs; by the losse and misse, to bring vs to conceiue more rightly of the worth of such a gift. The Lord grant wee may take it to heart, to make a right vse of it. Since for the cause procuring (so farre as it concerneth ourselues) alas! what may we reckon it, but our sinnes de∣seruing iustly so great, yea a greater iudgèment? as in detestation of our selues therefore, wee truely may, and wil redily, if once throughly humbled, acknowledge in our Prophets wai∣ling
words, Woe vnto vs that wee haue sinned. Since if wee also shall more question of the cause, or say in our heart, wherefore are these things thus come vpon vs? leremy our Prophet hath long agone made vs heereto answere, Ierem. 13. 22. For the multitude of thine iniquities, are thy skirts discouered, and thy heeles made bare. For surely so, as it is generally sin, that brings shame and iudgement vp∣on any people, as on the old world, on Sodome, and the Canaanites, &c. to the very rooting out of them from the earth: so more particularly and for the purpose, that it is for the peoples sins that princes are taken away, witnesse that testimony, Prou. 28. 2. For the transgression of a land there are many Princes thereof; often changes of the Crowne, being euermore dangerous to a Common-weale; as wee may see for instance. 1. King. 16. In the dis∣ioynted state of Israel. Yea farther, not to vrge many proofes to this purpose, looke but in Isaiah 3. How as a maine iudgement,Verse 1. the Lord of Hostes threatneth to take
away from Ierusalem and Iudah,Vers. 2 the stay and strength, the strong man, and the man of Warre, the Ruler, and the Prophet, the Prudent, and the Aged. Appointing children to be their Princes,vers. 4 and babes to rule ouer them. But what may be imagined the cause of all this ruine? It followeth after, Doubtlesse lerusalem is fallen,verse. 3. and Iudah is fallen downe; because their tongues and works are against the Lord, to prouoke the eies of his glory. Yea the triall of their coun∣tenance testisieth against them,vers. 9. they de∣clare their sinnes as Sodome, they hide them not; and therefore, Woe now vn∣to their soules, for they haue rewarded euill vnto themselues,ver. 14. 16. And hee instan∣ceth after in the end of the Chapter, in two chiefe euils, the tyrannous op∣pression of their gouernours, and their womens want onnesse and pride. The fruit of which and all the rest, redoun∣ding to the ruine and subuersion of the state, wee may read concluded in the last verse.verse 26. Therefore shall her gares lament, and mourne, and shee being de∣solate shall sit vpon the ground. To bring no more for confirmation
of this generall truth, that it is the sin of the people that mooueth God to take away their Princes; a thing which both Nehemiah and Daniel, and here and elsewhere our Ieremy, and all the faithfull in such cases truly humbled haue acknowledged: haue not wee reason in this case to suspect our selues, yea to conclude that for our sinnes, God Almighty in his displea∣sure, hath sent this losse of losses, and made this breach vpon vs? It may be (to make coniecture) for our great vnthankefulnesse; in that God hauing affoorded vs heretofore many great and maruellous, if not miraculous, Deliuerances; as to name but two most memorable, from the inuasion of our professed enemies, and their inuincible Armado in 88; and since from that hellish designe (wor∣thy a lasting monument for detesta∣tion) of the Popish pioners: wee haue not rendred according to the reward be∣stowed on vs,2. Chr. 32. 25. but haue had our hearts lift vp: for which therefore wee may iustly feare, that this wrath is come vp∣on vs.
Or may it not be, for yet a farther degree of foule ingratitude, that ha∣uing beene blessed by God, as much as euer any Nation, with aboundance of long peace in a fruitfull Countrey, wee haue giuen him cause to com∣plaine of vs, as in that song of Moses Deut 32.Verse 15. against his people, that we that should haue beene vpright, when we waxed fat haue spurned with the heele; yea being fatte and grosse and laden with fatnesse, haue either quite forsa∣ken God that made vs, or not as wee should regarded the strong God of our saluation,Verse 16. but haue prouoked him to an∣ger, if not with strange Gods, yet cer∣tainclie, with many foule abomina∣tions and crying sinnes? So that as the widowe of Sarephath, when shee saw her childe breathlesse, cried out in a passion vnto Elijab 1. King.Verse 16. 17: O thou man of God, art thou come to mee, to call my sinne to remembrance, and to stay my sonne? So may wee acknow∣ledge, with humiliation vnder his hand, that God is come vnto vs, to call our sinnes vnto remembrance, and therefore hath taken away our
Prince. And whether farther yet, his purpose be to proceede against vs, ex∣cept by speedy turning from sinne we stay his hand, wee haue cause to feare. But surely by this already done, the Lord God hath more then manife∣sted, that his are vpon vs, (as of old he threatned Israel) as vpon a sinful kingdome,Amos 9. 8. with whom he hath already entred action,Leuit. 26 25. as meaning to auenge the quarel of his couenant: and to main∣tain his controuersie against vs; the same verily and none other,Hosea 4. 1. which in Hosea he prosessed to haue with the inhabi∣tants of the Land of Israel, viz. for the crying sinnes of our Land prouoking the eies of his glory. For howsoeuer by the mercy of God, we haue wherewith to stop the mouth of the blasphemous Aduersary, both in regard of our profession after the way which they cal Heresie,Acts 24. 14. worship∣ping the God of our Fathers, beleeuing all things which are written in the Law and in the Prophets; and in regard of practise,Rom. 6. 17. not being destitute of those, who from the heart haue obeyed vnto
the forme of Doctrine, whereunto they haue beene deliuered: yet so few in comparison are they that ioine these two together, or willingly brooke the Narrow way to life,The strait gate &c. vpon Luk 13 13. 24 (as hath beene shewed in the treatise formerly writ∣ten touching that Argument,) that vpon the body of our professors may iustly light that exprobration of the Propher Ieremy,Ierem. 7. 8 viz that they doe but trust in lying words when they cry so loud, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord, &c. For alas show can it secure or profit vs before the Lord, that we haue the vn∣doubted marks of a true visible church, in soundnesse of Doctrine, and forme of worship, whiles the matter of cor∣troucrsie betweene God and vs remai∣neth, no truth,Hosca 4. 1. nor mercy, nor found knowledge of God in the lands No, but in∣steed there of for all the Lords care of his Vinoyard & our paineful preaching (and what, then thinke you would be if the Lord should let fall his care, if there were no preaching, no planting of the best plants. no plucking vp of the euill weedes?) A plentifull Vin∣tage
of those wilde and sowre grapes, of impiety and vnmercifulnesse, wher∣with in Esaies time his teeth were set on edge;Isai. 5. 4. and which by his Prophet Hosea hee casteth in the teeth of the wicked Israelites,Hos. 4. 2. who by swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and who∣ring, are said to breake out and bloud to touch bloud.vers. 3 And therefore no maruel if the land mourneth, &c. And yet behold, we are by the same Prophet immediatly after directed, to take knowledge of a sinne of lowder cry in the Lords eares, then any of the forementioned, where hee saith, yet let none rebuke nor reprooue another,verse 4 as if he should say, it is but lost labour, for thy people are as those that rebuke the Preist.Amos 5. 13 An euill time indeed when the prudent shall bee aduised to keepe silence,1. King. 22. 8. because, as Ahab could not a∣way with Micaiah, so, men hate him that rebuketh in the gate,verse 10 and abhorre him that speaketh vprightly. So euill a time, that where this sinne preuaileth it may bee feared the time of venge∣ance is not farre of; as the Lord him∣selfe sheweth, iustifying his seuere pro∣ceeding
against his people in the cap∣tiuity of Babylon,2. Chr. 36. 16. because they mocked his messengers, despised his words, misu∣sed his Prophets, vntill the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, and till there was no remedy, or (as the word imports) no farther [healing.] What shal I seeke for more particu∣lars? for those crying sinnes that pul∣led fire from heauen vpon Sodome, e∣uen those foure Cardinall crimes which the Prophet Ezekiel: Ezek. 16. 49. expresly mentioneth, viz. Pride, Fulnesse of bread, Abundance of idlenesse, Cruelty in not strengthening the hand of the poore and needy: Oh! that we could say our land were free from them! But alas, we cannot. For first, who seeth not that Pride, that setteth it selfe out to euery eic in their outward habit, proportionable neither to the body that weares it, nor to the estate that should maintaine it, nor to the sober liking of those that should approue it? in al which regards, it falleth vnder the same condemnati∣on with the strange and disguised at∣tire,Isa. . 5. Zeph. 1. 3. by the old Prophets so long agoe
seuerely censured. But there is yet another Pride, that keepeth it selfe more out of view, surking secretly in the heart; yet not so secretly, but, either by the trial of the countenance and gesture, or by words, especially when there is occasion of boasting and contention, or by port and af∣fecting of high place; or lastly by in∣truding into Gods office, rashly pas∣sing censure vpon anothers seruants, it doth more or lesse discouer it selfe to be that Pride of heart that God ab∣horreth. Secondly for fulnes of bread, com∣prehending not onely gluttonous ea∣ting, but also that fowler abuse, now a daies, and more vniuersall deluge of excessiue drinking: are not these the times which our Sauiour said should paralel the daies of Noah? and we of this nation the persons of whom no∣thing is to be storied, but that we are found as it were [at racke and manger] eating and drinking as if wee had no other care,Math. 24. 38.  but to nourish our hearts as in a day of slanghter?Iam 55. and God grant it bee not against the day of our
owne slaughter. So fearefully are wee ouerslowne with the inundation especially of the sinne of drunkennes, that it is hardly beleeued that excesse in drinking and quassing is a sinne, in such as can beare it away or stand vp∣right with it: although the Prophet Esay hath left a special woe against them that are mighty to drinke wine,Isai 5. 22. and strong to poure in strong drinke.1. Pet. 4. 3. And Th' appostle Peter among the lusts of the gentiles (of all that truly professe Christ to bee abandoned) reckoneth euen those [drinkings] and carrow∣sings; the shamefull sinne of our nati∣on. Oh! if some part of those huge healths, that haue beene heaued vp as a supposed honour to our late renow∣ned Prince, had beene conuerted into humble and feruent praiers to God for his preseruation: we might possi∣bly haue had him now liuing amongst vs, and God surely lesse offended at vs. Thirdly, that there is no want a∣mong vs of Aboundant idlenes, witnes the very liues, that all men looke vp∣on, of base vagarants; who like those
afflicted and assamished wretches spo∣ken of by the Prophet,Isai 8. 21. are suffered too much euery where (not for want of good lawes, but of due execution) to goe to and fro the countrie, wandring about in swarmes to doe mischiefe, and ready when they be hungry to freat themselues, and curese both their King and God; whiles they wilfully remaine in want because their hands refuse to worke,Prou. 21. 25. hauing nothing but what they get by spoile or beggery from others, to the shame of our christian com∣mon wealth, and contrary to the pro∣uision made by that old statute law in Moses;Deut. 15. 4. That there should bee no beg∣ger in Isruel; renewed and confirmed by Saint Paul as by a latter act of Parliament vnder the Gospell, where he telleth the Thessalonians,2. Thes. 3. 10. how he had warned them here of before, that if any would not worke being able, hoe should not eat. Howbeit, I would to God there were not others guilty of this Sodom∣sinne of Idlenes, that would be accoun∣ted as their place requireth, of farre better reckoning; yea euen of the
greater ones, the Nobles and gentrie of our Land, especially yonger bro∣thers, liuing without any calling care∣lesly,Amos 6. 1 not a few, who as those in Amos, against whom God denounceth a fearefull woe,ver. 3 liuing at ease in Sion, and therefore putting away farre from them the euil day,ver. 4 doe stretch themselues on beds of Iuory, eating the lambes of the flocke, and the Calues out of the stall, singing to the sound of the Ʋioll, &c. and drinking wine in bowles, no man be∣ing sorrie for the affliction of Ioseph. As if they had beene placed by God on earth to doe nothing else, but what Leuiathan is made to doe in the sea,Psal. 104. 26 euen to play and sport themselues; as those rich ones in Iames,Iam. 5. 5 against whom we read that indicement, inough in the last day if there were none other to condemne them, yee haue liued in plea∣sure vpon the earth. Fourthly that there is amongst vs (notwithstanding many wholsome lawes, better then which no kingdome euer had in that behalfe) cruelty and miserable oppression of the poorer sort, insteed of strengthning their hands,
practised for maintenance of riot and Idlenes in the rich (for idlenes must haue maintenance from others labors) as in those idlers in Saint Iames,Iam. 5. 4 that are noted to haue kept backe the Labo∣rers hire,ver 6 and to haue condemned and killed the righteous, that were not able to make their partie good against them: let the racking of rents, and rai∣sing of fines, turning out of Tenants, and decay of titlage by inclosures, the greedines of hard-hearted Vsurers &c. with the teares of many an oppressed fatherlesse and widdow, beare witnes; who if they bee not heard, and their wrongs redressed, God that alwaies hath an eare open to such complaints,Isa. 5. 9 will come neere in iudgement, and bee himselfe a swift witnesse,Mal. 3. 5. against such wrong doers,Col. 3. 25. who shall receiue for the wrong that they haue done, of him with whom there is no respect of persons. Adde hereto finally, that luke-warm∣nes both in profession and in practise, ouer-spreading our Church, some∣times reproued in Laodicea,Reu. 3. 16. whiles we conceit but too well of our owne perfections: and that conniuence and
suffering too much, as in Thyatira, of the woman lezabel,Reu. 2. 20 and her seducing shauelings: together with the little rec∣koning and light regard, that most make, not onely, as Manasses in his prosperity,2. Chro. 33 10 of instructions from the word of God, but also, as those in Isaiah, of the corrections and rod of God, that God may now despaire of vs, and say as to his people, Wherefore should yee be smitten any more,Isai 1. 5 for ye fall away yet more and more? So dange∣rously are wee ouer growne with that roote, bringing forth gall and worme∣wood,Deut. 29. 18 that whether wée heare the words of Gods curse, wee blesse our selues in our he iris,verse 19. saying we shall haue peace though we walke after the stubbornes of our owne hearts, thus adding drunkennes to thirst, till the Lord statly refuse to be any longer mercifull:verse 20 or whether wee feele the stroke of his hand smiting vs, as hee hath done, with pestilence, famine, inundations, drought, tempestuous weather, and the rauening teeth of those wild beasts, pernicious Pirates I meane, who haue gathered head, so that the seas are at this day, like tho
high waies of Israel,Iudg. 5. 6 in the daies of Sham∣gar and Iael, unoccupied in manner; and Trauailers forced to seeke out by-waies for their safetie, wee are so farre from returning to him that hath smitten vs,Isai 9. 13 that wee rather seeke to enter couenant with death and with hel,Isai 28. 15 that vnder the refuge of falshood wee may auoid the scourge; or howsoeuer, persisting with branded Ahaz in the time of tribulation to trespas yet more,3. Chro. 28. 22 against the Lord. All these laid now together vpon the heape, alasse, men and brethren, what thinke you that wee may iudge of our selues? or thinke you that it is not high time for vs,1. Cor. 11. 31 as the Corinthi∣ans are aduised by the Appostle, to iudge our selues, that we be not yet far∣ther iudged of the Lord? yes verily, nei∣ther shall we neede,Iosh. 7. 14. as Ioshua brought the tribes, families and housholds of Israel, so to bring forth and as it were cast lots vpon these our sinnes to find out the Achan that hath troubled Isra∣el: since all these sinnes, where euer they house or harbour, within the wa∣uy confines of this Ile, they be the wretched Achans, euery kind and
one of them, that haue by prouoking against vs Gods displeasure beene thus farre troublers and quenchers of the light of this our Israel. Neither yet,Iam 3. 21. were it not for the Neuer. failing, compassions and faithfulnesse of the Lord, might wee hope for fu∣ture peace or safety;2 King. 9. 22. whiles these witchcrafts and whoredomes of that Ie∣zabel of naturall corruption, are yet in so great number,Prou. 30. 20 that if we as the adul∣terous woman, should wipe our mouth and say we haue done none iniquity, yet could the Lord of heauen & earth, euen the Iudge himselfe, beare witnesse and reproue vs,Amos 5. 1 a saying as in Amos, I know your manifold trāsgressions, & your migh∣ty sins: To which therefore (to conclude at length this second point) let vs, without either blaming supposed se∣cond causes, or accusing God of too strict iustice in this behalfe, learne in true humility to referre all our losse, crying as heere our humbled Prophet, Woe now vnto vs, for we haue sinned, and therefore loe the Crowne of our head fallen. With which fall if yee de∣sire to heare how wee ought to bee
affected, it commeth now to bee consi∣dered from the first words of the 15. ver. The ioy of our heart is ceased. For, this being an vndoubted con∣sequent, of the feeling apprehensi∣on of their present calamitie, accom∣panied with feare of farther miserie; hence (to  enlarging) may wee take direction, how we also with our losse should bee affected: how? but as the holy Virgiue to whom the ma∣ny sorrowes for her blessed son were (as old Simcon compared thē) a sword that should pearce through her soule.Luk. 2. 35. A dangerous wound, and deadly, if not to the life, yet to the ioy and comfort of the heart. For verily those hearts must needs bee armed with stony, yea adamantine hardnesse; which are not pierced with this sword of sorrow: which melt not,2. Chro. 34. 28 as Iosiah his heart, at the apprehension of Gods iudgement: yea which, with Ieremy, wish not the head a cesterne of water,Ierem. 9. 1. and the eies as fountaines of teures, to weepe day and night for the fall of their crowne. The greatest cause of sorrow, and most important losse, excepting that
one (if that were greater, which was so soone and graciously by God him∣selfe repaired) of our last renowned Soueraigne Queene Elizabeth, that e∣uer in our age befell this flourishing state & kingdome: able to make all true hearted Subiects to weep, til with Dauid and his followers at Ziklag,1. Sam. 30 4 we be able to weepe noe more. If not for him so∣much, who was taken from our head to be translated into blisse, yet, as our Sauiour said to the daughters of Ie∣rusalem,Luk. 23. 28 for our selues and for our chil∣dren, who feele all the losse. Whereat howsoeuer wee haue iust cause to grieue, and somuch the more because we may easily conceiue how Gath and Ashkelon and the vncircum∣cised hollow hearted Philistines with∣in our selues,2. Sam. 1. 20 if not happily Moab, Ammon, and Edom, some of our borde∣ring euill neighbours also doe reioice (to whom wee haue to answer with the Church in Micah,Mica. 7. 8. Reioice not a∣gainst me,Lam. 4. 21 ô mine enemy, though I fall, &c. For, may not the cup also passe through vnto thee?) yet are wee not left destitute of most Princely hopes,
in those royal branches, more thē one, springing from the same blessed roots; and now a third, in lieu of that fallen off, we trust by Gods owne hand, for the increase of strength and honour to this kingdome, happily into the same stocke to be inserted. So happy a Match, howsoeuer the il willers to Siō may maligne it, that hardly could the Christian world, for purity and parity of true Religion, in all points funda∣mentall, agreeing with our Church (witnesse that worthy Palatine Cate∣chisme, expounded by learned Vrsinits) affoard the like. That yet we may haue good hope,1. Sam. 4, 21 that Ichabod is not borne,Num, 24, 23 nor the glo∣rie to depart from Israel (for, who shall liue when God doth this?) nor we to be left,1. King. 22, 17 as Israel in Micaiahs vision scat∣tered vpon the mountaines, as sheepe without any Shepheard: vnlesse as our vnthankefulnesse hath already defea∣ted our first hope,Isa. 9. 12. so the want of fee∣ling of this heauy stroake cause the hand of God to bee still stretched out against vs,Lam. 3. 65. till, maugre our dulnesse and obstinacie, he haue giuen vs sor∣row
of heart, euen his curse vpon vs. but, oh let it thus befall thine enemies and ours, O Lord! and such as reioice in our sorrow, or refuse to sorrow with vs, giue them sorrow in due time; but without vs. As for vs, whose names the Almighty hath changed from Na¦omi to Marah,Ruth 1. 20. teaching vs, not only by nature to lament the sorrowfull ef∣fect, but also by grace to be humbled for the sinnefull cause, let vs in the fourth and last place learne how to ex∣presse and testifie our repentant sor∣row, as the meanes to turne away Gods anger and prcuent our farther danger, from the practise of this holy Prophet, and people of God, profes∣sed in the last words of the 15 verse, our dance is turned into mourning. How could they, yea how can wee better suite our selues, to the hand and minde of God, (who calling to mour∣ning, chargeth men to bee no more mockers,Isai 28. 22 lest their bandes encrease) then when all ioy is darkened,Isai. 24. 11 and the mirth of the world is gone away, to turne our Harpes into mourning,Iob 30. 31 and our Or∣gans into the voice of them that weepe?
For, howsoeuer the Lord delighteth not in the affliction and sorrow of his creatures, being therefore to bee euer magnified,Psal, 35. 27 because he loueth the prospe∣rity of his seruants; yet knowing best what is for our good, and prouiding mercifully that by timely sorrow for sinne, we may haue peace in our latter end: he doth not cease both by voice & hand, to inforce this duty of humilia∣tion vpon vs. One while with loud threatning hee crieth out as by our Prophet Ieremy 13. 15. 16. Heare and giue eare, and be not proud, for the Lord hath spoken it: giue glorie to the Lord your God, before hee bring darkenesse, and or euer your feet stumble in the dark mountaines, &c. Yea, verse 18. Say vnto all [high and low] humble your selues, sit downe, for the crowne of your glory shall come downe from your heads. Another while, the former not pre∣dailing, hee vndertaketh by strong hand to create a day, or rather night, of mourning: In that day, saith he by the Prophet Amos,Amos 8. 9 I wil euen cause the Sunne to goe downe at noone, and I will darken the earth in the cleere day, &c.
And I will turne your feasts into mour∣ning,Verse 10. and all your songs into Lamentati∣ons, and I will bring sackloth vpon all loines, and baldnesse vpon euery head, and will make it as the mourning of an onely sonne, and the end thereof as a bitter day. One while he informeth vs how we must sit our selues so to draw neere vnto him, that hee may drawe neere to vs:Iam. 4. 9. [Afflict your selues] and sorrow and weepe; yea, let your laugh∣ter be turned into mourning, and your ioy into [a sad looked] heauinesse. An∣other while, he lets vs vnderstand, how indignely he takes it, that when hee calles to mourning, men should giue themselues to mirth and feasting: It was declared (saith the Prophet) in the cares of the Lord of Hosts.Isai. 22. 14. But what followeth? Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till yee die, saith the Lord of Hosts. A doome sufficient, if there were no∣thing else, to awake and rouse vs vp to sorrowing,Zach. 12. 11. to send vs to Iladadrimmon, and make vs all to fall downe weeping and wailing as in the valley of Megid∣don; yea to present our selues before
the Lord, that mercifull great King of Israel,1 Kings 20. 32 like Benhadads seruants, with ropes about our necks, acknowledg∣ing what wee haue demerited. For loe this the ready way to find com∣passion and abundant kindnes with the Lord; who hath himselfe, in Ioel 2. 12. directed vs vnto this course, of ren∣ting our hearts,ver. 13. and with fasting, weeping and mourning, to turne vnto him, that is gracious, and mercifull, slow to anger, and of great kindnes, repenting of the euill. For,verse 14 as it followeth, who knoweth, if hereupon he will repent, and returne and leaue a blessing behind him? especially, shall we to this noise of mourning, ad∣ioine the voice of feruent and humble crying (as verse 17. they were directed) both priest and people, weeping between the porch and the altar, and saying, spare thy people, O Lord, and giue not thy heri∣tage vnto reproch, for wherefore should they say among the people, where is their God? for surely being thus once truly humbled before the Lord, wee shall finde, as there is added ver. 18. that the Lord he will be iealous ouer his land and spare his people, hee will not giue his he∣ritage
vnto reproch, not suffer the ene∣mie to say, where is their God? No, for seeing the kingdome is the Lords, who howsoeuer mortall Prin∣ces perish,Lamen. 5. 19 yet rein lineth for euer, ha∣uing prepared his throne in heauen,Psal. 103. 19 and by his kingdome ruling ouer all, being he onely by whom Kings doe raigne,Prou 8. 15 and to whom, as Hannah sung, belong the pillers of the earth,1. Sam. 2. 8 who will preserue the feete of his Saints,verse 9 when the wicked shall be put to silence in the darke; who dwel∣leth among vs as a King in the armie,Iob 29. 25 and as hee that comforteth the mourners, saying,Isai 51. 12 I, euen I am he that comfort you; who are wee that wee should feare any mortall man, or the sonne of man who shall bee made as grasse?verse 13 forgetting the Lord our maker that hath spread out the heauens, and laid the foundation of the earth, &c. Doubtles there is none like God,Deut. 33. 20 O Iesehurun, which rideth vpon the heauens for thine helpe, and on the clouds in his glory, nor any like vnto thee ô people saued by the Lord who is the shield of thine helpe,verse 29 and the sword of thy glorie. Onely let our Asae, with all Iudah
and Beniamin heare the condition of amitie long agoe proclaimed by the Lords prophet;2. Chro. 15. 2 The Lord is with you, while you bee with him; and if yee seeke him he will be found of you:Isai 62. 5 Then shall we be a crowne of glory in the hand of the Lord, and as a roiall Diademe in the hand of our God: yea, he himselfe, the Lord of hostes shall bee vnto vs for a crowne of glorie,Isai 28. 5. and for a diademe of beautie: and to our King especially, as to his seruant Dauid,2. Sam. 22 51 a tower of saluation shewing mercy to his annointed, euen to his seruant Iames our Soueraigne, and to his seed after him for euer. Wherefore, for conclusion, to ap∣ply our selues both to that ancient counsell, and the present hand of God; (this being as the Philosopher told the Romane Emperor,Herodian l. 1 Non hoc, Iudo∣rum tempus, ô Commode, &c. no fit time for spor∣ting, when as not the sword of Peren∣nius, or any mortall enemy, but the glittering sword of the immortall God, may seeme to bee vnsheathed and sha∣ken at vs,) let vs, as many as desire to see the welfare of Ierusalem, and peace vpon Israel, so addresse our selues to
mourning,Amos 4. 12 that we may prepare to meet our God comming out against vs, who will no doubt be pacified towards vs, and repenting of the euill,2. Sam. 24. 16 will say to the destroying Angel, it is sufficient, hold now thine hand; when hee shall behold vs humbling our selues before him in vnfained repentance, and hearty praier. First, in repentance. For seeing the Lord hath himselfe begunne to search vs, as he did this people, and that wee suffer doubtles for our forenamed sinnes;Lament. 3. 40 what should we, but (after their example) search and try our waies, and turne againe vnto the Lord? who now assuredly hearkneth whether any speake aright,Ierem. 8. 6 repenting him of his wickednes, and saying, what haue I done? which if he may heare, behold a booke of remem∣brance,Malach. 3. 16 shall bee written before him for them that feare the Lord, and thinke vp∣on his name. Oh thē, let vs for our parts, write our booke of Remembrance, & because of all this,Nehe. 9. 38 make a sure couenant with the Lord, and we our Princes & our Priests, put hand and seale vnto it. Into
which whosoeuer shall refuse to enter, and to say with vs, woe now vnto vs that wee haue sinned,Ierem. 4. 13 shall certainly one day bee forced to cry out, woe and alasse vnto vs, for wee are destroied. Yea further for a speciall proofe of our sincere and serious Repentance, let vs with Asa and the people vnder him vpon the forementioned admonition ioifully enter into a league and oath of association,2. Chr. 15. 22 not only our selues to seeke the Lord God of our fathers, with all our heart, and with all our soule: but also whosoeuer will not seeke the Lord God of Israel (but will cleaue to,verse 13 or plead for Baal, and either become themselues, or approue of that accursed Iesuited generation, that account it merit ori∣ous, to vndermine and blow vp Par∣liament houses, to murder and massa∣cre sacred Princes, yea to kill young and old, nocents, as they reck on them, and innocents all together, their friends for company so their foes may perish) shall I say according to the iu∣stice of that law, let them be staine, whe∣ther great or small, whether man or wo∣man?
nay rather in charity, I wish first for their good, that they might be cōpelled to serue the Lord:2. Chro. 34. 33 or otherwise for our Churches peace, & kingdomes safety, that either they were exiled quite from among vs, that they might infect no longer, or so curbed at least, that their number and strength might not encrease, to endanger vs far∣ther. For surely (to speake plainely) how∣soeuer it be good to repose our confi∣dence alone in God, of whose care∣ful goodnes this land hath had so plen∣tifull experience; yet shall we, as beho∣ueth vs, consider the continuall machi∣nations, and attempts of these Iesuitish Locusts possessed with the spirit of their Prince Abaddon,Reuel 9. 11 or but looke vp∣on the wound that freshly bleeding in our neighbors sides (the reward which that redoubted French King Henry the fourth, receiued for taking downe the statue of reproch, and admitting a∣againe this viperous broode into the heart of his kingdome) how can wee iudge it lesse then a tempting of God
to relie still vpon miraculous deliue∣rances, if wee suffer meane while to the preiudice of our head, the taile of the false Prophet,Isai 9. 15 and popery, to spread it self, as a contagion thorough our land? Surely if the swarmes of those Locusts fill euery corner, and take liberty secretly to poison and infect both the mother & the children, (if not to packe them ouer sea to Rome or Rhemes &c. to be farther corrupted) we are in dan∣ger neuer to want pricks in our eies, and thornes in our sides,Numb. 33. 55 to vexvs in the good land, where we dwell; or cruell Esaus that gape but for a mournfull day,Gen. 27. 41 to take aduantage against their more blessed and therefore hated brethren. The God of coūsell work in the hearts, of them who are in chiefest place and power, carefully to prouide for the welfare and safety of this Church and state, especially of that light that ma∣keth great Britain glorious, that al the smoke of the bottomles pit may neuer dazle or eclipse his shining bright∣nes. For vs, the best part of our armour a∣gainst
these, & al both enemies & euils, what is it, but (which before was noted as necessary to be adioined to our Re∣pentance) to poure forth earnest and seruent praier vnto the Lord, with whō hauing power,Gen. 31. 28 wee shall vndoubtedly preuaile with men. First, for our selues and land in gene∣rall, that our crying sins, the causes of iudgement, vpon our true Repen∣tance being pardoned, there may be an end put to the Lords cōtrouersie; that the peace being renewed beween God and vs,Iob 22. 21 we may haue all prosperity; or if the Lord shal see that we stand in need of farther chastisement, he would be pleased yet to allow vs Dauids choise, that we may fal into his hands with whō is mercy,2. Sam. 24. 14 and not into the hands of vn∣reasonable and ruthlesse men. Secondly and principally, let our praier be vnto God for his royall Ma∣iesty, as to preserue his Princely per∣son, making,(Baruch 1. 11) his daies vpon earth as the daies of Heauen, that vnder him we may leade a quiet peaceable life,1. Tim. 2, 2 in all honesty and godlines, wishing him what the an∣cient
Christians did vnto their Empe∣rors,Tertul. in apo¦loget, cap. 30. vitam prolix∣am, Imperium securum, &c. that God would grant him a long life, &c. so to fil his heart with grace to make a right and holy vse of this great and heauy losse, that drawing neerer in humble submission & obedience vnto his God, he may be pleased to cheere vp his humbled soule with the inward sense and sweet feeling of his fatherly loue, and with assurance of his mercy towards himself, his gracious Queene, and their royall seed; that, both their elder yeeres may bee crowned with long lasting happinesse in themselues, and their seed after them continue as lights in our Ierusalem, to weare the Diademe,1. King. 11. 36 yea to bee the crowne of these Christian Kingdomes, vntill Shi∣loh his second comming in glory. And euen so let the Lord liue,Psal. 18. 46 & prai∣sed be our strength, & the God of our sal∣uatiō be exalted.Psal. 21. 1 Yea, let the King reioice in thy strength ô Lord, & be greatly glad in thy saluation. Giue him his hearts de∣sire, and denie him not therequest of his lips. Preuent himwith liberal blessings, & keepe the crowne of pure gold vpon his
head. Yea, ô Lord, that hee may long continue our crown, Adde to his yeers as to the daies of Hezekiah, and let his glory be great in thy saluatiō, increase of honour & dignity now in his elder yeeres being laid vpon him. Finally, let him re∣maine in himselfe, and his Progeny to vs and ours, as blessings for euer; Thou, ô Lord, making him glad with the ioy of thy louing countenance. For why? The King trusteth in the Lord, and therefore in the mercy of the most high hee shal not miscarry. For behold, Gods hand shall finde out all his enemies, &c. Amen, holy Father great King of glory, as thou didst deale with graci∣ous Queene Elizabeth, whiles semper cadē shee trusted in thee, & would not yeelde, maugre so many mischieuous attempts against her sacred person, one iot to Antichrist, and as thou hast hitherto also dealt miraculously in preseruing thine annointed seruant Iames our gracious Soueraigne; so deale with him, we beseech thee, still, and still;Psal. 132. 10. let all his enemies bee clothed with shame, but vpon himselfe and his,
let the crown of these Kingdomes flou∣rish, that happy he may be for euer,Psal. 146. 5. ha∣uing thee the God of Iaacob for his aide, and wee thy people happy, and our land, hauing thee for our God, and thy Christ for our Soueraigne king, and our Princes vnder him, main∣taining thy truth,Eccles. 10. 17. the sonnes of Nobles, and our glori∣ous Crowne. HOS. 6. 1:Come, and let vs returne vnto the Lord: for hee hath spoiled, and hee will heale vs; he hath wounded vs, and he will binde vs vp.
