6261 99844936 9795
THE POETICALL ESSAYES OF SAM. DANYEL. Newly corrected and aug∣mented. AEtas prima canat veneres, postrema tumultus. AT LONDON Printed by P. Short for Simon Waterson. 1599.
The Argumentes of these Essayes following. THe ciuill wars betweene the two houses of Lanca∣ster and Yorke. Musophilus, or a defence of learning. The Epistle of Octauia to Antonius. The Tragedy of Cleopatra corrected. The complaint of Rosamond.
To the Right honorable, Sir Charles Blunt Knight, Lord Mountioy, and Knight of the most Noble order of the Garter, and his most worthy Lord. I Do not plant thy great respected name Here in this front, to th' end thou shouldst protect These my endeuors from contempt or blame, Which none but their own forces must effect: Nor do I seeke to win thy more respect, Most learned Lord, by these Essaies of mine, Since that cleere iudgement that did first elect To fauor me, will alwaies keepe me thine: Nor do I this more honor to assigne. Vnto thy worth that is not more hereby, Since th' offrings made vnto the powers deuine, Enrich not them but shew mens pietie: But this I do to th'end if destinie Shall any monument reserue of me, Those times should see my loue, how willing I That liu'd by thee, would haue thee lius with me. S. D.
THE CIVIL WARS OF ENGLAND, BE∣tween the two Houses of Lancaster and Yorke. AEtas prima canat veneres, postrema tumultus. SAM. DANIELL: AT LONDON Printed by P. S. for Symon Waterson. 1599.
THE ARGVMENT OF THE FIRST BOOKE. What times forgoe Richard the seconds raigne: The fatall causes of this ciuile warre His Vnckles pride, his greedte Minions gaine, Glosters reuolt, and death dcliuered are: Herford accusd, exild, calld backe againe, Pretends t'amend what others Rule did marre. The King from Ireland, hastes but did no good, Whilst strange prodigious signes foretoken bloud. 1 I Sing the ciuil warrs, tumultuous broyles, And bloudy factions of a mighty land: VVhose people hauty, proud with forain spoyles Vpon themselues, turne back their conquering hand: VVhilst Kin their Kin, brother the brother foyles, Like Ensignes all against like Ensignes band: Bowes against bowes, the Crowne against the crowne, vvhil'st all pretending right, all right throwen downe.
2 What furie, ô what madnes held you so Deare people to too prodigall of bloud? To wast so much and warre without a foe, Whilst France to see your spoyles, at pleasure stood; How much might you haue purchasd with lesse wo? Thaue done you honor and your Nephewes good, Yours might haue beene what euer lies betweene The Perenei and Alps, Aquitayne, and Rbeine. 3 And yet ô God wee haue no cause to plaine Since hereby came, the quiet calme we ioye The blisse of thee ELIZA, happie gaine For all our losse; for that no other waye The heauens could find, then vnite againe The fatall seu'red families; that they Might bring forth thee; that in thy peace might grow That glory which no age could euer show. 4 O sacred Goddesse, I no muse but thee Invoke in this great worke I now entend, Do thou inspire my thoughts, infuse in mee A power to bring the same to happie end: Raise vp a worke for latter times to see That may thy glorie and my paines commend: Strengthen thy subiect strang thinges to rehearse And giue peace to my life, life to my verse.
5 And thou Charles Mountioy borne the worldes That hast receiu'd into thy quiet shore delight, Me tempest-driuen fortune-tossed wight, Tir'd with expecting and could hope no more: And cheerest on my better yeares to write A sadder Subiect then I tooke before, Receiue the worke I consecrate to thee Borne of that rest which thou dost giue to mee. 6 And MEMORIE, preseruresse of thinges done, Come thou, vnfold the wounds, the wracke, the wast, Reucale to me how all the strife begunne Twixt Lancaster and Yorke in ages past. How causes, counsels and euents did runne So long as these vnhappie times did last, Vnintermixt with fictions, fantasies; I versifie the troth, not poetize. 7 And to the end we maie with better ease Iudge the true progresse; here bigin to showe What weare the times fore going nere to thease, That these we maie with better profit knowe: Tell how the world fell into this disease And how so great distemperature did growe, So shall we see by what degrees it came How thinges grown full, do sone grow out of frame.
8 Ten kings had now raignd of the Norman race With variable fortune turning chaunce, All in two hundreth sixtie one yeares space, When Edward third of name and first of Fraunce Possest the crowne in fortunes highest grace; And did to greatest state, his state aduaunce, When England might the largest limits see That euer any king attaind but hee. 9 For most of all the rest, toyld in vnrest What with wrong titles, what with inward broyl, Hardlie a true establishment possest Of what they sought with such exceeding toyle; For why their power within it self opprest, Scarce could breake forth to greatnes al that while; Such wo the childhood of this state did passe Before it could attaine to what it wasse. 10 For first the Norman conquering all by might,William the Con∣querour. By might was forst to keepe what hee had got: Altring the lawes, chaunging the forme of Right, And placing barbarous Customes he had brought: Maistring the mighty, humbling the poorer wight With grieuous taxes tyranie had sought, Scarce laide th'assured groundes to build vpon The chaunge so hatefull in such course begon.
11 William his sonne tracing the selfesame wayesWilliam Rufus. The great outworne with war, or slaine in peace Onely vpon depressed weakenes prayes, And treades down what was likeliest to increase, Those that were left, being left to wofull daies, Had onely powre to wish for some release: Whilst giuing beastes what did to men pertaine Tooke for a beast himselfe was after slaine. 12 Henrie his brother raignes when he had donneHenry 1. (Who Roberts title better to reiect) The Norman Duke the Conquerours first sonne, Lightens in shew, rather then in effect Those greeuances, his fatall race begunne Reformes the lawes which soone he did neglect: Whose sons being drownd for whō he did prepare Leaues crowne & strif to Maud his daughters care. 13 Whom Stephen his Nephew (falsifying his oath) Preuents; assailes the Realm; obtaines the crown:King Stephen. Raising such tumults as torment them both Whil'st both held nothing certainlie their owne. Th'afflicted Realme deuided in their troth, And partiall faith; most miserable growne, Endures the while; till peace and Stephens death Conclude some hope, of quiet; to take breath.
14 The sonne of Maud (from Saxon bloud deriu'dHenry 2. By mothers line) succeeds th'vnrightfull king Henrie the second, in whose raigne reuiu'd Th'oppressed state and first began to spring, And ô if he had not beene too long liu'd T'haue seene th'affliction that his age did bring By his vngodly sonnes; then happie man, For they against him warr'd, for whom hewan 15 All Ireland, Scotland, th'Iles of Orcades, Poytiers, Guienna, Brittany hee got, And leades forth sorrow from it selfe to thease, Recouers strength at home so feeble brought: Giues courage to the strong, to weaker ease; Ads to the state what England neuer sought: Who him succeed (the forraine bloud out growne) Are home born kings by speech and birth our owne. 16 Lo hitherto the new borne state in teares Was in her raw and wayling infancie, During a hundred two and twentie yeares Vnder the hand of straungers tyranny: And now some better strength and youth appeares Which promises a glad recouery: For hard beginnings haue the greatest states What with their owne, or neighbourers debates.
17 Euen like to Rheine which in his birth opprest, Strangled almost with rocks and mightie hils, Workes out a way to come to better rest, Wars with the mountaines, striues against their wils: Bringes forth his streames in vnitie possest Into the quiet bed he proudlie fils, Carrying that greatnes which he cannot keepe Vnto his death and buriall in the deepe: 18 So did the worldes proud Mistres Rome at first Striue with a hard beginning, warr'd with need; Forcing her strong Confiners to the worst, And in her bloud her greatnes first did breed: So Spaine at home with Moores ere forth it burst Did practize long and in it selfe did bleed; So did our state begin with her owne woundes To try her strength ere it enlarg'd her boundes. 19 But now comes Richard to succeed his fire,Rich. t. Who much the glorie of our armes increast, His fathers limits bound not his desire He spreeds the English Ensignes in the East: And whilst his vertues would haue raisd him hyer Treason, and malice his great actions ceast: A faithles brother and a fatall king Cut off his growth of glory in the spring.
20 Which wicked brother contrarie to courseK.Iolm. False John vsurpes his Nephew Arthurs right, Gets to the crowne by craft, by wrong, by force, Rules it with lust, oppression, rigor, might: Murders the lawfull heire without remorse, Wherefore procuring all the worldes despight, A Tyrant loth'd, a homicide conuented Poysoned he dies, disgrac'd and vnlamented. 21 Henrie his sonne is chosen king, though youngHenry 3. And Lewes of Fraunce (elected first) beguilde, After the mightie had debated long, Doubtfull to choose a straunger or a child: With him the Barons (in these times grown strōg) Warre for their auncient lawes so long exild. He graunts the Charter that pretended ease And kept his owne, yet did his owne appease. 22 Edward his sonne a martiall king succeedes Iust, prudent, graue, religious, fortunate:Edwa.1. Whose happy ordred raigne most fertile breeds Plentie of mightie spirits to strength his state, And worthy mindes, to manage worthy deeds Th' experience of those times ingenerate: For euer great imployment for the great Quickens the bloud and honour doth beget.
23 And had not his mis-lead lasciuious sonneEdward.1. Edward the second, intermitted so The course of glorie happilie begunne Which brought him, and his fauorites to woe: That happy current without stop had runne Vnto the full of his sonne Edwards flo: But who hath often seene in such a state, Father and sonne like good, like fortunate. 24 But now this great succeeder all repaires,Edward.3. And rebrings-backe that discontinued good, He buildes vp strength and greatnes for his heires Out of the vertues that adornd his bloud: He makes his subiects Lords of more then theirs, And sets their bounds farre wider then they stood: Could greatnes haue but kept what he had gote It was enough he did, and what he wrought. 25 And had his heire surviu'd him in due course,Edward the black prince who died be∣fore his fa∣ther. What limits England hadst thou found, what barre? What world could haue resisted so great force? O more then men! two thunderbolts of warre, Why did not time your ioined worth diuorse T'haue made your seuerall glories greater farre? Too prodigall was nature thus to doe, To spend in one age, what should serue for two.
26 But now the scepter in this glorious stateRich, 2. 1 Supported with strong powre and victorie Was left vnto a child, ordain'd by fate To stay the course of what might grow too hie: Here was a stop that greatnes did abate When powre vpon so weake a base did lie, For lest great fortune should presume too farre Such oppositions interposed are. 27 Neuer this Iland better peopled stood, Neuer more men of might, and mindes addrest, Neuer more Princes of the royall bloud, (If not too many, for the publique rest) Nor euer was more treasure, wealth and good, Then when this Richard first the crowne possest Second of name, a name in two accurst, And well we might haue mist all but the first. 28 In this mans raigne began this fatall strife The bloudy argument where of we treate; That dearely cost so many' a Prince his life; That spoild the weake, & euen consum'd the great, That, wherein all calamitie was rife That memory euen grieues her to repeate And would that time would now this knowledge lose, But that tis good to learne by others woes.
29 Edward the third being dead, had left this child Sonne of his worthy sonne deceasd of late The crowne and Scepter of this Realme to wield, Appointing the protectors of his state Two of his sonnes to be his better shield, Supposing vnckles free from guile or hate Would order all things for his better good, In the respect and honour of their bloud. 30 Of these John Duke of Lancaster was one, (Too great a subiect growne, for such a state The title of a king and what h'had done In great exploits his mind did eleuate Aboue proportion kingdomes stand vpon, Which made him push at what his issue gate) The other Edmond Langley, whose milde sprite Affected quiet and a safe delight. 31 With these did interpose his proud vnrest Thomas of woodstocke, one most violent, Impatient of command, of peace, of rest, Whose brow would shew, that which his hart had ment: His open malice and repugnant brest Procur'd much mischiefe by his discontent: And these had all the charge of king and state, Till by himselfe he might it ordinate.
32 And in the first yeares of this gouernement, Things past, as first; the warres in Fraunce proceede Though not with that same fortune and euent Being now not followed with such carefull heed, Our people here at home growne discontent Through great exactions insurrections breed, Priuate respectes hindred the common weale, And idle ease doth on the mighty steale. 33 Too many kings breed factions in the court, The head too weake, the members grown too great: O this is that which kingdomes doth transport, This plague the heauens do for iniustice threat When children rule, who euer in this sort Confound the state their auncestors did get; For the ambitious once inur'd to raigne Can neuer brooke a priuate state againe. 34 And kingdomes euer suffer this distresse, For one or manie guide the infant king, Which one or manie, tasting this excesse Of greatnes and command; can neuer bring Their thoughts againe t'obay or to be lesse: From hence these insolencies euer spring, Contempt of others whom they seeke to foile, Then follow leagues, destruction, ruine, spoile.
35 Whether it were that they which had the charge Suffred the king to take a youthfull vaine, That they their priuate better might inlarge: Or whether he himselfe would farther straine (Thinking his yeares sufficient to discharge The gouernment) presumd to take the raigne, We will not saie: but now his eare he lendes To youthfull counsell, and his lusts attends. 36 And courts were neuer barren yet of those Which could with subtle traine and apt aduise Worke on the Princes weakenes, and dispose Of feeble frailtie easiest to intice: And such no doubt about this king arose, Whose flattery (the daungerous nurse of vice) Got hand vpon his youth to pleasures bent Which lead by them did others discontent. 37 For now his vnckles grew much to mislike These ill proceedings; were it that they saw, That others fauor'd did aspiring seeke Their nephew from their counsels to withdraw, Seeing his nature flexible and mecke, Because they onely would keepe all in awe: Or that indeed they found the king and state Abusde by such as now in office sate.
38 Or rather else they all were in the fault, Th' ambitious vnckles, th' indiscreet young king, The greedy counsell and the Minions naught, And all togither did this tempest bring; Besides the times withall iniustice fraught, Concurr'd in this confusd disordering, That we may truly say this spoild the state; Youthfull Counsell, priuate gaine, partiall hate. 39 And sure the king plainly discouereth Apparant cause his vnckles to suspect; For John of Gaunt was said to seeke his death By secret meanes, which came not to effect: The Duke of Gloster like wise practiseth In open world that all men might detect And leagues his Nobles, and in greatest strength Rises in armes against him too at length. 40 Vnder pretence from him to take away Such as they said the states oppressors weare, To whom the Realme was now become a pray; The chiefe of whom they nam'd was Robert Vere Then Duke of Ireland; bearing greatest sway About the king, who held him only dere, Him they would haue remou'd and diuers more, Or else would neuer lay downe armes they swore.
41 The king was forst in that next Parliment To grant them what he durst not well refuse, For thither arm'd they came and fully bent To suffer no repulse nor no excuse: And here they did accomplish their intent Where iustice did her sword, not ballance vse: For euen that sacred place they violate And there arest the Iudges as they sate. 42 Which soone with many others had their end, Cruelly slaine without the course of right, And still these warres that publique good pretend Worke most iniustice being done for spight: For the agrieued euermore doe bend Against those whom they see of greatest might, Who though themselues are wrong'd & often forst, Yet for they can doe most are thought the worst. 43 And yet I doe not seeme herein to excuse The Iustices, and Minions of the king Which might their office and their grace abuse, But onely blame the course of managing: For great men too well grac'd much rigor vse; Presuming fauorites mischiefe euer bring; So that concluding I may boldly speake, Minions too great, argue a king too weake.
44 Now that so much was granted as was sought, A reconcilement made although not ment Appeasd them all in shew, but not in thought Whilst euery one seem'd outwardlie content: Though hereby king, nor peeres, nor people got More loue, more strength, or easier gouerment; But euery day things now succeeded worse, For good from kings must not be drawne by force. 45 And this it lo continued till by chance The Queene (which was the emperours daughter) dy'de; When as the king t' establish peace with Fraunce And better for home quiet to prouide, Sought by contracting marriage to aduance His owne affaires against his vnckles pride: Tooke the young daughter of king Charles to wife Which after in the end raisd greater strife. 46 For now his vnckle Gloster much repin'd Against this french aliance and this peace, Hauing himselfe a working stirring mind Which neuer was content the warres should cease: Whether he did dishonourable finde Those articles that did our boundes decrease, And therfore storm'd because the crown had wrōg; Or that he fear'd the king would grow too strong;
47 Or whatsoeuer mou'd him; this is sure Hereby he wrought his ruine in the end, And was a fatall cause that did procure The swift approching mischiefes that attend: For lo the king no longer could indure Thus to be crost in what he did intend, And therefore watcht but some occasion fit T' attach the Duke when he thought least of it. 48 And fortune now to further this intent The great Earle of S.Paule doth hither bring, From Charles of Fraunce vnto the young Q. sent To see both her and to salute the king: To whom he shewes his vnckles discontent And of his secret dangerous practising, How he his subiects sought to fulleuare And breake the league with Fraunce concluded late. 49 To whom the suttle Earle forthwith replies, Great Prince it is within your power with ease, To remedy such feares, such ielousies, And rid you of such mutiners as thease; By cutting off that which might greater rise, And now at first preuenting this disease, And that before he shall your wrath disclose, For who threates first means of reuenge doth lose.
50 First take his head, then tell the reason why, Stand not to finde him guilty by your lawes, Easier you shall with him your quarrell try Dead then aliue who hath the better cause: For in the murmuring vulgar vsually This publique course of yours compassion drawes, Especially in cases of the great Which worke much pitty in the vndiscreat. 51 And this is sure though his offence be such, Yet doth calamitie attract commorse, And men repine at Princes bloudshed much How iust-socuer iudging tis by force: I know not how their death giues such a tuch In those that reach not to a true discourse; That so shall you obseruing formall right Be still thought as vniust and win more spight. 52 And oft the cause, may come preuented so, And therefore when tis done, let it be heard; So shall you hereby scape your priuate wo And satisfie the world to, afterward: What need you weigh the rumors that shall go? What is that breath being with your life compard? And therefore if you will be rul'd by me Strangled or poison'd secret let him be.
53 And then araigne the chiefe of those you find Were of his faction secretly compact, Whom you maie wisely order in such kind That you maie such confessions then exact, As both you maie appease the peoples mind And by their death much aggrauate the fact: So shall you rid your selfe of dangers quite And shew the world that you haue done but right. 54 This counsell vttred vnto such an eare As willing listens to the safest waies, Workes on the yeelding matter of his feare, Which easelie to any course obeies: For euerie Prince seeing his daunger neere By anie meanes his quiet peace assaies: And still the greatest wronges that euer were Haue then bin wrought when kings were put in fear. 55 And long it was not ere he apprehendes The Duke, who close to Calice was conuei'd, And th' Earles of Arundell and Warwike sendes, Both in close prisons strongly to be laid; And soone the Duke his life vnquiet endes, Strangled in secret ere it was bewraide; And Arundell was put to publike death, But Warwike by great meanes he banisheth.
56 And for his person he procures a guard A thousand Archers daily to attend, Which now vpon the act he had prepard As th' argument his actions to defend: But yet the world had now conceiu'd so hard That all this nought auaild him in the end: In vaine with terror is he fortified That is not guarded with firme loue beside. 57 Now storme his vnckles albeit in vaine, For that no remedy they could deuise, They might their sorrowes inwardly complaine, But outwardly they needs must temporise: The king was great, and they should nothing gaine T'attempt reuenge or offer once to rise, This league with Fraunce had made him now so strong That they must needs as yet indure this wrong. 58 For like a Lion that escapes his bounds Hauing bin long restraind his vse to straie, Raunges the restles woods, staies on no ground, Riottes with bloudshed, wantons on his praie: Seckes not for need but in his pride to wound, Glorying to see his strength and what he may; So this vnbridled king freed of his feares In libertie himselfe thus wildly beares.
59 For standing on himselfe he sees his might Out of the compasse of respectiue awe, And now beginnes to violate all right While no restraining feare at hand he saw: Now he exactes of all, wasts in delight, Riots in pleasure, and neglects the law; He thinkes his crowne is licensd to do ill That lesse should list, that may do what it will. 60 Thus b'ing transported in this sensuall course No frend to warne, no counsell to withstand, He still proceedeth on from bad to worse, Sooth'd in all actions that he tooke in hand By such as all impiety did nurse, Commending euer what he did commaund: Vnhappy kings that neuer may be taught To know themselues or to discerne their fault. 61 And whilst all sylent grieue at what is donne, The Duke of Herford then of courage bold And worthily great Iohn of Gaunts first sonne Vtters the passion which he could not hold, In sad discourse vpon this course begun, Which he to Mowbray Duke of Norfolke told; To th' end he being great about the king Might doe some good by better counselling.
62 The faithles Duke that presentlie takes holdFroisart. Pol. Virg. & Hall, der huer it in this sort. Of such aduantage to insinuate Hastes to the king, peruerting what was told, And what came of good minde he makes it hate: The king that might not now be so controld Or censur'd in his course, much frets thereat; Sendes for the Duke, who doth such wordes deny And craues the combate of his enemy. 63 Which straight was granted, and the daie assign'd When both in order of the field appeare To right each other as th' euent should find, And now both euen at point of combate were When lo the king changd sodenly his mind, Casts downe his warder and so staies them there, As better now aduisd what waie to take Which might for his assured safety make. 64 For now considering (as it likely might) The victorie should hap on Herfords side, A man most valiant and of noble sprite, Belou'd of all, and euer worthy tride: How much he might be grac'd in publique sight By such an act as might aduance his pride, And so become more popular by this, Which he feares, too much he already is.
65 And therefore he resolues to banish both, Though th' one in chiefest fauour with him stood, A man he dearely lou'd and might be loth To leaue him that had done him so much good: Yet hauing cause to do as now he doth To mitigate the enuie of his bloud, Thought best to loose a friend, to rid a foe, And such a one as now he doubted so. 66 And therefore to perpetuall exile hee Mowbray condemnes; Herford but for ten yeares: Thinking (for that the wrong of this decree Compard with greater rigour lesse appeares) It might of all the better liked be: But yet such murmuring of the fact he heares, That he is faine foure of the ten forgiue, And iudg'd him sixe yeares in exile to liue. 67 At whose departure hence out of the land, O how the open multitude reueale The wondrous loue they bare him vnderhand, Which now in this hote passion of their zeale They plainely shewde that all might vnderstand How deare he was vnto the common weale: They feard not to exclaime against the king As one that sought all good mens ruining.
68 Vnto the shore with teares, with sighes, with mone They him conduct, cursing the bounds that staie Their willing feete that would haue further gone Had not the fearefull Ocean stopt their way: Why Neptune hast thou made vs stand alone Deuided from the world, for this say they? Hemd in to be a spoile to tyranny Leauing affliction hence no way to flie? 69 Are we lockt vp poore soules, here t'abide Within the watery prison of thy waues, As in a fold, where subiect to the pride And lust of rulers we remaine as slaues? Here in the reach of might, where none can hide From th' eie of wrath, but onely in their graues? Happy confiners you of other landes That shift your soile and oft scape tyrants hands. 70 Ah must we leaue him here; that here were fit We should retaine the pillar of our state; Whose vertues well deserue to gouerne it, And not this wanton young effeminate? Why should not he in regall honour sit, That best knowes how a realme to ordinate? Yet one daie ô we hope thou shalt bring backe Deare Bullingbrooke the iustice that we lacke.
71 Thus muttred lo the malecontented sort That loue kings best before they haue them still, And neuer can the present state comport, But would as oft change as they change their will: For this good Duke had wonne them in this sort By suckring them and pittying of their ill, That they supposed straight it was one thing, To be both a good man, and a good king. 72 When as the grauer sort that saw the course And knew that Princes maie not be controlde, Likt wel to suffer this for feare of worse; Since many great, one kingdome cannot hold: For now they saw intestine strife of force The apt-deuided state intangle would, If he should stay whom they would make their head, By whom the vulgar body might be lead. 73 They saw likewise that Princes oft are faine To buy their quiet with the price of wrong: And better twere that now a few complaine Then all should morne, aswell the weake as strong: Seeing how little Realmes by change doe gaine, And therefore learned by obseruing long T' admire times past, follow the present will Wish for good Princes, but t' indure the ill.
74 For when it nought awailes what folly then To striue against the current of the time? Who will throw downe himselfe for other men That make a ladder by his fall to clime? Or who would seeke t'imbroile his country when He might haue rest; suffering but others crime? Since wisemen euer haue preferred farre Th' vniustest peace, before the iustest warre. 75 Thus they considered that in quiet fate, Rich or content, or else vnfit to striue: Peace louer-wealth, hating a troublous state Doth willing reasons for their rest contriue: But if that all were thus considerate How should in court the great, the fauour'd thriue? Factions must be and these varieties, And some must fall that other some may rise. 76 But long the Duke remaind not in exile Before that Iohn of Gaunt his father dies, Vpon whose state the king seasd now this while Disposing of it as his enemies: This open wrong no longer could beguile The world that saw these great indignities, Which so exasperates the mindes of all That they resolu'd him home againe to call
77 For now they saw twas malice in the king Transported in his il-conceiued thought, That made him so to prosecute the thing Against all law and in a course so naught: And this aduantage to the Duke did bring Fitter occasions whereupon he wrought: For to a man so strong and of such might He giues him more, that takes away his right. 78 The king, in this meane time, I know not how Was drawne into some actions forth the land, T' appease the Irish that reuolted now; And there attending what he had in hand Neglects those parts from whence worse daungers grow, As ignorant how his affaires did stand: Whether the plot was wrought it should be so, Or that his fate did draw him on to go. 79 Certaine it is that he committed here An ignorant and idle ouersight, Not looking to the Dukes proceedings there, Being in the court of Fraunce where best he might, Where both the king and all assured were T' haue stopt his course being within their right: But being now exild he thought him sure And free from farther doubting liu'd secure.
80 So blindes the sharpest counsels of the wise This ouershadowing prouidence on hie, And dazeleth the clearest sighted eies, That they see not how nakedly they lie: There where they little thinke the storme doth rise, And ouercasts their cleare security: When man hath stopt al waies saue only that That (least suspected) ruine enters at. 81 And now was all disorder in th' excesse And whatsoeuer doth a change portend, As idle luxury, and wantonnes, Proteus-like varying pride, vaine without end: Wrong-worker Riot, motiue to oppresse, Endles exactions, which the idle spend, Consuming vsury and credits crackt, Cald on this purging warre that many lackt. 82 Then ill perswading want in martiall minds, And wronged patience, long opprest with might, Loosenes in all, which no religion bindes, Commaunding force the measure made of right, Gaue suell to this fire, that easie findes The way t'inflame the whole indangerd quite: These were the publique breeders of this warre, By which stil greatest states confounded are.
83 For now this peace with Fraunce had shue in here The ouergrowing humours warres doe spend, For where t' cuacuate no employments were Widerth' vnwildy burthen doth distend; Men wholy vsd to warre, peace could not beare; As knowing no course else whereto to bend: For brought vp in the broiles of these two Realmes, They thought best fishing still in troubled streames. 84 Like to a riuer that is stopt his course Doth violate his bankes, breakes his owne bed, Destroies his bounds and ouer-runs by force The neighbour fields irregularly spread: Euen so this sodaine stop of warre doth nurse Home broiles within it selfe, from others lead: So dangerous the change hereof is tride Ere mindes come soft or otherwise imploid. 85 And all this makes for thee, ô Bullingbrooke, To worke a waie vnto thy Soueraintie; This care the heauens, fate and fortune tooke To bring thee to thy scepter easily: Vpon the fals that hap which him forsooke Who crownd a king, a king yet must not die, Thou wert ordaind by prouidence to raise A quarrell lasting longer then thy daies.
86 For now this absent king out of his land, Where though he shew'd great sprite and valor then, (Being attended with a worthy band of valiant Peeres, and most couragious men) Gaue time to them at home that had in hand Th' vngodly worke and knew the season when; Who faile not to aduise the Duke with speed, Solliciting to what he soone agreed. 87 For presently vpon so good report, He doth with cunning traine and pollicy Conuay himselfe out of the French kings court Vnder pretence to go to Brittanie: And with his followers that to him resort Landed in England. Welcom'd ioyfully Of th' altring vulgar apt for changes still As headlong caried with a present will. 88 And com'd to quiet shore but not to rest, The first night of his ioyfull landing here A fearefull vision doth his thoughts molest, Seeming to see in wofull forme appeare A naked goodly woman all distrest, Which with ful-weeping eies and rent-white haire, Wringing her hands as one that grieud and praid, With sighes commixt, with words it seem'd shee said.
89 O whither dost thou tend my vnkind sonne? What mischiefe dost thou go about to bring To her whose Genius thou here lookst vpon, Thy mother countrey whence thy selfe didst spring? O whither dost thou in ambition run, To change due course by foule disordering? What bloudshed, ô what broyles dost thou cōmence To last for many wofull ages hence? 90 Stay here thy foote, thy yet vnguilty foote, That canst not stay when thou art farther in, Retire thee yet vnstaind whilst it doth boote, The end is spoile of what thou dost begin: Iniustice neuer yet tooke lasting roote, Nor held that long impiety did win: The babes vnborne, shall ô be borne to bleed In this thy quarrell if thou doe proceede. 91 Thus said shee ceast, when he in troubled thought Grieu'd at this tale and sigh'd, and this replies: Deare Country ô I haue not hither brought These Armes to spoile but for thy liberties: Tho sinne be on their head that this haue wrought Who wrongd me first, and thee doe tyrannise; I am thy Champion and I seeke my right, Prouokt I am to this by others spight.
92 This this pretence faith shee, th' ambitious finde To smooth iniustice, and to flatter wrong: Thou dost not know what then will be thy mind When thou shalt see thy selfe aduanc'd and strong: When thou hast shak'd off that which others binde Thou soone forgettest what thou learnedst long: Men doe not know what then themselues will be When as more then themselues, themselues they see. 93 And here withall turning about he wakes, Lab'ring in sprite, troubled with this strange sight: And musd a while, waking aduisement takes Of what had past in sleepe and silent night. Yet hereof no important reck'ning makes But as a dreame that vanisht with the light: The day designes, and what he had in hand Left it to his diuerted thoughts vnskand. 94 Doubtfull at first, he warie doth proceed Seemes not t' affect, that which he did effect, Or els perhaps seemes as he ment indeed, Sought but his owne, and did no more expect: Then fortune thou art guilty of his deed, That didst his state aboue his hopes erect, And thou must beare some blame of his great sin That left'st him worse then when he did begin.
95 Thou didst conspire with pride, and with the time To make so easie an assent to wrong, That he that had no thought so hie to clime, (With fauoring comfort still allur'd along) Was with occasion thrust into the crime, Seeing others weakenes and his part so-strong: And ô in such a case who is it will Do good, and feare that maie liue free with ill. 96 We will not say nor thinke O Lancaster, But that thou then didst meane as thou didst swere Vpon th' Euangelists at Doncaster, In th' eie of heauen, and that assembly there That thou but as an vpright orderer Sought'st to reforme th' abused kingdome here, And get thy right, and what was thine before, And this was all, thou would'st attempt no more. 97 Though we might say & thinke that this pretence Was but a shadow to th' intended act, Because th' euent doth argue the offence And plainely seemes to manifest the fact: For that hereby thou mightst win confidence With those whom els thy course might hap distract, And all suspition of thy drift remoue, Since easily men credit whom they loue.
98 But God forbid we should so nerely pry Into the low deepe buried sinnes long past T' examine and conferre iniquity, Whereof faith would no memory should last: That our times might not haue t' exemplifie With aged staines, but with our owne shame cast, Might thinke our blot the first not done before, That new-made sins might make vs blush the more. 99 And let vnwresting charity beleeue That then thy oth with thy intent agreed, And others faith, thy faith did first deceiue, Thy after fortune forc'd thee to this deed: And let no man this idle censure giue Because th' euent proues so, twas so decreed: For ô what counsels sort to other end Then that which frailty did at first intend? 100 Whilst those that are but outward lookers on, That cannot sound these misteries of state, Deemes things were so contriu'd as they are done, Holding that policie, that was but fate: Wondring how strange twas wrought, how close begun, And thinke all actions else did tend to that, When ô how short they come, or cast too fare Making the happy wiser then they are.
101 But by degrees he venters now on blood, And sacrifiz'd vnto the peoples loue, The death of those that chiefe in enuy stood As th' Officers, who first these dangers proue: The treasorer and those that they thought good, Bushy and Greene by death he must remoue, These were the men the people thought did cause Those great exactions and abusd the lawes. 102 This done, his cause was preacht with learned skil, And th' Archbishop of Canterbury shew'd A pardon sent from Rome, to all that will Take part with him, and quit the faith they ow'd To Richard, as a Prince vnfit and ill, On whom the crowne was fatally bestow'd: And easie-yeelding zeale was quickly caught With what the mouth of grauity had taught. 103 O that this powre from euerlasting giuen The great alliance made twixt God and vs, Th' intelligence that earth doth hold with heauen, Sacred religion, ô that thou must thus Be made to smooth our waies vniust, vneuen, Brought from aboue earth-quarrels to discusse, Must men beguile our soules to winne our wils, And make our zeale the furtherer of ils?
104 But the ambitious to aduance their might Dispence with heauen and what religion would, The armed will finde right, or else make right, If this meanes wrought not, yet another should: And this and other now doe all incite To strength the faction that the Duke doth hold; Who easily obtained what he sought, His vertues and his loue so greatly wrought. 105 The king still busied in this Irish warre Which by his valour there did well succeede, Had newes how here his Lords reuolted are, And how the Duke of Herford doth proceed: In these affaires he feares are growne too farre, Hastes his returne from thence with greatest speed; But was by tempests, windes, and seas debarr'd As if they likewise had against him warr'd. 106 But at the length, though late, in wales he landes, Where thorowly inform'd of Henries force, And well aduertisd how his owne case stands,The Duke of Anibarle sonne to the Duke of Yorke. Which to his griefe he sees tendes to the worse: He leauest' Aumarle, at Milford all those bands He brought from Ireland; taking thence his course To Conwaie all disguisd with fourteene more Toth' Earle of. Salisburie thither sent before.
107 Thinking the Earle had raisd some forces there Whom there he findes for saken all alone, The people in those partes which leuied were B'ing closely shronke away dispersd and gone: The king had stayed too long, and they in feare Resolued euery man to shift for one, At this amasd such fortune he laments, Foresees his fall whereto each thing consents. 108 In this disturb'd tumultuous broken state, Whilst yet th'euent stood doubtfull what should be, Whilst nought but headlong running to debate And glittering troupes and armor men might see: Fury, and feare, compassion, wrath, and hate Confusd through all the land no Corner free: The strong all mad, to strife, to ruine bent; The weaker waild, the aged they lament, 109 And blame their many yeares that liue so long To see the horrour of these miseries: Why had not we (said they) dyde with the strong In forraine fields in honourable wise? In iust exploits, and lawfull without wrong, And by the valiant hand of enemies? And not thus now reserued in our age To home confusion and disordered rage.
110 Vnto the Temples flocke the weake deuout, Sad wailing women, there to vow and pray For husbands, brothers, or their sonnes gone out. To bloudshed, whom nor tears, nor loue could stay: Here graue religious fathers which much doubt The sad euents these broyles procure them may, As Prophets warne, exclaime, disswade these crimes By the examples fresh of other times. 111 And ô what doe you now prepare said they, Another conquest by these fatall waies? What must your own hands make your selues a pray To desolation, which these tumults raise? What Dane, what Norman, shall prepare his way To triumph on the spoile of your decaies? That which nor France nor all the world could doe In vnion, shall your discord, bring you to? 112 Conspire against vs neighbour nations all That enuy at the height whereto w'are growne; Coniure the barbarous North, and let them call Straunge fury from far distant shores vnknowne, And let them altogither on vs fall; So to diuert the ruine of our owne, That we forgetting what doth so incense May turne the hand of malice to defence.
113 Calme these tempestuous spirits O mighty Lord, This threatning storme that ouer hangs the land, Make them consider ere they'vnsheath the sword How vaine is th' earth, this point wheron they stand, And with what sad calamities is stoor'd The best of that, for which th' Ambitious band: Labor the end of labor, strife of strife, Terror in death and horrour after life. 114 Thus they in zeale whose humbled thoughts were good: Whil'st in this wide spread volume of the skies, The booke of prouidence disclosed stood, Warnings of wrath, foregoing miseries; In lines of fire and caracters of blood, There fearefull formes in dreadfull flames arise, Amazing Comets, threatning Monarches might And new-seene starres, vnknowne vnto the night. 115 Red fiery dragons in the aire doe flie, And burning Meteors, poynted-streaming lights, Bright starres in midst of day appeare in skie, Prodigious monsters, gastly fearefull sights: Straunge Ghosts, and apparitions terrific, The wofull mother her owne birth affrights, Seeing a wrong deformed infant borne Grieues in her paines, deceiu'd in shame doth morn.
116 The Earth as if afeard of bloud and woundes Trembles in terror of these falling bloes: The hollow concaues giue out groning sounds And sighing, murmurs to lament our woes: The Ocean all at discord with his boundes, Reiterates his strange vntimely floes: Nature all out of course to checke our course, Neglects her worke to worke in vs remorse. 117 So great a wracke vnto it selfe doth lo Disordered mortality prepare: That this whole frame doth euen labour so Her ruine vnto frailty to declare; And trauailes to fore-signifie the wo, That weake improuidence could not beware: For heauen and earth, and aire and seas and all Taught men to see, but not to shun their fall. 118 Is man so deare vnto the heauens that they Respect the waies of earth, the workes of sin? Doth this great all this vniuersall weigh The vaine designes that weakenes doth begin? Or doe our feare father of zeale make way Vnto this errour ignorance liues in? Making our faults the cause that moue these powres That haue their cause from other cause then ours?
119 Or doe the conscience of our wicked decdes Apply to sinne the terrour of these sights, Hapning at the instant when commotion breedes Amazing only timorous vulgar wights, Who euer aggrauating that which feedes Their feares, still find out matter that affrights, Whilst th' impious fierce, neglecting seele no touch, And weigh too light what other scare so much. 120 Ah no th' eternall powre that guides this frame And serues him with the instruments of heauen To call the earth and summon vp our shame, By an edict from euerlasting giuen; Forbids mortality to search the same, Where sence is blind, and wit of wit bereauen Terror must be our knowledge, feare our skill, T' admire his worke and tremble at his will. 121 And these beginnings had this impious warre, Th' vngodly bloudshed that did so defile The beauty of thy fields, and euen did marre The flowre of thy chiefe pride ô fairest Ile: These were the causes that incensd so farre The ciuil wounding hand inragd with spoile, That now the liuing with afflicted eie Looke backe with griefe on such calamity.
THE ARGVMENT OF THE SECOND BOOKE. King Richard mones his wrong and wailes his raigne: And here betrayd to London he is led, Basely attyrd attending Herfords traine, Where th' one is skornd, the other welcomed. His Wife mistaking him doth much complaine And both togither greatly sorrowed: In hope to saue his life and ease his thrall He yeelds vp state, and Rule, and Crowne, and all. 1 IN dearth of faith and scarsity of friends, The late great mighty monarch on the shore In th' vtmost corner of his land attends To call backe false obedience fled before: Toyles, and in vaine, his toile and labour spends, More hearts he sought to gaine he lost the more: All turn'd their faces to the rising sunne And leaues his setting-fortune night begun.
2 O Percy how by thy example leadThis Percy was Earle of Woster, and bro∣ther to the Earle of Northum∣berland. The household traine for sooke their wretched Lord, When with thy staffe of charge dishonoured, Thou brak'st thy faith, not steward of thy word, And tookst his part that after tooke thy head: When thine owne hand had strengthned first his For such great merits doe obraid, and call For great reward, or thinke the great too small. 3 And kings loue not to be beholding ought, Which makes their chiefest friends oft speed the worst: For those by whom their fortunes haue bin wrought Put them in mind of what they were at first: Whose doubtfull faith if once in question brought Tis thought they will offend because they durst, And taken in a fault are neuer spar'd, Being casier to reuenge, then to reward. 4 And thus these mighty actors sonnes of change, These partizanes of factions, often tride That in the smoake of innouations strange Build huge vncertaine plots of vnsure pride: And on the hazard of a bad exchange Haue venterd all the stocke of life beside, Whilst Princes raisd, disdaine to haue beene raisd By those whose helpes deserue not to be praisd.
5 O Maiestie left naked all alone, But with th' vnarmed title of thy right, Those gallant troupes, thy fortune followers gone; And all that pompe (the complements of might) Th' amazing shadowes that are cast vpon The eares of Princes, to be guile the sight, Are vanisht cleane, and only frailty left Thy selfe of all, besides thy selfe berest. 6 Like when some great Colossus, whose strong base Or mighty props are shronke or sunke awaie, Fore-shewing ruine, threatning all the place That in the danger of his fall doth stay, All straight to better safetie flocke apace, None rest to helpe the ruine while they maie: The perill great and doubtfull there dresse, Men are content to leaue right in distresse. 7 As stately Thames inricht with many a flood, And goodly riuers that haue made their graues And buried both their names and all their good Within his greatnes to augment his waues; Glides on with pompe of waters vnwithstood Vnto the Ocean, which his tribute craues And Taies vp all his wealth within that powre, Which in it selfe all greatnes doth deuour.
8 So flocke the mightie with their following traine Vnto the all-receiuing Builing brooke, Who wonders at himselfe how he should gaine So manie hearts as now his partie tooke, And with what ease and with how slender paine, His fortune giues him more then he could looke, What he imagind neuer could be wrought Is powrd vpon him, farre beyond his thought. 9 So often things which seeme at first in shew Without the compasse of accomplishment, Once ventred on to that successe do grow, That euen the Authors do admire th' euent: So manie meanes which they did neuer know Doe second their designes, and doe present Straunge vnexpected helpes, and chiefly then When th' Actors are reputed worthy men. 10 And Richard who lookt fortune in the backe, Sees headlong-lightnes running from the right, Amazed stands to note how great a wracke Of faith his riots causd, what mortall spight The beare him, who did law and iustice lacke: Sees how concealed hate breakes out in sight, And feare-depressed enuy pent before When fit occasion thus vnlockt the dore.
11 Like when some mastiue whelpe disposd to plaie A whole confused heard of beastes doth chace, Which with one vile consent run all awaie, If any hardier then the rest in place But turne the head that idle feare to stay, Backe straight the daunted chaser turnes his face, And all the rest with bold example led As fastrun on him as before they fled. 12 So with this bold opposer rushes on This many-headed monster Multitude: And he who late was feard is set vpon, And by his owne Actaeon-like pursude, His owne that had all loue and awe forgone; Whom breath and shadowes only did delude, And newer hopes which promises perswade: Though rare performed promises so made. 13 Which seeing this: thus to himselfe complaines: O why do you fond false deceiued so Run headlong to that change that nothing gaines But gaine of sorrow, onlie change of wo? Which is all one if he be like that raignes: Why will you buy with bloud what you forgoo Tis nought but shewes that ignorance esteemes, The thing possest is not the thing it seemes.
14 And when the sinnes of Bullingbrooke shall be As great as mine, and you vnanswered In these your hopes; then may you wish for me Your lawfull Sour'aigne from whose faith you fled, And grieued in your soules the error see That shining promises had shadowed: As th humorous sicke remouing finde no ease, When changed Chambers change not the disease. 15 Then shall you finde this name of liberty (The watchword of rebellion euer vsd The idle eccho of vncertainty, That euermore the simple hath abusd) But new-turnd seruitude and mise rie, And euen the same and worse before refusd, Th' aspirer once attaind vnto the top Cuts off those meanes by which himselfe got vp. 16 And with a harder hand and streighter raine Doth curbe that loosenes he did finde before, Doubting th'occasion like might serue againe, His owne example makes him feare the more: Then ô iniurious land what dost thou gaine To aggrauate thine owne affictions store Since thou must needs obay to gouernement, And no rule, euer yet could all content
17 O if my youth hath offred vp to lust Licentious fruits of indiscreet desires When idle heate of vainer yeares did thrust That fury on: yet now when it retires To calmer state: ô why should you distrust To reape that good whereto mine age aspires? The youth of Princes haue no bounds for sinne Vnlesse themselues do make them bounds within. 18 Who sees not that sees ought (wo worth the while) The easie way that greatnesse hath to fall Enuirond with deceit, hem'd in with guile, Sooth'd vp in flattery, fawned on of all: Within his owne liuing, as in exile, Heares but with others eares or not at all: Euen made a pray onely vnto a few, Who locke vp grace that would to others shew. 19 And who as let in lease doe farme the crowne, And ioy the vse of Maiestie and might, Whilst we hold but the shadow of our owne, Pleasd but with shewes, and dalied with delight: They as huge vnproportion'd mountaines growne. Betweene our land and vs, shadowing our light, Bereaue the rest of ioy and vs of loue, And keepe downe all to keepe themselues aboue.
20 Which woūds with griefe poore vnrespected zeale When grace holdes no proportion in the partes; When distribution in the common weale Of charge and honour due to good desarts Is stopt, when others greedy hands must deale The benefit that Maiestic imparts: What good we ment comes gleaned home but light Whilst we are robd of praise, they of their right. 21 O hence I see, and to my griefe I see, Th' vnreconcileable disunion Is growne betweene m' aggraued realme and mee, And by their fault, whose faith I trusted on: My easie nature tractable and free, Soone drawne to what my councel would haue done Is thus betraid by them and my neglect, Easiest deceiud where least I did suspect. 22 Thus he complaind, when lo from Lancaster (The new intituled Duke) with order sent Ariu'd Northumberland, as to conferre And make relation of the Dukes intent: And offred there, if that he would referre The controuersie vnto Parlament, And punish those that had abusd the state As causers of this vniuersall hate,
23 And also see that iustice might be had On those the Duke of Glosters death procur'd, And such remoud from councell as were bad, His cosin Henrie would he there assur'd On humble knees before his grace be glad To aske him pardon to be well secur'd, And haue his right and grace restor'd againe, The which was all he laboured t' obtaine. 24 And therefore he a Parley doth exhort, Perswades him leaue that vnbeseeming place And with a Princely hardines resort Vnto his people, that attend his grace: They ment the publique good and not his hurt, And would most ioifull be to see his face: He Iaies his soule to pledge, and takes his oth The ost of Christ an ostage for his troth. 25 This profer with such protestations made Vnto a king that so nere daunger stood, Was a sufficient motiue to perswade When no way els could shew a face of good: Th vnhonourable meanes of safety bade Danger accept what Maiestie withstood: When better choices are not to be had We needs must take the seeming best of bad.
26 Yet stands h' in doubt a while what way to take, And doth confer with that small staying troope That fortune left; which neuer would forsake Their poore distressed Lord, nor euer stoope To any hopes the stronger part could make: Good Carlile, Ferby and sir Stephen ScroopeThe Bishop of Carlile. Montague Earle of Sa∣lisbury. With that most worthy Montague were al, That were content with Maiestie to fall. 27 O Time, commit not sacrilegious theft Vppon the holy faith of these good men: Let not succeeding ages be bereft Of such examples worthy of our Pen: Nor thou magnanim'ous Leigh shalt not be left In darkenes for thy constant honour then, That then to saue thy faith wouldst loose thy head, That reuerent head that all men pittied. 28 Nor conscience would that I should iniury O Ienico thy memory so cleere,Ienico d' Artois a Gascoyn. For being not ours, though wish that Gascony Claimd not for hers the faith we hold so deere; So England should haue this small companie Wholy her owne, and shee no partner heere; But lets deuide this good betwixt vs both, Take shee thy birth and we will haue thy troth.
29 Graue Montague, whom long experience taught In either fortune; this aduisd his king: Deare Sou'raigne know, the matter that is sought Is onely now your Maiestie to bring From out of this poore safety you haue got Into their hands, that else hold euery thing: Nothing but onely you they want of all, And wanting you, they nothing theirs can call. 30 Here haue you craggy rockes to take your part That neuer will betray their faith to you; These trustie mountaines here will neuer start But stand t' obraid their shame that are vntrue, Here maie you fence your safetie with small art Against the pride of that confused Crew: If men will not, these very cliffes will fight And be sufficient to defend your right. 31 Then keepe you here, and here shall you behold Within short space the sliding faith of those That cannot long their resolution hold, Repent the course their idle rashnes chose: For that same mercenarie faith they sold With least occasions discontented growes, And insolent those voluntarie bands, Presuming how by them he chieflie stands.
32 And how can he those mightie troupes sustaine Long time where now he is, or any where? Besides what discipline can he retaine Where as he dares not keepe them vnder feare, For feare to haue them to reuolt againe? So that it selfe when greatnes cannot beare With her owne waight must needes confusdly fall Without the helpe of other force at all. 33 And hither to approach h' will neuer dare Where deserts, rockes, and hils no succours giue, Where desolation and no comforts are, Where few can do no good, manie not liue: Besides we haue the Ocean to prepare Some other place if this should not relieue; So shall you tire his force, consume his strength And weary all his followers out at length. 34 Doe but referre to time and to small time, And infinite occasions you shall find, To quaile the reble euen in the prime Of all his hopes beyond all thought of mind, For manie with the curse what they design'd; And bad sucesse obraiding their ill fact Drawes them that others draw from such an act.
35 For if the least imagind ouerture But of conceiud reuolt men once espie, Straight shrinke the weake, the great wil not indure, Th' impatient run, the discontented flie, The friend his friends example doth procure, And altogither haste them presently Some to their home, some hide, others that stay To reconcile themselues, the rest betray. 36 What hope haue you that euer Bullingbrooke Will liue a subiect that hath tride his fate? Or what good reconcilement can you looke Where he must alwaies feare, and you must hate? And neuer thinke that he this quarrell tooke To reobtaine thereby his priuate state; Twas greater hopes that hereto did him call And he will thrust for all, or else loose all. 37 Nor trust this suttle Agent nor his oth, You know his faith, you tride it before hand, His fault is death and now to loose his troth, To saue his life he will not greatly stand: Nor trust your kinsmans proffer, since you both Shew bloud in Princes is no stedfast band: What though he hath no title, he hath might That makes a title where there is no right?
38 Thus he: when that good Bishop thus repliesThe Bishop of Castile Out of a mind that quiet did affect, My Lord, I must confesse as your case lies, You haue great cause your subiects to suspect And counterplot against their subtelties, You all good care and honestie neglect And feare the worst what insolence maie doe, Or armed fury maie incense them to. 39 But yet my Lord, feare maie as well transport Your care beyond the truth of what is ment, As other wife neglect maie fall too short In not examining of their intent: But let vs weigh the thing which they exhort, Tis Peace, submission and a parlament, Which how expedient tis for either part Twere good we iudged with an vnpartiall hart. 40 And first for you my Lord, in griefe we see The miserable case wherein you stand Void here of succour, helpe or maiestie, On this poore promontory of your land, And where how long a time your grace may be, Expecting what may fall into your hand We know not: sinceth' euent of things do lie Clos'd vp in darknes far from mortall eie.
41 And how vnsit it were you should protract, Long time in this so dangerous disgrace, As though that you good spirit and courage lackt To issue out of this opprobrious place: When euen the face of kings do oft exact Feare and remorse in faulty subiects base, And longer stay a great presumption drawes That you were guilty or did doubt your cause. 42 What subiects euer so inragd would dare To violate a Prince, t' offend the bloud Of that renowmed race, by which they are Exalted to the glorie of this good? What if some things by chance misguided were, Which they haue now rebelliously withstood? They neuer will proceed with that despight To wracke the state, and to confound the right. 43 Nor doe I thinke that Bulling brooke can do So blind ambitious to affect the crowne, Hauing himselfe no title, and doth see Others, if you should faile, must keepe him downe: Besides the Realme, though mad, will neuer gree To haue a right succession ouerthrowne, To raise confusion vpon them and theirs By preiudicing true and lawfull beires.
44 And now it may be fearing the successe Of his attempts, or with remorse of mind, Or else distrusting secret practises, He would be glad his quarrell were resignd, So that there were some orderly redresse In those disorders which the Realme did find: And this I thinke he now fees were his best Since farther actions farther but vnrest. 45 And for the impossibility of peace And reconcilement which my Lords obiects: I thinke when doying iniury shall cease (The cause pretended) then surcease th' effects: Time and some other Actions may increase As may diuert the thought of these respects; Others law of forgetting iniuriesLex Amne∣stis. Maie serue our turne in like calamities. 46 And for his oath my Lord I thinke in conscience; True honour would not so be found vntrue, Nor spot his bloud with such a fowle offence Against his soule, against his God and you: Our Lord for bid that euer with th'expence Of heauen and heauenly ioies that shall insue, Mortality should buy this litle breath T'indure the horror of eternall death.
47 And therefore as I thinke you safely maie Accept this proffer, that determine shall All doubtfull courses by a quiet waie; Needfull for you, fit for them, good for all: And here my sou'raigne to make longer stay T'attend for what you are vnsure will fall May slippe th'occasion and incense their will, For feare thats wiser then the truth doth ill. 48 Thus he perswades euen of a zealous mind, Supposing men had spoken as they ment, And vnto this the king likewise inclinde As wholy vnto peace and quiet bent, And yeelds himselfe to th'earle, goes, leaues behind Safety, Scepter, honor, gouernment: For gone, all's gone, he is no more his owne; And they rid quite offeare, he of the crowne. 49 A place there is where proudly raisd there stands A huge aspiring rocke neighbou'ring the skies Whose surly brow imperiously commands The sea his bounds that at his proud feet lies: And spurnes the waues that in rebellious bands Assault his Empire and against him rise: Vnder whose craggy gouernment there was A niggard narrow way for men to passe.
50 And here in hidden cliffes concealed lay A troope of armed men to intercept The vnsuspecting king, that had no way To free his foote that into danger stept: The dreadfull Ocean on th' one side lay, The hard∣incroching mountaine th'other kept, Before him he beheld his hatefull foes; Behind, him traiterous enemies inclose. 51 Enuiron'd thus the Earle begins to cheere His all-amased Lord by him betraide: Bids him take courage ther's no cause offeare, These troopes but there to guard him safe were laid: To whom the king: what needs so many here? This is against your oth my Lord he said: But now he fees in what distresse hee stood, To striue was vaine, t' intreat would do no good. 52 And therefore on with carefull hart he goes Complaines (but to himself) sighes, grieues & freats, At Rutland dines, though feedes but on his woes, The griefe of mind hindred the minde of meats: For sorrow, shame and feare, skorne of his foes, The thought of what hee was and what now threats, Then what he should and now what he hath done, Musters confused passions all in one.
53 To Flint from thence vnto a restles bed That miserable night he comes conuayd, Poorely prouided, poorely followed, Vncourted, vnrespected, vnobayd: Where if vncertaine sleepe but hoouered Ouer the drooping cares that heauy weigh'd, Millions of figures fantasie presents Vnto that sorrow, wakened griefe augments. 54 His new misfortune makes deluding sleepe Say twas not so, false dreames the truth deny: Where with he starts: feeles waking cares do creepe Vpon his soule, and giues his dreame the lie: Then sleepes againe, and then againe as deepe Deceits of darknes mocke his misery: So hard belieu'd was sorrow in her youth That he thinks truth was dreames, & dreames were truth. 55 The morning light presents vnto his view Walking vpon a turret of the place, The truth of what he fees is prou'd too true; A hundred thousand men before his face Carne marching on the shore which thither drew: And more to aggrauate his fowle disgrace, Those he had wrongd or done to them dispight As if they him obrayd, came first in sight.
56 There might he see that false for sworne vile crue, Those shameles agents of vnlawfull lust, His Pandars, Parasites, people vntrue To God and man, vnworthy any trust: Pressing vnto that fortune that was nue And with vnblushing faces formost thrust As those that liue in sun-shine of delights, And flie the winter when affliction lights. 57 There he beheld how humbly diligent New adulation was to be at hand, How ready Falshood stept, how nimbly went Base∣pick thanke Flattery and preuents command: He saw the great obay, the graue consent, And all with this new-raisd Aspirer stand, Which when he saw and in his sorrow waid Thus out of griefe vnto himselfe he said 58 O faithlesse Cosen, here behold I stand Spectator of that act my selfe haue plaid, That act of rule which now vpon thy hand This wauering mutability hath laid: But Cosen, know the faith of this false land Stands sworne to me, that faith they haue betraid Is mine, tis mine the rule, thou dost me wrong T' vsurpe the gouernment I held so long.
59 And when thou hast but tride what I haue found, Thou maist repent t'haue bought cōmand so deare, When thou shalt find on what vnquiet ground Greatnes doth stand, that stands so high in feare: Where infinite occasions do confound The peace of minde, the good thou look'st for here: O fatall is th' ascent vnto a crowne! From whence men come not downe, but must tall downe. 60 O you that cherish fat iniquity, Inriching sinne, with store, and vice with gaine By my disgrace, see what you get thereby To raise the bad, to make the good complaine: These vipers spoile the wombe wherein they lie, And haue but impudence a grace to gaine, But bodies and bold browes no mindes within But minde of ill, that knowes but how to sin. 61 And for the good which now do take thy part Thou maiste reioyce, for th'others I am glad To thinke they may in time likewise subuart The expectation which of thee men had: When thou shalt find how difficult an art It is to rule and please the good and bad: And seele the grieuance of this fatall sort, Which still are borne for court are made in court.
62 More griefe had said: when lo the Duke he saw Entring the Castle come to parle there, Which makes him presently from thence withdraw Into a fitter place some other where: His fortune now inforst an yeelding awe To meete him, who before in humble feare Would haue beene glad t' haue staid, and to prepare The grace of audience, with attendant care. 63 The Duke when come in presence of his king, Whether the sight of maiestie did breed Remorse of wrong which reuerence did bring; Or whether but to formalize his deed, He kneeles him downe euen at his entering, Rose, kneeles againe (for craft will still exceed) When as the king approcht, put off his hood And welcomd him, though wishd him little good. 64 To whom the Duke thus said: my Lord I know That both vnlookt for, and vnsent vnto I haue presumed to come hither now; But this your wrong and rigor draue me to, And being come I purpose now to shew You better how to rule, and what to doe: You haue had time too much to worke our ill, But now redresse is planted in our will.
65 As you shall please deare cosin said the king, You haue me in your powre, I am content And I am pleasd, if my disgrace may bring Good to my countrey which I euer ment: But yet God grant your course held in this thing Cause not succeeding ages to repent. And so they left: the Duke had hast to go, It was no place to end the matter so. 66 Straight towards London in this heate of pride The Duke sets forward as they had decreed, With whom the Captiue King constraind must ride, Most meanely mounted on a simple steed: Degraded of all grace and case beside, Thereby neglect of all respect to breed; For th' ouer-spreading pompe of prouder might Must darken weaknes and debase his sight. 67 Approaching nere the Citty he was met With all the sumptuous shewes ioy could deuise, Where new-desire to please did not forget To passe the vsuall pompe of former guise; Striuing applause as out of prison let, Runnes on beyond all boundes to nouelties: And voice and hands and knees and all do now A straung deformed forme of welcome show.
68 And manifold confusion running greeces Shootes, cries, claps hands, thrusts, striues and presses nero: Houses impou'risht were t'inrich the streetes, And streetes left naked that vnhappy were Plac'd from the sight where ioy with wonder meets, Where all of all degrees striue to appeare: Where diuers-speaking zeale, one murmure findes In vndistinguisht voice to tell their mindes. 69 He that in glorie of his fortune fate, Admiring what he thought could neuer be, Did feele his bloud within salute his state, And lift vp his reiouicing soule to see So manie hands and harts congratulate Th'aduancement of his long-desir'd degree: When prodigall of thankes in passing by He resalutes them all with cheerefull eie. 70 Behind him all aloofe came pensiue on The vnregarded king, that drooping went Alone, and but for spight scarce lookt vpon, Iudge if he did more enuy or lament: O what a wondrous worke this daie is done, Which th'image of both fortunes doth present, In th' one to shew the best of glories face, In th' other worse then worst of all disgrace.
71 Now I Sabell the young afficted Queene, Whose yeares had neuer shew'd her but delights, Nor louely eies before had euer seene Other then smiling ioies and ioyfull sights: Borne great, matcht great, liu'd great and euer beene Partaker of the worlds best benefits, Had plac'd her selfe, hearing her Lord should passe That way where shee vnseene in secret was. 72 Sicke of delay and longing to behold Her long mist loue in fearfull ieoperdies, To whom although it had in fort beene told Of their proceeding, and of his surprize, Yet thinking they would neuer be so bold To lead their Lord in any shamefull wise, But rather would conduct him as their king, As seeking but the States reordering. 73 And forth shee looks: and notes the form oft traine And grieues to view some there she wisht not there, Seeing the chiefe not come, staies, lookes againe, And yet she sees not him that should appeare: Then backe she stands, and then desires was saine Againe to looke to see if he were nere, At length a glittring troupe farre off shee spies, Perceiues the thronge and heares the shoots & cries.
74 Lo yonder now at length he comes (saith shee) Looke my good women where he is in sight: Do you not see him? yonder that is hee Mounted on that white courser all in white, There where the thronging troupes of people bee, I know him by his seate, he sits s' vpright: Lo now he bows: deare Lord with what sweet grace: How long haue I longd to behold that face? 75 O what delight my hart takes by mine eie? I doubt me when he comes but something neare I shall set wide the window: what care I Who doth see me, so him I may see cleare? Thus doth false ioy delude her wrongfully Sweet lady in the thing she held so deare; For nearer come, shee findes shee had mistooke, And him shee markt was Henrie Bullingbrooke. 76 Then Enuie takes the place in her sweet eies Where sorrow had prepard herselfe a feat, And words of wrath from whēce complaints should rise, Proceed from egar lookes, and browes that threat: Traytor faith shee: i'st thou that in this wise To braue thy Lord and king art made so great? And haue mine eies done vnto me this wrong To look on thee? for this staid I so long?
77 O haue they grac'd a periur'd rebell so? Well for their error I will weepe them out, And hate the tongue defilde that praisde my so, And loath the minde that gaue me not to doubt: O haue I added shame vnto my woe? Ile looke no more; Ladies looke you about, And tell me if my Lord bee in this traine, Least my betraying eies should erre againe. 78 And in this passion turnes her selfe away: The rest looke all, and carefull note each wight; Whilst she impatient of the least delay. Demaunds againe, and what not yet in fight? Where is my Lord? what gone some other way? I muse at this, O God graunt all go right. Then to the window goes againe at last And sees the chiefest traine of all was past. 79 And sees not him her soule desir'd to see, And yet hope spent makes her not leaue to looke, At last her loue-quicke eies which ready be, Fastens on one whom though shee neuer tooke Could be her Lord: yet that sad cheere which he Then shew'd, his habit and his wofull looke, The grace he doth in base attire retaine, Causd her she could not from his sight refraine.
80 What might be she said that thus alone Rides pensiue in this vniuersall ioy: Some I perceiue as well as we doe mone, All are not pleasd with euery thing this day, It maie be he laments the wronge is done Vnto my Lord, and grieues as well he may, Then he is some of ours, and we of right Must pitty him, that pitties our sad plight. 81 But stay, its not my Lord himselfe I see? In truth if twere not for his base araie, I verily should thinke that it were he; And yet his basenes doth a grace bewray: Yet God forbid, let me deceiued be; O be it not my Lord although it may: And let desire make vowes against desire, And let my sight approue my sight a liar. 82 Let me not see him, but himselfe, a king; For so he left me, so he did remoue: This is not he, this feeles some other thing, A passion of dislike or els of loue: O yes tis he, that princely face doth bring The euidence of maiestie to proue: That face I haue conferr'd which now I see With that within my hart, and they agree.
83 Thus as shee stoode assur'd and yet in doubt, Wishing to see, what seene she grieud to see, Hauing beliefe, yet saine would be without; Knowing, yet striuing not to know twas he: Her hart relenting, yet her hart so stout As would not yeeld to thinke what was, could be: Till quite condemnd by open proofe of sight Shee must confesse or else denie the light. 84 For whether loue in him did sympathize Or chance so wrought to manifest her doubt, Euen iust before, where she thus secret prize, He staies and with cleare face lookes all about: When she: tis ô too true, I know his eies Alas it is my owne deare Lord, cries out: And with that crie sinkes downe vpon the flore, Abundant griefe lackt words to vtter more. 85 Sorrow keepes full possession in her soule, Lockes him within, laies vp the key of breath, Raignes all alone a Lord without controule So long till greater horror threatneth: And euen in daunger brought, to loose the whole His forst come forth or else to stay with death, Opens a sigh and lets in sence againe, And sence at legth giues words leaue to complaine.
86 Then like a torrent had beene stopt before, Teares, sighes, and words, doubled togither flow, Confusdly striuing whether should do more The true intelligence of griefe to show: Sighes hindred words, words perisht in their store, Both intermixt in one together grow: One would do all, the other more then's part Being both sent equall agents from the hart. 87 At length when past the first of sorrowes worst, When calm'd confusion better forme affords Her hart commands her words should past outfirst, And then her sighes should interpoint her words; The whiles her eies out into teares should burst, This order with her sorrow she accords, Which orderles all forme of order brake, So then began her words and thus she spake. 88 O dost thou thus returne againe to mee? Are these the triumphs for thy victories? Is this the glory thou dost bring with thee From that vnhappy Irish enterprise? O haue I made so many vowes to see Thy safe returne, and see thee in this wise? Is this the lookt for comfort thou dost bring, To come a captiue that wentst out a king?
89 And yet deare Lord though thy vngratefull land Hath left thee thus, yet I will take thy part, I do remaine the same vnder thy hand, Thou still dost rule the kingdome of my hart; If all be lost, that gouernment doth stand And that shall neuer from thy rule depart: And so thou be, I care not how thou be, Let greatnes goe, so it goe without thee. 90 And welcome come, how so vnfortunate, I will applaud what others do dispise, I loue thee for thy selfe not for thy state, More then thy selfe is what without thee, lies: Let that more go, if it be in thy fate, And hauing but thy selfe it will sussize: I married was not to thy crowne but thee, And thou without a crowne all one to mee. 91 But what doe I heere lurking idlie mone And waile a part, and in a single part Make seuerall griefe which should be both in one, The touch being equall of each others hart? Ah no sweete Lord thou must not mone alone, For without me thou art not all thou art, Nor my teares without thine are fullie teares, For thus vnioyn'd, sorrow but halfe appeares.
92 Ioine then our plaints & make our griefe ful griefe, Our state being one, ô lets not part our care, Sorrow hath only this poore bare reliefe, To be bemon'd of such as wofull are: O should I rob thy griefe and be the thiefe To steale a priuate part, and seuerall share, Defrauding sorrow of her perfect due? No no my Lord I come to helpe thee rue. 93 Then forth shee goes a close concealed way As grieuing to be seene not as shee was; Laborst' attaine his presence all shee maie, Which with most hard a doe was brought to passe: For that night vnderstanding where he laie With earncst treating she procur'd her passe To come to him. Rigor could not deny Those teares, so poore a suite or put her by. 94 Entring the chamber where he was alone As one whose former fortune was his shame, Loathing th' obraiding eie of anie one That knew him once and knowes him not the same: When hauing giuen expresse commaund that none Should presse to him, yet hearing some that came Turnes angerly about his grieued eies When lo his sweet afflicted Queene he spies.
95 Straight cleeres his brow & with a borrowed smile What my dere Queene, ô welcome deare he faies? And striuing his owne passion to beguile And hide the sorrow which his eie betraies, Could speake no more but wrings her hands the while, And then (sweetlady) and againe he staies: Th' excesse of ioy and sorrow both affords Affliction none, or but poore niggard words. 96 Shee that was come with a resolued hart And with a mouth full stoor'd, with words wel chose, Thinking this comfort will I first impart Vnto my Lord, and thus my speech dispose: Then thus ile say, thus looke, and with this art Hide mine owne sorrow to relieue his woes, When being come all this prou'd nought but winde, Teares, lookes, and sighes doe only tell her minde. 97 Thus both stood silent and confused so, Their eies relating how their harts did morne Both bigge with sorrow, and both great with woe In labour with what was not to be borne: This mighty burthen where withall they goe Dies vndeliuered, perishes vnborne; Sorrow makes silence her best oratore Where words may make it lesse not shew it more.
98 But he whom longer time had learn'd the art T' indure afflicton as a vsuall touch: Straines forth his wordes, and throwes dismay apart To raise vp her, whose passions now were such As quite opprest her ouerchardged hart, Too small a vessell to containe so much, And cheeres and mones, and fained hopes doth frame As if himselfe belieu'd, or hop'd the same. 99 And now the while these Princes sorrowed, Forward ambition come so nere her ende, Sleepes not nor slippes th' occasion offered T' accomplish what it did before intende: A parlament is foorthwith summoned In Richards name, whereby they might pretend A forme to grace disorder and a shew Of holie right, the right to ouerthrow. 100 Ah could not Maiestie bee ruined But with the fearefull powre of her owne name? And must abusd obedience thus be led With powerfull titles to consent to shame? Could not confusion be established But forme and order must confirme the same? Must they who his authority did hate, Yet vse his stile to take away his state?
101 Order, ô how predominant art thou! That if but only thou pretended art, How soone deceiu'd mortality doth bow To follow thine as still the better part? Tis thought that reuerent forme will not allow Iniquity: or sacred right peruart: Within our soules since ô thou dwell'st so strong How ill do they that vse thee to do wrong? 102 So ill did they that in this formall course Sought to establish a deformed right: Who might as well effected it by force, But that men hold it wrong what's wrought by might: Offences vrg'd in publique are made worse, The shew of iustice aggrauates despight: The multitude that looke not to the cause Rest satisfied, so it be done by lawes. 103 And now doth enuie articles obiect Of rigor, malice, priuate fauourings, Exaction, riot, falshood and neglect; Crimes done, but not to b' answered by kings: Which subiectes maie complaine but not correct: And all these faults which Lancaster now brings Against a king, must be his owne when he By vrging others sinnes a king shall be.
104 For all that was most odious was deuisd And publisht in these articles abrode, All th' errors of his youth were here comprisd Calamitie with obloquie to lode: And more to make him publikely dispisd Libels, inuectiues, rayling rimes were sow'd Among the vulgar, to prepare his fall With more applause and good consent of all. 105 Looke how the day-hater Mineruas bird Whil'st priuiledg'd with darknes and the night, Doth liue securet' himselfe of others feard, But if by chance discouered in the light O how each little soule with enuy stirr'd Cals him to iustice, vrges him with spight; Summons the feathered flockes of all the wood To come to scorne the tyrant of their blood. 106 So fares this king layd open to disgrace Whilst euery mouth full of reproch inuaies, And euery base detractor in this case Vppon th' aduantage of misfortune plaies: Downe-falling greatnes vrged on a pace Was followed hard by all disgracefull waies, Now in the point t' accelerate an end Whilst misery had no meanes to defend.
107 Vpon these articles in parlament So haynous made, inforst, and vrgd so hard, He was a diugd vnfit for gouernment And of all regall powre and rule debarr'd: For who durst contradict the Dukes intent, Or if they durst should patiently be heard? Desire of change, old wrongs, new hopes, fresh feare Being far the maior part, the cause must beare. 108 Yet must we thinke that some which saw the course The better few, whom passion made not blind Stood carefull lookers on with sad commorse, Amazd to see what headlong rage dessignd: And in a more considerate discourse Of tragicall euents there of deuind, And did or might their grieued harts to ease Vtter their sorrowes in like termes as these. 109 What dissolute proceedings haue we here? What strange presumptuous disobedience? What vnheard sury void of awe or feare, With monstrous vnexampled insolence? Durst subiects euer here or any where Thus impiously presume so fowle offence? To violate the power commanding all And into iudgement maiestie to call.
110 O same conceale and doe not carry word To after-comming ages of our shame, Blot out of bookes and rase out of Record All monuments memorials of the same: Forget to tell how we did lift our sword, And enuious idle accusations frame Against our lawfull fou'raigne, when we ought His end and our release haue staid not sought. 111 Since better yeares might worke a better care, And time might well haue cur'd what was amisse; Since all these faults fatall to greatnes are, And worse desertes haue not beene punisht thus, But ô in this the heauens we feare prepare Confusion for our sinnes as well as his, And his calamity beginneth our: For he his owne, and we abusd his powre. 112 Thus grieued they: when to the king were sent Certaine that might perswade and vrge him on To leaue his crowne, and make with free consent A voluntaric resignation, Seeing he could no other way preuent The daunger of his owne confusion, For not to yeeld to what feare would constraine, Would barre the hope of life that did remaine.
113 And yet this scarce could worke him to consent To yeeld vp that so soone men hold so deare: Why let him take (said he) the gouernment, And let me yet the name, the title beare: Leaue me that shew and I will be content, And let them rule and gouerne without feare: O can they not my shadowe now indure When they of all the rest do stand secure? 114 Let me hold that, I aske no other good: Nay that I will hold, Henrie doe thy worst, For ere I yeeld my crowne ile loose my bloud, That bloud that shall make thee and thine accurst: Thus resolute a while he firmely stood, Till loue of life and feare of being forst Vanquisht th' innated valour of his minde; And hope and friends, so wrought that he resignd. 115 Then to the towre (where he remained) went The Duke with all the Peeres attended on: To take his offer with his free consent, And testifie his resignation: And there of to informe the parlament That all things might more formally be done: And men might rest more satisfide thereby As not done of constraint but wilsingly.
116 And forth h' is brought vnto th'accomplishmēt Deckt with the crowne in princely robes that day, Like as the dead in other landes are sent Vnto their graues in all their best aray: And euen like good did him this ornament, For what he brought he must not beare away, But buries there his glory and his name Intombd for euermore in others blame. 117 And there vnto th' assembly of these states His sorrow for their long indured wrong Through his abusd authority relates, Excuses with confessions mixt among: And glad he faies to finish all debates He was to leaue the rule they sought for long, Protesting if it might be for their good He would as gladly sacrifice his bloud. 118 There he his subiects all in generall Assoyles and quites of oth and fealty, Renounces interest, title, right and all That appertaind to kingly dignity; Subscribes thereto and doth to witnes call Both heauen and earth, and God and saints on hie, And all this did he but t' haue leaue to liue The which was all he crau'd that they would giue.
119 Tis said with his owne hands he gaue the crowne To Lancaster, and wisht to God he might Haue better ioy thereof then he had knowne, And that his powre might make it his by right: And furthermore he crau'd of all his owne But life to liue apart a priuate wight; The vanity of greatnes he had tride And how vnsurely standes the foote of pride. 120 This brought to passe the lords returne with speed T' acquaint the Parlament with what is done, Where they at large publisht the kings owne deed And manner of his resignation: When Canterbury vrgd them to proceed Forthwith vnto a new election,Arundell Bishop of Canterbury And Henry make his claime both by discent And resignation to the gouernement. 121 Who there with full and generall applause Is straight proclaimd as king and after crownd, The other cleane reiected by the lawes, As one the Realme had most vnworthy found. And yet ô Lancaster I would thy cause Had had as lawfull and as sure a ground As had thy vertues, and thy glorious worth For Empire borne, for Gouernment brought forth
122 Then had not ô that sad succeeding age Her fieldes engrain'd with bloud, her riuers dide With purple streaming wounds of her owne rage, Nor seene her Princes slaine, her Peeres distroide: Then hadst not thou deare country come to wage Warre with thy selfe, nor those afflictions tride Of all-consuming discord here so long, Too mighty now against thy selfe too strong. 123 So had the bloud of thirteene battels fought About this quarrell, fatall to our land, Haue beene reseru'd with glory to haue brought Nations and kingdomes vnder our commaund; So should all that thy sonne and thou had got, With glorious praise haue still beene in our hand, And that great worthy last of all thy name Had ioind the westerne Empire to the same. 124 So should his great imperiall daughter now Th' admired glory of the earth, hereby Haue had all this nere bordring world to bow To her immortalized maiestie: Then proud Iberus Lord not seeking how T'attaine a false-conceiued Monarchie, Had kept his barraine boundes and not haue stood In vaine attemptst' inrich the seas with bloud.
125 Nor interposd his greedy medling hand In other mens affaires t' aduance his owne, Nor tyrannisd ouer so manie landes From late obscurity so mighty growne: But we with our vndaunted conquering bandes Had lent our Ensignes vnto landes vnknowne, And now with more audacious force began To march against th' earths-terror Ottoman. 126 Where thou (O worthy Essex) whose deare blood Reseru'd from these sad times to honour ours, Shouldst haue conducted Armies and now stood Against the strength of all the Easterne Powers: There should thy valiant hand perform'd that good Against the barbarisme that all deuoures, That all the states of the redeemed Earth Might thee admire, and glorise thy birth. 127 Thence might thy valor haue brought in despight Eternall Tropheis to Elizas name, And laid downe at her sacred feete the right Of all thy deedes and glory of the same. All that which by her powre, and by thy might Thou hadst attaind to her immortall fame Had made thee wondred here, admir'd a farre The Mercury of peace, the Mars of warre.
128 And thou my Lord the glorie of my muse Pure-spirited Mounti, th' ornament of men, Hadst had a large and mighty field to vse Thy holie giftes and learned counsels then: Whole landes and Prouinces should not excuse Thy trusty faith, nor yet sufficient beene For those great vertues to haue ordered And in a calme obedience gouerned. 129 Nor had I then at solitary brooke Sate framing bloudy accents of these times, Nor told of woundes that grieued eies might looke Vpon the horror of their fathers crimes, But rather a more glorious subiect tooke To register in euerlasting rimes The sacred glories of ELIZABETH, T' haue kept the wonder of her worth from death. 136 And like wise builded for your great designes O you two worthies bewties of our state, Immortall tombes of vnconsuming lines To keepe your holic deedes inuiolate: You in whose actions yet the image shines Of ancient honor neere worne out of date, You that haue vertue into fashion brought In these neglected times respected nought.
131 But whither am I carried with the thought Of what might haue beene, had not this beene so? O sacred Fury how was I thus brought To speake of glory that must tell of wo? These acted mischiefes cannot be vnwrought Though men be pleasd to wish it were not so. And therefore leaue sad Muse th' imagin'd good, For we must now returne againe to bloud.
THE ARGVMENT OF THE THIRD BOOKE. Henry the fourth the Crowne established, The Lords that did to Glosters death consent, Degraded doe rebell, are vanquished: King Richard vnto Promfret Castle sent Is murthered there. The Percies making head Against the king, receiue the punishment: And in the end a tedious troublous raigne A grieuous death concludes with care, and paine. I Tow risen is that head, by which did spring The birth of two strong heads, two crownes, two rights; That monstrous shape that afterward did bring Deform'd confusion to distracted wights: Now is attain'd that dearely purchased thing What fild the world with lamentable sights: And now attain'd, all care is how to frame Meanes to establish, and to hold the same.
2 Striuing at first to build a strong conceit Of his weake cause, in apt-abused mindes, He deckes his deed with colours of deceit And ornaments of right, which now he findes: Succession, conquest, and election straight Suggested are, and prou'd in all three kindes: More then inough he findes, that findes his might Hath force' to make all that he will haue, right. 3 All these he hath when one good would suffize The worlds applause, and liking to procure, But who his owne cause makes doth still deuise To make too much to haue it more then sure: Feare casts too deepe, and euer is too wise, The doubtfull can no vsuall plots indure: These selfe-accusing titles all he had Seeking to make one good of maine bad. 4 Like foolish he that feares, and saine would stop An inundation working on apace, Runs to the breach, heapes mighty matter vp, Throwes indigested burthens on the place, Loades with huge waights, the outside and the top, But leaues the inner parts in feeble case; Thinking for that the outward forme seemes strong Tis sure inough, and may continue long.
5 But when the vnder working waues come on Searching the secrets of vnsenced waies, The full maine Ocean following hard vpon Beares downe that idle frame, skorning such staies; Prostrates that frustrate paines as if not done, And proudly on his silly labors plaies, Whilst he perceiues his error, and doth finde His ill proceeding contrary to kind. 6 So fares it with our indirect diffeignes And wrong-contriued labors at the last, Whilst working time or Iustice vndermines The feeble ground-worke craft thought laid so fast: Then when out-breaking vengeance vncombines The ill-ioynd plots so fairely ouercast, Turnes vp those strong pretended heapes of showes And all these weake illusions ouerthrowes. 7 But wel he thought his powre made al seem plain, And now t' his coronation he proceedes, Which in most sumptuous fort (to intertaine The gazing vulgar whom this error feedes) Is furnisht with a stately-glorious traine, Wherein the former kings he far exceeds: And all t' amuse the world, and turne the thought Of what, and how twas done, to what is wrought.
8 And that he might on many props repose He strengths his owne, and who his part did take: New officers, new counsellours he chose, His eldest sonne the Prince of Wales doth make, His second Lord high Steward, and to those Had hazarded their fortunes for his sake He giues them charge, as merites their desart; Seeking all meanes t' oppresse the aduerse part. 9 All Counsellers vnto the former king, All th' officers, and iudges of the state, He to disgrace, or els to death did bring Lead by his owne, or by the peoples hate: Who euermore by nature mallicing Their might whom not their vertues, but their fate Exalted hath, who when kings do what's naught Because tis in their powre, tis thought their faut. 10 And plac'd for these such as were popular Belou'd of him, and in the peoples grace, Learned graue Shirley he makes Chauncellor, One of great spirit, worthy his worthy race: And Clifford he ordaines Lord Treasuror, A man whose vertues well deseru'd that place: Others to other roomes (whom people hold So much more lou'd how much they loathd the old)
17 Then against those he strictly doth proceed Who chiefe of Glosters death were guilty thought, (Not so much for the hatred of that deed) But vnder this pretext the meanes he sought, To ruine such whose might did much exceed His powre to wrong, nor els could wel be wrought; Law, Iustice, bloud, the zeale vnto the dead Were on his side, and his drist shadowed. 12 Here maine of the greatest of the landThe Accusd were of the act, strong proofes brought out Which strongly were refell'd, the Lords all stand To cleere their cause most resolutely stoute: The king perceiuing what he tooke in hand Was not with safety to be brought about Desistes to vrge their death in anie wise, Respecting number, strength, friends, and allies. 13 Nor was it time now in his tender raigne And infant-young-beginning gouernment, To striue with bloud when lenity must gaine The mighty wight, and please the discontent: New kings do feare, when old courts farther straine, Establisht states to all things will consent: He must dispence with his will, and their crime, And seeke t'oppresse and weare them out with time.
14 Yet not to seeme but to haue something done In what he could not as he would effect, To satisfie the people that begun Reuenge of wrong, and iustice to expect: He causd be put to execution One that to doe this murther was elect, A base meane man whom few or none would misse, Who first did serue their turne, and now serues his. 15 And to abase the too high state of those That were accusd, and lessen their degrees, Aumarle, Surry, Exceter, must lose The names of Dukes, their titles, dignities, And what soeuer honour with it goes: The Earles their titles and their Signories, And all they gote in th' end of Richards raigne Since Glosters death, they mustrestore againe. 16 By this as if by Ostracisme t'abate That great presumptiue wealth, whereon they stand; For first hereby impou'rishing their state He kils the meanes they might haue to withstand: Then equals them with other whom they hate, Who (by their spoiles) are raisd to hie command, That weake, and enuied if they should conspire They wracke themselues, and he hath his desire.
17 And by this grace which yet must be a grace As both they, and the world, are made belieue, He doth himselfe secure and them defuce, Thinking not rigor that which life doth giue: But what an error was it in this case To wrong so many, and to let them liue? But errors are no errors but by fate, For oft th' euent make soule faults fortunate. 18 The parlament which now is held, decreed What euer pleasd the king but to propound; Confirm'd the crowne to him and to his feed. And by their oth their due obedience bound: And ô b' it sinne t' examine how this deed How iust tis done and on how fure a ground? Whether that Court maie change due course or no Or ought the realme against the realme can do? 19 Here was agreed to make all more secure That Richard should remaine for euermore Close-prisoner, least the realme might chāce indure Some new reuolt, or any fresh vprone: And that if any should such broile procure By him or for him, he should die therefore. So that a talke of tumult and a breath Would serue him as his passing-bell to death.
20 Yet reuerent Carlile thou didst there oppose Thy holy voice to saue thy Princes bloud, And freely check'st this iudgement and his foes, When all were bad, yet thou dar'st to be good: Be it inrold that time may neuer lose The memory how firme thy vertues stood, When powre, disgrace, nor death could ought diuart Thy glorious tongue, thus to reueale thy hart. 21 Graue, reuerent Lords, since that this sacred place Our Auentine, Retire, our holy hill; This place, soule of our state, the Realmes best grace Doth priuiledge me speake what reason will: O let me speake my conscience in this case Least sin of silence shew my hart was ill, And let these walles witnes if you will not, I do discharge my soule of this soule blot. 22 Neuer shall this poore breath of mine consent That he that two and twenty yeeres hath raignd As lawfull Lord, and king by iust discent, Should here be iudged vnheard, and vnaraignd By subiects two: Iudges incompetent To iudge their king vnlawfully detaind, And vn-brought forth to plead his guiltles cause, Barring th' annointed libertie of lawes.
23 Haue you not done inough? blush to thinke, Lay on your harts those hands; those hands too rash, Know that this staine that's made doth farther sinke Into your soules then all your blouds can wash, Leaue with the mischiefe done and doe not linke Sin vnto sin, for heauen, and earth will dash This ill accomplisht worke ere it be long, For weake he builds that sences wrong with wrong. 24 Stopt there was his too vehemēt speech with speed, And he sent close to warde from where he stood: His zeale vntimely deem'd too much t' exceed The measure of his wit and did no good: They resolute for all this doe proceed Vnto that iudgement could not be withstood: The king had all he crau'd or could compell, And all was done we will not say how well. 25 Now Muserelate a wofull accident And tell the bloudshed of these mighty Peeres Who lately reconcild, rest discontent, Grieu'd with disgrace, remaining in their feares How euerseeming outwardly content, Yet th' inward touch that wounded honor beares Rosts closely rankling and can find no ease Till death of one side cure this great disease.
26 Meanes how to feele, and learne each others hart By th' Abbot now of Westminster is found, Who secretly disliking Henries part Inuites these Lords, and those he ment to sound, Feasts them with cost, and drawes them on with art, And darke, and doubtful questions doth propound: Then plainer speakes, and yet vncertaine speakes, Then wishes wel, then off abruptly breakes. 27 My Lord faith he, I feare we shall not finde This long-desired king such as was thought: But yet he may doe well: God turne his minde: Tis yet new daies: but ill bodes new and nought: Some yet speed well: though all men of my kind Haue cause to doubt; his speech is not forgot, That Princes had too little, we too much; God giue him grace, but tis ill trusting such. 28 This open-close, apparent-darke discourse Drew on much speech, and euery man replies, And euery man ads heat, and wordes inforce And vrge out words, for when one man espies Anothers minde like his, then ill breedes worse, And out breakes all in th' end what closest lies, For when men well haue fed th' bloud being warme Then are they most improuident of harme.
29 Bewray they did their in ward boyling spight Each stirring other to reuenge their cause, One saies he neuer should indure the sight Of that forsworne, that wrongs both land and lawes: Another vowes the same of his minde right: A third t' a point more nere the matter drawes, Sweares if they would, he would attempt the thing To chaste th' vsurper, and replace their king. 30 Thus one by one kindling each others fire Till all inflam'd they all in one agree, All resolute to prosecute their ire, Seeking their owne, and Countries cause to free: And haue his first that their bloud did conspire, For no way else they said but this could be Their wrong-detained honor to redeeme, Which true-bred bloud shoulde more then life esteeme. 31 And let not this our new-made faithles Lord Saith Surry thinke, that we are lest so bare Though bare inough: but we will find a sword To kill him with, when hee shall not beware: For he that is with life and will but stoor'd, Hath for reuenge inough, and needs not care, For time will fit and furnish all the rest, Let him but euen attend, and doe his best.
32 Then of the manner how t' effect the thing Consulted was, and in the end agreed That at a maske and common reuelling Which should b' ordaind, they should performe the deed; For that would be least doubted of the king And fittest for their safety to proceed, The night, their number, and the suddaine act Would dash all order, and protect their fact. 33 Besides they might vnder the faire pretence Of Tilts and Turnements which they intend, Prouide them horse, and armour for defence, And all things else conuenient for their end: Besides they might hold sure intelligence Among themselues without suspect t' offend: The king would think they sought but grace in court Withall their great preparing in this sort. 34 A solemne oth religiously they make By intermutuall vowes protesting there This neuer to reueale; nor to forsake So good a cause, for daunger hope, or feare: The Sacrament the pledge of faith they take, And euery man vppon his sword doth sweere By knighthood, honor, or what els should binde, To assecure the more each others minde.
35 And whenal this was done, and thought welldone And euery one assures him good successe, And easie seemes the thing to euery one That nought could crosse their plot or thē suppresse; Yet one among the rest, whole mind not wonne With th' ouerweening thought of hot excesse, Nor headlong carried with the streame of will, Nor by his owne election lead to ill: 36 Sober, milde Blunt, whose learning, valor, witSir Thomas Bluns. Had taught true iudgement in the course of things, Knew daungers as they were, and th humerous fit Of ware-lesse discontent, what end it brings: Counsels their heat with calme graue words, & fit Words welfore thought that from experiēce springs, And warnes a warier cariage in the thing Least blind presumption worke their ruining. 37 My Lords (saith he) I know your wisedomes such As that of my aduise you haue no need, I know you know how much the thing doth touch The maine of all your states, your bloud, your seed: Yet since the same concernes my life as much As his whose hand is chiefest in this deed, And that my foote must go as farre as his, I thinke my tongue may speake what needfull is.
38 The thing we enterprize I know doth beare Great possibility of good effect, For that so many men of might there are That venter here this action to direct: Which meaner wights of trust, and credit bare Not so respected could not looke t' effect; For none without great hopes will follow such Whose powre, and honor doth not promise much. 39 Besides this new, and doubtfull gouernment, The wauering faith of people vaine, and light, The secret hopes of many discontent, The naturall affection to the right, Our lawfull sou'raignes life, in prison pent, Whom men begin to pitty now, not spight, Our wel-laid plot, and all I must confesse With our iust cause doth promise good successe. 40 But this is yet the outward fairest side Of our disseigne: within rests more of feare, More dread of sad euent yet vndiscride Then ô most worthy Lords I would there were: But yet I speake not this as to deuide Your thoughts from th' act, or to dismay your cheere, Onely to adde vnto your forward will A moderate feare to cast the worst of ill.
41 Danger before, and in, and after th' act You needs must grant, is great, and to be waigh'd Before: least while we doe the deed protract It be by any of our selues be wraid: For many being priuy to the fact How hard it is to keepe it vnbetraid? When the betrayer shall haue grace and life And rid himselfe of danger and of strife. 42 For though some few contioue resolute, Yet many shrinke, which at the first would dare And be the formost men to execute, If the act, and motion at one instant were: But intermission suffers men dispute What dangers are, and cast with farther care Cold doubt cauils with honor, skorneth fame, And in the end feare waighes down faith with shame. 43 Then in the act, what perils shall we finde If either place, or time, or other course Cause vs to alterth' order now assign'd? Or that, then we expect things happen worse? If either error, or a fainting minde, An indiserect amazement or remorse In any at that instant should be found, How much it might the act, and all confound?
44 After the deed the daungers are no lesse, Least that our forwardnes not seconded By our owne followers, and accomplices Being kept backe or flow or hindered: The hastie multitude rush on t'oppresse Confused weaknes there vnsuccored, Or raise another head of that same race T' auenge his death, and prosecute the case, 45 All this my Lords must be considered The best and worst of that which maie succeed, That valour mixt with feare, boldnes with dread, May march more circumspect with better heed: And to preuent these mischiefes mentioned Is by our faith, our secrefie and speed, For euen already is the worke begun And we rest all vndone, till all be done. 46 And ô I could haue wisht another course In open field t' haue hazarded my bloud, But some are heere whose loue is of that force To draw my life, whom zeale hath not withstood: But like you not of your disseigne the worse If the successe be good your course is good: And ending well our honor then begins, No hand of strife is pure, but that which wins.
47 This said, a sad still silence hold their minds Vpon the fearefull proiect of their woe, But that not long ere forward fury finds Incouraging perswasions on to go: We must said they, we will, our honour bindes, Our safety bids, our faith must haue it so, We know the worst can come, tis thought vpon, We cannot shift, being in, we must goe on. 48 And on indeed they went, but ô not sarre, A fatall stop trauersd their headlong course, Their drist comes knowne, and they discouered are, For some of many will be False of force: Aumarle became the man that all did marre Whether through indisoretions chance or worse, He makes his peace with offring others bloud And shewes the king how all the matter stood. 49 Then lo dismaid confusion all possest Th' afflicted troupe hearing their plot discride, Then runnes amazd distresse with sad vnrest To this, to that, to flie, to stand, to hide: Distracted terror knew not what was best On what determination to abide, At last despaire would yet stand to the sword, To trie what friends would doe or fate afford.
50 Then this then that mans ayd they craue, implore, Post here for helpe, seeke there their followers; Coniure the frendes they had, labor for more, Sollicite all reputed fauorers, Who Richards cause seem'd to affect before, And in his name write, pray, send messengers; To try what faith was left, if by this art Anie would step to take afflictions part: 51 And some were found, & some againe draw backe Vncertaine power could not it selfe retaine, Intreat they may, autority they lacke, And here, and there they march, but all in vaine: With desp'rat course, like those that see their wracke Euen on the Rockes of death, and yet they straine That death maie not them idly find t'attend Their certaine last, but worke to meet their end. 52 And long they stand not ere the chiefe surprizd Conclude with their deare bloud their tragedie: And all the rest disperst, run some disguisd To vnknowne costes, some to the shores do flie, Some to the woodes, or whether feare aduisd, But running from all to destruction hye, The breach once made vpon a battered state Downe goes distresse, no shelter shroudes their fate.
53 O now what horror in their soules doth grow? What sorrowes with their frendes, and nere allyes? What mourning in their ruin'd houses now? How many childrens plaints and mothers cryes? How many wofull widowes left to bow To sad disgrace? what perisht families? What heires of hie rich hopes their thought smust frame To bace-downe-looking pouerty and shame! 54 This slaughter, and calamitie forgoes Thy eminent destruction wofull king, This is the bloudie comet of thy woes That doth fortell thy present ruyning: Here was thy end decreed when these men rose And euen with their, this act thy death did bring Or hastened, at the least vpon this ground; Yet if not this, another had beenbe found. 55 Kinges (Lordes of times and of occasions) May take th' aduantage, when, and how they lift, For now the Realme with these rebellions Vext, and turmyld, was thought would not resist Nor feele the wound, when like confusions Should by this meanes be stayd, as all men wist, The cause be'ing once cut off that did molest, The land should haue her peace, and he his rest.
56 He knew this time, and yet he would not seeme Too quicke to wrath, as if affecting bloud; But yet complaines so far, that men might deeme He would twere done, and that he thought it good; And wisht that some would so his life esteeme As rid him of these feares wherein he stood:This knight was Sir Pierce of Exton. And therewith eies a knight, that then was by, Who soone could learne his lesson by his eie. 57 The man he knew was one that willingly For one good looke would hazard soule and all, An instrument for any villanie, That needed no commission more at all: A great ease to the king that should hereby Not need in this a course of iustice call, Nor seeme to wil the act, for though what's wrought Were his own deed, he grieues should so be thought. 58 So soule a thing ô thou iniustice art That tortrest both the doer and distrest, For when a man hath done a wicked part, O how he striues t' excuse to make the best, To shift the fault, t'vnburthen his charg'd hart And glad to finde the least furmise of rest: And if he could make his seeme others sin, O what repose what easelie findes therein?
59 This knight, but ô why should I call him knight To giue impiety this reuerent stile, Title of honour, worth, and vertues right Should not be giuen to a wretch so vile? O pardon me if I doe not aright, It is because I will not here defile My vnstaind verse with his opprobrious name, And grace him so to place him in the same. 60 This eaitise goes and with him takes eight more As desperat as himselfe; impiously bold Such villaines as he knew would not abhorre To execute what wicked act he would, And hastes him downe to Pomfret wherebefore The restles king conuaid, was laide in hold: There would he do the deed he thought should bring To him great grace and fauour with his king. 61 Whether the soule receiue intelligence By her nere Genius of the bodies end, And so impartes a sadnesse to the sense Forgoing ruine whereto it doth end: Or whether nature else hath conference With profound sleope, and so doth warning send By prophetizing dreames what hurt is neere, And giues the heauie carefull hart to feare:
62 How euer so it is, the now sad king Tost here and there his quiet to confound, Feeles a straunge waight of sorrowes gathering Vpon his trembling hart, and sees no ground: Feeles so dayne terror bring cold shiuering. Lists not to eat, still muses, sleepes vnfound, His sences droope, his steedy eye vnquicke And much he ayles, and yet hee is not sicke. 63 The morning of that day, which was his last, After a weary rest rysing to paine Out at a little grate his eyes he cast Vppon those bordering hils, and open plaine, And viewes the towne, and sees how people past, Where others libertie makes him complaine The more his owne, and grieues his soule the more Conferring captiue-Crownes with freedome pore. 64 O happie man, faith hee, that lo I see Grazing his cattel in those pleasant fieldes! O if he knew his good, how blessed hee That feeles not what affliction greatnes yeeldes, Other then what he is he would not bee, Nor chaung his state with him that Scepters weildes: O thine is that true life, that is to liue, To rest secure, and not rise vp to gricue.
65 Thou sit'st at home safe by thy quiet fire And hear'st of others harmes, but feelest none; And there thou telst of kinges and who aspire, Who fall, who rise, who triumphs, who doe mone: Perhappes thou talkst of mee, and dost inquire Of my restraint, why here I liue alone, O know tis others sin not my desart, And I could wish I were but as thou art. 66 Thrice-happie you that looke as from the shore And haue no venter in the wracke you see, No sorrow, no occasion to deplore Other mens trauayles while your selues sit free. How much doth your sweet rest make vs the more To see our misery and what we bee? O blinded greatnes! thou with thy turmoyle Still seeking happie life, mak'st life a toyle. 67 But looke on mee, and note my troubled raigne, Examine all the course of my vext life; Compare my little ioyes with my long paine, And note my pleasures rare, my sorrowes rife, My childhood difrent in others pride, and gaine, My youth in daunger, farther yeares in strise, My courses crost, my deedes wrest to the worst, My honour spoild, my life in daunger forst.
68 This is my state, and this is all the good That wretched I haue gotten by a crowne, This is the life that costes men so much bloud And more then bloud to make the same their owne, O had not I then better beene t'haue stood On lower ground, and safely liu'd vnknowne, And beene a heards man rather then a king, Which inexperience thinkes so sweet a thing. 69 O thou great Monarch, and more great thereforeDioclesian the Empe∣ror. For skorning that whereto vaine pride aspires, Reckning thy gardens in Illiria more Then all the Empire; took'st those sweet retires: Thou well didst teach, that ô he is not poore That little hath, but he that much desires: Finding more true delight in that small ground Then in possessing all the earth was found. 70 But what do I repeating others good To vexe mine owne perplexed soule the more? Alas how should I now free this poore bloud And care-worne body from this state restore? How should I looke for life or liuely-hood Kept here distrest to die, condemnd before, A sacrifice prepared for his peace That can but by my death haue his release?
71 Are kings that freedom giue themselues not free, As meaner men to take what they maie giue? O are they of so fatall a degree That they cannot discend from that and liue? Vnlesse they still be kings can they not bee, Nor maie they their authority surviue? Will not my yeelded crowne redeeme my breath? Still am I fear'd? is there no way but death? 72 Scarce this word death had sorrow vttered, But in rusht one, and tels him how a knight Is come from court, his name deliuered. What newes with him said he that traiterous wight? What more remoues? must we be farther lead? Are we not sent inough yet out of sight? Or hath this place not strength sufficient To guard vs in? or haue they worse intent? 73 By this the bloudy troope were at the dore, When as a sodaine and a strange dismay Inforst them straine, who should go in before; One offers, and in offring makes a stay: Another forward sets and doth no more, A third the like, and none durst make the way: So much the horror of so vile a deed In vilest mindes hinders them to proceed.
74 At length, as to some great assault the knight Cheeres vp his fainting men all that he can, And valiantly their courage doth incite And all against one weake vnarmed man: A great exployt worthy a man of might, Much honour wretch therein thy valor wan: Ah poore weake prince, yet men that presence feare Which once they knew autoritie did beare. 75 Then on thrustes one, and he would formost be To shead anothers bloud, but lost his owne; For entring in, as soone as he did see The face of maiestie to him well knowne, Like Marius soldier at Minternum, hee Stood still amazd his courage ouerthrowne: The king seeing this, startes vp from where he fate Out from his trembling hand his weapon gate. 76 Thus euen his foes that came to bring him death, Bring him a weapon that before had none, That yet he might not idly loose his breath But diereuengd in action not alone: And this good chaunce that this much fauoureth He slackes not, for he presently speedes one, And Lion-like vpon the rest he flies, And here falles one, and there another lies.
77 And vp and downe he trauerses his ground, Now wardes a felling blow, now strikes againe, Then nimbly shiftes a thrust, then lendes a wound, Now backe he giues, then rushes on amaine, His quicke and readie hand doth so confound These shamefull beastes that foure of them dies slain, And all had perisht happily and well But for one act, that ô I greiue to tell. 78 This coward knight seeing with shame and feare His men thus slaine and doubting his owne end, Leapes vp into a chaire that lo was there, The whiles the king did all his courage bend Against those foure that now before him were, Doubting not who behind him doth attend, And plies his handes vndaunted, vnaffeard And with good hart, and life for life he stird. 79 And whiles he this, and that, and each mans blow Doth eye, desend, and shift, being laid to sore Backward he beates for more aduantage now, Thinking the wall would safegard him the more, When lo with impious hand o wicked thou That shamefull durst not come to strike before, Behind him gau'st that wofull deadly wound, That laid that most sweet Prince flat on the ground.
08 Monster of men, ô what hast thou here done Vnto an ouerpressed innocent, Lab'ring against so many, he but one, And one poore soule with care, with sorrow spent? O could thy eies indure to looke vpon Thy hands disgrace, or didst thou then relent? But what thou didst I will not here deuine Nor straine my thoughts to enter into thine. 81 But leue thee wretch vnto blacke infamie, To darke eternall horror, and disgrace, The hatefull skorne to all posterity, The out-cast of the world, last of thy race, Of whose curst seed, nature did then deny To bring forth more her faire workes to deface: And as asham'd to haue produc'd that past She staies her hand, and makes this worst her last. 82 There lies that comely body all imbrude With that pure bloud, mixt with that fowle he shed: O that those sacred streames with such vile rude Vnhallowed matter should be mingled! O why was grossenes with such grace indude, To be with that sweet mixture honoured? Or seru'd it but as some vile graue ordaind, Where an imbalmed corpes should be containd?
83 Those faire distended limmes all trembling lay, Whom yet nor life nor death their owne could call, For life remou'd had not rid all away, And death though entring seas'd not yet on all: That short-tim'd motion (that soone finish shall The mouer ceasing) yet a while doth stay, As th' organ sound a time suruiues the stop Before it doth the dying note giue vp: 84 So holdes those organs of that goodly frame The weake remaines of life a little space, But ah full soone cold death poffest the same, Set are those sun-like eles, bloudlesse that face, And all that comely whole a lump became, All that fair forme which death could scarce disgrace Lies perisht thus, and thus vntimely fate Hath finisht his most miserable state. 85 And thus one king most nere in bloud allide is made th' oblation for the others peace: Now onely one, both name and all beside Intirely hath, plurality doth cease: He that remaines, remaines vnterrifide With others right; this day doth all release: And henceforth he is absolutely king, No crownes but one, this deed confirmes the thing.
86 And yet new Hydraes lo, new heades appeare T' afflict that peace reputed then so sure, And gaue him much to do, and much to feare, And long and daungerous tumults did procure, And those euen of his chiefest followers were Of whom he might presume him most secure, Who whether not so grac'd or so preferd As they expected, these new factions stird. 87 The Percyes were the men, men of great might, Strong in alliance, and in courage strong That thus conspire, vnder pretence to right The crooked courses they had suffered long: Whether their conscience vrgd them or despight, Or that they saw the part they tooke was wrong, Or that ambition hereto did them call, Or others enuide grace, or rather all. 88 What cause soeuer were, strong was their plot, Their parties great, meanes good, th' occasion fit: Their practise close, their faith suspected not, Their states far off and they of wary wit: Who with large promises draw in the Scot To ayde their cause, he likes, and yeeldes to it, Not for the Ioue of them or for their good, But glad hereby of meanes to shed our bloud.
89 Then ioyne they with the Welsh, who fitly traind And all in armes vnder a mightie head Great Glendowr, who long warr'd, and much attaind,Omen Glenden Sharp conflicts made, and many vanquished: With whom was Edmond Earle of March retaind Being first his prisoner, now confedered, A man the king much fear'd, and well he might Least he should looke whether his Crown stood right. 90 For Richard, for the quiet of the state, Before he tooke those Irish warres in handRich. 2. About succession doth deliberate, And finding how the certaine right did stand, With full consent this man did ordinate The heyre apparent to the crowne and land: Then iudge if this the king might nerely touch, Although his might were smal, his right being much. 91 With these the Percyes them confederate, And as three heades they league in one intent, And instituting a Triumuirate Do part the land in triple gouerment: Deuiding thus among themselues the state, The Percyes should rule all the North from Trent And Glendowr Wales: the Earle of March should bee Lord of the South from Trent; and thus they gree.
92 Then those two helpes which still such actors find Pretence of common good, the kings disgrace Doth fit their course, and draw the vulgar mind To further them and aide them in this cafe: The king they accusd for cruell, and vnkind That did the state, and crowne, and all deface; A periurde man that held all faith in skorne, Whose trusted othes had others made for sworne. 93 Besides the odious detestable act Of that late murdered king they aggrauate, Making it his that so had will'd the fact That he the doers did remunerate: And then such taxes daily doth exact That were against the orders of the state, And with all these or worse they him assaild Who late of others with the like preuaild. 94 Thus doth contentious proud mortality Afflict each other and it selfe torment: And thus o thou mind-tortring misery Restles ambition, borne in discontent, Turn st and retossest with iniquity The vnconstant courses frailty did inuent: And fowlst faire order and defilst the earth Fostring vp warre, father of bloud and dearth.
95 Great seemd the cause, and greatly to, did ad The peoples loue thereto these crimes rehearst, That manie gathered to the troupes they had And many more do flocke from costs disperst: But when the king had heard these newes so bad, Th'vnlookt for dangerous toyle more nearly perst; For bēt t'wards Wales t' appease those tumults there, H'is for'st diuert his course, and them forbeare. 96 Not to giue time vnto th'increasing rage And gathering fury, forth he hastes with speed, Left more delay or giuing longer age To th'euill growne, it might the cure exceed: All his best men at armes, and leaders sage All he prepard he could, and all did need; For to a mighty worke thou goest ô king, To such a field that power to power shall bring. 97 There shall young Hotespur with a fury leadThe son to the Earle of Northūberland. Meete with thy forward sonne as fierce as he: There warlike Worster long experienced In forraine armes, shall come t' incounter thee: There Dowglas to thy Stafford shall make head: There Vernon for thy valiant Blunt shal be: There shalt thou find a doubtfull bloudy day, Though sicknesse keepe Northumberland away.
98 Who yet reseru'd, though after quit for this, Another tempest on thy head to raise, As if still wrong reuenging Nemesis Did meane t' afflict all thy continuall dayes: And yet this field he happely might misse For thy great good, and therefore well he staies: What might his force haue done being ioynd thereto, When that already gaue so much to do? 99 The swift approch and vnexspected speed The king had made vpon this new-raisd force In th'vnconfirmed troupes much feare did breed, Vntimely hindring their intended course; The ioyning with the Welsh they had decreed Was hereby stopt, which made their part the worse, Northumberland with forces from the North Expected to be there, was not set forth. 100 And yet vndaunted Hotspur seeing the king So nere approch'd, leauing the worke in hand With forward speed his forces marshalling, Sets forth his farther comming to withstand: And with a cheerfull voice incouraging By his great spirit his well imboldned band, Bringes a strong host of firme resolued might, And plac'd his troupes before the king in sight.
101 This day (saith he) ô faithfull valiaunt frendes, What euer it doth giue, shall glorie giue: This day with honor frees our state, or endes Our misery with fame, that still shall liue, And do but thinke how well this day he spendes That spendes his bloud his countrey to relieue: Our holie cause, our freedome, and our right, Sufficient are to moue good mindes to fight. 102 Besides th' assured hope of victory That wee may euen promise on our side Against this weake-constrained companie, Whom force & feare, not will, and loue doth guide Against a prince whose soule impiety The heauens do hate, the earth cannot abide, Our number being no lesse, our courage more, What need we doubt if we but worke therefore. 103 This said, and thus resolu'd euen bent to charge Vpon the king, who well their order viewd And carefull noted all the forme at large Of their proceeding, and their multitude: And deeming better if he could discharge The day with safetie, and some peace conclude, Great proffers sendes of pardon, and of grace If they would yeeld, and quietnes imbrace.
104 But this refusd, the king with wrath incensd Rage against fury doth with speed prepare: And ô faith he, though I could haue dispensd With this daies bloud, which I haue sought to spare That greater glory might haue recompensd The forward worth of these that so much dare, That we might honor had by th' ouerthrown That th' wounds we make, might not haue bin our own. 105 Yet since that other mens iniquity Calles on the sword of wrath against my will, And that themselues exact this cruelty, And I constrained am this bloud to spill: Then on my maisters, on couragiously True-harted subiects against traitors ill, And spare not them who seeke to spoile vs all, Whose fowle confused end soone see you shall. 106 Straight moues with equall motion equall rage The like incensed armies vnto blood, One to defend, another side to wage Foule ciuill war, both vowes their quarrell good: Ah too much heare to bloud doth now inrage Both who the deed prouokes and who withstood, That valor here is vice, here manhood sin, The forward st hands doth ô least honor win.
107 But now begin these fury-mouing soundes The notes of wrath that musicke brought from hell, The ratling drums which trumpets voice cōfounds, The cryes, th' incouragements, the shouting shrell; That all about the beaten ayre reboundes, Thundring confused, murmurs horrible, To rob all sence except the sence to fight, Well handes may worke, the mind hath lost his sight. 108 O war! begot in pride and luxury, The child of wrath and of dissention, Horrible good; mischiefe necessarie, The fowle reformer of confusion, Vniust-iust scourge of our iniquitie, Cruell recurer of corruption: O that these sin-sicke states in need should stand To be let bloud with such a boystrous hand! 109 And ô how well thou hadst bene spar'd this day Had not wrong counsaild Percy bene peruers,The Prince of Wales, Whose yong vndanger'd hand now rash makes way Vpon the sharpest fronts of the most fierce: Where now an equall fury thrusts to stay And rebeat-backe that force and his disperse, Then these assaile, then those chace backe againe, Till staid with new-made hils of bodies slaine.
110 There lo that new-appearing glorious starre Wonder of Armes, the terror of the field Young Henrie, laboring where the stoutest are, And euen the stoutest forces backe to yeild, There is that hand boldned to bloud and warre That must the sword in woundrous actions weild: But better hadst thou learnd with others bloud A lesse expence to vs, to thee more good. 111 Hadst thou not there lent present speedy ayd To thy indaungerde father nerely tyrde, Whom fierce incountring Dowglas ouerlaid, That day had there his troublous life expirde: Heroycall Couragious Blunt araidWhich was Sir Walter Blunt In habite like as was the king attirde And deemd for him, excusd that fate with his, For he had what his Lord did hardly misse. 112 For thought a king he would not now disgrace The person then supposd, but prince like shewes Glorious effects of worth that fit his place, And fighting dyes, and dying ouerthrowes: Another of that forward name and raceAnother Blunt which was the kings Standard bearer. In that hotte worke his valiant life bestowes, Who bare the standard of the king that day, Whose colours ouerthrowne did much dismaie.
113 And deare it cost, and ô much bloud is shed To purchase thee this loosing victory O trauayld king: yet hast thou conquered A doubtfull day, a mightie enemy: But ô what woundes, what famous worthlyes dead! That makes the winner looke with sorrowing eye, Magnanimous Stafford lost that much had wrought, And valiant Shorly who great glory gote.Sir Hugh Shorly. 114 Such wracke of others bloud thou didst behold O furious Hotspur, ere thou lost thine owne! Which now once lost that heate in thine waxt cold, And soone became thy Armie ouerthrowne; And ô that this great spirit, this courage bold, Had in some good cause bene rightly showne! So had not we thus violently then Haue termd that rage, which valor should haue ben. 115 But now the king retires him to his peace, A peace much like a feeble sickemans sleepe, (Wherein his waking paines do neuer cease Though seeming rest his closed eyes doth keepe) For ô no peace could euer so release His intricate turmoiles, and sorrowes deepe, But that his cares kept waking all his life Continue on till death conclude the strife.
116 Whose harald sicknes, being sent before With full commission to denounce his end, And paine, and griefe, enforcing more and more, Besiegd the hold that could not long defend, And so consum'd all that imboldning store Of hote gaine-striuing bloud that did contend, Wearing the wall so thin that now the mind Might well looke thorow, and his frailty find. 117 When lo, as if the vapours vanisht were, Which heate of boyling bloud & health did breed, (To cloude the sence that nothing might appeare Vnto the thought, that which it was indeed) The lightned soule began to see more cleere How much it was abusd, & notes with heed The plaine discouered falsehood open laid Of ill perswading flesh that so betraid. 118 And lying on his last afflicted bed Where death & conscience both before him stand, Th'one holding out a booke wherein he red In bloudie lines the deedes of his owne hand; The other shewes a glasse, which figured An ougly forme of fowle corrupted sand: Both bringing horror in the hyest degree With what he was, and what he straight should bee.
119 Which seeing all confusd trembling with feare He lay a while, as ouerthrowne in sprite, At last commaunds some that attending were To fetch the crowne and set it in his sight, On which with fixed eye and heauy cheere Casting a looke, O God (saith he) what right I had to thee my soule doth now conceiue; Thee, which with bloud I gote, with horror leaue. 120 Wert thou the cause my climing care was such To passe those boundes, nature, and law ordaind? Is this that good which promised so much, And seemd so glorious ere it was attaind? Wherein was neuer ioye but gaue a touch To checke my soule to thinke, how thou wert gaind, And now how do I leaue thee vnto mine, Which it is dread to keepe, death to resigne. 121 With this the soule rapt wholy with the thought Of such distresse, did so attentiue weigh Her present horror, whilst as if forgote The dull consumed body senceles lay, And now as breathles quite, quite dead is thought, When lo his sonne comes in, and takes awaie The fatall crowne from thence, and out he goes As if vnwilling longer time to lose.
122 And whilst that sad confused soule doth cast Those great accounts of terror and distresse, Vppon this counsell it doth light at last How she might make the charge of horror lesse, And finding no way to acquit thats past But onely this, to vse some quicke redresse Of acted wrong, with giuing vp againe The crowne to whom it seem'd to appertaine. 123 Which found, lightned with some small ioy shee hyes, Rouses her seruaunts that dead sleeping lay, (The members of hir house,) to exercise One feeble dutie more, during her stay: And opening those darke windowes he espies The crowne for which he lookt was borne awaie, And all-agrieu'd with the vnkind offence He causd him bring it backe that tooke it thence. 124 To whom (excusing his presumteous deed By the supposing him departed quite) He said: ô Sonne what needes thee make such speed Vnto that care, where feare exceeds thy right, And where his sinne whom thou shalt now succeed Shall still vpbraid thy' inheritance of might, And if thou canst liue, and liue great from wo Without this carefull trauaile; let it go.
125 Nay father since your fortune did attaine So hye a stand: I meane not to descend, Replyes the Prince; as if what you did gaine I were of spirit vnable to defend: Time will appease them well that now complaine, And ratefie our interest in the end; What wrong hath not continuance quite outworne? Yeares makes that right which neuer was so borne. 126 If so, God worke his pleasure (said the king) And ô do thou contend with all thy might Such euidence of vertuous deeds to bring, That well may proue our wrong to be our right: And let the goodnes of the managing Race out the blot of foule attayning quite: That discontent may all aduauntage misse To wish it otherwise then now it is. 127 And since my death my purpose doth preuent Touching this sacred warre I tooke in hand, (An action wherewithall my soule had ment T'appease my God, and reconcile my land) To thee is left to finish my intent, Who to be safe must neuer idly stand; But some great actions entertaine thou still To hold their mindes who else will practise ill.
128 Thou hast not that aduantage by my raigne To riot it (as they whom long descent Hath purchasd loue by custome) but with payne Thou must contend to buy the worlds content: What their birth gaue them, thou hast yet to gaine By thine owne vertues, and good gouernment, And that vnles thy worth confirme the thing Thou canst not be the father to a king. 129 Nor art thou born in those calme daies, where rest Hath brought a sleepe sluggish securitie; But in tumultuous times, where mindes adrest To factions are inurd to mutinie, A mischiefe not by force to be supprest Where rigor still begets more enmitie, Hatred must be beguild with some new course, Where states are strong, & princes doubt their force 130 This and much more affliction would haue said Out of th'experience of a troublous raigne, For which his high desires had dearly paide Th'interest of an euer-toyling paine But that this all-subduing powre here staid His faultring tongue and paine r'inforc'd againe, And cut off all the passages of breath To bring him quite vnder the state of death.
113 In whose possession I must leaue him now, And now into the Ocean of new toyles, Into the stormie Maine where tempests grow Of greater ruines, and of greater spoiles Set forth my course to hasten on my vow O're all the troublous deepe of these turmoiles: And if I may but liue t'attaine the shore Of my desired end, I wish no more. 132 Help on ô sou'raigne Muse, helpe on my course If these my toyles be gratefull in thy eyes; Or but looke on, to cheere my feeble force That I faint not in this'great enterprize: And you ô worthy you, that take remorse Of my estate, and helpe my thoughts to rise; Continue still your grace that I may giue End to the worke wherein your worth may liue.
THE ARGVMENT OF THE FOVVRTH BOOKE. Henry the fifth cuts off his enemy The earle of Cambridge that conspir'd his death: Henry the fixt maryed vnluckely His and his countryes glory ruineth: Suffolke that made the match preferd too hie Going to exile a pirat murthereth: What meanes the Duke of Yorke obserud to gaine The worlds goodwill, seeking the crowne t'attaine. 1 CLose smothered lay the low depressed fire, Whose after-issuing flames confounded all Whilst thou victorious Henry didst conspireHen. 5. The wracke of Fraunce, that at thy feete did fall: Whilst ioyes of gotten spoiles, and new desire Of greater gaine to greater deedes did call Thy conquering troupes, that could no thoughts re∣taine But thoughts of glorie all that working raigne.
2 What do I feele ô now in passing by These blessed times that I am forst to leaue? What trembling sad remorse doth terrefie M' amazed thought with what I do conceiue? What? doth my pen commit impietie To passe those sacred tropheis without leaue? And do I sin, not to salute your ghostes Great worthies, so renown'd in forraine coasts? 3 Who do I see out of the darke appeare, Couered almost with clowdes as with the night, That here presents him with a martiall cheere Seeming of dreadfull, and yet louely fight? Whose eye giues courage, & whose brow hath feare Both representing terror and delight, And staies my course, and off my purpose breakes, And in obraiding wordes thus fiersly speakes. 4 Vngratefull times that impiously neglect That worth that neuer times againe shall shew, What, merites all our toile no more respect? Or else standes idlenes asham'd to know Those wondrous Actions that do so obiect Blame to the wanton, sin vnto the slow? Can England see the best that shee can boast Ly thus vngrac'd, vndeckt, and almost loft?
5 Why do you seeke for fained Palladins Out of the sinoke of idle vanitie, That maie giue glorie to the true dissignes Of Bourchier, Talbot, Neuile, Willoughby? Why should not you striue to fill vp your lines With wonders of your owne, with veritie? T' inflame their ofspring with the loue of Good And glorious true examples of their bloud. 6 O what eternall matter here is found! Whence new immortall Fliads might proceed, That those whose happie graces do abound In blessed accents here maie haue to feed Good thoughts, on no imaginary ground Of hungrie shadowes which no profit breed: Whence musicke like, instant delight may grow, But when men all do know they nothing know. 7 And why dost thou in lamentable verse Nothing but bloudshed, treasons, sin and shame, The worst of timos, th'extreame of ils rehearse, To raise old staines, and to renew dead blame? As if the minds of th'evill, and peruerse Were not far sooner trained from the same By good example of faire vertuous acts, Then by the shew of foule vngodly facts
8 O that our times had had some sacred wight, Whose wordes as happie as our swordes had bin To haue prepard for vs Tropheis aright Of vndecaying frames t'haue rested in: Triumphant Arkes of perdurable might O holy lines: that such aduauntage win Vpon the Sieth of time in spight of yeares, How blessed they that gaine what neuer weares. 9 What is it ô to do, if what we do Shall perish nere as soone as it is donne? What is that glorie we attaine vnto With all our toile, if lost as soone as wonne? O small requitall for so great a doo Is this poore present breath a smoake soone gone; Or these dombe stones erected for our sake, Which formles heapes few stormie chaunges make. 10 Tell great ELIZA since her daies are grac'd With those bright ornaments to vs denide, That she repaire what darknes hath defac'd, And get our ruyn'd deedes reediside: Shee in whose all directing eye is plac'd A powre the highest powers of wit to guide, She may commaund the worke and ouersee The holy frame that might eternall bee.
11 O would she be content that time should make A rauenous pray vpon her glorious raigne; That darknes and the night should ouertake So cleere a brightnes, shining without staine? Ah no, she softens some no doubt that wake For her eternity, with pleasing paine: And if she for her selfe prepare this good, O let her not neglect those of her bloud. 12 This that great Monarch Henry seemd to craue;Hen. 5. When (weighing what a holy motiue here Vertue proposd, and fit for him to haue, Whom all times ought of dutie hold most deare) I sighd, and wishd that some would take t'ingraue With curious hand so proud a worke to reare, To grace the present, and to blesse times past, That might for euer to our glorie last. 13 So should our well taught times haue learn'd alike How faire shind vertue, and how soule vice stood, When now my selfe haue driuen to mislike Those deedes: of worth I dare not vow for good: I cannot mone who lose, nor praise who seeke By mightie Actions to aduaunce their bloud; I must faie who wrought most, least honor had, How euer good the cause, the deedes were bad.
14 And onely tell the worst of euery raine And not the intermedled good report, I leaue what glorye vertue did attaine At th'euermemorable Agincorte: I leaue to tell what wit, what powre did gaine Th'assieged Roan, Caen, Dreux, or in what sort: How maiestic with terror did aduaunce Her conquering foote on all subdued Fraunce. 15 All this I passe, and that magnanimous King Mirror of vertue, miracle of worth, Whose mightie Actions with wise managing Forst prouder bosting climes to serue the North: The best of all the best the earth can bring Skarse equals him in what his raigne brought forth, Being of a mind as forward to aspire As fit to gouerne what he did desire. 16 His comely body was a goodly seate Where vertue dwelt most faire as lodgd most pure, A bodic strong whene vse of strength did get A stronger state to do, and to endure: Making his life th' example to beget Like spirit in those he did to good in vre, Most glorying to aduaunce true vertuous bloud, As if he greatnes sought but to do good.
17 Who as the chiefe, and all-directing head, Did with his subiects as his members liue, And them to goodnes forced not, but lead Winning not much to haue, but much to giue: Deeming the powre of his, his powre did spread As borne to blesse the world & not to grieue: Adornd with others spoiles not subiects store, No king exacting lesse, none winning more. 18 He after that corrupted faith had bred An ill inur'd obedience for commaund, And languishing luxuriousnes had spred Feeble vnaptnes ouer all the land, Yet he those long vnordred troupes so led Vnder such formall discipline to stand, That euen his soule seemd only to direct So great a bodie such exployts t'effect. 19 He bringes abrode distracted discontent, Disperst ill humors into actions hie, And to vnite them all in one consent Plac'd the faire marke of glorie in their eye, That malice had no leasure to dissent, Nor enuie time to practise treachery, The present actions do diuert the thought Of madnes past, while mindes were so well wrought.
20 Here now were pride, oppression, vsury, The canker-eating mischeifes of the state, Cal'd forth to praie vppon the enemie, Whilst the home-burthned better lightned sate: Ease was not suffered with a gredie eye T'examine states or priuate wealthes to rate, The silent Courtes warr'd not with busie wordes, Nor wrested law gaue the contentious swordes. 21 Now nothing entertaines th'attentiue care But stratagems, assaults, surprises, fights; How to giue lawes to them that conquered were, How to articulate with yeelding wights: The weake with mercie, and the proud with feare How to retaine, to giue desarts their right, Were now the Arts, and nothing else was thought But how to win and maintaine what was gote. 22 Here ô were none that priuately possest And held alone imprisoned maiestie, Proudly debarring entraunce from the rest As if the praie were theirs by victorie: Here no detractor woundes who merits best, Nor shameles brow cheeres on impietie, Vertue who all her toyle with zeale had spent Not here all vnrewarded, sighing went.
23 But here the equally respecting eye Of powre, looking alike on like desarts, Blessing the good made others good thereby. More mightie by the multitude of harts: The field of glorie vnto all doth lie Open alike, honor to all imparts; So that the only fashion in request Was to bee good or good-like, as the rest. 24 So much ô thou example dost effect Being far a better maister then commaund, That how to do by doing dost direct And teachest others, action by thy hand. Who followes not the course that kings elect? When Princes worke, who then will idle stand? And when that dooing good is onely thought Worthy reward; who will be bad for nought? 25 And had not th' earle of Cābridge with vaine speed Vntimely practizd for anothers right, With hope t'aduaunce those of his proper seed, (On whom yet rule seem'd destined to light) The land had seene none of her owne to bleed During this raigne, nor no aggrieued sight: None the least blacknes interclouded had So faire a day, nor any eye lookt sad.
26 But now when Fraunce perceiuing from a far The gathering tempest growing on from hence Readie to fall, threatning their state to marre, They labor all meanes to prouide defence: And practising how to preuent this warre, And shut out such calamities from thence, Do softer here some discord lately growne To hold Ambition busied with her owne. 27 Finding those humors which they saw were fit Soone to be wrought and easie to be fed, Swolne full with enuie that the crowne should sit There where it did, as if established: And whom it toucht in bloud to grieue at it They with such hopes and helps sollicited, That this great Earle was drawne t'attempt the thing And practises how to depose the king. 28 For being of mightie meanes to do the deed And yet of mightier hopes then meanes to do, And yet of spirit that did his hopes exceed, And then of bloud as great to ad thereto: All which, with what the gold of Fraūce could breed Being powers inough a climing mind to woo, He so imploid, that many he had wonne Euen of the chiefe the king relide vppon.
29 The wel-known right of the Earle of March alurd A leaning loue, whose cause he did pretend; Whereby he knew that so himselfe procurd The Crowne for his owne children in the end: For the Earle being (as he was assurd) Vnapt for issue, it must needes descend On those of his being next of Clarence race, As who by course of right should hold the place. 30 It was the time when as the forward Prince Had all prepar'd for his great enterprize,At South∣haton. And readie stand his troupes to part from hence And all in stately forme and order lyes: When open fame giues out intelligence Of these bad complots of his enemies: Or else this time of purpose chosen is Though knowne before, yet let run on till this. 31 That this might yeeld the more to aggrauate Vpon so foule a deed so vilely sought, Now at this time t'attempt to ruinate So glorious great disseignes so forward brought: Whilst carefull vertue seekes t'aduaunce the state And for her euerlasting honor sought That though the cause were right, and title strong The time of dooing it, yet makes it wrong.
32 And straight an vnlamented death he had, And straight were ioyfully the Anchors weighd And all flocke fast aboord, with visage glad, As if the sacrifize had now beene payd For their good speed; that made their stay so sad Lothing the least occasion that delayd. And now new thoughts, great hopes, calme seas, fair windes Whith present action intertaines their mindes. 33 No other crosse ô Henry saw thy daies But this that toucht thy now possessed hold; Nor after long, till this mans sonne assaiesRichard Duke of Yorke. To get of thine the right that he controwld: For which contending long, his life he paies; So that it fatall seemd the father should Thy winning seeke to staie, and then his sonne Should be the cause to loose, when thou hadst won. 34 Yet now in this so happie a meane while And inter lightning times thy vertues wrought, That discord had no leasure to defile So faire attempts with a tumultuous thought: And euen thy selfe, thy selfe didst so beguile With such attention vppon what was sought, That time affoordes not now with care or hare Others to seeke thee to secure thy state.
35 Else ô how easie had it beene for thee All the pretendant race t'haue laid full low If thou proceeded hadst with crueltie, Not suffering anie fatall branch to grow: But vnsuspicious magnanimitie Shames such effects of feare, and force to show: Busied in free, and open Actions still Being great; for being good, hates to be ill. 36 Which ô how much it were to be requir'd In all of might, if all were like of mind; But when that all depraued haue conspird To be vniust, what saftie shall they find (After the date of vertue is expird) That do not practize in the selfe-same kind, And countermine against deceite with guile? But ô what mischiefe feeles the world the while? 37 And yet such wronges are held meete to be don, And often for the state thought requisite, As when the publicke good depends thereon, When most iniustice is esteemd most right: But ô what good with doing ill is won? Who hath of bloud made such a benefite As hath not fear'd more after then before, And made his peace the lesse, his plague the more?
38 Far otherwise dealt this vndaunted king That cheerished the ofspring of his foes And his competitors to grace did bring, And them his frendes for Armes, and honors, chose; As if plaine courses were the safest thing Where vpright goodnes, sure, and stedfast goes Free from that subtile mask't impietie, Which this depraued world calles policie. 39 Yet how hath fate dispos'd of all this good? What haue these vertues after times availd? In what steed hath hy-raised valor stood, When this continuing cause of greatnes faild? Then when proud-growne the irritated bloud Enduring not it selfe it selfe assaild, As though that Prowesse had but learnt to spill Much bloud abrode to cut her throte with skill. 40 O doth th'Eternall in the course of thinges So mixe the causes both of good and ill, That thus the one effects of th' other bringes, As what seemes made to blisse, is borne to spill? What from the best of vertues glorie springes That which the world with miserie doth fill? Is th' end of happines but wretchednesse, Hath sin his plague, and vertue no successe?
41 Either that is not good, the world holds good, Or else is so confusd with ill, that we Abused with th'appearing likelihood Run to offend, whilst we thinke good to be: Or else the heauens made man, in furious bloud To torture man: And that no course is free From mischiefe long. And that faire daies do breed But storms, to make more foule, times that succeed. 42 Who would haue thought but so great victories, Such conquests, riches, land, and kingdome gaind, Could not but haue establish't in such wise This powreful state, in state to haue remaind? Who would haue thought that mischief could deuise A way so soone to loose what was attaind? As greatnes were but shewd to grieue not grace, And to reduce vs into far worse case. 43 With what contagion France didst thou insect The land by thee made proud, to disagree? T'inrage them so their owne swords to direct Vpon themselues that were made sharpe in thee? Why didst thou teach them here at home t'erect Trophees of their bloud which of thine should be? Or was the date of thy affliction out, And so was ours by course to come about?
44 But that vntimely death of this Great King, Whose nine yeares raign so mighty wōders wrought To thee thy hopes, to vs despaire did bring Not long to keepe, and gouerne what was gote: For those that had th'affaires in managing Although their countries good they greatly sought, Yet so ill accidents vnfitly fell That their desseignes could hardly prosper well. 45 An infant king doth in the state succeed Skarse one yeare old, left vnto others guide, Whose carefull trust, though such as shewd indeed They waighd their charge more then the world be∣side; And did with dutie, zeale and loue proceed: Yet for all what their trauaile could prouide Could not woo fortune to remaine with vs When this her Minion was departed thus. 46 But by degrees first this, then that regaind The turning tide beares backe with flowing chaunce Vnto the Dolphin all we had attaind, And fils the late low-running hopes of Fraunce, When Bedford who our onely hold maintaind Death takes from vs their fortune to aduaunce, And then home strife that on it selfe did fall Neglecting forraine care, did soone loose all.
47 Nere three score years are past since Bullinbrooke Did first attaine (God knowes how iust) the crowne: And now his race for right possessors tooke Were held of all, to hold nought but their owne: When Richard Duke of Yorke, begins to looke Into their right, and makes his title knowne: Wakening vp sleeping-wrong that lay as dead To witnes how his race was iniured. 48 His fathers end in him no feare could moue T'attempt the like against the like of might, Where long possession now of feare, and loue Seem'd to prescribe euen an innated right, So that to proue his state was to disproue Time, law, consent, oth, and allegeance quight: And no way but the waie of bloud there was Through which with all confusion he must passe. 49 O then yet how much better had it beene T'indure a wrong with peace, then with such toyle T'obtaine a bloudie right; since Right is sinne That is ill sought, and purchased with spoile? What madnes vnconstrained to begin To right his state, to put the state in broyle? Iustice her selfe maie euen do wrong in this, No war be'ing right but that which needfull is.
50 And yet that oportunity which led Him to attempt, seemes likewise him t'excuse: A feeble spirited king that gouerned Vnworthy of the Scepter he did vse; His enemies that his worth maliced, Who both the land and him did much abuse, The poeples loue, and his apparant right, May seeme sufficient motiues to incite. 51 Besides the now ripe wrath (deferd till now,) Of that sure and vnfailing Justicer, That neuer suffers wrong so long to grow And to incorporate with right so farre; That it might come to seeme the same in show, T'incourage those that euill minded are By such successe; but that at last he will Confound the branch whose root was planted ill. 52 Else might the ympious say with grudging spright, Doth God permit the great to riot free, And blesse the mighty though they doe vnright, As if he did vnto their wrongs agree? And only plague the weake and wretched wights For smallest faults euen in the highest degree? When he but vsing them others to scourge, Likewise of them at length the world doth purge.
53 But could not ô for bloudshed satisfie The now well-ruling of th'ill-gotten crowne? Must euen the good receiue the penaltie Of former sinnes that neuer were their owne? And must a iust kings bloud with miserie Pay for a bad vniustly ouerthrowne? Then ô I see due course must rightly goe And th' earth must trace it or else purchase woe. 54 And sure this king that now the crowne possest Henry the sixt was one, whose life was free From that commaund of vice, whereto the rest Of many mighty foueraignes subiectés be: And numbred might haue beene among the best Of other men, if not of that degree: A right good man, but yet an euill king Vnfit for what he had in managing. 55 Mild, meeke of spirit, by nature patient: No thought t' increase or scarse to keepe his owne: Apter for pardoning then for punishment, Seeking his bounty, not his powre t' haue knowne; Far from reuenge, soone won, soone made content: As fitter for a cloyster then a crowne: Whose holy minde so much addicted is On th'world to come, that he neglecteth this.
56 With such a weake, good, feeble, godly king Hath Richard Duke of Yorke his cause to trie: Who by th'experience of long managing The warres of Fraunce with supreame dignitie; And by his owne great worth with furthering The common good against the enemie, Had wrought that zeale and loue attend his might And made his spirit equall vnto his right. 57 For now the Duke of Bedford beeing dead, He is ordaind the Regent to succeed In Fraunce for fiue yeares, where he trauailed Whith ready hand and with as carefull heed To seeke to turne backe fortune that now fled, And hold vp falling power, in time of need: And gote, and lost and reattaines againe That which againe was lost for all his paine. 58 His time expird, he should for fiue yeares more Haue had his charge prolong'd, but SommersetThe Duke of Somer∣sit a great enemy to the Duke of Yorke & had euer enuied his prefermēt. That still had enuide his commaund before, That place and honor for himselfe did get: Which ans that matter to th' alreadie store Of kindled hate, which such a fire doth set Vnto the touch of that confounding flame As both their blouds could neuer quench the same.
59 And now the weaknes of that feeble head That doth neglect all care, but his soules care, So easie meanes of practise ministred Vnto th'ambitious members to prepare Their owne desires, to what their humors lead; That all good Actions coldly followed are, And seurall-tending hopes do wholy bend To other now then to the publique end. 60 And to draw on more speedy misery, The king vnto a fatall match is led With Rayners daughter king of Sicilie,This Rai∣ner was Duke of Aniou & only inioid the title of the K. of Sicilia. Whom with vnlucky starres he married: For by the meanes of this affinitie Was lost all that his Father conquered, Euen as if Fraunce had some Erynnis sent T'auenge their wrongs done by the insolent. 61 This marriage was the Duke of Suffolks deed With great rewardes won to effect the same: Which made him that he tooke so little heed Vnto his countries good, or his owne shame: Being a match could stand vs in no steedWhich were deli∣uered vp to her father vpon the match. For strength, for wealth, for reputation, fame: But cunningly contriued for their gaine To cost vs more then Aniou, Mauns, and Maine.
62 And yet as if he had accomplished Some mighty benefit vnto the land; He gote his trauailes to be registred In Parliment, for euermore to stand A witnes to approue all what he did: To th' end that if hereafter it were scand, Autoritie might yet be on his side, As doing nought but what was ratifide. 63 Imagining th' allowance of that place Would make that good the which he knew was naught, And so would his negotiation grace As none would thinke it was his priuat faut: Wherein though wit dealt wary in this case, Yet in the end it selfe it ouer raught, Striuing to hide he opened it the more, His after care shewd craft had gone before. 64 Deare didst thou buy ô king so faire a wife, So rare a spirit, so high a minde the while: Whose portion was destruction, dowry strife, Whose bed was sorrow, whose imbracing spoile: Whose maintenance cost thee, and thine their life, And whose best comfort neuer was but toyle: What Paris brought this booty of desire To set our mighty Ilium here on fire?
65 I grieue that I am forst to say thus much, To blame her, that I yet must wonder at; Whose so sweet beauty, wit and worth were such, As euerlasting admiration gat: Yet doth my countries zeale so nerely touch That I am drawne to say I know not what, And yet ô that my pen should euer giue Staine to that sex by whom her fame doth liue. 66 For sure those vertues well deserud a crowne, And had it not beene ours, no doubt she might Haue matcht the worthiest that the world hath known And now sate faire with fame, with glorie bright: But comming in the way where sin was grown So foule and thicke, it was her chance to light Amidst that grosse infection of those times, And so came staind with blacke disgracefull crimes. 67 And some the world must haue on whom to lay The heauie burthen of reproach, and blame, Against whose deedes th' afflicted may inuay As th' only Authors, whence destruction came: When yet perhaps twas not in them to stay The current of that streame, nor helpe the same; But liuing in the eie of Action so Not hindring it, are thought to draw on wo.
68 So much vnhappie doth the mightie stand That stand on other then their owne defence, When as distruction is so neare at hand, That if by weakenes, folly, negligence, They do not comming miserie withstand They shall be thought th'authors of the offence, And to call in that which they kept not out, And curst as those, that brought those plagues a∣bout. 69 And so remaine for euer registred In that eternall booke of infamie: When ô how many other causes lead As well to that, as their iniquitie: The worst complots oftly close smothered, And well ment deedes fall out vnluckily: Whilst the aggrieued stand not t'waigh th'intent But euer iudge according to th'euent. 70 I say not this t'excuse thy Sinne ô Queene, Nor cleare their faults that mightie Actors are: I cannot but affirme thy pride hath beene A speciall meanes this commonwealth to marre: And that thy way ward will was plainly seene In vaine ambition to presume too farre, And that by thee the onely way was wrought The Duke of Gloster to his death was brought.His frer Duke of Gloster.
71 A man though seeming in thy thought to sit Betweene the light of thy desires and thee, Yet did his taking thence plainly permit Others to looke to that they could not see During his life, nor would aduenture it: When his remoue quite made that passage free; So by his fall thinking to stand alone Hardly could stand at all when he was gone. 72 For this Duke as Protector many yeares Had rul'd the land, during the kings young age: And now the selfe same charge and title beares As if he still were in his pupillage: With such disgrace vnto the Queene appeares That all incensd with an ambitious rage She doth conspire to haue him made awaie, As who the course of her maine will doth staie. 73 Thrust thereinto not onely with her pride But by her fathers counsell and consent, That grieu'd likewise that any else beside Should haue the honor of the gouernment: And therfore he such deepe aduise applide As forraine craft and cunning could inuent, To circumuent an vnsuspecting wight Before he should discerne of their despight.
74 And manie ready hands shee straight doth find To aide her deede, of such as could not brooke The length of one mans office in that kind That to himselfe th'affaires all wholly tooke: And ruling all had neuer any minde T'impart a part with others that would looke To haue likewise some honor in their hands, And grieu'd at such ingrossing of commaunds. 75 And had he not had such a greedy loue Of still continuing of his charge too long, Enuie had beene vnable to reproue His acted life without shee did him wrong: But hauing liu'd so manie yeeres aboue He grieues now to descend to be lesse strong, And kils that fame that vertue did beget, Chose to be held lesse good, then seene lesse great. 76 O could the mighty but giue bounds to pride And weigh backe fortune ere shee pull them downe, Contented with inough, with honors satisfide, Not striuing how to make so much their owne As to leaue nothing for the rest beside, Who seeme by their high spreading ouergrowne: Whilst they themselues remaine in all mens sight The odious marke of hatred and dispight.
77 Then should not ô so many tragedies Burthen our knowledge with their bloudy end, Nor their disgrac'd confounded families From so hye pride to so low shame descend: But planted on that ground where safety lies, Their branches should to eternity extend: But euer those that ouerlooke so much Must ouersee themselues; their state is such. 78 Seuere he was, and strictly did obserue Due forme of Iustice towardes euery wight, Vnmoueable, and neuer won to swerue For any cause in what he thought was right: Wherein although he did so well deserue, In the licentious yet it bread despight; So that euen vertue seemes an Actor too To ruine those fortune prepares to vndoo. 79 Those, thus prouided whom the Queene wel knew Hated his might, and glad to inoouate Vnto so great, and strong a party grew As easie t'was to ouerthrow his state: And onely hope of alteration drew Manie to yeeld that had no cause to hate: For euen with goodnes men grow discontent Where states are ripe to fall, and vertue spent.
80 And taking all the rule into her hand (Vnder the shadowe of that feeble king) The Duke sh' excludes from office and command, And in the reach of enmity doth bring From that respected height where he did stand, Whilst malice scarce durst mutter anything: When straight the worst of him comes all reueald Which former feare, or rigor kept conceald. 81 Now is he taxed that he rather sought His priuate profit then the publique good, And many things presumptuously had wrought Other then with our lawes, and customes stood: As one that would into the land haue brought, The ciuile forme in cases touching bloud, And such poore crimes that shewd their spight was sound, But yet bewraide, their matter wanted ground. 82 Yet seru'd they well the turne, and did effect That which is easie wrought in such a case, Where what suborned Iustice shall obiect Is to the purpose, and must passe with grace: And what the wretched bring of no effect Whose hainous faults his matter must deface: For where powre hath decreed to find th' oftence The cause is better still then the defence.
83 A Parlament at Berry summoned Dispatcht the deed more speedily then well, For thither came the Duke without all dread Or ought imagining of what befell: Where as the matter is so followed That he conuented is ere he could tell He was in danger or had done offence, And presently to prison sent from thence. 84 Which quicke, and sodaine action gaue no time For men to weigh the iustice of the deed, Whilst looking only on the vrged crime Vnto the farther drift they take no heed: For these occasions taken in the prime Of courses new, that old dislikes succeed, Leaue not behind that feeling touch of wrong, Sacietie makes passions still lesse strong. 85 And yet they seem'd some mutiny to doubt For thus proceeding with a man of might, Seeing he was most popular and stout And resolute would stand vpon his right: And therefore did they cast this way about To haue him closely murdred out of sight, That so his trouble, and his death hereby Might come togither and togither dye.
86 Reekning it better since his end is ment And must be wrought, at once to rid it cleere And put it to the fortune of th'euent, Then by long doing to be long in feare: When in such courses of high punishment The deed and the attempt like daunger beare; And oft things done perhaps doe lesse anoy Then may the doing handled with delay. 87 And so they had it straight accomplished, For that day after his committing he Is dead brought foorth being found so in his bed. Which was by sodaine sicknes said to bee That had vpon his sorrowes gathered, As by apparant to kens men might see: And thus ô Sicknes thou art oft belide, When death hath many waies to come beside. 88 Are these the deedes hye forraine wits inuent? Is this that wisedome whereof they so boast? O then I would it neuer had beene spent Here amongst vs, nor brought from out their coast! O let their cunning in their limits pent Remaine amongst themselues that like it most! And let the North they count of colder bloud Beheld more grosse, so it remaine more good.
89 Let them haue fairer citties, goodlier soiles, And sweeter fields for beautie to theeie, So long as they haue these vngodly wiles, Such detestable vile impietie: And let vs want their vines, their fruites the whiles, So that we want not faith and honestie, We care not for those pleasures, so we may Haue better harts, and stronger hands then they. 90 Neptune keepe out from thy imbraced Ile This foule contagion of iniquitie; Drowne all corruptions comming to defile Our faire proceedings ordred formally; Keepe vs mere English, let not craft beguile Honor and Iustice with strang subtiltie: Let vs not thinke, that that our good can frame, Which ruinde hath the Authors of the same. 91 But by this impious meanes that worthy man Is brought vnto this lamentable end, And now that current with maine fury ran (The stop remou'd that did the course defend) Vnto the full of mischiefe that began T'a vniuersall ruine to extend, That Isthmus failing which the land did keepe From the intire possession of the deepe.
92 And now the king alone all open lay, No vnderprop of bloud to stay him by, None but himselfe standes weakely in the way Twixt Yorke and the affected sou'raignty: Gone is that barre that would haue beene the stay T'haue kept him backe from mounting vp so hie. But ô in what a state stand these men in That cannot liue without, nor with their kin? 93 The Queene hath yet by this her full desire And now she with her minion Suffolke raignes, Now shee hath all authority intire, And all affaires vnto her selfe retaines: And only Suffolke is aduanced hyre, He is the man rewarded for his paines: He that did her insteed most chiefly stand, And more aduanc'd her, then he did the land. 94 Which when they saw who better did expect, Then they beganne their error to descry, And well perceiue that only the defect Was in their iudgements, passion-drawne awry: Found, formall rigour fitter to direct Then pride and insolent inconstancie; Better seuerity that's right and iust Then impotent affections led with lust.
95 And there upon in sorrow thus complaine: O what great inconuenience do they feele, Where as such imbecility doth raigne As so neglectes the care of common weale? Where euer one or other doth obtaine So high a grace thus absolute to deale: The whilst th'aggreieued subiect suffers still The pride of some predominating will. 96 And euer one remou'd, a worse succeedes; So that the best that we can hope is warre, Tumults and stirres, that this disliking breedes, The sword must mend, what insolence doth marre: For what rebellions, and what bloudy deedes Haue euer followed where such courses are? What oft remoues, what death of counsailers, What murder, what exile of officers? 97 Witnes the Spencers, Gaueston and Vere The mighty minions of our feeblest kings; Who euer subiects to their subiects were, And only the procurers of these things: When worthy Monarches that hold honor deare Maister themselues, and theirs; which euer brings That vniuersall reuerence, and respect: For who waighes him that doth himselfe neglect?
98 And yet our case is like to be farre worse Hauing a king though not so bent to ill, Yet so neglecting good, that giuing force By giuing leaue doth all good order kill: Suffring a violent woman take her course To manage all according to her will, Which how she doth begin, her deeds expresse, And what will be the end, our selues may gesse. 99 Thus well they deem'd what after followed When now the shamefull losse of Fraunce much Which vnto Suffolke is attributed As who in all mens sight most hatefull liues: grieues, He with the enemy consedered Betraies the state, and secret knowledge giuesArticles obiected against de la Poole Duke of Suffolke. Of all our strength; that all which we did hold By his corruption is or lost or sold. 100 And as he deales abroad, so likewise here He robs at home, the treasurie no lesse Here, where he all authorities doth beare And makes a Monopoly of offices: He is inricht, h'is raisd, and placed neere And only he giues counsaile to oppresse: Thus men obiect, whilst many vp in armes Offer to be reuenged of these harmes.
101 The Queene perceiuing in what case shee stood, To loose her minion or ingage her state; (After with long contention in her bloud Loue and ambition did the cause debate) Shee yeeldes to pride, and rather thought it good To sacrifice her loue vnto their hate, Then to aduenture else the losse of all Which by maintaining him was like to fall. 102 Yet seeking at the first to temporize, She tries if that some short imprisonment would calme their heat: when that would not suffize, Then to exile him shee must needes consent: Hoping that time would salue it in such wise As yet at length they might become content, And shee againe might haue him home at last, When the first fury of this rage was past. 103 But as he to his iudged exile went, Hard on the shore he comes incountered By some, that so far off his honor sent, As put his backe-returne quite out of dread: For there he had his rightfull punishment Though wrongly done, and there he lost his head, Part of his bloud hath Neptune, part the sand, As who had mischiefe wrought by sea and land.
104 Whose death when swift-wingd fame at full conuaid Vnto the trauaild Queen misdoubting nought, Despight and sorrow such affliction laid Vpon her soule as wondrous passions wrought: O God (saith she) and art thou thus betraid? And haue my fauours thy destruction brought? Is this their gaine whom highnes fauoureth, Who chiefe preferd, stand as preferd to death? 105 O fatall grace without which men complaine And with it perish, what preuailes that we Thus beare the title of a soueraigne, And suffred not to be that which we be? O must our subiects limit and constraine Our sauors where as they themselues decree? Must we our loue at their appointment place? Do we commaund, and they direct our grace? 106 O will they then our powre, and will deuide? And haue we might, but must not vse our might? Poore maiestie that other men must guide Whose discontent can neuer looke aright: For euermore we see those that abide Gracious in ours, are odious in their sight, Who would all-maistring maiesty defeat Of her best grace, that is to make men great.
107 Decre Suffolke, ô I saw thy wofull cheere When thou perceiu'dst no helpe but to depart: I saw that looke wherein did plaine appeare The lamentable message of thy heart: That seemd to say: O Queene, and canst thou beare My ruine so? the cause whereof thou art: Canst thou indure to see them worke their will And not defend me from the hand of ill? 108 Haue I for thee aduentured so much, Made ship wracke of my honor, faith and fame? And doth my seruice giue no deeper touch To thy hard heart better to feele the same? Or dost thou feare, or is thy weakenes such As not of force to keepe me from this shame? Or else now hauing seru'd thy turne of me, Art well-content my ouerthrow to see? 109 As if my sight did read vnto thy minde The lecture of that shame thou wouldst forget, And therefore peraduenture glad to finde So fit occasion dost it forward set: Or else thy selfe from dangerous toile t'vnwinde Downe on my necke dost all the burthen let; Since kings must haue some hated worse then they, On whom they may the waight of enuy lay.
114 No Suffolke, none of this, my soule is cleere; Without the thought of such impiety: Yet must I needes confesse that too much feare Made me defend thee lesse couragiously: Seeing more Princes euer ruind were By their immoderate fauoring priuately Then by seueritie in generall, For best h'is lik't, that is alike to all. 111 Thus in her passion lo shee vttered, When as far greater tumults now burst out, Which close and cunningly were practised By such as sought great hopes to bring about: For vp in armes in Kent were gathered A mighty insolent rebellious rout Vnder a daungerous head; who to deter The state the more, himselfe nam'd Mortimer. 112 The Duke of Yorke that did not idle stand But seekes to worke on all aduantages, Had likewise in this course a secret hand, And hartned on their chiefe accomplices, To try how that the people of the land Would (if occasion seru'd) b' in readines. To aide that line if one should come indeed To moue his right, and in due course proceed.
113 Knowing himselfe to be the onely one That must attempt the thing if any should, And therefore lets the Rebel now runne on With that false name t' effect the best he could To make a way for him to worke vpon, That but on certaine ground aduenture would: For if the traitor sped, the gaine were his; If not, yet he standes safe, and blamelesis. 114 T' attempt with others dangers, not his owne, He countes it wisedome if it could be wrought: And t'haue the honor of the people knowne Was now that which was chiefly to be sought: For with the best he knew himselfe was growne In that account, as made him take no thought, Hauing obseru'd in those he ment to proue Their wit, their wealth, their cariage, and their loue. 115 With whom and with his owne alliances He first begins to open in some wise The right he had, yet with such doubtfulnes, As rather sorrow then his drift descries: Complaining of his countries wretchednes In what a miserable case it lies, And how much it importes them to prouide For their defence against this womans pride.
116 Then with the discontented he doth deale In sounding theirs, not vttering his intent, As being sure not so much to reueale Where by they might be made againe content: But when they grieued for the common weale He doth perswade them to be patient, And to indure there was no other course, Yet so perswades as makes their malice worse. 117 And then with such as with the time did run He doth in most vpright opinion stand, As one that neuer crost what they begun, But seem'd to like what stil they tooke in hand: Seeking all causes of offence to shun, Praises the rule, and blames th' vnrulie land: Workes so with giftes, and kindlie offices That euen of them he serues his turne no lesse. 118 Then as for those that were his followers Being all choice men for vertues or desarts, He so with grace, and benefits prefers, That he becomes the monarch of their harts: He drawes the learned for his Counsailers And cherishes all men of rarest partes, To whom good done doth an impression strike Of ioic and loue in all that are alike.
119 And now by meanes of th'intermitted warre Manie most valiant men impou'rished, Onely by him fed and relieued are, Onely respected, grac'd and honoured: Which let him in, vnto their hearts so farre, As they by him were wholy to be led: He onely treades the sure and perfect path To greatnes who loue and opinion hath. 120 And to haue one some certaine prouince his As the maine body that must worke the feate, Yorkeshire he chose, the place wherein he is By title, liuings, and possessions great: No country he preferres so much as this, Here hath his bountie her abiding seat, Here is his Iustice and relieuing hand Ready to all that in destresse do stand. 121 What with his tenants, seruants, followers, friends, And their alliances, and amities, All that Shire vniuersally attendes His hand held vp to any enterprize: And thus farre vertue with her power extendes, The rest touching th' euent in fortune lies. With which accomplement so mighty growne Forward he tendes with hope t' attaine a crowne. The end of the fourth booke.
The fift Booke of the Ciuill warres betweene the two Houses of Lancaster and Yorke. THE ARGVMENT. The bad successe of Cades rebellion, Yorks open practise and conspiracie, His comming in, and his submission, Th' effect of Printing and Artillerie, Burdeux reuolts, craues our protection, Talbot defending ours, dyes gloriously. The French Wars end, & York begins againe, And at S. Albones Sommerset is slaine. 1 THE furious trayne of that tumultuous rout, Whom close subayding powre & good successe, Had made vnwisely proud, and fondly stout, Thrust headlong on, oppresion to oppresse: And now to fulnes growne, boldly giue out That they the publique wrongs meant to redresse; Formlesse themselues, reforming doe pretend, As if confusion could disorder mend.
2 And on they march with theyr false-named head,Iack Cade. Of base, and vulgar birth, though noble fayn'd, Who puft with vaine desires, to London led His rash abused troupes, with shadowes trayn'd. When as the King thereof assertained, Supposing some small power would haue restrain'd Disordred rage, sends with a simple crew Syr Humfry Stafford, whom they ouerthrew. 3 Which so increasd th' opinion of theyr might, That much it gaue to doe, and much it wrought, Confirm'd their rage, drew on the vulgar wight, Calld forth the timerous, fresh pertakers brought; For many, though most glad theyr wrongs to right, Yet durst not venture theyr estates for nought: But see'ing the cause had such aduantage got, Occasion makes them styr, that els would not. 4 So much he errs, that scornes or els neglects The small beginnings of arysing broyles, And censures others, not his owne defects, And with a selfe conceite himselfe beguiles: Thinking small force will compasse great effects, And spares at first to buy more costly toyles: When true obseruing prouidence in war Still makes her foes, far stronger then they are.
5 Yet thys good fortune all theyr fortune mard Which fooles by helping euer doth suppresse: For warelesse insolence whilst vndebard Ofbounding awe, runnes on to such excesse, That following lust, and spoyle, and blood so hard, Sees not how they procure theyr owne distresse: The better, lothing courses so impure, Rather will like theyr wounds, then such a cure. 6 For whilst thys wilde vnrained multitude (Led with an vnfore-seeing greedy minde Of an imagin'd good, that did delude Their ignorance, in theyr desires made blind,) Ransack the Citty, and with hands imbrude, Run to all out-rage in th'extreamest kind, Heaping vp wrath and horror more and more, Adding fresh guilt, to mischiefes done before. 7 And seeing yet all thys draw to no end But to theyr owne, no promisd ayde t'appeare, No such pertakers as they dyd attend, Nor such successes as imagin'd were: Good men resolu'd the present to defend Iustice against them with a brow seuere. Themselues feard of themselues, tyr'd with excesse, Found, mischiefe was no sit way to redresse.
8 Like when a greedy Pyrat hard in chace Pursuing of a rich supposed prize, Works for the winds, plyes sayles, beares vp a pace, Out-runnes the clowdes, scoures after her that flyes, Pryde in his hart, and wealth before his face, Keepes his hands wrought, & fixed keepes his eyes, So long, till that ingag'd within some straight He falls amid his foes layd close in wayt: 9 Where all too late discouering round about Danger and death the purchase of his hast; And no back flying, no way to get out, But there to perrish, or to yeeld disgrast, Cursing his error, yet in th'error stout: Hee toyles for life, now charges, now is chast: Then quailes, and then fresh courage takes againe, Striuing t'vnwind himselfe, but all in vaine. 10 So stands thys rout in desperat comberment, Enuirond round with horror, blood, and shame: Crost of theyr course, dispayring of th'euent When pardon, that smooth bayt of basenes came: Pardon, (the snare to catch the impotent) Beeing once pronounc'd, they straight embrace the same, And as huge snowy Mountaines melt with heat, So they dissolu'd with hope, and home they get.
11 Leauing their Captaine to discharge alone The shott of blood consumed in theyr heat: Too small a sacrifice for mischiefes done Was one mans breath, which thousands dyd defeat. Vnrighteous Death, why art thou but all one Vnto the small offender and the great? Why art thou not more then thou art, to those That thousands spoyle, and thousands liues doe lose: 12 Thys fury passing with so quick an end, Disclosd not those, that on th'aduantage lay, Who seeing the course to such disorder tend, With-drew theyr foote, asham'd to take that way; Or els preuented whilst they dyd attend Some mightier force, or for occasion stay, But what they meant, ill fortune must not tell, Mischiefe be'ing oft made good by speeding well. 13 Put by from thys, the Duke of Yorke dissignes Another course to bring his hopes about: And with those frends affinity combines In surest bonds, his thoughts he poureth out, And closely feeles, and closely vndermines The fayth of whom he had both hope and doubt: Meaning in more apparant open course To try his right, his fortune, and his force.
14 Loue and aliance had most firmly ioynd Vnto his part, that mighty family The fayre discended stock of Neuiles kind, Great by theyr many issued progeny; But greater by theyr worth, that cleerely shind And gaue faire light to theyr nobilitie: A mightie partie for a mighty cause By theyr vnited amitie hee drawes. 15 For as the spreading members of proud Po, That thousand-branched Po, whose limmes embrace Thy fertile and delicious body so Sweet Lombardie, and beautifies thy face: Such seemd this powreful stock; frō whence did grow So many great discents, spreading theyr race That euery corner of the Land became, Enricht with some great Heroes of that name. 16 But greatest in renowne doth VVarwick sit, That great King-maker VVarwick, so far growne In grace with Fortune, that he gouerns it, And Monarchs makes, and made, againe puts downe; What reuolutions his first mouing wit Heere brought about, are more then too well known; That fatall kindle-fire of those hote dayes, Whose worth I may, whose worke I cannot prayse.
17 With him, with Richard Earle of Salisbury, Courtny and Brooke, his most assured frends, Hee intimates his minde, and openly, The present bad proceedings discommends; Laments the state, the peoples misery, And that which such a pittyer seldom mends, Oppression, that sharpe two edged sword That others wounds, and wounds likewise his Lord. 18 My Lord, sayth he, how things are carryed heere In thys corrupted state, you plainly see, What burden our abused shoulders beare Charg'd with the weight of imbecillitie; And in what base account all we appeare That stand without their grace that all must be: And who they be, and how their course succeeds, Our shame reports, and time bewrayes theyr deeds. 19 Aniou and Maine, (O maine that foule appeares, Eternall scarre of our dismembred Land) And, Guien's lost, that did three hundred yeeres Remaine subiected vnder our commaund. From whence, me thinks, there sounds vnto our eares The voyce of those deere ghosts, whose liuing hand Got it with sweat, and kept it with theyr blood, To doe vs, thankles vs, theyr of-spring good.
20 And seeme to cry; O how can you behold Their hatefull feet vpon our graues should tread? Your Fathers graues, who gloriously dyd hold That which your shame hath left recouered. Redeeme our Tombes, O spirits too too cold, Pull backe these Towres our Armes haue honored: These Towres are yours, these Forts we built for you, These walls doe beare our names, and are your due. 21 Thus well they may obrayd our rechlesnes, Whilst we, as if at league with infamie, Ryot away for nought, whole Prouinces; Giue vp as nothing worth all Normandy, Traffique strong holds, sell Fortresses, So long, that nought is left but misery: Poore Callice, and these water-walls about, That basely pownds vs in, from breaking out. 22 And which is worse, I feare we shall in th' end Throwne from the glory of inuading war, Be forst our propper limmits to defend, Where euer, men are not the same they are Where hope of conquest doth theyr spyrits extend Beyond the vsuall powres of valor far: For more is he that ventureth for more, Then who fights but for what he had before.
22 Put to your hands therefore to reskew nowe Th'indangered state, dere Lords, from thys disgrace, And let vs in our honor, labour how To brings thys scorned Land in better case: No doubt but God our action will allow That knowes my right, and how they rule the place Whose weakenes calls vp our vnwillingnesse, As opening euen the doore to our redresse. 24 Though I protest it is not for a Crowne My soule is moou'd, (yet if it be my right, I haue no reason to refuse myne owne) But onely these indignities to right. And what if God whose iudgements are vnknowne, Hath me ordaynd the man, that by my might My Country shall be blest; if so it be, By helping me, you rayse your selues with me. 25 In those whom zeale and amitie had bred A fore-impression of the right he had, These styrring words so much encouraged, That with desire of innouation mad, They seem'd to runne before, not to be led, And to his fire doe quicker fuell ad: For where such humors are prepard before, The opening them makes them abound the more.
26 Then counsell take they fitting theyr desire, (For nought that fits not theyr desire is wayghd) The Duke is straight aduised to retyre Into the bounds of Wales to leauy ayde; Which vnder smooth pretence he doth require T' amoue such persons as the state betrayd, And to redresse th'oppression of the land, The charme which weakenes seldom doth withstand. 27 Ten thousand straight caught with this bait of breth Are towards greater lookt-for forces led, Whose power the King by all meanes trauaileth In theyr arising to haue ruined: But theyr preuenting head so compasseth, That all ambushments warilie are fled, Refusing ought to hazard by the way, Keeping his greatnes for a greater day. 28 And to the Citty straight directs his course, (The Citty, seate of Kings, and Kings cheefe grace) Where finding of his entertainment worse By far then he expected in that place, Much disappoynted, drawes from thence his force, And towards better trust marches a pace; And downe in Kent (fatall for discontents) Nere to thy banks fayre Thames doth pitch his Tents.
29 And there intrencht, plants his Artillery, Artillery th' infernall instrument, New brought from hell to scourge mortality With hideous roring, and astonishment: Engin of horror, fram'd to terrific And teare the earth, and strongest Towers to rent; Torment of Thunder, made to mock the skyes, As more of power in our calamities. 30 O if the fire subtile Promethius brought Stolne out of heauen, did so afflict mankind, That euer since plagu'd wyth a curious thought Of styrring search, could neuer quiet find; What hath he done who now by stealth hath got Lightning and Thunder, both in wondrous kind? What plague deserues so proude an enterprize? Tell Muse, and how it came, and in what wise. 31 It was the tyme when fayre Europa sate With many goodly Diadems addrest, And all her parts in florishing estate Lay beautifull, in order at their rest: No swelling member vnproportionate Growne out of forme, sought to disturbe the rest: The lesse, subsisting by the greaters might, The greater, by the lesser kept vpright.
32 No noyse of tumult euer wak'd them all, Onely perhaps some priuatiarrs within For tytles or for confines might befall, Which ended soone, made better loue begin; But no eruption dyd in generall Breake downe theyr rest with vniuersall sin: No publique shock dysioynted thys fayre frame, Tyll Nemesis from out the Orient came. 33 Fierce Nemisis, mother of fate and change, Sword-bearer of th'eternall prouidence, That had so long with such afflictions strange Confounded Asias proude magnificence, And brought foule impious Barbarisme to range On all the glory of her excellence, Turnes her sterne looke at last vnto the West, As greeu'd to see on earth such happy rest. 34 And for Pandora calleth presently, (Pandora, Ioues fayre gift, that first deceiu'd Poore Epimetheus imbecillitie, That thought he had a wondrous boone receiu'd, By meanes whereof curioius mortalitie Was of all former quiet quite bereau'd) To whom being come, deckt with all qualities, The wrathfull Goddesse breakes out in thys wise:
35 Doost thou not see in what secure estate Those florishing fayre Westerne parts remaine? As if they had made couenant with Fate To be exempted free from others paine: At one with theyr desires, friends with debate, In peace with pride, content with theyr owne gaine, Their bounds cōtaine their minds, their minds applide To haue their bounds with plentie beautified. 36 Deuotion, (mother of Obedience,) Beares such a hand on theyr credulity, That it abates the spirit of eminence, And busies them wyth humble pietie: For see what works, what infinite expence, What monuments of zeale they edifie, As if they would, if that no stop were found, Fill all with Temples, make all holy ground. 37 But we must coole thys all-beleeuing zeale, That hath enioyd so fayre a turne so long, And other reuolutions must reueale, Other desires, other designes among: Dislike of thys, first by degrees shall steale Vpon the soules of men perswaded wrong, And th'abus'd power that such a power hath got, Shall giue herselfe the sword to cut her throat.
38 Goe thou therefore with all thy styrring trayne Of swelling sciences, (the gyfts of greefe) Goe loose the lynks of that soule-binding chayne, Inlarge thys vninquisitiue beleefe; Call vp mens spirits, whom darknes doth detaine, Enter theyr harts, and Knowledge make the theefe To open all the doores to let in light, That all, may all things see, but what is right. 39 Opinion Arme against opinion growne, Make new-borne contradiction still so rise As if Thebes-founder Cadmus tongues had sowne In stead of teeth, for greater mutinies. Bring lyke defended fayth against fayth knowne, Weary the soule with contrarieties: Till all Religion become retrograde, And that fayre tyre, the maske of sin be made. 40 And better to effect a speedy end, Let there be found two fatall instruments, The one to publish, th' other to defend Impious contention, and proud discontents: Make that instamped Characters may send Abroad to thousands, thousand mens intents, And in a moment, may dispatch much more Then could a world of pennes performe before.
41 Whereby all quarrels, tytles, secrecies, May vnto all be presently made knowne, Factions prepard, parties allur'd to rise, Sedition vnder fayre pretentions sowne; Whereby the vulgar may become so wise, That with a selfe presumption ouer-growne Hee may of deepest misteries debate, Controule his betters, censure acts of state. 42 And then, when this dispersed mischiefe shall Haue brought confusion in each misterie, Calld vp contempt of all states generall, Ripened the humor of impietie, Then haue they th' other Engin, where-with-all They may torment theyr selfe-wrought misery, And scourge each other, in the strangest wise As tyme or Tyrants neuer could deuise. 43 For by this stratagem they shall confound All th' ancient forme and discipline of war: Alter theyr camps, alter theyr fights, theyr ground, Daunt mighty spirits, prowesse and manhood mar; For basest cowards from a far shall wound The most couragious, forst to fight a far; Valor rapt vp in smoake, as in the night, Shall perrish without witnes, without sight.
44 But first, before thys generall disease Breake forth into so great extreamity, Prepare it by degrees; first kill thys ease, Spoyle thys proportion, mar thys harmony Make greater States vpon the lesser seaze, Ioyne many kingdoms to one soueraignty, Rayse a few great, that may with greater power Slaughter each other, and mankind deuoure. 45 And first begin with factions, to deuide The fayrest land, that from her thrusts the rest, As if shee car'd not for the world beside, A world within her selfe, with wonders blest; Rayse such a strife as tyme shall not decide, Till the dere blood of most of all her best Be poured forth, and all her people tost With vnkind tumults, and almost all lost. 46 Let her be made the sable Stage whereon Shall first be acted bloody Tragedies: That all the neighbour States gazing there on, May make their profit by her miseries. And those whom shee before had march'd vpon, (Hauing by this both tyme and meane to rise) Made martiall by her Armes, shall grow so great, As saue theyr owne. no force shall them defeat.
47 That when theyr power vnable to sustaine And beare it selfe, vpon it selfe shall fall, Shee may (recouered of her wounds againe) Sit and behold theyr parts as tragicall: For there must come a tyme that shall obtaine Truce for distresse. When make-peace Hymen shall Bring the conioyned aduers powers to bed, And set the Crowne made one, vpon one head. 48 Out of which blessed vnion shall arise A sacred branch, with grace and glory blest, Whose vertue shall her Land so patronize, As all our power shall not her dayes molest: For shee, sayre shee, the Minion of the skyes, Shall purchase of the highe'st to hers such rest, (Standing betweene the wrath of heauen and them) As no distresse shall touch her Diadem. 49 Though thou shalt seeke by all the means thou may, And Arme impiety and hell and all; Styrre vp her owne, make others to assay, Bring sayth disguisd, the power of Pluto call, Call all thy orafts to practise her decay, And yet shall thys take no effect at all: For shee secure, (as intimate with Fate) Shall sit and scorne those base dissignes of hate.
50 And from the Rocks of safety shall discry The wondrous wracks that wrath layes ruined, All round about her, blood and misery, Powers betrayd, Princes slaine, Kings massacred, States all-confusd, brought to calamitie, And all the face of kingdoms altered. Yet she the same inuiolable stands, Deere to her owne, wonder to other Lands. 51 But let not her defence discourage thee, For neuer none but shee, shall haue thys grace From all disturbs to be so long kept free, And with such glory to discharge that place: And therefore, if by such a power thou be Stopt of thy course, reckon it no disgrace; Sith shee alone (being priuiledg'd from hie) Hath thys large Patent of eternite. 52 This charge the Goddesse gaue, when ready straight The subtill messenger accompayned With all her crew of crafts that on her wayt, Hastes to effect what shee was counsailed: And out shee pours of her mimens conceit, Vpon such searching spirits as trauailed In penetrating hidden secrecies, Who soone these meanes of misery deuise.
53 And boldly breaking with rebellious minde Into theyr mothers close-lockt Treasury, They mineralls combustible doe finde, Which in stopt concaues placed cunningly They fire, and fire imprisoned against kind, Teares out away, thrusts out his enemy, Barking with such a horror, as if wroth With man, that wrongs himselfe and nature both. 54 And this beginning had this cursed frame, Which Yorke hath now planted against his King, Presuming by his power, and by the same, His purpose vnto good effect to bring; When diuers of the grauest Counsell came Sent from the King, to vnderstand what thing Had thrust him into these proceedings bad, And what he sought, and what intent he had. 55 Who with words mildly-sharp, gently-seuere, Wrought on those wounds that must bee toucht with heed, Applying rather salues of hope then feare, Least corasiues should desperat mischiefes breed. And what my Lord, sayd they, should moue you here In thys vnseemely manner to proceed, Whose worth being such, as all the Land admires, Hath sayrer wayes then these to your desires?
56 Will you whose meanes, whose many friends, whose grace, Can work the world in peace vnto your wil, Take such a course as shall your blood deface, And make by handling bad, a good cause ill? How many harts hazard you in thys case, That in all quiet plots would ayde you still, Hauing in Court a Partie far more strong, (Then you conceiue) prest to redresse your wrong. 57 Fy, fy, forsake thys hatefull course, my Lord, Downe with these Armes that will but wound your cause What peace may do, hazard not with the sword, Fly from the force that from your force with-drawes, And yeeld, and we will mediat such accord As shall dispence with rigor and the lawes: And interpose thys solemne fayth of our Betwixt your fault, and the offended power. 58 Which ingins of protests, and proffers kinde, Vrg'd out of seeming greese, and shewes of loue, So shooke the whole foundation of his minde, As it dyd all his resolution moue: And present seem'd vnto theyr course inclind, So that the King would Sommerset remoue; The man whose most intollerable pride, Trode downe his worth, and all good mens beside.
59 Which they there vow'd should presently be done; For what will not pence-louers willing grant Where dangerous euents depend thereon, And men vnfurnisht, and the state in want? And if with words, the conquest will be won, The cost is small: and who holds breath so scant As then to spare, tho' against his dignity, Better discend, then end in maiestie. 60 And here-vpon the Duke dissolues his force, Submits him to the King, on publique vow. The rather to, presuming on thys course For that his sonne the Earle of March was now With mightier powers abroad, which would enforce His peace, which els the King would not allow. For seeing not all of him in him he hath, His death would but gyue life to greater wrath. 61 Yet comming to the King, in former place Hys foe, the Duke of Sommerset he finds, Whom openly reproching to hys face, Hee charg'd with treason in the highest kinds. The Duke returnes lyke speeches of dysgrace, And fiery words bewrayd theyr flaming minds: But yet the tryall was for them deferd Till fitter tyme allow'd it to be heard.
62 At Westminster a Counsell gathered Deliberats what course the cause should end Of th'apprehended Duke of Yorke, whose head Doth now on others doubtfull breath depend; Law fiercely vrgd his deed, and found him dead, Frends fayld to speake where they could not defend: Onely the King himselfe for mercy stood, As prodigall of lyse, nyggard of blood. 63 And as if angry with the Lawes of death, And why should you, sayd he, vrge things so far? You, that invr'd with mercinary breath, And hyred tongue so peremptory are? Brauing on him whom sorrow prostrateth, As if you dyd with poore affliction war, And pray on frailty folly hath betrayd, Bringing the lawes to wound, neuer to ayd. 64 Dispence sometyme with sterne seueritie, Make not the lawes still traps to apprehend, Win grace vpon the bad with clemencie, Mercy may mend whom malice made offend: Death giues no thanks, but checks authority, And lyfe doth onely maiestie commend. Reuenge dyes not, rigor begets new wrath, And blood hath neuer glory, mercy hath.
65 And for my part, (and my part should be chiefe) I am most willing to restore his state; And rather had I win him with reliefe Then loose him with despight, and get more hate: Pitty drawes loue, bloodshed as natures griefe, Compassion, followes the vnfortunate. And loosing him, in him I loose my power, We rule who liue, the dead are none of our. 66 And should our rigor lessen then the same Which we with greater glory should retaine? No, let hym lyue, his lyfe must giue vs fame, The chyld of mercy, newly borne againe: As often burials is Phisitions shame, So, many deaths, argues a Kings hard raigne. Why should we say, the law must haue her vigor? The law kills him, but quits not vs of rigor. 67 You, to get more preferment by your wit, Others, to gaine the spoyles of misery, Labour with all your power to follow it, Shewing vs feares, to draw on cruelty. You vrge th'offence, not tell vs what is fit, Abusing wrong-informed maiestic: As if our power, were onely but to slay, And that to sane, were a most dangerous way.
68 Thus out of pitty spake that holy King, Whom mylde affections led to hope the best. When Sommerset began to vrge the thing With words of hotter temper, thys exprest: Deare soueraigne Lord, the cause in managing Is more then yours, t' imports the publique rest, We all haue part, it touches all our good, And lyfe's ill spard, that's spar'd to cost more blood. 69 Compassion here is cruolty, my Lord, Pitty will cut our throats for sauing so. What benefit shall we haue by the sword If mischiefe shall escape to draw on mo? Why should we gyue what Law cannot afford To 'be' accessaries to our proper wo? Wisdom must iudge twixt men apt to amend And minds incurable, borne to offend. 70 It is no priuat cause (I doe protest) That moues me thus to prosecute his deede, Would God his blood and myne had well releast The dangers that his pryde is lyke to breed: Although at me, he seemes to haue addrest His spight, tis not his end he hath decreed: I am not he alone, hee doth pursue But thorow me, he meanes to shoote at you.
71 For this course euer they deliberate Which doe aspyre to reach the gouernment, To take aduantage of the peoples hate, Which euer hate those that are eminent: For who can manage great affayres of state, And all a wayward multitude content? And then these people-minions they must fall To worke out vs, to worke themselues int'all. 72 But note my Lord, first who is in your hand, Then, how he hath offended, what's his end: It is the man whose race would seeme to stand Before your right, and doth a right pretend; Who (Traytor-like) hath raysd a mighty band With coullor your proceedings to amend: Which if it should haue hapned to succeed, You had not now fate to adiudge hys deed. 73 If oftentimes the person not th' offence Haue beene sufficient cause of death to some, Where publique safety puts in euidence Of mischiefe, likely by theyr lyfe to come; Shall he, whose fortune and his insolence Haue both deseru' d to dye, escape that doome? When you shall saue your Land, your Crowne therby, And since you cannot lyue vnlesse he dye?
74 Thys spake th' agreeued Duke, that grauely saw Th' incompatible powers of Princes minds; And what affliction his escape might draw Vnto the state, and people of all kinds. And yet the humble yeelding and the aw Which Yorke there shew'd, so good opinion finds, That, with the rumor of his sonnes great strength And French affayres, he there came quit at length. 75 For euen the feare t' exasperat the heat Of th' Earle of March, whose forward youth & might Well followd, seem'd a proude reuenge to threat If any shame should on his Father light: And then desire in Gascoyne to reget The glory lost, which home-broyles hinder might, Aduauntaged the Duke, and sau'd his head, Which question lesse had els been hazarded. 76 For now had Burdeux offered vpon ayd Present reuolt, if we would send with speed. Which fayre aduantage to haue then delayd Vpon such hopes, had been a shamefull deed: And therfore this, all other courses stayd, And outwardly these inward hates agreed: Giuing an interpause to pride and spight, Which breath'd but to break out with greater might.
77 Whilst dreadfull Talbot terror late of Fraunce (Against the Genius of our fortune) stroue The down-throwne glory of our state t'aduaunce; Where Fraunce far more then Fraunce hee now doth proue. For frends, opinion, & succeeding chaunce, Which wrought the weak to yeld, the strong to loue, Were not the same, as he had found before In happyer tymes, when lesse would haue done more. 78 For both the Britayne and Burgonian nowThe Dukes of Britany and Bur∣gundio. Came altred with our luck, & won with theirs Those bridges and the gates that dyd allow So easie passage vnto our affayres. Iudging it safer to endeuour how To linke with strength, then leane vnto dispayres; And who wants frends, to back what he begins In Lands far of, gets not, although he wins. 79 Which too well prou'd thys fatall enterprize, The last that lost vs all we had to lose: Where, though aduantag'd by some mutenies, And petty Lords that in our cause arose, Yet those great fayld; whose ready quick supplyes Euer at hand, cheerd vs, and quaild our foes: Succours from far, come seldom to our mind, For who holds league with Neptune, or the wind?
80 Yet worthy Talbot, thou didst so imploy The broken remnants of discattered power, That they might see it was our destiny Not want of spirit that lost vs what was our: Thy dying hand sold them the victory With so deere wounds as made the conquest sowre: So much it cost to spoyle who were vndon, And such a doe to win, when they had won. 81 For as a fierce couragious mastiue fares That hauing once sure fastned on his foe, Lyes tugging on that hold, neuer forbeares What force soeuer force hym to forgoe; The more he feeles his wounds, the more he dares, As if his death were sweet in dying so; So held his hold thys Lord, whilst he held breath, And scarce but with much blood lets goe in death. 82 For though he saw prepard against his side Both vnlike fortune, and vnequall force, Borne with the swelling current of theyr pryde Downe the mayne streame of a most happy course: Yet stands he stiffe vndasht, vnterrified, His minde the same, although his fortune worse; Vertue in greatest dangers being best showne, And though opprest, yet neuer ouerthrowne.
83 For reskuing of besieg'd Chatillion Where hauing first constraind the French to flye, And following hard on theyr confusion, Comes loe incountred with a strong supply Of fresh-ariuing powers, that back thrust on Those flying troupes, another chaunce to try; Who double Arm'd, with shame, and fury, straine To wreake their foyle, and win theyr fame againe. 84 Which seeing, th' vndaūted Talbot with more might Of spirit to will, then hands of power to doe: Preparing t'entertaine a glorious fight, Cheeres vp his wearied souldiers thereunto: Courage, sayth he, those brauing troupes in sight Are but the same that now you dyd vndoe. And what if there be come some more then they? They come to bring more glory to the day. 85 Which day must eyther thrust vs out of all, Or all with greater glory back restore. Thys day your valiant worth aduenture shall For what our Land shall neuer fight for, more: If now we faile, with vs is like to fall All that renowne which we haue got before: Thys is the last, if we discharge the same, The same shall last to our eternall fame.
86 Neuer had worthy men for any fact A more fayre glorious Theater then we: VVhereon true magnanimity might act Braue deeds, which better witnessed could be. For loe, from yonder Turrets yet vnsackt, Your valiant fellowes stand your worth to see, T'auouch your valour, if you liue, to gaine, And if we die, that we dyde not in vaine. 87 And euen our foes, whose proud & powrefull might VVould seeme to swallow vp our dignitie, Shall not keepe backe the glory of our right Which theyr confounded blood shall testifie: For in theyr wounds our gored swords shall write The monuments of our eternitie: For vile is honor and a tytle vayne The which true worth, and danger doe not gayne. 88 For they shall see when we in carelesse sort Shall throw our selues on theyr despised speares, Tis not dispaire that doth vs so transport, But euen true fortitude, that nothing feares: Sith we may well retire vs, in some sort, But shame on him that such a foule thought beares; For be they more, let Fortune take theyr part, We'ill tugge her to, and scratch her, ere we part.
89 Thys sayd, a fresh infusd desire of fame, Enters theyr warmed blood, with such a will That they deem'd long they were not at the same: And thogh they march'd, they thought they yet stood still, And that their lingring foes too slowly came To ioyne with them, spending much time so ill: Such force had words fierce humors vp to call, Sent from the mouth of such a Generall. 90 Who weighing yet his force and theyr desire, Turnes him about in priuate to his sonne,The Lo Lisie. A worthy sonne, and worthy such a Sire, Tells him the doubtfull ground they stood vpon, Aduising him in secrete to retyre; Seeing his youth but euen now begun, Would make it vnto him at all no staine, His death small fame, his flight no shame could gaine. 91 To whom th' agreeued sonne as if dysgrac'd Ah Father, haue you then selected mee To be the man, which you would haue displac'd Out of the role of immortalitie? What haue I done thys day that hath defac'd My worth: that my hands worke dispisd should bee? God shield I should beare home a Cowards name, I haue liu'd enough, if I can dye with fame.
92 At which the Father toucht with sorrowing-ioy, Turnes him about, shaking his head, and sayes: O my deere sonne, worthy a better day To enter thy first youth in hard assayes. And now had wrath, impatient of delay Begun the fight, and farther speeches stayes: Fury thrusts on, striuing whose sword should be First warmed in the wounds of th' enemie. 93 Hotely these small, but mighty minded Bands (As if ambitious now of death) doe straine Against innumerable armed hands, And gloriously a wondrous fight maintaine: Rushing on all what euer strength with-stands, Whetting theyr wrath on blood and on disdaine; And so far thrust, that hard 'twere to discry Whether they more desire to kill, or dye. 94 Franke of theyr owne, greedy of others blood, No stroke they giue but wounds, no wound but kills; Neere to theyr hate, close to theyr worke they stood, Hit where they would, theyr hand obeyes their wills, Scorning the blow from far that doth no good, Loathing the crack vnlesse some blood it spills: No wounds could let out life that wrath held in, Till others wounds reueng'd dyd first begin.
95 So much true resolution wrought in those That had made couenant with death before, That theyr small number scorning so great foes, Made Fraunce most happy that there were no more Sith these made doubtfull how Fate would dispose That weary day, or vnto whom restore The glory of a conquest deerely bought, Which scarce the Conqueror, can think worth ought. 96 For as with equall rdge, and equa'll might Two aduers winds combat with billowes proude And neyther yeeld: Seas, skyes maintayne like fight, Waue against waue opposd, and clowd to clowd, So war both sides with obstinate despight, With like reuenge, and neyther party bowd: Fronting each other vvith confounding blowes, No wound, one sword vnto the other owes. 97 Whilst Talbot, whose fresh spirit hauing got A meruailous aduantage of his yeeres. Carries his vnfelt age as if forgot, Whirling about where any neede appeares: His hand, his eye, his wits all present, wrought The function of the glorious part he beares: Now vrging here, now cheering there he flyes, Vnlocks the thickest troupes where most force lyes.
98 In midst of wrath, of wounds, of blood and death, There is he most whereas he may doe best. And there the closest ranks he seueroth, Driues back the stoutest powres that forward prest: There makes his sword his way, there laboureth Th'infatigable hands that neuer rest, Scorning vnto his mortall wounds to yeeld Till Death became best muister of the field. 99 Then lyke a sturdy Oake that hauing long Against the warrs of fiercest winds made head, When with some forst tempestious rage, more strong, His downe-borne top comes ouer-maistered, All the neere bordering Trees hee stood among, Crusht with his waighty fall, lye ruined: So lay his spoyles, all round about him slayne T'adorne his death, that could not dye in vaine. 100 On th'other part, his most all-daring sonne (Although the inexperience of his yeeres Made him lesse skyld in what was to be done, Yet dyd it thrust him on beyond all feares) Flying into the mayne Batallion, Neere to the King, amidst the chiefest Peeres, With thousand wounds became at length opprest, As if he scornd to dye, but with the best.
101 Who thus both hauing gaynd a glorious end, Soone ended that great day that set so red, As all the purple playnes that wide extend A sad tempestious season with essed: So much a doe had toyling Fraunce to rend From vs the right so long inherited, And so hard went we from what we possest, As with it, went the blood we loued best. 102 Which blood not lost, but fast layd vp with heed In euerlasting same, is there held deere, To seale the memory of thys dayes deed, Th'eternall euidence of what we were: To which our Fathers, we, and who succeed, Doe owe a sigh, for that it touch vs neere: Who must not sinne so much as to neglect The holy thought of such a deere respect. 103 Yet happy haples day, blest-ill-lost breath, Both for our better fortune, and your owne: For what soule wounds, what spoyle, what shamefull death, Had by this forward resolution growne, If at S. Albons, Wakefield, Barnet-heath, It should vnto your in famie be showne? Blest you, that dyd not teach how great a faute Euen vertue is in actions that are naught.
104 Yet would thys sad dayes losse, had now been all That thys day lost, then should we not much playne, If hereby wee had come but there to fall, And that day ended, ended had our payne. Then small the loste of Fraunce, of Giuen small, Nothing the shame to be turnd home againe Compard with other shames. But now Fraunce lost Sheds vs more blood then all her winning cost. 105 For loosing war abroad; at home lost peace, Be'ing with our vnsupporting selues close pent. And no dissignes for pryde that did increase, But our owne throats, & our owne punishment. The working spyrit ceast not tho worke dyd cease, Hauing fit time to practise dyscontent. And styrre vp such as could not long lye still, Who not imployd to good, must needs doe ill. 106 And now the greefe of our receiued shame Gaue fit occasion for ambitious care, They draw the chiefe reproch of all the fame On such as naturally hated are, Seeing them apt to beare the greatest blame That offices of greatest enuie beare. And that in vulgar eares delight it breedes To haue the hated, Authors of misdeodes.
107 And therefore easily great Sommerset VVhom enuie long had singled out before VVith all the vollie of disgraces met, As the maine marke Fortune had plac'd therefore: On whose hard-wrought opinion spight dyd whet The edge of wrath, to make it pierce the more. Griefe being glad t'haue gotten now on whom To lay the fault of what, must light on some. 108 Whereon th'againe out-breaking Yorke beginnes To builde new models of his olde desire, Se'ing the fayre bootie Fortune for him winnes Vpon the ground of thys enkindled ire. Taking th'aduantages of others sinnes To ayde his owne, and helpe him to aspire: And doubting peace should better scanne deeds past, Hee thinks not safe, to haue his sword our last. 109 Especially, sith euery man now prest To innouation doe with rancor swell, A styrring humor generally possest Those peace-spylt tymes, weary of beeing well: The weake with wrongs, the happy tyr'd with rest, And many mad, for what, they could not tell. The world euen great with change, thought it vvent wrong To stay beyond the bearing tyme so long.
110 And therefore now these Lords consedered Being much increasd in number and in spight, So shap'd theyr course, that drawing to a head, Began to grow to be offeare full might; Th'abused world so hastie gathered, Some for reuenge, some for wealth, some for delight, That Yorke from small-beginning troups soone drawes A world of men to venture in hys cause. 111 Lyke as proude Seuerne from a priuate head, With humble streames at first doth gently glyde, Tyll other Riuers haue contrybuted The springing riches of theyr store beside, Wherewith at length high swelling shee doth spread Her broad discended waters layd so wide, That comming to the Sea, shee seemes from far Not to haue trybute brought, but rather war. 112 Euen so is Yorke now growne, and now is bent T'incounter with the best, and for the best, Whose neere approch the King hastes to preuent, Seeking t'haue had his power, far of supprest: Fearing the Citty, least some insolent And mutinous, should harten on the rest To take his part. But h'is so forward set, That at S. Albones both the Annies met.
113 Whether theyr hast far fewer hands dyd bring Then els theyr better leysure would haue done: And yet too many for so foule a thing Sith who dyd best, hath but dishonor won: For whilst some offer peace sent from the King, VVarwicks too forward hand hath war begun: A war that doth the face of war deforme Which still is foule, but soulest wanting forme. 114 Neuer dyd valiant Leaders so well knowne For braue performed actions done before Blemish the reputation of renowne In any weake effected seruice more, To bring such powres into so straight a Towne As to some Citty-tumulr or vprore: Which slaughter, and no battaile might be thought. Where that side vsd theyr swords, & this theyr throat. 115 But thys on VVarwicks wrath must needs be layd, And vpon Sommersets desire t'obtayne The day with peace, for which he longer stayd Then wisdom would, or then was for his gayne: Whose force in narrow streets once ouer layd, Neuer recouerd head, but there came slayne Both he, and all the Leaders els besides: The King himselfe alone a prisoner bides.
116 A prisoner, though not to the outward eye, For that he must seeme grac'd with his lost day, All things be'ing done for his commoditie, Against such men as dyd the state betray: For with such apt deceiuing clemencie And seeming-order, Yorke dyd so allay That touch of wrong, as made him make great stealth In weaker minds, with shew of Common wealth. 117 Long-lookt-for powre thus got into his hand, The former face of Court now altered, All the supreamest charges of commaund Were to his ayders straight contributed: Himselfe is made Protector of the land. A tytle found, which onely couered All-working powre vnder another style, Which yet the greatest part doth act the whyle. 118 The King held onely but an empty name Left with his lyfe, where of the proofe was such As sharpest pryde could not transpers the same, Nor once, all-seeking Fortune durst to tuch: Impietie had not inlarged shame As yet so wide as to attempt so much: Mischiefe was not full ripe for such a deede, Left for th' vnbounded horrors that succeed. The end of the fift Booke.
MVSOPHILVS: CONTAINING a generall defence of learning. SAMVEL DANIEL. AT LONDON Printed by P. S. for Simon Waterson. 1599.
To the right worthie and iudicious fauourer of vertue, maister Fulke Greuill. I Do not here vpon this hum'rous Stage, Bring my transformed verse apparailed With others passions, or with others rage; With loues, with wounds, with factions furnished: But here present thee, onelie modelled In this poore frame, the forme of mine owne heart: Here to reuiue my selfe my Muse is lead With motions of her owne, t' act her owne part Striuing to make, her now contemned arte As faire t'her selfe as possiblie she can; Least seeming of no force, of no desart She might repent the course that she began, And, with these times of dissolution, fall From goodnes, vertue, glorie, fame and all.
MVSOPHILVS. CONTAINING A generall defence of all learning. PHILOCOSMVS. Fond man Musophilus, that thus dost spend In an vngainefull arte thy deerest daies, Tyring thy wits and toiling to no end, But to attaine that idle smoake of praise; Now when this busie world cannot attend Th'vntimely musicke of neglected layes. Other delights then these, other desires This wiser profit-seeking age requires. Musophilus. Friend Philocosmus, Iconfesse indeed, I loue this sacred arte thou sett'st so light,
And though it neuer stand my life in steed, It is inough, it giues my selfe delight, The whiles my vnafflicted minde doth feed On no vnholy thoughts for benefit. Be it that my vnseasonable song Come out of time, that fault is in the time, And I must not do vertue so much wrong As loue her ought the worse for others crime; And yet I find some blessed spirits among, That cherish me, and like and grace my rime. Againe that I do more in soule esteeme Then al the gain of dust, the world doth craue; And if I may attaine but to redeeme My name from dissolution and the graue, I shall haue done enough, and better deeme T'haue liu'd to be, then to haue dyde to haue. Short-breath'd mortalitie would yet extend That span of life so far forth as it may, And rob her fate, seeke to beguile her end Of some few lingring daies of after staie, That all this little All, might not descend Into the darke a vniuersall pray. And giue our labors yet this poore delight, That whē our daies do end they are not done; And though we die we shall not perish quite, But liue two liues where other haue but one.
Philocosmus, Sillie desires of selfe-abusing man, Striuing to gaine th'inheritance of ayre That hauing done the vttermost he can Leaues yet perhaps but beggerie to his heir; Al that great purchase of the breath he wan, Feeds not his race, or makes his house more faire. And what art thou the better thus to leaue A multitude of words to small effect, Which other times may scorn and so deceiue Thy promis'd name of what thou dost expect, Besides some viperous Creticke may bereaue Th' opinion of thy worth for some defect, And get more reputation of his wit By but controlling of some word or sence, Then thou shalt honor for contriuing it, With all thy trauell, care and diligence; Being learning now enough to contradict And censure others with bold insolence. Besides so many so confusedlie sing, Whose diuers discords haue the musick mar'd, And in contempt that mysterie doth bring, That he must sing alowd that will be heard; And the receiu'd opinion of the thing, For some vnhallowed strings that vildly iar'd,
Hath so vnseason'd' now the eares of men, That who doth touch the tenor of that vaine Is held but vaine, and his vnreck'ned pen The title but of leuitie doth gaine. A poore light gaine to recompence their toile, That thought to get eternitie the while. And therefore leaue the left & out-worne course Of vnregarded wayes, and labour how To fit the times with what is most in force, Be new with mens affections that are new; Striue not to run an idle counter-course Out from the sent of humours, men allow. For not discreetly to compose our parts Vnto the frame of men (which we must be) Is to put off our selues, and make our artes Rebles to Nature and societie, Whereby we come to burie our desarts, In th' obscure graue of singularitie. Musophiliss. Do not profane the worke of doing well, Seduced man, that canst not looke so hie From out that mist of earth as thou canst tell The wayes of right, which vertue doth descrie, That ouer-lookes the base, contemptiblie, And low-laid follies of mortalitie:
Nor meate out truth and right-deseruing prayse, By that wrong measure of confusion The vulgar foote: that neuer takes his wayes By reason, but by imitation; Rowling on with the rest, and neuer way's The course which he should go, but what is gone. Well were it with mankind, if what the most Did like were best, but ignorance will liue By others square, as by example lost; And man to man must th' hand of errour giue That none can fall alone at their owne cost, And all because mē iudge not, but beleeue. For what poore bounds haue they whom but th' earth boūds, What is their end whereto their care attaines, When the thing got relieues not, but cōfounds Hauing but trauaile to succeed their paines? What ioy hath he of liuing that propounds Affliction but his end, and griefe his gaines? Gath'ring, incroching, wresting, ioining to, Destroying, building, decking, furnishing, Repairing, altring, and so much a do To his soules toile, and bodies trauailing: And all this doth he little knowing who Fortune ordaines to haue th'inheriting. And his faire house rais'd hie in enuies eie, Whose pillars rear'd perhaps on blood & wrong
The spoyles and pillage of iniquitie. Who can assure it to continue long? If rage spar'd not the walls of pietie, Shal the profanest piles of sinne keepe strong? How manie proude aspiring pallaces Haue we known made the pray of wrath and pride, Leuell'd with th'earth, left to forgetfulnes, Whilest titlers their pretended rights decide, Or ciuill tumults, or an orderles Order pretending change of some strong side? Then where is that proude title of thy name, Written in yee of melting vanitie? Where is thine heire left to possesse the same? Perhaps not so well as in beggerie. Some thing may rise to be beyond the shame Of vile and vnregarded pouertie. Which, I confesse, although I often striue To cloth in the best habit of my skill, In all the fairest colours I can giue; Yet for all that me thinks she lookes but ill, I cannot brooke that face, which dead-aliue Shewes a quicke bodie, but a buried will. Yet oft we fee the barres of this restraint Holds goodnes in, which loose wealth would let flie, And fruitlesse riches barrayner then want, Brings forth small worth from idle libertie?
Which when disorders shal againe make scant, It must resetch her state from pouertie. But yet in all this interchange of all, Virtue we see, with her faire grace, stands a fast; For what hy races hath there come to fall, With low disgrace, quite vanished and past, Since Chaucer liu'd who yet liues and yet shall, Though (which I grieue to say) but in his last Yet what a time hath he wrested from time, And won vpon the mighty waste of daies, Vnto th' immortall honor of our clime, That by his meanes came first adorn'd with Baies, Vnto the sacred Relicks of whose rime We yet are bound in zeale to offer praise? And could our lines begotten in this age Obtaine but such a blessed hand of yeeres, And scape the sury of that threatning rage, Which in confused clowdes gastly appeares, Who would not straine his trauailes to ingage, Whē such true glory should succeed his cares? But whereas he came planted in the spring, And had the Sun, before him, of respect; We set in th' Autumne, in the withering, And sullen season of a cold defect, Must taste those foure distastes the times do bring, Vpon the fulnesse of a cloid neglect,
Although the stronger constitutions shall Weare out th' infection of distempred daies, And come with glory to out-liue this fall, Recouring of another spring of praise, Cleer'd from th' oppressing humors, wherewithall The idle multitude surcharge their laies. VVhen as perhaps the words thou scornest now May liue, the speaking picture of the mind, The extract of the soule that laboured how To leaue the image of her selfe behind, VVherein posteritie that loue to know The iust proportion of our spirits may find. For these lines are the vaines, the Arteries, And vndecaying life-strings of those harts That still shall pant, and still shall exercise The motion spirit and nature both imparts, And shall, with those aliue so sympathize As nourisht with their powers inioy their parts. O blessed letters that combine in one All ages past, and make one liue with all, By you we do confer with who are gone, And the dead liuing vnto councell call: By you th' vnborne shall haue communion Of what we feele, and what doth vs befall. Soule of the world, knowledge, without thee, VVhat hath the earth that truly glorious is?
Why should our pride make such a stir to be, To be forgot? what good is like to this, To do worthy the writing, and to write Worthy the reading, and the worlds delight? And let th' vnnaturall and waiward race Borne of one wombe with vs, but to our shame That neuer read t' obserue but to disgrace, Raise all the tempest of their powre to blame; That puffe of follie neuer can deface, The worke a happy Genius tooke to frame. Yet why should ciuill learning seeke to wound And mangle her own members with despight? Prodigious wits that study to confound The life of wit, to seeme to know aright, As if themselues had fortunately found Some stand frō of the earth beyond our sight, Whence ouerlooking all as from aboue, Their grace is not to worke, but to reproue. But how came they plac'd in so high degree Aboue the reach and compasse of the rest? VVho hath admitted them onely to be Free-denizons of skill, to iudge the best? From whom the world as yet could neuer see The warrant of their wit soundly exprest. T'acquaint our times with that perfection Of high conceipt, which only they possesse,
That we might haue things exquisitely done Measur'd with all their strict obseruances: Such would (I know) skorne a translation, Or bring but others labors to the presse; Yet oft these monster-breeding mountains wil Bring forth small Mice of great expected skill. Presumption euer fullest of defects, Failes in the doing to performe her part; And I haue known proud words and poore effects, Of such indeed as do condemne this Arte: But let them rest, it euer hath beene knowne, They others vertues skorn, that doubt their owne: And for the diuers disagreeing cordes, Of interiangling ignorance that fill The dainty eares, & leaue no roome for words, The worthier mindes neglect, or pardon will; Knowing the best he hath, he frankly foords And skornes to be a niggard of his skill. And that the rather since this short-liu'd race, Being fatallie the sonnes but of one day, That now with all their powre ply it apace, To hold out with the greatest might they may Against confusion that hath all in chace, To make of all a vniuersall pray. For now great Nature hath laid down at last That mighty birth, where with so long she went
And ouerwent the times of ages past, Here to lie in, vpon our soft content, Where fruitfull she, hath multiplied so fast, That all she hath on these times, seem'd t'haue spent. All that which might haue many ages grac'd, Is borne in one, to make one cloid with all; Where plenty hath imprest a deepe distast, Of best and worst, and all ingenerall: That goodness seems, goodnes to haue defac't, And virtue hath to virtue giuen the fall. For emulation, that proud nurse of wit, Skorning to stay below or come behind, Labors vpon that narrow top to sit Offole perfection in the highest kind; Enuie and wonder looking after it, Thrust likewise on the selfe same blisse to find: And so long striuing till they can no more, Do stuffe the place or others hopes shut out, Who doubting to ouertake those gone before Giue vp their care, and cast no more about; And so in skorne leaue all as fore possest, And will be none where they may not be best. Euen like some empty Greek that long hath lain, Left or neglected of the Riuer by, Whose searching sides pleas'd with a wandring, vaine, Finding some little way that close did lie,
Steale in at first, then other streames againe Second the first, then more then all supplie, Till all the mighty maine hath borne at last The glory of his chiefest powre that way, Plying this new-found pleasant roome so fast Till all be full, and all be at a staie; And then about, and backe againe doth cast, Leauing that full to fall another way: So feares this humorous world, that euermore Rapt with the Current of a present course, Runs into that which laie contemnd before; Then glutted leaues the same, and falst'a worse: Now zeale holds all, no life but to adore; Then cold in spirit, and faith is of no force. Straight all that holie was vnhallowed lies, The scattered carcasses of ruind vowes: Then truth is false, and now hath blindnes eies, Then zeale trusts al, now scarcely what it knows: That euermore to foolish or to wise, It fatall is to be seduc'd with showes. Sacred Religion, mother offorme and feare, How gorgeously somtimes dost thou sit deckt? What pompous vestures do we make thee weare? What stately piles we prodigall erect? How sweet perfum'd thou art, how shining cleare? How solemnly obseru'd, with what respect?
Another time all plaine, and quite threed bare, Thou must haue all within and nought without, Sit poorely without light, disrob'd, no care Of outward grace, to amuze the poore deuout, Powrelesse vnfollowed, scarcely men can spare Thee necessary rites to set thee out. Either truth, goodnes, vertue are not still The selfe same which they are, and alwaies one, But alter to the proiect of our will, Or we our actions make them waite vpon Putting them in the liuery of our skill, And cast them off againe when we haue done. You mighty Lords, that with respected grace Do at the sterne of faire example stand, And all the body of this populace Guide with the onely turning of your hand, Keepe a right course, bear vp from al disgrace, Obserue the point of glory to our land: Hold vp disgraced knowledge from the ground, Keepe vertue in request, giue worth her due, Let not neglect with barbarous means cōfound So faire a good to bring in night anew. Be not, ô be not accessary found Vnto her death that must giue life to you: Where wil you haue your vertuous names safe laid, In gorgeous tombes, in sacred Cels secure?
Do you not see those prostrate heapes betraid Your fathers bones, and could not keepe them sure? And will you trust deceitfull stones faire laid: And thinke they will be to your honor truer? No, no, vnsparing time will proudly send A warrant vnto wrath that with one frown Wil al these mock'ries of vaine glory rend, And make them as before, vngrac'd, vnknown, Poore idle honors that can ill defend Your memories, that cannot keepe their own. And whereto serue that wondrous trophei now, That on the godly plaine neare Wilton stands? That huge domb heap, that cannot tel vs how, Nor what, nor whence it is, nor with whose hands, Nor for whose glory, it was set to shew How much our pride mockes that of other lands? Where on when as the gazing passenger Hath greedy lookt with admiration, And faine would know his birth, and what he were, How there erected, and how long agone: Enquires and askes his fellow trauailer What he hath heard and his opinion: And he knowes nothing. Then he turnes againe And looks and sighs, and then admires afr esh, And in himselfe with sorrow doth complaine The misery of darke for getfuln esse;
Angrie with time that nothing should remain, Our greatest wonders, wonder to expresse. Then ignorance with fabulous discourse Robbing faire arte and cunning of their right, Tels how those stones were by the diuels force From Affricke brought to Ireland in a night, And thence to Britannie by Magicke course, From giants hand redeem'd by Merlins sleight. And then neare Ambri plac'd in memorie Of all those noble Britons murthred there By Hengist and his Saxon trecherie, Comming to parle in peace at vnaware. With this old Legend then credulitie Holdes her content, and closes vp her care: But is antiquitie so great a liar, Or, do her yonger sonnes her age abuse, Seeing after commers still so apt t'admire The graue authoritie that she doth vse, That reuerence and respect dares not require Proofe of her deeds, or once her words refuse? Yet wrong they did vs to presume so far Vpon our easie credit and delight: For once found false they straight became to mar Our faith, and their owne reputation quite: That now her truths hardly beleeued are, And though sh'auouch ȳ right, she scarce hath right.
And as for thee, thou huge and mightie frame That stands corrupted so with times despight, And giu'st false euidence against their fame That set thee there to testifie their right: And art become a traitor to their name That trusted thee with all the best they might; Thou shalt stand still belide and slandered, The onely gazing stocke of ignorance, And by the guile the wife admonished Shal neuer more desire such heapest' aduance, Nor trust their liuing glorie with the dead That cannot speak, but leaue their fame to chance; Considering in how small a roome do lie And yet lie safe, as fresh as if aliue All those great worthies of antiquitie, Which long foreliu'd thee, & shal long suruiue, Who stronger tombs found for eternitie, Then could the powres of al the earth cōtriue. Where they remaine these trifles to obraid Out of the reach of spoile, and way of rage, Though time with all his power of yeares hath laid Long batterie, back'd with vndermining age, Yet they make head onely with their own aide And war, with his all conquering forces, wage: Pleading the heauens prescription to be free And t'haue a grant t'indure as long as he.
Philocosmus. Beholde how euery man drawne with delight Of what he doth, flatters him in his way; Striuing to make his course seeme onely right Doth his owne rest, and his owne thoughts betray; Imagination bringing brauely dight Her pleasing images in best aray, With flattering glasses that must shew him faire And others foule; his skill and his wit best, Others seduc'd, deceiu'd and wrong in their; His knowledge right, all ignorant the rest, Not seeing how these minions in the aire Present a face of things falsely exprest, And that ye glimmering of these errors showne, Are but a light to let him see his owne. Alas poore Fame, in what a narrow roome As an incaged Parrot, art thou pent Here amongst vs; where euē as good be domb As speake, and to be heard with no attent? How can you promise of the time to come When as the present are so negligent? Is this the walke of all your wide renowne, This little point, this scarce discerned Ile, Thrust from ye world, with whō our speech vnknown Made neuer any traffike of our stile.
And is this all where all this care is showne, T'inchant your fame to last so long a while? And for that happier tongues haue woon so much, Think you to make your barbarous language such Poore narrow limits for so mightie paines, That cannot promise any forraine vent: And yet if here to all your wondrous vaines Were generally knowne, it might content: But lo how many reads not, or disdaines The labors of the chiefe and excellent. How many thousands neuer heard the name Of Sydney, or of Spencer, or their bookes? And yet braue fellowes, and presume of fame And seem to beare downe all the world with lookes: What then shall they expect of meaner frame, On whose indeuours few or none scarse looks? Do you not see these Pamphlets, Libels, Rymes, These strange confused tumults of the minde, Are growne to be the sicknes of these times, The great disease inflicted on mankind? Your vertues, by your follies, made your crimes, Haue issue with your indiscretion ioin'd Schooles, arts, professions, all in so great store, Passe the proportion of the present state, Where being as great a number as before, And fewer roomes them to accommodate;
It cannot be but they must throng the more, And kicke, and thrust, and shoulder with debate. For when the greater wittes cannot attaine Th'expected good, which they account their right, And yet perceiue others to reape that gaine Of far inferiour vertues in their sight; They present with the sharpe of Enuie straine To wound them with reproches and despight: And for these, cannot haue as well as they They scorne their faith should daigne to looke that way. Hence discontented Sects, and Schismes arise, Hence interwounding controuersies spring, That feed the simple, and offend the wife, Who know the consequence of cauilling: Disgrace that these to others do deuise, Contempt and scorne on all in th'end doth bring Like scolding wiues reckning each others fault Make standers by imagin both are naught. For when to these rare dainties time admits, All commers, all Complexions, all that will, Where none should be let in, but choisest wits, Whose milde discretion could comport with skill, For when the place their humor neither fits, Nor they the place: who can expect but ill? For being vnapt for what they tooke in hand, And for ought else where to they shalb'addrest
They euen become th'incombrance of the land As out of ranke disordring all the rest: This grace of theirs to seeme to vnderstand, Marres all their grace to do, without their rest. Men find that action is another thing Then what they in discoursing papers reade, The worlds affaires require in managing More arts then those wherein you Clearks proceed, Whilst timorous knowledge stands considering, Audacious ignorance hath done the deed. For who knowes most, the more he knows to doubt The least discourse is commonly most stout. This sweet in chaunting knowledge turnes you cleene Out from the fields of natur all delight, And makes you hide vnwilling to be seene In th'open concourse of a publike sight: This skill where with you haue so cunning beene, Vnsinewes all your powres, vnmans you quite. Publike societie and commerce of men Require another grace, another port: This eloquence, these rymes, these phrases then Begot in shades, do serue vs in no sort, Th'vnmateriall swellings of your pen Touch not the spirit that action doth import: A manly stile fitted to manlie eares Best grees with wit, not that which goes so gay,
And commonly the gaudie liu'rie weares Of nice corruptions which the times do sway, And waites on th'humor of his pulse that beares His passions set to such a pleasing kay; Such dainties serue onely for stomacks weake, For men do fowlest when they finest speake. Yet do I not dislike that in some wise Be sung the great heroycall deserts Of braue renowned spirits, whose exercise Of worthy deedes may call vp others hearts, And serue a modell for posterities To fashion them fit for like glorious parts: But so that all our spirits may tend hereto To make it not our grace, to say, but do. Musophilus. Much thouhast said, and willingly I heare, As one that am not so possest with loue Of what I do, but that I rather beare An eare to learne, then a toong to disproue: I know men must as caried in their spheare According to their proper motions moue. And that course likes them best which they are on, Yet truth hath certaine bounds, but falshood none. I do confesse our limits are but small Compar'd with all the whole vaste earth beside,
All which againe rated to that great All, Is likewise as a point scarcelie discride; So that in these respects we may this call A point but of a point where we abide. But if we shall descend from that high stand Of ouer-looking Contemplation, And cast our thoughts but to, and not beyond This spatious circuit which we tread vpon, We then may estimate our mightie land A world within a world standing alone. Where if our fame confind cannot get out, What shall we then imagine it is pen'd That hath so great a world to walke about, Whose boūds with her reports haue both one end: Why shall we not rather esteeme her stout That farther then her owne scorne to extend? Where being so large a roome both to do well And eke to heare th' applause of things well done, That farther if men shall our vertues tell We haue more mouthes, but not more merit won, It doth not greater make that which is laudable, The flame is bigger blowne, the fire all one. And for the few that onely lend their care, That few is all the world, which with a few Doth euer liue, and moue, and worke and stirre, This is the heart doth feele, and onely know.
The rest of all, that onely bodies beare Rowle vp and downe, and fill but vp the row: And serue as others members not their own, The instruments of those that do direct. Then what disgrace is this not to be known To those know not to giue themselues respect? And though they swel with pomp of folly blown, They liue vngrac'd, and die but in neglect. And for my part if onely one allow The care my labouring spirits take in this, He is to me a Theater large ynow, And his applause only sufficient is: All my respect is bent but to his brow, That is my all, and all I am is his. And if some worthy spirits be pleased to, It shall more comfort breed, but not more will; But what if none; it cannot yet vndo The loue I beare vnto this holy skill: This is the thing that I was borne to do, This is my Scene, this part must I fulfill. Let those that know not breath esteeme of wind, And set t'a vulgar ayre their seruile song, Rating their goodnesse by the praise they find, Making their worth on others firs belong, As vertue were the hyreling of the mind, And could not liue if fame had ne'r a tongue.
Hath that all-knowing powre that holdes within The goodly prospectiue of all this frame,Virtue. (Where whatsoeuer is, or what hath bin, Reflects a certaine image of the same) No inward pleasures to delight her in, But she must gad to seeke an alines of fame? Must she like to a wanton Curtezan Open her breasts for shew, to win her praise, And blaze her faire bright beauty vnto man, As if she were enamourd of his waies? And knew not weakenes nor could rightly skan To what defects his humorous breath obaies. She that can tell how proud ambition Is but a begger, and hath nought at all But what is giuen of meere deuotion; For which how much it sweats, how much it's thrall? What toile it takes, and yet when all is done, The endes in expectation neuer fall. Shall she ioine hands with such a seruile mate, And prostrate her faire body to commit Folly with earth, and to defile that state Of cleerenes, for so grosse a benefit? Hauing reward dwelling within her gate, And glory of her own to furnish it. Her selfe a recompence sufficient Vnto her selfe, to giue her owne content.
Ist not in ought that she hath raisd so hie Those that be hers, that they may sit and see The earth below them, and this All to lie Vnder their view: taking the true degree Of the iust height of swolne mortalitie Right as it is, not as it seemes to be, And vndeceiued with the paralax Of a mistaking eie of passion, know By these mask'd outsides what the inward lacks Meas'ring man by himselfe not by his show, Wondring not at their rich and golden backs That haue poore minds, and little else to shew. Nor taking that for them, which well they see Is not of them, but rather is their lode: The lies of fortune, where withall men be Deemed within, when they be all abroad: Whose ground, whose grasse, whose earth haue cap & knee, Which they suppose, is on themselus bestow'd. And thinke like Isis Asse, all honors are Giuen vnto them alone, the which are done Vnto the painted I doll which they beare, That only makes them to be gezod on: For take away their pack and shew them bare, And see what beast this honor rides vpon. Hath knowledge lent to hers the priuy kay, To let them in vnto the hiest stage
Of causes, secrets, Councels; to suruay The wits of men, their heats, their colds, their rage, That build, destroy, praise, hate, say and gaine say; Beleeue, and vnbeleeue, all in one age. And shall we trust goodnesse as it proceedes From that vnconstant mouth; which with one breath Will make it bad againe, vnlesse it feedes The present humor that it fauoreth? Shall we esteeme and reckon how it heedes Our works, that his own vowes vnholloweth? Then whereto serues it to haue been inlarg'd With this free manumission of the mind, If for all that we still continue charg'd With those discouered errors, which we find? As if our knowledge only were discharg'd, Yet we our selues staid in a seruile kind. That virtue must be out of countenance, If this grosse spirit, or that weake shallow brain, Or this nice wit, or that distemperance, Neglect, distast, vncomprehend, disdaine; When such sicke eies, can neuer cast a glance But through the colours of their proper staine. Though I must needs confesse the small respect, That these great-seeming best of men do giue, (Whose brow begets th' inferior sorts neglect,) Might moue the weake irresolute to grieue:
But stronger, see how iustly this defect Hath ouertooke the times wherein we liue; That learning needs must run the common fate Of all things else, thrust on by her own weight, Comporting nother selfe in her estate Vnder this burthen of a selfe conceipt: Our own dissentious hands opening the gate Vnto Contempt, that on our quarrels waite, Discouered haue our inward gouernment, And let in hard opinion to disgrace The generall, for some weake impotent That beare out their disease with a stolne face, Who (sillie soules) the more wit they haue spent, The lesse they shew'd not bettring their bad case. And see how soone this rowling world can take Aduantage for her dissolution, Faine to get loose from this with holding stake Of ciuill science and diseretion: How glad it would run wilde, that it might make One formelesse forme of one confusion? Like tyrant Ottomans blindfolded state, Which must know nothing more but to obay: For this, seekes greedy ignorance t'abate Our number, order, liuing, forme and sway; For this, it practises to dissipate Th'vnsheltred troupes, till all be made awaie.
For since our fathers sinnes puld first to ground The pale of their disseuered dignitie, And ouerthrew that holy reuerent bound That parted learning and the laiety, And laid all flat in common to confound The honor and respect of pietie: It did so much invile the estimate Of th'opened and invulgard mysteries, Which now reduc'd vnto the basest rate, Must waite vpon the Norman subtleties, Who (being mounted vp into their state) Do best with wrangling rudenesse sympathize. And yet though now set quite behind the traine Of vulgar sway (and light of powre wai'd light) Yet would this giddy innouation faine Downe with it lower to abase it quite: And those poore remnants that do yet remain The spoiled marks of their deuided right: They wholy would deface, to leaue no face Of reuerent distinction and degree, As if they waigh'd no difference in this case Betwixt Religions age and infancie; Where th'one must creepe, th'other stand with grace Least turn'd to a child it ouerturned bee. Though to pull backe th' on-running state of things, (Gathering corruption as it gathers daies)
Vnto the forme of their first orderings, Is the best meanes that dissolution staies, And to go forward backward, right, men brings, T'obserue the line frō whence they tooke their waies. Yet being once gone wide, and the right way Not leuell to the times condition: To alter course may bring men more astray; And leauing what was knowne to light on none, Since euery change the reuerence doth decay Of that which alway should continue one. For this is that close kept Palladium, Which once remou'd brings ruine euermore: This stird makes men fore-setled to become Curious to know what was belieu'd before: Whilst faith disputes that vsed to be dombe, And more men striue to talke then to adore. For neuer head-strong reformation will Rest till to th'extreame opposite it run, And ouer-run the mean distrusted still As being too neere of kin, to that men shun: For good and bad, and all must be one ill, When once there is another truth begun. So hard it is an euen hand to beare, In tempering with such maladies as these, Least that our forward passions launce to neare, And make the cure proue worse then the disease?
For with the worst we will not spare the best, Because it growes with that which doth displease: And faults are easier lookt in, then redrest; Men running with such eager violence At the first view of errors fresh in quest, As they to rid an inconuenience, Sticke not to raise a mischiefe in the steed, Which after mocks their weake improuidence: And therefore ô make not your own sides bleed To pricke at others, you that would amend By pulling down; and thinke you can proceed By going backe vnto the farther end, Let stand that little Couert left behind, Where on your succours and respects depend. And bring not down the prizes of the mind, With vnder-rating of your selues so base: You that the mighties doors do crooching find, To sell your selues to buy a little grace, Or waite whole months to out-bid Simonie, For that which being got is not your place: For if it were, what needed you to buy What was your due, your thursting shews your shift, And little worth that seekes iniuriously A worthier from his lawfull roome to lift? We cannot say that you were then preferr'd, But that your mony was, or some worse gift.
O scattring gath'rers that without regard Of times to come, will to be made, vndo: As if you were the last of men, prepar'd To burie in your graues all other to. Dare you prophane that holie portion Which neuer sacreligious hands durst do? Did forme-establishing deuotion, To maintaine a respectiue reuerence Extend her bountifull prouision With such a charitable prouidence, For your deforming handes to dissipate And make Gods due your impious expence? No maruaile then though th'ouer pestred state Want roome for goodnes, if our little hold Be lessned vnto such a narrow rate That reuerence cannot sit, sit as it should; And yet what need we thus for roomes complaine, That shall not want void roome if this course hold: And more then will be fill'd, for who will straine To get an emptie title to betray His hopes and trauaile for an honour vaine And gaine a port without support or stay? What need hath enuie to maligne their state That will themselues so kind, giue it away? This makes indeed our number passe the rate Of our prouisions; which if dealt aright
Would yeeld sufficient roome t'accommodate More then we haue in places requisite. The ill disposing onely doth vs set In disaray, and out of order quite. Whiles other gifts then of the mind shall get Vnder our colours that which is our dues, And to our trauailes neither benefite, Nor grace, nor honor, nor respect accrewes: This sicknes of the states soule, Learning, then The bodies great distemprature insues. For if that learnings roomes to learned men Were as their heritage distributed, All this disordred thrust would cease, for when The sit were call'd, th'vn worthy frustrated These would b'asham'd to seek, those to b'vnsought And stay'ng their turn were sure they should be sped. Then would our drooping Academies brought Againe in heart, regaine that reuerend hand Oslost opinion, and no more be thought Th'vnnecessarie furnish of the land, Nor disincourag'd with their small esteeme, Confus'd, irresolute, and wauering stand. Caring not to become profound, but seeme Contented with a superficiall skill Which for a sleight reward inough they deem, When th'one succeedes as well as th' other will,
Seeing shorter wayes lead sooner to their end, And others longer trauailes thriue so ill. Then would they onely labour to extend Their now vnsearching spirits beyond these bounds Of others powres, wherein they must be pend As if there were besides no other grounds: And set their bold Plus vltra far without The pillers of those Axioms age propounds. Discou'ring dayly more, and more about In that immense and boundlesse Ocean Of Natures riches, neuer yet found out Nor fore-clos'd, with the wit of any man. So far beyond the ordinarie course That other vnindustrious ages ran, That these more curious times they might deuorce From the opinion they are linckt vnto Of our disable and vnactiue force, To shew true knowledge can both speak and do: Arm'd for the sharpe, which in these dayes they finde, With all prouisions that belong thereto. That their experience may not come behind The times conceipt, but leading in their place May make men see the weapons of the mind Are states best strengths, and kingdoms chiefest grace, And rooms of charge, charg'd ful with worth & praise Makes maiestie appeare with her full face,
Shining with all her beames, with all her raies Vnscanted of her parts, vnshadowed In any darkned point: which still bewrayes The waine of powre, when powr's vnfurnished And hath not all those entire complements Wherewith the state should for her state be sped. And though the fortune of some age consents Vnto a thousand errors grossely wrought, Which flourisht ouer with their faire euents Haue past for current, and good courses thought; The least whereof in other times againe Most dangerous inconueniences haue brought, Whilst to the times, not to mens wits pertaine The good successes of ill manag'd deeds, Though th'ignorant deceiu'd with colours vaine Misse of the causes whence this lucke proceeds. Forreine defects giuing home-faults the way, Make euen that weakenes somtimes well succeeds. I grant that some vnlettered practique may (Leauing beyond the Alpes faith and respect, To God and man) with impious cunning sway The courses fore-begun with like effect, And without stop maintaine the turning on And haue his errors deemd without defect: But when some powrefull opposition Shall, with a sound incountring shocke, disioint
The fore-contriued frame, and theroupon Th'experience of the present disappoint, And other stirring spirits, and other hearts Built-huge, for action, meeting in a point; Shall driue the world to sommon all their artes And all too little for so reall might, When no aduantages of weaker parts Shal beare out shallow councels from the light; And this sence-opening action (which doth hate Vnmanly crast) shall looke to haue her right. Who then holds vp the glorie of the state (Which lettered armes, & armed letters won) Who shall be fittest to negotiate Contemn'd Iustinian, or else Littleton? When it shall not be held wisedome to be Priuately made, and publiquely vndon: But sound deseignes that iudgment shal decree Out of a true discern, of the cleare wayes That lie direct, with safe-going equitie Imbroyling not their owne & others dayes. Extending forth their prouidence beyond The circuit of their owne particular; That euen the ignorant may vnderstand How that deceipt is but a cauiller, And true vnto it selfe can neuer stand, But stil must with her owne conclusions war.
Can truth and honestie, wherein consists The right repose on earth, the surest ground Of trust, come weaker arm'd into the lists, Then sraud or vice, that doth it selfe confound? Or shall presumption that doth what it lists, Not what it ought, carry her courses sound? Then what safe place out of confusion Hath plain proceeding honestie to dwell? What sute of grace, hath vertue to put on If vice shall weare as good, and do as well? If wrong, if craft, if indiscretion, Act as faire parts with ends as laudable? Which all this mightie volume of euents The world, the vniuersall mappe ofdeedes Strongly controwles, and proues from all discents, That the directest courses best succeedes When craft, wrapt still in many comberments With all her cunning thriues not, though it speedes. For should not graue and learn'd experience That lookes with th'eyes of all the world beside, And with all ages holdes intelligence, Go safer then deceipt without a guide? Which in the by-paths of her diffidence Crossing the wayes of Right, still runs more wide: Who will not grant? and therefore this obserue, No state standes sure but on the grounds of Right,
Of vertue, knowledge, iudgement to preserue, And all the powres of learnings requisite; Though other shifts a present turne may serue, Yet in the triall they will wey too light. And do not thou contemne this swelling tide And streame of words that now doth rise so hie Aboue the vsuall banks, and spreads so wide Ouer the borders of antiquitie: Which I confesse comes euer amplifide With th'abounding humours that do multiplie: And is with that same hand of happines Inlarg'd as vices are out of their bands; Yet so, as if let out but to redresse And calme, and sway th'affections it cōmands: VVhich as it stirres, it doth againe represse And brings in, th'outgone malice that with stands. Powre aboue powres, O heauenly Eloquence, That with the strong reine of commanding words, Dost manage, guide, and master th'eminence Of mens affections, more then all their swords: Shall we not offer to thy excellence The richest treasure that our wit affoords? Thou that canst do much more with one poor pen Then all the powres of princes can effect: And draw, diuert, dispose, and fashion men Better then force or rigour can direct:
Should we this ornament of glorie then As th'vnmateriall fruits of shades, neglect? Or should we carelesse come behind the rest In powre of wordes, that go before in worth, When as our accents equall to the best Is able greater wonders to bring forth: When all that euer hotter spirits exprest Comes bettered by the patience of the North? And who in time knowes whither we may vent The treasure of our tongue, to what strange shores This gaine of our best glorie shal be sent, T'inrich vnknowing Nations with our stores? VVhat worlds in th'yet vnformed Occident May come refin'd with th'accents that are ours? Or who can tell for what great worke in hand The greatnes of our stile is now ordain'd? VVhat powres it shall bring in, what spirits cōmand, What thoughts let out, what humors keep restrain'd What mischiefe it may powrefully withstand, And what faire ends may thereby be attain'd: And as for Poesie (mother of this force) That breeds, brings forth, and nourishes this might, Teaching it in a loose, yet measured course, VVith comely motions how to go vpright: And fostring it with bountifull discourse Adorns it thus in fashions of delight,
What should I say? since it is well approu'd The speech of heauen, with whō they haue cōmerce That only seeme out of themselues remou'd, And do withmore then humane skils conuerse: Those nūbers where with heauen & earth are'mou'd, Shew, weakenes speaks in prose, but powre in verse. Where in thou like wise seemest to allow That th'acts of worthy men shuld be preseru'd; As in the holiest tombes we can bestow Vpon their glory that haue well deseru'd, Wherein thou dost no other virtue show Then what most barbrous countries haue obseru'd: When all the happiest nations hitherto Did with no lesser glory speake then do. Now to what else thy malice shall obiect, For schooles, and Arts, and their necessitie: When from my Lord, whose iudgement must direct And forme, and fashion my abilitie I shall haue got more strength: thou shalt expect Out of my better leasure, my reply. And if herein the curious sort shall deeme My will was caried far beyond my force, And that it is a thing doth ill beseeme The function of a Poem, to discourse: Thy learned iudgement which I most esteeme (Worthy Fulke Greuil) must defend this course.
By whose mild grace, and gentle hand at first My Infant Muse was brought in open sight From out the darkenesse wherein it was nurst, And made to be partaker of the light; Which peraduenture neuer else had durst T'appeare in place, but had beene smothered quite. And now herein incourag'd by thy praise, Is made so bold and ventrous to attempt Beyond example, and to trie those waies, That malice from our forces thinkes exempt: To see if we our wronged lines could raise Aboue the reach of lightnesse and contempt. FINIS.
A LETTER FROM OCTAVIA TO MARCVS ANTONIVS. SAMVEL DANIEL. AT LONDON Printed by P. Short for Simon Waterson. 1599.
To the right Honourable and most vertuous Ladie, the Ladie Margaret Countesse of Cumberland. Although the meaner fort (whose thoughts are plac'd As in another region, far below The Sphere of greatnesse) cannot rightly taste What touch it hath, nor right her passions know: Yet haue there aduentur'd to bestow Words vpon griefe, as my griefes comprehend, And made this great afflicted Ladie show Out of my feelings, what she might haue pend. And here the same, I bring forth, to attend Vpon thy reuerent name, to liue with thee Most vertuous Ladie, that vouch saf'st to lend Eare to my notes, and comfort vnto me, That one day may thine owne faire vertues spread Be'ing secretarie now, but to the dead.
The Argument. Vpon the second agreement (the first being bro∣ken through iealousie of a disproportion of eminencie) betweene the Triumuiri Octaui∣us Caesar, Marcus Antonius, and Lepidus: Octauia the sister of Octauius Caesar, was married to Antonius, as a linke to combine that which ne∣uer yet, the greatest strength of nature, or anie power of nearest respect could long holde togither, who made but the instrument of others ends, and deliuered vp as an Ostage to serue the oportunitie of aduantages, met not with that in∣tegritie she brought: but as highlie preferred to affliction encountered with all the greeuances that beate vppon the miserie of greatnes, exposed tost and betwixt the diuers te∣nding humours of vnquiet parties. For Antonie hauing yet vpon him the letters of AEgypt, layde on by the power of a most incomparable beautie, could admit no new lawes into the state of his affection, or dispose of himselfe being not himselfe, but as hauing his heart turned Eastwarde whi∣ther the point of his desires were directed, touchte with the strongest allurements that ambition, and a licencious so∣ueraintie could draw a man vnto: could not trulie descend to the priuate loue of a ciuill nurtred Matrone, whose en∣tertainment
bounded with modestie and the nature of her education, knew not to cloth her affections in any other co∣lours then the plain habit of truth: wherein she euer suted alher actions, and vsed all her best ornaments of honestie, to win the good liking of him that helde her but as a Curtaine drawne betweene him and Octauius to shadow his other purposes withall; which the sharpe sight of an equallie ie alous ambition could soone pierce into, and as easily looke thorow and ouer bloud and nature as he to abuse it: And therefore to preuent his aspiring, he armes his forces either to reduce Antonic to the ranke of his estate, or else to di∣sranke him out of state and al. When Octauia by the imploi∣ment of Antonie (as being not yet ready to put his fortune to her triall) throwes her selfe, great with child, and as big with sorrowe, into the trauaile of a most labour some re∣conciliation: taking her iourney from the farthest part of Greece to find Octauius, with whom her care and teares were so good agents that they effected their commission beyond all expectation: and for that time quite disarmed their wrath, which yet long could not hold so. For Anto∣nius falling into the relaps of his former disease, watching his oportunity got ouer againe into Egypt, where he so for∣got himselfe, that he quite put off his own nature, and whol∣ely became a pray to his pleasures, as if hee had wound him∣selfe out of the respect of Country, bloud and alltance, which gaue to Octauia the cause of much affliction, and to me the Argument of this letter.
A Letter sent from Octauia to her husband Marcus Antonius into Egypt. 1 To thee (yet deere) though most disloiall Lord, Whom impious loue keepes in a barbarous land, Thy wronged wife Octauia sendeth word Of th'vnkind wounds receiued by thy hand, Grant Antony, ô let thine eyes asford But to permit thy heart to vnderstand The hurt thou dost, and do but read her teares That still is thine though thou wilt not be hers. 2 Although perhaps, these my complaints may come Wilst thou in th'armes of that incestious Queene The staine of Aegypt, and the shame of Rome Shalt dallying sit, and blush to haue them seene: Whilst proud disdainfull she, gessing from whome The message came, and what the cause hath beene, Wil skorning saie, faith, this comes from your Deere, Now sir you must be shent for staying heere.
3 From her indeed it comes, delitious dame, (Thou royal Concubine, and Queene of lust) Whose Armes yet pure, whose brests are voide of blame, And whose most lawfull flame proues thine vniust: Tis shee that sendes the message of thy shame, And his vntruth that hath betraid her trust: Pardon, deare Lord, from her these sorrowes are Whose bed bringes neither infamie nor warre. 4 And therefore heare her wordes, that too too much Hath heard the wronges committed by thy shame; Although at first my trust in thee was such As it held out against the strongest fame; My heart would neuer let in once a touch Of least beliefe, till all confirmd the same: That I was almost last that would belieue Because I knew mee first that most must grieue. 5 How oft haue poore abused I tooke parte With falshood onely for to make thee true? How oft haue I argued against my heart Not suffring it to know that which it knew? And for I would not haue thee what thou arte I made my selfe, vnto my selfe vntrue: So much my loue labourd against thy Sinne To shut out feare which yet kept feare within:
6 For I could neuer thinke th' aspiring mind Of worthie and victorious Antonie, Could be by such a Syren so declind, As to be traynd a pray to Luxury: I could not thinke my Lord would be f'vnkind As to despise his Children, Rome and me: But ô how soone are they deceiud that trust And more their shame, that wilbe so vniust. 7 But now that certaine fame hath open layd Thy new relaps, and straunge reuolt from mee, Truth hath quite beaten all my hopes awaie And made the passage of my sorrowes free: For now poore hart, there's nothing in the waie Remaines to stand betwixt despaire and thee; All is throwne downe, there comes no succors newe It is most true, my Lord is most vntrue. 8 And now I may with shame inough pull in The colours Iaduanced in his grace For that subduing powre, that him did win Hath lost me too, the honour of my face: Yet why should I bearing no part of sinne Beare such a mightie part of his disgrace? Yes though it be not mine, it is of mine; And his renowne being clips'd, mine cannot shine.
9 Which makes me as I do, hide from the eie Of the misiudging vulgar that will deeme, That sure there was in me some reason why Which made thee thus, my bed to disesteeme: So that alas poore vndeseruing I A cause of thy vncleane deserts shall seeme, Though Iust takes neuer ioy in what is due, But still leaues known delights to seeke out new. 10 And yet my brother Caesar laboured To haue me leaue thy house, and liue more free, But God forbid, Octauia should be led To leaue to liue inthine, though left by thee The pledges here of thy forsaken bed, Are still the obiects that remember me What Antony was once, although false now, And is my Lord, though he neglect his vow. 11 These walles that here do keepe me out of sight Shall keepe me all vnspotted vnto thee, And testifie that I will do thee right, Ile neuer staine thy house, though thou shame me: The now sad Chamber of my once delight Shall be the temple of my pietie Sacred vnto the faith I reuerence, Where I will paie my teares for thy offence.
12 Although my youth, thy absence, and this wrong Might draw my bloud to forfeit vnto shame, Nor need I frustrate my delights so long That haue such meanes to carrie so the same, Since that the face of greatnesse is so strong As it dissolues suspect, and beares out blame, Hauing all secret helps that long thereto That seldome wants there ought but will to do: 13 Which yet to do, ere lust this heart shall frame Earth swallow me aliue, hel rap me hence: Shall I because despisd contemne my shame, And ad disgrace to others impudence? What can my powre but giue more powre to fame? Greatnesse must make it great incontinence; Chambers are false, the bed and all wil tell, No doore keepes in their shame that do not well. 14 Hath greatnesse ought peculiar else alone But to stand faire and bright aboue the base? What doth deuide the cottage from the throne, If vice shall laie both leuell with disgrace? For if vncleannesse make them but all one What priuiledge hath honor by his place? What though our sinnes go braue and better clad, They are as those in rags as base as bad.
15 I know not how, but wrongfullie I know Hath vndiscerning custome plac'd our kind Vnder desart, and set vs farre below The reputation to our sexe assign'd; Charging our wrong reputed weakenes, how VVe are vnconstant, fickle, false, vnkinde: And thogh our life with thousand proofs shewes no Yet since strength saies it, weaknes must be so. 16 Vnequall partage to b'allow'd no share Of power to do of lifes best benefite; But stand as if we interdicted were Of vertue, action, libertie and might: Must you haue all, and not vouchsafe to spare Our weaknes any intrest of delight? Is there no portion left for vs at all, But sufferance, sorrow, ignorance and thrall? 17 Thrice happie you in whom it is no fault, To know, to speake, to do, and to be wife: VVhose words haue credit, and whose deeds though naugh Must yet be made to seeme far otherwise: You can be onely heard whilst we are taught To hold our peace, and not to exercise The powers of our best parts, because your parts Haue with our fredome robb'd vs of our hearts.
18 We in this prison of our selues confin'd Must here shut vp with our own passions liue Turn'd in vpon vs, and denied to find The vent of outward means that might relieue: That they alone must take vp all our mind; And no roome left vs, but to thinke and grieue, Yet oft our narrowed thoughts look more direct Then your loose wisdoms borne with wild neglect. 19 For should we to (as God forbid we should) Carrie no better hand on our desires Then your strength doth; what int'rest could Our wronged patience paie you for your hires? What mixture of strange generations would Succeed the fortunes of vncertaine Sires? What foule confusion in your blood and race To your immortall shame, and our disgrace? 20 What? are there bars for vs, no bounds for you? Must leuitie stand sure, though firmnes fall? And are you priuiledg'd to be vntrue, And we no grant to be dispens'd withall? Must we inuiolable keepe your due, Both to your loue, and to your falshood thrall? Whilst you haue stretch'd your lust vnto your will As if your strength were licenc'd to do ill.
21 O if you be more strong then be more iust, Cleere this suspition, make not the world to doubt Whether in strong, or weake be better trust, Iffrailtie, or else valour be more stout: And if we haue shut in our harts from lust Let not your bad example let them out, Thinke that there is like feeling in our bloud, If you will haue vs good, be you then good. 22 Is it that loue doth take no true delight In what it hath, but still in what it would, Which drawes you on to do vs this vnright, Whilst feare in vs of loosing what we hold Keepes vs in still to you, that set vs light, So that what you vnties, doth vs infold? Then loue tis thou that dost confound vs so To make our truth the occasion of our wo. 23 Distressed woman kind that either must For louing loose your loues, or get neglect; Whilst wantons are more car'd for, then the iust And falshood cheerisht, faith without respect: Better she fares in whom is lesser trust, And more is lou'd that is in more suspect. VVhich (pardon me) shewes no great strength of mind To be most theirs, that vse you most vnkind.
24 Yet wel it fits for that sinne euer must Be tortur'd with the racke of his own frame, For he that holds no faith shall find no trust, But sowing wrong is sure to reape the same: How can he looke to haue his measure iust That fils deceipt, and reckons not of shame, And being not pleas'd with what he hath in lot Shall euer pine for that which he hath not? 25 Yet if thou couldst not loue, thou mightst haue seem'd, Though to haue seem'd had like wise beene vniust: Yet so much are leane shewes of vs esteem'd That oft they feed, though not suffice our trust: Because our nature grieueth to be deem'd To be so wrong'd, although we be and must. And it's some ease yet to be kindly vs'd In outward shew, though secretly abus'd. 26 But wo to her, that both in shew despis'd, And in effect disgrac'd, and left forlorne, For whom no comforts are to be deuis'd, Nor no new hopes can euermore be borne: O Antony, could it not haue suffiz'd That I was thine, but must be made her skorne That enuies all our bloud, and doth deuide Thee from thy selfe, onely to serue her pride?
27 What fault haue I committed that should make So great dislike of me and of my loue? Or doth thy fault but an occasion take For to dislike what most doth it reproue? Because the conscience gladlie would mistake Her own misdeedes which she would faine remoue, And they that are vnwilling to amend Will take offence because they will offend. 28 Or hauing run beyond all pardon quite They flie and ioine with sin as wholy his, Making it now their side, their part, their right, And to turne backe would shew t'haue done amisse: For now they thinke not to be opposite To what obraides their fault, were wickednesse: So much doth follie thrust them into blame That euen to leaue of shame, they count it shame. 29 Which do not thou, deere Lord, for I do not Pursue thy fault, but sue for thy returne Backe to thy selfe; whom thou hast both forgot With me, poore me, that doth not spight but mourne: And if thou couldst as well amend thy blot As I forgiue, these plaints had beene forborne: And thou shouldst be the same vnto my hart VVhich once thou were, not that which nowe thou art.
30 Though deepe doth sit the hard recouering smart Of that last wound (which God grant be the last) And more doth touch that tender feeling part Of my sad soule, then all th'vnkindnes past: And Antony I appeale to thine own hart, (If th'hart which once was thine thou yet still hast) To iudge if euer woman that did liue Had iuster cause, then wretched I, to grieue. 31 For comming vnto Athens as I did, Wearie and weake with toile, and all distrest, After I had with sorrow compassed A hard consent, to grant me that request: And how my trauaile was considered And all my care, and cost, thy selfe knowes best: That wouldst not moue one foot from Iust for me That had left all was deere to come to thee! 32 For first what great a do had I to win My' offended brother Caesars backward will? And praid, and wept, and cride to staie the sinne Of ciuill rancorrising twixt you still: For in what case shall wretched I be in, Set betwixt both to share with both your ill? My bloud said I with either of you goes, Who euer win, I shall be sure to lose.
33 For what shame should such mighty persons get For two weake womens cause to disagree? Nay what shall I that shall be deem'd to set Th'inkindled fire, seeming inflam'd for mee? O if I be the motiue of this heate Let these vnguiltie hands the quenchers bee, And let me trudge to mediate an accord The Agent twixt my brother and my Lord. 34 With praiers, vowes and tears, with vrging hard Iwrung from him a slender grant at last, And with the rich prouisions I prepard For thy (intended Parthian war) made haste Weighing not how my poore weake body far'd, But all the tedious difficulties past: And came to Athens; whence I Niger sent To shew thee of my comming and intent. 35 Where of when he had made relation: I was commanded to approch no neare; Then sent I backe to know what should be done With th'horse, and men, and monie I had there: Where at perhaps when some remorse begun To touch thy soule, to thinke yet what we were, Th'Inchantres straight steps twixt thy hart & thee And intercepts all thoughts that came of mee.
36 She armes her teares, the ingins of deceit And all her batterie, to oppose my loue: And bring thy comming grace to a retraite The powre of all her subtiltie to proue: Now pale and faint she languishes, and straight Seemes in a sound, vnable more to moue: Whilst her instructed followers plie thine eares With forged passions, mixt with fained teares. 37 Hard-harted lord, say they, how canst thou see This mightie Queene a creature so diuine, Lie thus distrest, and languishing for thee And onely wretched but for beeing thine? Whilst base Octauia must intitled bee Thy wife, and she esteem'd thy concubine: Aduance thy heart, raise it vnto his right And let a scepter baser passions quit. 38 Thus they assaile thy natures weakest side And worke vpon th'aduantage of thy mind, Knowing where iudgment stood least fortified And how t'incounter follie in her kinde: But yet the while O what dost thou abide, Who in thy selfe such wrastling thoughts dost finde? In what confused case is thy soule in Rackt betwixt pitie, sorrow, shame and sin?
39 I cannot tell but sure I dare beleeue My trauails needs must some cōpassion moue: For no such locke to bloud could nature giue To shut out pitie, though it shut out loue: Conscience must leaue a little way to grieue To let in horror comming to reproue, The guilt of thy offence that caus'd the same, For deepest woūds the hand, of our owne shame. 40 Neuer haue vniust pleasures beene compleet In ioyes intire, but still feare kept the dore And held back something from that ful of sweet To intersowre vnsure delights the more: For neuer did all circumstances meete With those desires which were cōceiu'd before Something must still be left to check our sinne, And giue a touch of what should not haue bin. 41 Wretched mankinde, wherefore hath nature made The lawfull, vndelightfull, th'vniust shame? As if our pleasure onelie were forbade, But to giue fire to lust, t'ad greater flame; Or else but as ordained more to lade Our heart with passions to confound the fāme, Which though it be, yet ad not worse to ill, Do, as the best men do, bound thine owne will.
42 Redeeme thy selfe, and now at length make peace With thy deuided hart opprest with toile: Breake vp this war, this brest dissention cease, Thy passions to thy passions reconcile; I do not only seeke my good t'increase, But thine owne ease, and liberty the while: Thee in the circuite of thy selfe confine, And be thine owne, and then thou wilt be mine. 43 I know my pitied loue, doth aggrauate Enuy and wrath for these wrongs offered: And that my suffrings adde with my estate Coales in thy bosome, hatred on thy head: Yet is not that, my fault, but my hard fate, Who rather wish to haue beene vnpitied Of all but thee, then that my loue should be Hurtfull to him that is so deere to me. 44 Cannot the busie world let me alone To beare alone the burthen of my griefe, But they must intermeddle with my mone And seeke t'offend me with vnsought reliese? Whilst my afflictions labour'd to moue none But only thee; must pitie play the thiefe, To steale so many harts to hurt my hart, And moue apart against my deerest part?
45 Yet all this shall not preiudice my Lord If yet he will but make returne at last, His sight shall raze out of the sad record Of my inrowled griefe all that is past; And I will not so much as once affoord Place for a thought to thinke I was disgrac'st: And pity shall bring backe againe with me Th'offended harts that haue forsaken thee. 46 And therfore come deer lord, least longer stay Do arme against thee all the powers of spight, And thou be made at last the wofull pray Of full inkindled wrath, and ruin'd quite: But what presaging thought of bloud doth stay My trembling hand, and doth my soule affright? What horror do I see, prepar'd t'attend Th'euent of this? what end vnlesse thou end? 47 With what strange formes and shadowes ominous Did my last sleepe, my grieu'd soule intertaine? I dreamt, yet ô, dreames are but friuolous, And yet ile tell it, and God grant it vaine. Me thought a mighty HippopotamusA Sea Horse. From Nilus floting, thrusts into the maine, Vpon whose backe a wanton Mermaide fate, As if she ruld his course and steerd his fate.
48 With whom t'incounter, forth another makes, Alike in kind, of strength and powre as good: At whose ingrappling Neptunes mantle takes A purple colour dyde with streames of bloud, Whereat, this looker on, amaz'd forsakes Her Champion there, who yet the better stood; But se'ing her gone straight after her he hies As if his hart and strength Iaie in her eyes. 49 On followes wrath vpon disgrace and feare, Where of th'euent forsooke me with the night, But my wak'd cares, gaue me, these shadowes were Drawne but from darknes to instruct the light, These secret figures, natures message beare Of cōming woes, were they desciphered right; But if as clouds of sleepe thou shalt them take, Yet credit wrath and spight that are awake. 50 Preuent great spirit the tempests that begin, If lust and thy ambition haue lest waie. But to looke out, and haue not shut all in, To stop thy iudgement from a true suruay Of thy estate; and let thy hart within Consider in what danger thou doost lay Thy life and mine, to leaue the good thou hast, To follow hopes with shadowes ouercast.
51 Come, come away from wrong, from craft, frō toile, Possesse thine owne with right, with truth, with peace; Breake from these snares, thy iudgement vnbeguile, Free thine owne torment, and my griefe release. But whither am I caried all this while Beyond my scope, and know not when to cease? Words still with my increasing sorrowes grow; I know t'haue said too much, but not ynow. Wherefore no more but only I commend To thee the hart that's thine, and so I end. FINIS.
THE TRAGEDIE OF CLEOPATRA. Aetas prima canat ueneres, po∣strema tumultus. SAM. DANYELL: AT LONDON Printed by P. S. for Symon Waterson. 1599.
To the Right Honourable, the Lady Mary, Countesse of PEMBROOKE. Loe heere the worke the which she did impose, Who only doth predominate my Muse: The starre of wonder, which my labors chose To guide their way in all the course I vse. She, whose cleere brightnesse doth alone infuse Strength to my thoughts, and makes me what I am; Call'd vp my spirits from out their low repose, To sing of state, and tragick notes to frame. I, who (contented with an humble song,) Made musique to my selfe that pleas'd me best, And onely told of DELIA, and her wrong, And prais'd her eies, and plaind mine own vnrest: (A text from whence my Muse had not degrest) Madam, had not thy well grac'd Anthony, (who all alone, hauing remained long,) Requir'd his Cleopatras company.
Who if she heere doe so appeare in act, That for his Queen and Loue he scarce will know her, Finding how much she of her selfe hath lackt, And mist that glory wherein I should shew her, In maiestie debas'd, in courage lower; Yet lightning thou by thy sweet fauoring eies My darke defects, which from her spirit detract, He yet may gesse it's she; which will suffise. And I hereafter in another kinde, More fitting to the nature of my vaine, May (peraduenture) better please thy minde, And higher notes in sweeter musique straine: Seeing that thou so graciously doost daine, To countenance my song and cherish mee, I must so worke posterity may finde How much I did contend to honor thee. Now when so many pens (like Speares) are charg'd, To chase away this tyrant of the North: Grosse Barbarism, whose powre grown far inlarg'd, Was lately by thy valiant brothers worth First found, encountred, and prouoked forth: Whose onset made the rest audacious, Whereby they like wise haue so well discharg'd. Vpon that hideous beast incroching thus.
And now must I with that poore strength I haue, Resist so foule a foe in what I may: And arme against obliuion and the graue, That else in darknesse carries all away, And makes of all our honours but a pray. So that if by my pen procure I shall But to defend me, and my name to saue, Then though I die, I cannot yet die all; But still the better part of me will liue, Deckt and adorned with thy sacred name, Although thy selfe dost farre more glorie giue Vnto thy selfe, then I can by the same. Who dost with thine own hand a Bulwark frame Against these monsters, (enemies of honour) Which euer-more shall so defend thy Fame, That Time nor they, shall neuer pray vpon her. Those Hymnes that thou doost consecrate to heauen, Which Israels Singer to his God did frame: Vnto thy voyce eternitie hath giuen, And makes thee decre to him from whence they came. In them must rest thy euer reuerent name, So long as Syons God remaineth-honoured; And till confusion hath all zeale be-reauen, And murthered Faith, and Temples ruined.
By this (great Ladie,) thou must then be knowne, When Wilton lies low leuell'd with the ground: And this is that which thou maist call thine owne, Which sacrilegious time can not confound; Heere thou suruiu'st thy selfe, here thou art found Of late succeeding ages, fresh in fame: This monument cannot be ouer-throwne, Where, in eternall Brasse remaines thy Name. O that the Ocean did not bound our stile VVithin these strict and narrow limits so: But that the melodie of our sweete He, Might now be heard to Tyber, Arne, and Po: That they might know how far Thames doth out-go The Musique of declined Italie: And listning to our songs another while, Might learne of thee their notes to purifie. O why may not some after-comming hand, Vnlocke these limits, open our confines: And breake asunder this imprisoning band, T inlarge our spirits, and publish our deseignes; Planting our roses on the Apenines? And teach to Rhene, to Loyre, and Rhodanus, Our accents, and the wonders of our Land, That they might all admire and honour vs.
Whereby great Sydney and our Spencer might, With those Po-singers being equalled, Enchaunt the world with such a sweet delight, That their eternall songs (for euer read,) May shew what great Elizas raigne hath bred. VVhat Musique in the kingdome of her peace Hath now beene made to her, and by her might, VVhereby her glorious fame shall neuer cease. But if that fortune doth denie vs this, Then Neptune, locke vp with thy Ocean key This treasure to our selues, and let them misse Of so sweet ritches: as vnworthie they To taste the great delights that we inioy. And let our harmonie so pleasing growne, Content our selues, whose errour euer is, Strange notes to like, and disesteeme our owne. But, whither do my vowes transport me now, VVithout the compasse of my course inioind? Alas, what honour can a voyce so low As this of mine, expect hereby to find? But, (Madam,) this doth animate my mind, That fauoured by the worthies of our Land, My lines are lik'd; the which may make me grow, In time to take a greater taske in hand.
THE ARGVMENT. AFter the death of Antonius, Cleopatra (li∣uing still in the Monument she had caused to bee built,) coulde not by anie meanes bee drawne foorth, although Octauius Caesar verie earnestlie laboured it: and sent Proculcius to vse all diligence to bring her vnto him: For that he thought it woulde bee a great Ornament to his tryumphes, to get her aliue to Rome. But neuer woulde shee put her selfe into the handes of Proculeius, although on a time hee founde the meanes, (by a window that was at the toppe of the Monument,) to come downe vnto her: where hee perswaded her (all hee might) to yeelde her selfe to Cae∣sars mercie. Which shee, (to bee ridde of him,) cunning∣lie seemed to graunt vnto. After that, Octauius in per∣son
went to visite her, to whome shee excused her offence, laying all the fault vpon the greatnesse, and feare shee had of Antonius, and withall, seemed verie tractable, and wil∣ling to be disposed of by him. VVhereupon Octauius, (thinking himselfe sure) re∣solu'd presentlie to sende her away to Rome. Whereof, Do∣labella a fauourite of Caesars, (and one that was growne into some good liking of her,) hauing certified her, shee makes her humble petition to Caesar, that hee would suffer her to sacrifice to the ghost of Antonius: which beeing graunted her, shee was brought vnto his Sepulcher, where after her rytes perfourmed, she returned to the Monument, and there dined with great magnificence. And in dinner time, came there one in the habite of a Countrey-man, with a Basket of Figges vnto her who (vnsuspected) was suffered to carrie them in. And in that Basket (among the Figges) were conueyed the Aspicks wherewith she did herselfe to death. Dinner beeing ended, shee dispatched Letters to Caesar, contayning great lamentations: with an earnest supplication, that she might bee intomb'd with Antonius. Whereupon Caesar knowing what shee inten∣ded, sent presentlie with all speede, Messengers to haue pre∣uented her death, which not withstanding, before they came was dispatched. Caesario her sonne, which she had by Iulius Caesar, (conuaied before vnto India, out of the daunger of the
warres,) was about the same time of her death, murthered at Rhodes: trayned thither by the falshoode of his Tutor, corrupted by Caesar. And so hereby, came the race of the Ptolomies to bee wholie extinct, and the flouri∣shing rich kingdome of Egypt vtter∣lie ouer-throwne and subdued.
The Scaene supposed Alexandria. THE ACTORS. Cleopatra. Octauius Caesar. Proculeius. Dolabella. Titius, seruant to Dolebella. Arius, Philosopher. Philostratus, Philosopher. Seleucus, secretarie to Cleopatra. Rodon, Tutor to Caesario. Nuntius. The Chorus, all Egyptians.
THE TRAGEDIE OF CLEOPATRA. ACTVS PRIMVS. CLEOPATRA. YET do I liue, and yet doth breath extend My life beyond my life, nor can my graue Shut vp my griefes, to make my end my end? Will yet confusion haue more then I haue? Is th' honor, wonder, glory, pompe and all Of Cleopatra dead, and she not dead? Haue I out-liu'd my selfe, and seene the fall Of all vpon me, and not ruined? Can yet these eyes endure the gastly looke Of desolations darke and ougly face, Wont but on fortunes fairest side to looke, Where nought was but applause, but smiles, and grace? Whiles on his shoulders all my rest relide On whom the burthen of m'ambition lay, My Atlas, and supporter of my pride That did the world of all my glory sway, Who now thrown down, disgrac'd, confoūded lies Crusht with the weight of shame and infamie, Following th' vnlucky party of my eies, The traines of lust and imbecilitie,
Whereby my dissolution is become The graue of AEgypt and the wracke of all; My vnforeseeing weakenesse must intoome My Countries fame and glory with my fall. Now who would think that I were she who late With all the ornaments on earth inrich'd, Enuiron'd with delights, compast with state, Glittering in pomp that harts and eies bewitch'd; Should chus distrest, cast down from of that heigth Leuell'd with low disgrac'd calamitie, Vnder the waight of such affliction sigh, Reduc'd vnto th'extreamest miserie? Am I the woman whose inuentiue pride, Adorn'd like Isis, skornd mortalitie? Is't I would haue my frailty so belide That flattery could perswade I was notd? Well now I see they but delude that praise vs, Greatnesse is mockt, prosperitie betraies vs. And we are but our selues, although this clowd Of interposed smokes make vs seeme more: These spreading parts of pompe wherof w'are prou'd, Are not our parts, but parts of others store: Witnesse these gallant fortune-following traines, These Summer Swallowes of felicitie Gone with the heate, of all see what remaines, This monument, two maides, and wretched I.
And I t'adorne their triumphs am reseru'd. A captiue, kept to honor others spoiles, Whom Caesar labors so to haue preseru'd, And seekes to entertaine my life with wiles. But Caesar, it is more then thou canst do, Promise, flatter, threaten extremitie, Imploy thy wits and all thy force thereto, I haue both hands, and will, and I can die. Though thou of both my country and my crown, Of powre, of means & al doost quite bereaue me; Though thou hast wholy Egypt made thine own, Yet hast thou left me that which will deceiue thee. That courage with my bloud and birth innated, Admir'd of all the earth as thou art now, Can neuer be so abiectly abated To be thy Slaue that rull'd as good as thou. Thinke Caesar I that liu'd and raign'd a Queene, Doe skorne to buy my life at such a rate, That I should vnder neath my selfe be seene, Basely induring to suruiue my state: That Rome should see my scepter-bearing hands Behind me bound, and glory in my teares, That I should passe whereas Octauia stands, To view my misery that purchas'd hers. No, I disdaine that head which wore a crowne Should stoope to take vp that which others giue;
I must not be, vnlesse I be mine owne. Tis sweet to die when we are forc'd to liue, Nor had I staide behind my selfe this space, Nor paid such intrest for this borrow'd breath, But that hereby I seeke to purchase grace For my distressed seed after my death. It's that which doth my deerest bloud controule, That's it alas detaines me from my tombe, VVhiles nature brings to contradict my soule The argument of mine vnhappy wombe. You luckles issue of an wofull mother, The wretched pledges of a wanton bed, You Kings design'd, must subiects liue to other; Or else, I feare, scarse liue, when I am dead. It is for you I temporize with Caesar, And staie this while to mediate your saftie: For you I faine content and sooth his pleasure, Calamity herein hath made me craftie. But this is but to trie what may be done, For come what will, this stands, I must die free, And die my selfe vncaptiu'd, and vnwon. Bloud, Children, Nature, all must pardon me. My soule yeelds honor vp the victory, And I must be a Queene, forget a mother, Though mother would I be, were I not I; And Queene would not be now, could I be other.
But what know I if th' heauens haue de cred, And that the sinnes of AEgypt haue deseru'd The Ptolomies should faile and none succeed, And that my weakenes was thereto reseru'd That I should bring confusion to my state, And fill the measure of iniquitie, Luxuriousnesse in me should raise the rate Of loose and ill-dispensed libertie. If it be so, then what neede these delaies? Since I was made the meanes of miserie: Why shuld I striue but to make death my praise, That had my life but for my infamie? And let me write in letters of my bloud A fit memoriall for the times to come, To be example to such Princes good As please themselues and care not what becom. And Antony, because the world takes note That my defects haue only ruin'd thee: And my ambitious practises are thought The motiue and the cause of all to be: Though God thou know'st, how iust this staine is laid Vpon my soule, whom ill successe makes ill: Yet since condemn'd misfortune hath no ayd Against proud luck that argues what it will, I haue no meanes to vndeceiue their mindes, But to bring in the witnesse of my bloud,
To testifie the faith and loue that bindes My equall shame, to fall with whom I stood. Defects I grant I had, but this was worst, That being the first to fall I dy'd not first. Though I perhaps could lighten mine own side With some excuse of my constrained case Drawn down with powre: but that were to deuide My shame: to stand alone in my disgrace. To cleere me so, would shew m'affections naught, And make th'excuse more hainous then the fault. Since if I should our errours disunite, I should confound afflictions onely rest, That from stearn death euen steales a sad delight To die with friends or with the like distrest; And since we tooke of either such firme hold In th'ouerwhelming seas of fortune cast, What powre should be of powre to reunfold The armes of our affections lockt so fast, For grapling in the ocean of our pride, We sunke each others greatnesse both together; And both made shipwracke of our fame beside, Both wrought a like destruction vnto either: And therefore I am bound to sacrifice To death and thee, the life that doth reproue me: Our like distresse I feele doth simpathize, And euen affliction makes me truly loue thee.
Which Antony, I must confesse my fault I neuer did sincerely vntill now: Now I protest I do, now am I taught In death to loue, in life that knew not how. For whilst my glory in her greatnesse stood, And that I saw my state and knew my beautie; Saw how the world admir'd me, how they woo'd, I then thought all men must loue me of dutie; And I loue none: for my lasciuious Court, Fertile in euer fresh and new-choise pleasure, Affoorded me of so bountifull disport That I to stay on loue had neuer leasure: My vagabond desires no limits found, For lust is endlesse, pleasure hath no bound. Thou comming from the strictnes of thy City, And neuer this loose pomp of monarchs learnest, Inu'rd to wars, in womens wiles vnwitty, Whilst others faynd, thou fell'st to loue in earnest; Not knowing how we like them best that houer, And make least reckning of a doting louer. And yet thou cam'st but in my beauties waine, When new appearing wrinkles of declining Wrought with the hand of yeers, seem'd to detain My graces light, as now but dimly shining Euen in the confines of mine age, when I Failing of what I was, and was but thus;
When such as we do deeme in iealousie That men loue for themselues and not for vs, Then and but thus, thou didst loue most sincerely O Antony, that best deseru'st it better, This Autumne of my beauty bought so dearely, For which in more then death, I stand thy debter, Which I will pay thee with so true a mind, (Casting vp all these deepe accoumpts of mine) That both our soules, and all the world shall find All recknings cleer'd, betwixt my loue and thine. But to the end I may preuent proud Caesar, Who doth so eagerly my life importune, I must preuaile me of this little leasure, Seeming to sute my mind vnto my fortune; Thereby with more conuenience to prouide For what my death and honor best shall fit: An yeelding base content must wary hide My last dissigne till I accomplish it, That hereby yet the world shall see that I, Although vnwise to liue had wit to die. Exit.
CHORVS, Behold what furies still Torment their tortur'd brest, Who by their doing ill, Haue wrought the worlds vnrest. Which when being most distrest, Yet more to vex their sp'rite, The hidious face of sinne, (In formes they must detest) Stands euer in their sight. Their conscience still within Th'eternall larum is That euer-barking dog that calles vpon their misse. No meanes at all to hide Man from himselfe can finde: No way to start aside Out from the hell of minde. But in himselfe confin'd, He still sees sinne before: And winged-footed paine, That swiftly comes behind, The which is euer-more,
The sure and certaine gaine Impietie doth get, And wanton loose respect, that dooth it selfe forget. And Cleopatra now, Well sees the dangerous way She tooke, and car'd not how, Which led her to decay. And likewise makes vs pay For her disordred lust, The int'rest of our blood: Or liue a seruile pray, Vnder a hand vniust, As others shall thinke good. This hath her riot wunne, And thus she hath her state, herselfe and vs vndunne. Now euery mouth can tell, What close was muttered: How that she did not well, To take the course she did. For now is nothing hid, Of what feare did restraine. No secrete closelie done, But now is vttered. The text is made most plaine
That flattry glos'd vpon, The bed of sinne reueal'd And all the luxurie that shame would haue conceal'd. The scene is broken downe, And all vncou'red lyes, The purple actors knowne Scarce man, whom men despise. The complots of the wise, Proue imperfections smoake: And all what wonder gaue To pleasure-gazing eyes, Lyes scattred, dasht, all broke. Thus much beguiled haue Poore vnconsiderate wights, These moment arie pleasures, fugitiue delights. ACTVS SECVNDVS: CAESAR. PROCVLEIVS. KIngdoms I see we winne, we conquere Climates, Yet cannot vanquish hearts, nor force obedience, Affections kept in close-concealed limits, Stand farre without the reach of sworde or violence.
Who forc'd do pay vs dutie, pay not loue: Free is the heart, the temple of the minde, The Sanctuarie sacred from aboue, Where nature keeps the keies that loose & bind. No mortall hand force open can that doore, So close shut vp, and lockt to all mankind: I see mens bodies onely ours, no more, The rest, anothers right, that rules the minde. Behold, my forces vanquisht haue this Land, Subdu'd that strong Competitor of mine: All Egypt yeelds to my all-conqu'ring hand, And all their treasure and themselues resigne. Onely this Queene, that hath lost all this all, To whom is nothing left except a minde: Cannot into a thought of yeelding fall, To be dispos'd as chance hath her assign'd. But Proculei, what hope doth she now giue, Will shee be brought to condiscend to liue? Proc. My Lord, what time being sent frō you to try To win her forth aliue (if that I might) From out the Monument, where wofully She liues inclos'd in most aficted plight: No way I found, no means how to surprize her, But through a grate at th'entry of the place Standing to treat, llabour'd to aduise her, To come to Caesar, and to sue for grace.
She said, she crau'd not life, but leaue to die, Yet for her children, pray'd they might inherite, That Caesar would vouchsafe (in clemencie) To pittie them, though she deseru'd no merite. So leauing her for then; and since of late, With Gallus sent to trie another time, The whilst he entertaines her at the grate, I found the meanes vp to the Tombe to clime. Where in descending in the closest wise, And silent manner as I could contriue: Her woman me descri'd, and out she cries, Poore Cleopatra, thou art tane aliue. With that the Queen raught from her side her knife, And euen in act to stab her martred brest, I stept with speede, and held, and sau'd her life, And forth her trembling hād the blade did wrest. Ah Cleopatra, why shouldst thou, (said I) Both iniurie thy selfe and Caesar so? Barre him the honour of his victorie, Who euer deales most mildly with his foe? Liue and relie on him, whose mercie will To thy submission alwayes readie be. With that (as all amaz'd) she held her still, Twixt maiestie confuz'd and miserie. Her proud grieu'd eyes, held sorow and disdaine, State and distresse warring within her soule: Dying ambition dispossest her raigne,
So base affliction seemed to controule. Like as a burning Lampe, whose liquour spent With intermitted flames, when dead you deem it, Sendes forth a dying flash, as discontent, That so the matter failes that should redeeme it: So shee (in spight) to see her low-brought state, (When all her hopes were now consum'd to nought) Scornes yet to make an abiect league with Fate, Or once descend into a seruile thought. Th'imperious tongue vnused to beseech, Authoritie confounds with prayers, so Words of cōmand conioin'd with humble speech, Shew'd she would liue, yet scorn'd to pray her foe. Ah, what hath Caesar here to doe, said she, In confines of the dead in darknes lying? Will he not grant our sepulchres be free, But violate the priuiledge of dying? VVhat, must he stretch forth his ambitious hand Into the right of Death, and force vs here? Hath miserie no couert where to stand Free from the storme of pride, ist safe no where? Cannot my land, my gold, my crowne suffise, And all what I held deere, to him made common, But that he must in this fortty tyrannize, Th'afflicted bodie of an wofull woman? Tell him, my frailtie, and the Gods haue giuen Sufficient glorie, if he could content him:
And let him now with his desires make euen, And leaue me to this horror, to lamenting. Now he hath taken all away from mee, VVhat must he take me from my selfe by force? Ah, let him yet (in mercie) leaue me free The kingdome of this poore distressed corse. No other crowne I seeke, no other good. Yet wish that Caesar would vouchsafe this grace, To fauour the poore ofspring of my blood. Confused issue, yet of Roman race. If blood and name be links of loue in Princes, Not spurres of hate; my poore Caesario may Finde fauour notwithstanding mine offences, And Caesars blood, may Caesars raging stay. But if that with the torrent of my fall, All must be rapt with furious violence, And no respect, nor no regard at all, Can ought with nature or with blood dispence: Then be it so, if needes it must be so. There stayes and shrinkes in horror of her state: VVhen I began to mitigate her woe, And thy great mercies vnto her relate; VVishing her not despaire, but rather come And sue for grace, and shake off all vaine feares: No doubt she should obtaine as gentle doome As she desir'd, both for, her selfe and hers. And so with much a-do, (well pacifide
Seeming to be,) she shew'd content to liue, Saying she was resolu'd thy doome t'abide, And to accept what fauour thou would'st giue, And here-with all, crau'd also, that she might Performe her last rites to her lost belou'd. To sacrifice to him that wrought her plight: And that shee might not be by force remou'd. I granting from thy part this her request, Left her for then, seeming in better rest. Caes. But dost thou thinke she will remaine so still? Pro. I thinke and do assure my selfe she will. Caes. Ah, priuat men sound not the harts of princes, Whose actions oft beare contrarie pretences. Pro. Why, tis her safetie for to yeeld to thee. Caes. But tis more honour for her to die free. Pro. She may thereby procure her childrens good. Caes. Princes respect their honor more then blood. Pro. Can princes powre dispence with nature thā? Caes. To be a prince, is more then be a man. Pro. There's none but haue in time perswaded beene. Caes. And so might she too, were she not a Queene. Pro. Diuers respects will force her be reclaim'd. Caes. Princes (like Lyons) neuer will be tarn'd. A priuate man may yeeld, and care not how, But greater hearts will breake before they bow. And sure I thinkesh' will neuer condiscend, To liue to grace our spoiles with her disgrace:
But yet let still a wary watch attend, To guard her person, and to watch the place. And looke that none with her come to confer: Shortly my selfe will go to visite her. CHORVS. OPINION, how doost thou molest Th'affected minde of restles man? Who following thee neuer can, Nor euer shall attaine to rest, For getting what thou saist is best, Yet loe, that best he findes farre wide Of what thou promisedst before: For in the same he lookt for more, Which proues but smal whē once tis tride Then something else thou find st beside, To draw him stil frō thought to thought: When in the end all proues but nought. Farther from rest hee findes him than, Then at the first when he began. O malecontent seducing guest, Contriuer of our greatest woes: Which born of wind, & fed with showes, Doost nurse thy selfe in thine vnrest. Iudging vngotten thinges the best,
Or what thou in conceit design'st. And all things in the world doost deeme, Not as they are, but as they seeme: Which shewes, their state thou ill defin'st: And liu'st to come, in present pin'st. For what thou hast, thou still doost lacke: O mindes tormentor, bodies wracke, Vaine promiser of that sweet rest, Which neuer anie yet possest. If we vnto ambition tende, Then doost thou drawe our weakenes on, With vaine imagination Of that which neuer hath an ende. Or if that lust we apprehend, How doth that pleasant plague infest? O what strange formes of luxurie, Thou straight doost cast t'intice vs by? And tell'st vs that is euer best, Which we haue neuer yet possest. And that more pleasure rests beside, In something that we haue not tride. And when the same likewise is had, Then all is one, and all is bad. This Antony can say is true, As Cleopatra knowes tis so,
By th'experience of their woe. Shee can say, she neuer knew But that lust found pleasures new, And was neuer satisfide: He can say by proofe of toile, Ambition is a Vulture vile, That feeds vpō the hart of pride: And finds no rest when all is tride. For worlds cannot confine the one, Th'other, lists and bounds hath none. And both subuert the minde, the state, Procure destruction, enuie, hate. And now when all this is prou'd vaine, Yet Opinion leaues not heere, But sticks to Cleopatra neere, Perswading now, how she shall gaine Honour by death, and fame attaine. And what a shame it were to liue, Her kingdome lost, her Louer dead: And so with this perswasion led, Dispaire doth such a courage giue, That nought else can her mind relieue, Nor yet diuert her from that thought: To this conclusion all is brought. This is that rest this vaine world lends, To end in death that all things ends.
ACTVS TERTIVS. PHILOSTRATVS. ARIVS. HOW deepely Arius am I bound to thee, That sau'dst from death this wretched life of mine: Obtaining Caesars gentle grace for mee, When I of all helps else dispaird but thine? Although I see in such a wofull state, Life is not that which should be much desir'd: Sith all our glories come to end their date, Our Countries honour and our own expir'd. Now that the hand of wrath hath ouer-gone vs, Liuing (as 'twere) in th'armes of our dead mother, With bloud vnder our feet, ruine vpon vs, And in a Land most wretched of all other, When yet we reck on life our deerest good. And so we liue, we care not how we liue: So deepe we feele impressed in our blood, That touch which Nature with our breath did giue. And yet what blasts of words hath learning found, To blow against the feare of death and dying? What comforts vnsicke eloquence can sound, And yet all failes vs in the point of trying. For whilst we reason with the breath of safety, Without the compasse of destruction liuing: What precepts shew we then, what courage lofty
In taxing others feares in counsell giuing? When all this ayre of sweet-contriued words Proues but weake armour to defend the hart. For when this life, pale feare and terror boords, Where are our precepts then, where is our arte? O who is he that from himselfe can turne, That beares about the body of a man? Who doth not toile and labour to adiorne The day of death, by any meanes he can? All this I speake to th' end my selfe t'excuse, For my base begging of a seruile breath, Wherein I grant my selfe much to abuse, So shamefully to seek t'auoide my death. Arius. Philostratus, that selfe same care to liue, Possesseth all alike, and grieue not then Nature doth vs no more then others giue: Though we speak more then mē, we are but mē. And yet (in truth) these miseries to see, Wherein we stand in most extreame distresse: Might to our selues sufficient motiues be To loath this life, and weigh our death the lesse: For neuer any age hath better taught, What feeble footing pride and greatnesse hath. How' improuident prosperitie is caught, And cleane confounded in the day of wrath.' See how dismaid Confusion keepes those streetes, That nought but mirth and musique late resounded,
How nothing with our eie but horror meeres, Our state, our wealth, our pride and all confounded. Yet what weake sight did not discerne from far This black-arisingtempest, all confounding? Who did not see we should be what we are, When pride and ryot grew to such abounding. VVhen dissolute impietie possest Th'vnrespectiue mindes of prince, and people: VVhen infolent Security found rest In wanton thoughts, with lust & ease made feeble. Then when vnwary peace with fat-fed pleasure, New-fresh inuented ryots still detected, Purchac'd with all the Ptolomies ritch treasure, Our lawes, our gods, our mysteries neglected. VVho saw not how this confluence of vice, This inundation of disorders, must At length of force pay backe the bloody price Of sad destruction, (a reward for lust.) O thou and I haue heard, and read, and knowne Of like proude states, as wofully incombred, And fram'd by them, examples for our own: VVhich now among examples must be numbred. For this decree a law from high is giuen, An auncient Cannon, of eternall date, In Consistorie of the starres of heauen, Entred the booke of vnauoided Fate; That no state can in height of happinesse,
In th' exaltation of their glory stand: But thither once ariu'd, declining lesse, Ruine themselues, or fall by others hand. Thus doth the euer-changing course of things Runne a perpetuall circle, euer turning: And that same day that hiest glory brings, Brings vs vnto the point of back-returning. For sencelesse sensualitie, doth euer Accompany selicitie and greatnesse. A fatal witch, whose charmes do leaue vs neuer, Till we leaue all in sorrow for our sweetnesse; When yet our selues must be the cause we fall, Although the same befirst decreed on hie: Our errors still must beare the blame of all, This must it be, earth aske notheauen why. Yet mighty men with wary iealous hand, Striue to cut off all obstacles of feare: All whatsoeuer seemes but to withstand Their least conceit of quiet, held so deere; And so intrench themselues with blood, with crimes, With all iniustice as their feares dispose: Yet for all this we see, how oftentimes The meanes they worke to keepe, are meanes to lose. And sure I cannot see, howe this can stand With great Augustus safety and his honor, To cut off all succession from our land, For her offence that puld the wars vpon her.
Phi. Why must her issue pay the price of that? Ari. The price is life that they are rated at. Phi. Casario to, issued of Caesars blood? Ari. Pluralitie of Caesars are not good. Phi. Alas what hurt procures his feeble arme? Ari. Not for it doth, but that it may do harme. Phi. Then when it offers hurt, represse the same. Ari. Tis best to quench a sparke before it flame. Phi. Tis inhumane, an innocent to kill. Ari. Such innocents, sildome remaine so still. And sure his death may best procure our peace, Competitors the subiect deerely buies: And so that our affliction may surcease, Let great men be the peoples sacrifice. But see where Caesar comes himselfe, to try And worke the mind of our distressed Queene, To apprehend some falsed hope: whereby She might be drawn to haue her fortune seene. But yet I thinke, Rome will not see that face (That queld her champiōs,) blush in base disgrace. SCENA SECVNDA. CAESAR. CLEOPATRA, SELEVCVS, DOLABELLA. Caes. WHat Cleopatra, doost thou doubt so much Of Caesars mercy, that thou hid'st thy face?
Or dost thou thinke, thy' offences can be such, That they surmount the measure of our grace? Cleo. O Caesar, not for that I flie thy sight My soule this sad retyre of sorrow chose: But that my'oppressed thoghts abhorring light Like best in darknes, my disgrace t'inclose. And here to these close limits of despaire, This solitarie horror where I bide: Caesar, I thought no Roman should repaire, More after him, who here oppressed dyde. Yet now, here at thy conquering feete I lie, Poore captiue soul, that neuer thought to bow: Whose happie foote of rule and Maiestie Stood late on̄y same ground thou standest now. Caes. Rise Queene, none but thy selfis cause of all. And yet, would all were but thine owne alone: That others ruine had not with thy fall Brought Rome her sorowes, to my triumphs mone. For breaking off the league of loue and blood, Thou mak'st my winning ioy a gain vnpleasing: Sith th'eye of griefe must looke into our good, Thorow the horror of our own blood shedding. And all, we must attribute vnto thee. Cleo. To me? Caesar, what should a woman doe Opprest with greatnes? what was it for me To contradict my Lord, being bent thereto? I was by loue, by feare, by weakenes, made
An instrument to such disseignes as these. For when the Lord of all the Orient bade, Who but obey'd? who was not glad to please? And how could I withdraw my succouring hand From him that had my heart, and what was mine? The intrest of my faith in streightest band, My loue to his most firmly did combine. Caes. Loue? alas no, it was th'innated hatred That thou and thine hast euer born our people: That made thee seeke all means to haue vs scattred, To disunite our strenght and make vs feeble. And therefore did that brest nurse our dissentiō, With hope t'exalt thy selfe, t'augment thy state: To pray vppon the wracke of our contention, And (with the rest our foes,) to ioy thereat. Cleo. O Caesar, see how easie tis t'accuse Whom Fortune hath made faultie by their fall, The wretched conquered may not refuse The titles of reproch he's charg'd withall. The conquering cause hath right, wherein thou art, The vanquisht, still is iud'g the worser part. Which part is mine, because Ilost my part. No lesser then the portion of a Crowne. Enough for me, alas what needed arte To gaine by others, but to keepe mine owne? But here let weaker powers note what it is, To neighbour great Competitors too neere,
If we take part, we oft do perish thus, If neutrall bide, both parties we must feare. Alas, what shall the forst partakers doe, When folowing none, yet must they perish to? But Caesar, sith thy right and cause is such, Be not a heauie weight vpon calamitie: Depresse not the afflicted ouer-much, The chiefest glorie is the Victors lenitie. Th'in heritance of mercie from him take, Of whom thou hast thy fortune and thy name: Great Caesar me a Queene at first did make, And let not Caesar now confound the same, Read here these lines which still I keep with me, The witnes of his loue and fauours euer: And God forbid this should be said of thee, That Caesar wrong'd the fauoured of Caesar. For looke what I haue beene to Antonie, Think thou the same I might haue been to thee. And here I do present thee with the note Of all the treasure, all the iewels rare That Egypt hath in many ages got; And looke what Cleopatra hath, is there. Seleus. Nay there's not all set downe within that roule, I know some things she hath reseru'd apart. Cleo. What vile vngrateful wretch, dar'st thou cōtroule Thy Queen & soueraigne, caitife as thou art. (hands. Caes. Hold, holde; a poore reuenge can worke so feeble
Cleo. Ah Caesar, what a great indignitie Is this, that here my vassall subiect stands T'accuse me to my Lord of trecherie? If I reseru'd some certaine womens toyes, Alas it was not for my selfe (God knowes,) Poore miserable soule, that little ioyes In trifling ornaments, in outward showes. But what I kept, I kept to make my way Vnto thy Liuia and Octauias grace, That thereby in compassion mooued, they Might mediate thy fauour in my case. Caes. Well Cleopatra, feare not, thou shalt finde What fauour thou desir'st, or canst expect: For Caesar neuer yet was found but kinde To such as yeeld, and can themselues subiect. And therefore giue thou comfort to thy minde; Relieue thy soule thus ouer charg'd with care, How well I will intreate thee thou shalt find, So soone as some affaires dispatched are. Til whē farewel. Cl. Thanks thrise-renowned Caesar, Poore Cleopatra rests thine owne for euer. Dol. No maruel Caesar though our greatest spirits, Haue to the powre of such a charming beautie Been brought to yeeld the honor of their merits? Forgetting all respect of other dutie. Then whilst the glory of her youth remain'd The wondring obiect to each wanton eye:
Before her full of sweet (with sorrow wain'd,) Came to the period of this miserie. If still, euen in the midst of death and horror Such beautie shines, thorow clouds of age & sorow, If euen those sweet decaies seeme to plead for her, Which from affliction mouing graces borrow: If in calamitie she could thus moue, What could she do adorn'd with youth and loue? What could she do then, when as spreading wide The pompe of beautie, in her glorie dight? When arm'd with wonder, she could vse beside, Th'ingines of her loue, Hope and Delight? Beautie daughter of Maruaile, ô see how Thou canst disgracing sorrowes sweetly grace. What power thou shew'st in a distressed brow, That mak'st affliction faire, giu'st tears their grace. What can vntressed locks, can torne rent haire, A weeping eye, a wailing face be faire? I see then, artlesse feature can content, And that true beautie needes no ornament. Caes. What in a passion Dolabella? what take heed: Let others fresh examples be thy warning; What mischiefes these, so idle humors breed, Whilst error keepes vs from a true discrening. In deed I saw she labour'd to impart Her sweetest graces in her saddest cheere: Presuming on the face that know the arre
To moue with what aspect so eu'r it were. But all in vaine, she takes her ayme amisse, The ground and marke, her leuel much deceiues; Time now hath altred all, for neither is She as she was, nor we as she conceiues. And therfore now, twere best she left such badnes, Folly in youth is sinne, in age, tis madnes. And for my part, I seeke but t' entertaine In her some feeding hope to draw her forth; The greatest Trophey that my trauailes gaine, Is to bring home a prizall of such worth. And now, sith that she seemes so well content To be dispos'd by vs, without more stay She with her children shall to Rome be sent, Whilst I by Syria thither take my way CHORVS, O Fearefull frowning Nemesrs, Daughter of Iustice, most seuere, That art the worlds great arbitresse, And Queene of causes raigning heere. Whose swift-sure hand is euer neere Eternall iustice, righting wrong: Who neuer yet deserest long The proudes decay, the weakes redresse. But through thy power euery where,
Dost raze the great, and raise the lesse. The lesse made great dost ruine to, To shew the earth what heauen can do. Thou from darke-clos'd eternitie, From thy black clowdy hidden seate, The worlds disorders dost descry: Which when they swel so proudly great, Reuersing th' order nature set, Thou giu'st thy all consounding doome, Which none can know before it come. Th' ineuitable destinie, Which neither wit nor strength can let, Fast chain'd vnto necessitie, In mortall things doth order so, Th' alternate course of weale or wo. O how the powres of heauen do play With trauailed mortalitis: And doth their weakness still betray, In their best prosperitie? When being lifted up so hie, They looke beyond themselues so farre, That to themselues they take no care; Whilst swift confusion downe doth lay, Their late proude mounting vanitie: Bringing their glorie to decay,
And with the ruine of their fall, Extinguish people, state and all. But is it iustice that all we The innocent poore multitude, For great mens faults should punisht be, And to destruction thus pursude? O why should th' heauens vs include, Within the compasse of their fall, Who of themselues procured all? Or do the Gods (in close) decree, Occasion take how to extrude Man from the earth with crueltie? Ah no, the Gods are euer iust, Our faults excuse their rigor must. This is the period Fate set downe To Egypts fat prosperitie: Which now vnto her greatest growne, Must perish thus, by course must die. And some must be the causers why This reuolution must be wrought: As borne to bring their state to nought. To change the people and the crowne, And purge the worlds iniquitie: Which vice so farre bath ouer-growne. As we, so they that treate vs thus, Must one day perish like to vs.
ACTVS QVARTVS. SELEVCVS. RODON. Sel. NEuer friend Rodon in a better howre, Could I haue met thee thē eu'n now I do Hauing affliction in the greatest powre Vpon my soule, and none to tell it to. For tis some ease our sorrowes to reueale, If they to whom we shall impart our woes Seeme but to feele a part of what we feele: And meete vs with a sigh but at a cloze. Rod. And neuer (friend Seleucus) found'st thou one That better could beare such a part with thee: Who by his own, knows others cares to mone, And can, in like accord of griefe, agree. And therefore tell th' oppression of thy hart, Tell to an eare prepar'd and tun'd to care: And I will likewise vnto thee impart As sad a tale as what thou shalt declare. So shall we both our mournefull plaints combine, Ile waile thy state, and thou shalt pitty mine. Sel. Well then, thou know'st how I haue liu'din grace With Cleopatra, and esteem'din Court As one of Counsell, and of chiefest place, And euer held my credite in that sort: Till now in this confusion of our state,
When thinking to haue vs'd a meane to climbe, And fled the wretched, flowne vnto the great, (Following the fortune of the present time,) Am come to be cast down and ruin'd cleene; And in the course of mine own plot vndonne. For hauing all the secrets of the Queene Reueald to Caesar, to haue fauor wonne: My trechery is quited with disgrace, My falshood loath'd, and not without great reason Though good for him, yet Princes in this case Do hate the Traitor, though they loue the treason For how could hee imagine I would be Faithfull to him, being false vnto mine owne? And false to such a bountious Queene as shee, That had me rais'd and made mine honor knowne He saw twas not for zeale to him I bare, But for base feare, or mine owne state to settle. Weakenesse is false, and faith in Cowards rare, Feare findes out shifts, timiditie is subtle, And therefore scorn'd of him, scorn'd of mine own, Hatefull to all that looke into my state: Despis'd Seleucus now is onely grown The marke of infamy, that's pointed at. Rod. Tis much thou faist, and ôo too much to feele, And I do grieue and do lament thy fall: But yet all this which thou doost heere reueale, Compar'd with mine, wil make thine seem but smal
Although my fault be in the selfe-same kind, Yet in degree far greater, far more hatefull; Mine sprong of mischiefe, thine from feeble mind, I staind with bloud, thou onely but vngratefull, For vnto me did Cleopatra giue The best and deerest treasure of her blood, Louely Caesario, whom she would should liue Free from the dangers wherein Egypt stood. And vnto me with him this charge she gaue, Here Rodon, take, conuay from out this Coast, This precious Gem, the chiefest that I haue, The iewell of my soule I value most. Guide him to INDIA, lead him far from hence, Safeguard him where secure he may remaine, Till better fortune call him backe from thence, And Egypts peace be reconcil'd againe. For this is he that may our hopes bring backe; (The rising Sunne of our declining state:) These be the hands that may restore our wrack, And raise the broken ruines made of late. He may giue limits to the boundles pride Of fierce Octauius, and abate his might: Great Julius of-spring, he may come to-guide The Empire of the world, as his by right. O how he seemes the modell of his Syre? O how I gaze my Caesar in his face? Such was his gate, so did his lookes a spire;
Such was his threatning brow, such was his grace. High shouldred, and his forehead euen as hie. And ô, (if he had not beene borne so late,) He might haue rul'd the worlds great Monarchy, And now haue beene the Champion of our state. Then vnto him, ô my deere Sonne (she saies,) Soone of my youth, flie hence, ô flie, be gone, Reserue thy selfe, ordain'd for better daies, For much thou hast to ground thy hopes vpon. Leaue me (thy wofull Mother) to endure The sury of this tempest heere alone: Who cares not for her selfe, so thou be sure, Thou mayst reuenge, when others can but mone: Rodon will see thee safe, Rodon will guide Thee and thy waies, thou shalt not need to feare. Rodon (my faithfull seruant) will prouide What shall be best for thee, take thou no care. And ô good Rodon, looke well to his youth, The waies are long, and dangers eu'ry where. I vrge it not that I do doubt thy truth, Mothers will cast the worst, and alwaies feare. The absent danger greater still appeares, Lesse fears he, who is neere the thing he feares. And ô, I know not what presaging thought My sp'rit suggests of luckles bad euent: But yet it may be tis but loue doth dote, Or idle shadowes with my feares present.
But yet the memory of mine own fate Makes me feare his. And yet why should I feare His fortune may recouer better state, And he may come in pompe to gouerne heere. But yet I doubt the Genius of our race By some malignant spirit comes ouer-throwne Our bloud must be extinct, in my disgrace, Egypt must haue no more Kings of their owne. Then let him stay, and let vs fall together, Sith it is fore-decreed that we must fall. Yet who knowes what may come? let him go thither, What Merchaunt in one Vessell venters all? Let vs deuide our stars. Go, go my sonne, Let not the fate of Egypt find thee heere: Try if so be thy destinie can shunne The common wracke of vs, by being there. But who is he found euer yet defence Against the heauens, or hid him any where? Then what need I to send thee so far hence To seeke thy death that maystas well die here? And here die with thy mother, die in rest, Not trauailing to what will come to thee. Why should we leaue our bloud vnto the East, When Egypt may a Tombe sufficient be? O my deuided soule, what shall I do? Where on shall now my resolution rest? What were I best resolue to yeeld vnto
When both are bad, how shall I know the best? Stay; I may hap so worke with Caesar now, That he may yeeld him to restore thy right. Go; Caesar neuer will consent that thou So neere in bloud, shalt be so great in might. Then take him Rodon, go my sonne fare-well. But stay; ther's something else that I would say: Yet nothing now, but ô God speed thee well, Least saying more, that more may make thee stay. Yet let me speake: It may be tis the last That euer I shall speake to thee my Sonne. Doe Mothers vse to part in such post-haste? What, must I end when I haue scarce begun? Ah no (deere hart,) tis no such slender twine Where-with the knot is tide twixt thee and me, That bloud within thy vaines came out of mine, Parting from thee, I part from part of me: And therefore I must speake. Yet what? O sonne. Here more she would, when more she could not say, Sorrow rebounding backe whence it begun, Fild vp the passage, and quite stopt the way: When sweet Caesario with a princely spirite, (Though comfortles himself) did comfort giue, With mildest words, perswading her to beare it. And as for him, she should not need to grieue. And I (with protestations of my part,) Swore by that faith, (which sworn I did deceiue)
That I would vse all care, all wit and arte To see him safe; And so we tooke our leaue. Scarce had we trauail'd to our iourneies end, When Caesar hauing knowledge of our way, His Agents after vs with speed doth send To labour me, Caesario to betray. Who with rewards and promises so large, Assail'd me then, that I grew soone content; And backe to Rhodes did reconuay my charge, Pretending that Octauius for him sent, To make him King of Egypt presently. And thither come, seeing himselfe betray'd, And in the hands of death through trechery, Wailing his state, thus to himselfe he said. Lo here brought back by subtile train to death Betraide by Tutors faith, or traytors rather: My fault my bloud, and mine offence my birth, For being sonne of such a mighty Father. From India, (whither sent by mothers care, To be reseru'd from Egypts common wracke,) To Rhodes, (so long the armes of tyrants are,) I am by Caesars subtile reach brought backe: Here to be made th' oblation for his feares, Who doubts the poore reuenge these hands may doe him: Respecting neither blood, nor youth, nor yeeres, Or how small safety can my death be to him. And is this all the good of beeing borne great?
Then wretched greatnesse, proud rich misery, Pompous distresse, glittering calamity. Is it for this th' ambitious Fathers swear, To purchase bloud & death for thē and theirs? Is this the issue that their glories get, To leaue a sure destruction to their heyros? O how much better had it beene for me, From low descent, deriu'd of humble birth, T'haue eat the sweet-sowre bread of pouertie, And drunke of Nilus streams in Nilus earth: Vnder the cou'ring of some quiet Cottage, Free from the wrath of heauen, secure in mind, Vntoucht when sad euents of princes dotage Confounds what euer mighty it doth find. And not t'haue stood in their way, whose condition Is to haue all made cleere, and all thing plaine Betweene them and the marke of their ambition, That nothing let, the ful sight of their raigne. Where nothing stands, that stands not in submission; Where greatnesse must all in it selfe containe. Kings will be alone, Competitors must downe, Neere death he stands, that stands too neere a Crowne. Such is my case, for Caesar will haue all. My bloud must seale th' assurance of his state: Yet ah weake state that blood assure him shall, Whose wrongfull shedding, Gods & men do hate. Iniustice neuer scapes vnpunisht still,
Though men reuenge not, yet the heauens wil. And thou Augustus that with bloodie hand, Cutt'st off succession from anothers race, Maist find the heauens thy vowes so to withstand, That others may depriue thine in like case. When thou maist see thy proud contentious bed Yeelding thee none of thine that may inherite: Subuert thy blood, place others in their sted, To pay this thy iniustice her due merite. If it be true (as who can that denie Which sacred Priests of Memphis doe fore-say) Some of the of-spring yet of Antonis, Shall all the rule of this whole Empire sway; And then Augustus, what is it thou gainest By poore Antillus blood, or this of mine? Nothing but this thy victorie thou slainest, And pull'st the wrath of heauen on thee and thine. In vaine doth man contend against the starr's, For that he seekes to make, his wisdom marr's. Yet in the mean-time we whom Fates reserue, The bloodie sacrifices of ambition, We feele the smart what euer they deserue, And woindure the present times condition. The iustice of the heauens reuenging thus, Doth onely satisfie it selfe, not vs. Yet tis a pleasing comfort that doth ease Affliction in so great extremitie,
To thinke their like destruction shall appease Our ghosts, who did procure our miserie. But dead we are, vncertaine what shall bee, And liuing, we are sure to feele the wrong: Our certaine ruine we our selues do see. They ioy the while, and we know not how long. But yet Caesario, thou must die content, For men will mone, and God reuenge th'innocent. Thus he cōplain'd, & thus thou hear'st my shame. Sel. But how hath Caesar now rewarded thee? Rod. As he hath thee. And I expect the same As fell to Theodor to fall to mee: For he (one of my coate) hauing betraid The young Antillus, sonne of Anthonie, And at his death from off his necke conuaid A iewell: which being askt, he did denie: Caesar occasion tooke to hang him straight. Such instruments with Princes liue not long. Although they need such actors of deceit, Yet still our sight seemes to vpbraid their wrong; And therefore we must needes this daunger runne, And in the net of our owne guile be caught: We must not liue to brag what we haue done, For what is done, must not appeare their fault. But here comes Cleopatra, wofull Queene, And our shame will not that we should be seene. Exeunt.
Cleopatra. WHat hath my face yet powre to win a Louer? Can this torne remnant serue to grace me so, That it can Caesars secrete plots discouer What he intends with me and mine to do? Why then poore Beautie thou hast done thy last, And best good seruice thou could'st do vnto mee. For now the time of death reueal'd thou hast, Which in my life didst serue but to vndoe mee. Heere Dolabella far forsooth in loue, Writes, how that Caesar meanes forthwith, to send Both me and mine, th'ayre of Rome to proue: There his Triumphant Chariot to attend. I thanke the man, both for his loue and letter; The one comes fit to warne me thus before, But for th'other, I must die his debter, For Cleopatra now can loue no more. But hauing leaue, I must go take my leaue And last farewell of my dead Anthonie: Whose deerly honour'd tombe must here receiue This sacrifice, the last before I die. O sacred euer-memorable stone, That hast without my teares, within my flame, Receiue th'oblation of the wofull'st mone That euer yet from sad affliction came, And you deare reliques of my Lord and Loue,
(The sweetest parcels of the faithfull'st liuer,) O let no impious hand dare to remoue You out from hence, but rest you here for euer. Let Egypt now giue peace vnto you dead, That liuing gaue you trouble and turmoile: Sleepe quiet in this euer-lasting bed, In forraine land preferr'd before your soile. And ô, if that the sp'rits of men remaine After their bodies, and do neuer die, Then heare thy ghost thy captiue spouse cōplaine And be attentiue to her miserie. But if that labour some mortalitie Found this sweete error, onely to confine The curious search of idle vanitie, That would the deapth of darknes vndermine: Or rather to giue rest vnto the thought Of wretched man, with th'after-comming ioy Of those conceiued fields whereon we dote, To pacifie the present worlds anoy. If it be so, why speake I then to th'ayre? But tis not so, my Anthonie doth heare: His euer-liuing ghost attends my prayer, And I do know his houering sp'rit is neere. And I will speake, and pray, and mourne to thee, O pure immortall loue that daign'st to heare: I feele thou answer'st my credulitie With touch of comfort, finding none elswhere.
Thou know'st these hands cotomb'd thee here of late, Free and vnsorc'd, which now must seruile be, Reseru'd for bands to grace proud Caesars state, Who seekes in me to triumph ouer thee. O if in life we could not seuerd be, Shall death deuide our bodies now asunder? Must thine in Egypt, mine in Italie, Be kept the Monuments of Fortunes wonder? If any powres be there where as thou art, (Sith our owne Country Gods betray our case,) O worke they may their gracious helpe impart, To saue thy wofull wife from such disgrace. Do not permit she should in triumph shew The blush of her reproch, ioyn'd with thy shame: But (rather) let that hatefull Tyrant know, That thou and I had powre t'auoyde the same. But what doe I spend breath and idle winde, In vaine inuoking a conceiued ayde? Why do I not my selfe occasion find To breake the bounds where in my'selfe am staid? Words are for them that can complaine and liue, Whose melting hearts compos'd of baser frame, Can to their sorrowes, time and leisure giue, But Cleopatra may not do the same. No Anthonie, thy loue requireth more: A lingring death, with thee deserues no merit, I must my selfe force open wide a dore
To let out life, and so vnhouse my spirit, These hands must breake the prison of my soule To come to thee, thereto enioy like state, As doth the long-pent solitaric Foule, That hath escapt her cage, and found her mate. This Sacrifice to sacrifize my life, Is that true incense that dooth best beseeme: These rites may serue a life-desiring wife, Who doing them, t'haue done inough doth deeme. My hart blood should the purple flowers haue been, Which heere vpon thy Tombe to thee are offred, No smoake but dying breath should heere been seen, And this it had beene to, had I beene fufired. But what haue I saue these bare hands to do it? And these weake fingers are not iron-poynted: They cannot pierce the flesh be'ing put vnto it, And I of all meanes else am disappointed. But yet I must away and meanes seeke, how To come vnto thee, what so ere I doo. O Death art thou so hard to come by now, That we must pray, intreate, and seeke thee too? But I will find thee where so ere thou lie, For who can stay a minde resolu'd to die? And now I go to works th'effect indeed, He neuer send more words or sighes to thee: He bring my soule my selfe, and that with speede, My selfe will bring my soule to Antbonie.
Come go my Maides, my fortunes sole attenders, That minister to miserie and sorrow: Your Mistris you vnto your freedom renders. And will discharge your charge yet ere to morrow. And now by this, I thinke the man I sent, Is neere return'd that brings me my dispatch. God grant his cunning sort to good euent, And that his skill may well beguile my watch: So shall I shun disgrace, leaue to be sorie, Flie to my loue, scape my foe, free my soule; So shall I act the last of life with glorie, Die like a Queene, and rest without controule. Exit. CHORVS. Mysterious Egypt, wonder breeder, strict religions strange obseruer, State-ordrer zeale, the best rule-keeper, Fostring still in temp'rate feruor: O how cam'st thou to lose so wholy All religion, law and order? And thus become the most vnholy of all Lands, that Nylus border? How could confus'd Disorder enter Where sterne Law sute so sewerely? How durst weake lust and riot venter
th'eye of Iustice looking neerely? Could not those means that made thee great Be still the means to keepe thy state? Ah no, the course of things requireth change and alteration euer. That same continuance man desireth, th'vnconstant world yeeldeth neuer. We in our counsels must be blinded, And not see what doth import vs: And often-times the thing least minded is the thing that most must hurt vs. Yet they that haue the sterne in guiding, tis their fault that should preuent it. For oft they seeing their Country sliding, take their ease, as though contented. We imitate the greater powres, The Princes manners fashion ours. Th'example of their light regarding, Vulgar loosenes much incences: Vice vncontrould, growes wide inlarging, Kings small faults, be great offences. And this hath set the window open. vnto licence, lust and riot: This way confusion first found broken, whereby entred our disquiet.
Those lawes that olde Sesostris founded, and the Ptolomies obserued, Hereby first came to be confounded, which our state so long preserued. The wanton luxurie of Court, Did forme the people of like sort. For all (respecting priuate pleasure,) vniuersally consenting To abuse their time, their treasure, in their owne delights contenting: And future dangers nought respecting, whereby, (ô how easie matter Made this so generall neglecting, confus'd weakenesse to discatter?) Caesar found th'effect true tried, in his easie entrance making: Who at the sight of armes, descryed all our people, all forsaking. For ryot (worse then warre,) so sore Had wasted all our strength before. And thus is Egypt seruile rendred to the insolent destroyer: And all their sumptuous treasure tendred, All her wealth that did betray her. Which poison (O if heauen be right full,)
may so far infect their sences, That Egypts pleasures so delightfull, may breed them the like offences. And Romans learne our way of weakenes, be instructed in our vices: That our spoiles may spoile your greatnes, ouercome with our deuises. Fill full your hands, and carry home Inough from vs to ruine Rome. ACTVS QVINTVS. DOLABELLA. TITIVS. Dol. Come tell me Titius eu'ry circumstance How Cleopatra did receiue my newes: Tell eu'ry looke, each gesture, countenance, That she did in my Letters reading, vse. Tit. I shal my Lord, so far as I could note, Or my conceite obserue in any wise. It was the time when as she hauing got Leaue to her Deerest dead to sacrifize; And now was issuing out the Monument With Odors, Incense, Garlands in her hand, When I approcht (as one from Caesar sent,) And did her close thy message t'vnderstand. She turnes her backe, and with her, takes me in, Reades in thy lines thy strange vnlooke for tale:
And reades, and smiles, and staies, and doth begin Againe to reade, then blusht, and then was pale. And hauing ended with a sigh, resoldes Thy Letter vp: and with a fixed eye, (Which stedfast her imagination holds) She mus'd a while, standing confusedly: At length. Ah friend, (saith shee), tell thy good Lord, How deere I hold his pittying of my case: That out of his sweet nature can afford A miserable woman so much grace. Tel him how much my heauy soule doth grieue Mercilesse Caesar should so deale with me: Pray him that he would all the counsell giue, That might diuert him from such orueltie. As for my loue, say Antony hath all, Say that my hart is gone into the graue VVith him, in whom it rests and euer shall: I haue it not my selfe, nor cannot haue. Yet tell him, he shall more command of me Then any, whosoeuer hiuing can. Hee that so friendly shewes himselfe to be A right kind Roman, and a Gentleman. Although his Nation (fatall vnto me,) Haue had mine age a spoile, my youth a pray, Yet his affection must accepted be, That fauours one distrest in such decay. Ah, he was worthy then to haue beene lou'd,
Of Cleopatra whiles her glory lasted; Before she had declining fortune prou'd, Or seen her honor wrackt, her flowre blasted. Now there is nothing left her but disgrace, Nothing but her affliction that can moue: Tell Dolabella, one that's in her case, (Poore soule) needs rather pity now thē loue. But shortly shall thy Lord heare more of me. And ending so her speech, no longer stai'd, But hasted to the tombe of Antony. And this was all she did, and all she said. Dol. Ah sweet distressed Lady. What hard hart Could chuse but pity thee, and loue thee too? Thy worthines, the state wherein thou art Requireth both, and both I vow to doo. Although ambition lets not Caesar see The wrong he doth thy maiesty and sweetnes, Which makes him now exact so much of thee, To adde vnto his pride, to grace his greatnes, He knowes thou canst no hurt procure vs now, Sith all thy strength is seaz'd into our hands: Nor feares he that, but rather labours how He might shew Rome so great a Queene in bands: That our great Ladies (enuying thee so much That stain'd them al, and held them in such wonder,) Mightioy to see thee, and thy fortune such, Thereby exrolling him that brought thee vnder.
But I will seeke to stay it what I may; I am but one, yet one that Caesar loues, And ô if now I could doe more then pray, Then should'st thou know how far affection moues. But what my powre and praier may preuaile, Ile ioine them both, to hinder thy disgrace: And euen this present day I will not faile To do my best with Caesar in this case. Tit. And sir, euen now her selfe hath letters sent, I met her messenger as I came hither, With a dispatch as he to Caesar went, But know not what imports her sending thither. Yet this he told, how Cleopatra late Was come from sacrifice. How richly clad Was seru'd to dinner in most sumptuous state, With all the brauest ornaments she had. How hauing dyn'd, she writes, and sends away Him straight to Caesar, and commanded than All should depart the Tombe, and none to stay But her two maides, & one poore Countryman: Dol. Why then I know, she sends t'haue audience now, And means t' experience what her state can do: To see if Maiesty will make him bow To what affliction could not moue him to. And ô, if now she could but bring a view Of that fresh beauty she in youth possest, (The argument where with she ouerthrew
The wit of Julius Caesar, and the rest,) Then happily Augustus might relent, VVhilst powreful Loue, (far stronger then ambition) Might worke in him, a mind to be content To grant her asking, in the best condition. But being as she is, yet doth she merite To be respected, for what she hath beene: The wonder of her kind, of rarest spirit, A glorious lady, and a mighty Queene. And now, but by a little weakenesse falling To do that which perhaps sh'was forst to do: Alas, an error past, is past recalling, Take away weakenes, and take women too. But now I go to be thy aduocate, Sweet Cleopatra, now Ile vse mine arte. Thy presence will me greatly animate, Thy face will teach my tongue, thy loue my hart. SCENA SECVNDA. Nvntivs. AM I ordain'd the carefull Messenger, And sad newes-bringer of the strangest death, VVhich selfe hand did vpon it selfe infer, To free a captiue soule from seruile breath? Must I the lamentable wonder shew, Which all the world must grieue and meruaile at
The rarest forme of death in earth below, That euer pitty, glory, wonder gat. Chor. What newes bring'st thou, can Egypt yet yeelde (more Of sorrow then it hath? what can it adde To the already ouerflowing store Of sad affliction, matter yet more sad? Haue we not seene the worst of our calamity? Is there behind yet something of distresse Vnseene, vnknown? Tel if that greater misery There be, that we waile not that which is lesse. Tell vs what so it be, and tell at first, For sorrow euer longs to heare her worst. Nun. Well then, the strangest thing relate I will, That euer eye of mortall man hath seene. I (as you know) euen frō my youth, haue still Attended on the person of the Queene: And euer in all fortunes good or ill, With her as one of chiefest trust haue beene. And now in these so great extreamities, That euer could to maiestie befall, I did my best in what I could deuise, And left her not, till now she left vs all. Chor. What is she gone. Hath Caesar forst her so? Nun. Yea, she is gone, and hath deceiu'd him to. Chor. What, fled to INDIA, to go find her sonne? Nun. No, not to INDIA, but to find her sonne. Chor. why then ther's hope she may her state recouer.
Nun. Her state? nay rather honor, and her Louer. Chor. Her Louer? him she cannot haue againe. Nun. Well, him she hath, with him she doth remaine. Cho. Why then she's dead. Ist so? why speak'st not thou? Nun. You gesse aright, and I will tell you how. When she perceiu'd al hope was cleane berest her, That Caesar meant to send her straight away, And saw no meanes of reconcilement left her, Worke what she could, she could not worke to stay: She cals me to her, and she thus began. O thou, whose trust hath euer been the same And one in all my fortunes, faithfull man, Alone content t'attend disgrace and shame. Thou, whom the fearefull ruine of my fall, Neuer deterr'd to leaue calamitie: As did those others smooth state-pleasers all, Who followed but my fortune, and not me. Tis thou must do a seruice for thy Queene, Wherein thy faith and skill must do their best: Thy honest care and duty shall be seene Performing this, more then in all the rest. For al what thou hast don, may die with thee, Although tis pitty that such faith should die. But this shall euermore remembred be, A rare example to posterity. And looke how long as Cleopatra shall In after ages liue in memory,
So long shall thy cleere fame endure withall, And therefore thou must not my sute denie; Nor contradict my will. For what I will I am resolu'd: and this tis thou must do me: Go find mee out with all thy art and skill Two Aspicqs, and conuay them close vnto me. I haue a worke to do with them in hand, Enquire not what, for thou shalt soone see what, If the heauens do not my disseignes withstand, But do thy charge, and let me shift with that. Being thus coniur'd by her t'whom I'had vow'd My true perpetuall seruice, forth I went, Deuising how my close attempt to shrowde, So that there might no art my art preuent. And so disguis'd in habite as you see, Hauing found out the thing for which I went, I soone return'd againe, and brought with me The Aspicqs, in a basket closely pent. Which I had fill'd with figges, and leaues vpon. And comming to the guard that kept the dore, What hast thou there? said they, and looke thereon. Seeing the figgs, they deem'd of nothing more, But said, they were the fairest they had seene. Taste some, said I, for they are good and pleasant. No, no, said they, go beare them to thy Queene, Thinking me some poore māy brought a present. Well, in I went, where brighter then the Sunne,
Glittering in all her pompous rich aray, Great Cleopatra sate, as if sh'had wonne Caesar, and all the world beside this day: Euen as she was when on thy cristall streames, O Cydnos she did shew what earth could shew. When Asia all amaz'd in wonder, deemes Venus from heauen was come on earth below. Euen as she went at first to meete her Loue, So goes she now at last againe to find him. But that first, did her greatnes onely proue, This last her loue, that could not liue behind him. Yet as she fate, the doubt of my good speed, Detracts much from the sweetnes of her looke: Cheer-marrer Care, did then such passions breed, That made her eye bewray the care she tooke. But she no sooner sees me in the place, But straight her sorow-clowded brow she cleeres, Lightning a smile from out a stormie face, Which all her tempest-beaten sences cheeres. Looke how a stray'd perplexed trauailer, When chas'd by theeues, & euē at point of taking, Descrying suddainly some towne not far, Or some vnlookt-for aid to him-ward making; Cheers vp his tired sp'rits, thrusts forth his strēgth To meet that good, that comes in so good houre: Such was her ioy, perceiuing now at length, Her honour was t'escape so proude a powre,
Forth from her seat she hastes to meet the present, And as one ouer-ioy'd, she caught it straight. And with a smiling cheere in action pleasant, Looking among the figs, findes the deceite. And seeing there the vgly venemous beast, Nothing dismaid, she stayes and viewes it well. At length th' extreamest of her passion ceast, When she began with words her ioy to tell. O rarest beast (saith she) that Affrick breedes, How deerly welcome art thou vnto me? The fairest creature that faire Nylus feedes Me thinks I see, in now beholding thee. What though the euer-erring worlde doth deeme That angred Nature fram'd thee but in spight? Little they know what they so light esteeme, That neuer learn'd the wonder of thy might. Better then Death, Deaths office thou dischargest, That with one gentle touch can free our breath: And in a pleasing sleepe our soule inlargest, Making our selues not priuie to our death. If Nature err'd, ô then how happy error, Thinking to make thee worst, she made thee best: Sith thou best freest vs from our liues worst terror, In sweetly bringing soules to quiet rest. When that inexorable Monster Death That followes Fortune, flies the poore destressed, Tortures our bodies ere he takes our breath,
And loads with paines th' already weak oppressed. How oft haue I begg'd, prayd, intreated him To take my life, and yet could neuer get him? And when he comes, he comes so vgly grim, That who is he (if he could chuse) would let him? Therefore come thou, of wonders wonder chiefe, That open canst with such an easie key The doore of life, come gentle cunning thiefe, That from our selues so steal'st our selues away. Well did our Priests discerne something diuine Shadow'd in thee, and therefore first they did Offrings and worships due to thee assigne, In whom they found such mysteries were hid. Comparing thy swift motion to the Sunne, That mou'st without the instruments that moue: And neuer waxing olde, but alwayes one, Doost sure thy strange diuinitie approue. And therefore to, the rather vnto thee In zeale I make the offring of my blood, Calamitie confirming now in me A sure beliefe that pietie makes good. Which happy men neglect, or hold ambiguous. And onely the afflicted are religious. And heere I sacrifice these armes to Death, That Lust late dedicated to Delights: Offring vp for my last, this last of breath, The complement of my loues dearest rites.
With that she bares her arme, and offer makes To touch her death, yet at the touch with-drawes, And seeming more to speake, occasion takes, Willing to die, and willing to to pause. Looke how a mother at her sonnes departing For some far voyage bent to get him fame, Doth intertaine him with anidle parling And stil doth speake, and still speakes but the same; Now bids farewell, and now recalls him backe, Tels what was told, and bids againe fare-well, And yet againe recalls; for still doth lacke Something that loue would faine and cannot tell. Pleas'd he should go, yet cannot let him go. So she, although she knew there was no way But this, yet this she could not handle so But she must shew that life desir'd delay. Faine would she entertaine the time as now, And now would faine that Death would seaze vpō her, Whilst I might see presented in her brow, The doubtful combattry'd twixt Life and Honor. Life bringing Legions of fresh hopes with her, Arm'd with the proofe of time, which yeelds we say Comfort and helpe, to such as do refer All vnto him, and can admit delay. But Honour scorning Life, loe forth leades he Bright immortalitie in shining armour: Thorow the rayes of whose cleere glorie, shee Might see Lifes basenes, how much it might harm her.
Besides she saw whole armies of Reproches, And base Disgraces, Furies fearfull sad, Marching with Life, and Shame that stil incroches Vpon her face, in bloodie colours clad. Which representments seeing, worse then death She deem'd to yeeld to Life, and therefore chose To render all to Honour, hart and breath; And that with speede, least that her in ward foes False flesh and blood, ioyning with life and hope, Should mutinie against her resolution. And to the end she would not giue them scope, She presently proceedes to th' execution. And sharply blaming of her rebell powres, False flesh (saith she,) & what dost thou conspire With Caesar to, as thou wert none of ours, To worke my shame, and hinder my desire? Wilt thou retaine in closure of thy vaines, That enemie Base life, to let my good? No, know there is a greater powre constraines Then can be countercheckt with fearfull blood. For to the mind that's great, nothing seems great: And seeing death to be the last of woes, And life lasting disgrace, which I shall get, What do I lose, that haue but life to lose? This hauing said, strengthned in her owne hart, And vnion of herselfe, sences in one Charging togither, she performes that part That hath so great a part of glorie wonne.
And so receiues the deadly poysoning touch; That touch that try'd the gold of her loue, pure, And hath confirm'd her honour to be such, As must a wonder to all worlds endure. Now not an yeelding shrinke or touch offeare, Consented to bewray least sence of paine: But still in one same sweete vnaltred cheere, Her honor did her dying thoughts retaine. Wel, now this work is done (saith she,) here ends This act of life, that part the Fates assign'd: What glory or disgrace heere this world lends, Both haue I had, and both I leaue behind. And now ô Earth, the Theater where I Haue acted this, witnes I die vnforst. Wirnes my soule parts free to Anthonie, And now proude Tyrant Caesar do thy worst. This said, she staies, and makes a suddaine pause, As twere to feele wheher the poyson wrought: Or rather else the working might be cause That made her stay, and intertain'd her thought. For in that instant I might well perceiue The drowsie humor in her falling brow: And how each powre, each part opprest did leaue Their former office, and did sencelesse grow. Looke how a new pluckt branch against the Sun, Declines his fading leaues in feeble sort; So her disioyned ioyntures as vndonne, Let fall her weake dissolued limmes support.
Yet loe that face the wonder of her life, Retaines in death, a grace that graceth death, Colour so liuely, cheere so louelie rife, That none would think such beauty could want breath. And in that cheere th'impression of a smile Did seeme to shew she scorned Death and Caesar, As glorying that she could them both beguile, And telling death how much her death did please her. Woonder it was to see how soone she went, She went with such a will, and did so haste it, That sure I thinke she did her paine preuent, Fore-going paine, or staying not to taste it. And sencelesse, in her sinking downe she wryes The Diademe which on her head she wore, Which Charmion (poore weake feeble mayd) espies, And hastes to right it as it was before. For Eras now was dead, and Charmion too Euen at the poynt, for both would imitate Their Mistresse glorie, striuing like to doo. But Charmion would in this exceed her mate, For she would haue this honour to be last, That should adorne that head that must be seene To weare a Crowne in death, that life held fast, That all the world might know she dyde a Queene, And as she stood setting it fitly on, Lo in rush Caesars Messengers in haste, Thinking to haue preuented what was done, But yet they came too late, for all was past.
For there they found stretch'd on a bed of gold, Dead Cleopatra, and that proudly dead, In all the rich attyre procure she could, And dying Charmion trimming of her head, And Eras at her feet, dead in like case. Charmion, is this well done? said one of them. Yea, well said she, and her that from the race Of so great Kings descends, doth best become. And with that word, yeelds to her faithful breath, To passe th'affurance of her loue with death. Chor. But how knew Caesar of her close intent? Nun. By Letters which before to him she sent. For when she had procur'd this meanes to die, She writes, and earnestly intreates, she might Be buried in one Tombe with Antony. Where by then Caesar gess'd all went not right. And forth-with sends, yet ere the message came She was dispatcht, he crost in his intent, Her prouidence had ordred so the same That she was sure none should her plot preuent CHORVS. THen thus we haue bepeld Th'accomplishment of woes, The full of ruine and The worst of worst of ills: And seene all hope expeld,
That euer sweet repose Shall re-possesse the Land That Desolation fils, And where Ambition spils With vncontrouled hand, All th'issue of all those That so long rule haue held: To make vs no more vs, But cleane confound vs thus. And canst ô Nylus thou, Father of floods indure, That yellow Tyber should With sandy streames rule thee? Wilt thou be pleas'd to bow To him those feet so pure, Whose vnknown head we hold A powre diuine to be? Thou that didst euer see Thy free banks vncontrould, Liue vnder thine own care: Ah wilt thou beare it now? And now wilt yeeld thy streams A pray to other Reames? Draw backe thy waters flo To thy concealed head: Rockes strangle vp thy waues. Stop Cataractes thy fall.
And turne thy courses so, That sandy Desarts dead, (The world of dust that craues To swallow thee vp all,) May drinke so much as shall Reuiue from vastie graues Aliuing green which spred Far florishing, may gro On that wide face of Death, Where nothing now drawes breath. Fatten some people there, Euen as thou vs hast done, With plenties wanton store, And feeble luxurie: And them as vs prepare Fit for the day of mone Respected not before. Leaue leuell'd Egypt drie, A barren pray to lie, Wasted for euer-more. Of plenties yeelding none To recompence the care Of Victors greedy lust, And bring forth nought but dust. And so O leaue to be, Sith thou art what thou art: Let not our race possesse
Th'inheritance of shame, The fee of sin, that we Haue left them for their part: The yoke of whose distresse Must still vpbraidour blame, Telling from whom it came. Our weight of want onnesse Lies heauie on their hart, Who neuer-more shall see The glory of that worth They left, who brought vs forth. O thou all-seeing light, High President of heauen, You magistrates the starres Of that eternall Court Of Prouidence and Right, Are these the bounds y'haue giuen Th'vntran spassable barres, That limit pride so short, Is greatnesse of this sort, That greatnesse greatnesse marres, And wracks it selfe, selfe driuen On Rocks of her own might? Doth Order order so Disorders ouer-thro? FINIS.
THE COMPLAINT OF ROSAMOND. OVT from the horror of Infernall deepes, My poore afflicted ghost comes heere to plain it, Attended with my shame that neuer sleepes, The spot where-with my kinde and youth did staine it. My body found a graue where to containe it. A sheete could hide my face, but not my sin, For Fame findes neuer tombe t'inclose it in. And which is worse, my soule is now denied, Her transport to the sweet Elisian rest, The ioifull blisse for ghosts repurified, The euer-springing Gardens of the blest: Caron denies me waftage with the rest. And saies, my soule can neuer passe the Riuer, Till Louers sighes on earth shall it deliuer, So shall I neuer passe, for how should I Procure this sacrifice amongst the liuing? Time hath long since worne out the memorie Both of my life, and liues vniust depriuing, Sorrow for me is dead for aye reuiuing. ROSAMOND hath little left her but her name, And that disgrac'd, for time hath wrong'd the same.
No muse suggests the pitty of my case, Each pen doth ouerpasse my iust complaint, Whilst others are preferd, though far more base; Shores wife is grac'd, and passes for a Saint; Her Legend iustifies her foule attaint. Her wel-told tale did such compassion find, That she is pass'd, and I am left behind. Which seene with griefe, my miserable ghost, (Whilome inuested in so faire a vaile, Which whilst it liu'd, was honored of the most, And being dead giues matter to bewaile.) Comes to sollicite thee, (since others faile,) To take this taske, and in thy woful song To forme my case, and register my wrong. Although I know thy iust lamenting Muse, Toild in th' affliction of thine owne distresse, In others cares hath little time to vse, And therefore maist esteeme of mine the lesse: Yet as thy hopes attend happie redresse, Thy ioies depending on a womans grace, So moue thy mind a wofull womans case.
DELIA may hap to deigne to read our storie, And offer vp her sigh among the rest, Whose merit would suffice for both our glorie, Whereby thou might'st be grac'd and I be blest; That indulgence would profit me the best. Such power she hath by whom thy youth is led, To ioy the liuing, and to blesse the dead. So I (through beautie) made the wofull'st wight, By beautie might haue comfort after death: That dying fairest, by the fairest might Find life aboue on earth, and rest beneath. She that can blesse vs with one happie breath, Giue comfort to thy Muse to do her best, That thereby thou maistioy, and I might rest. Thus said: forth-with mou'd with a tender care, And pittie, (which my selfe could neuer find,) What she desir'd, my Muse deign'd to declare, And therefore, will'd her boldly tel her mind. And I (more willing,) tooke this charge assignd, Because her griefes were worthy to be known, And telling hers, might hap forget mine own:
Then write (quoth she) the ruine of my youth, Report the down-fall of my slippry state, Of all my life reueale the simple truth, To teach to others what I learnt too late. Exemplifie my frailty, tell how Fate Keepes in eternall darke our fortunes hidden, And ere they come, to know thē tis forbidden. For whilst the sun-shine of my fortune lasted, Iioy'd the happiest warmth, the sweetest heate That euer yet imperious beauty tasted, I had what glory euer flesh could get: But this faire morning had a shamefull set. Disgrace darkt honor, sin did clowd my brow, As note the sequel, and Ile tell thee how. The bloud I staind, was good and of the best, My birth had honour, and my beauty fame: Nature and Fortune ioin'd to make me blest, Had I had grace t'haue knowne to vse the same. My education shew'd from whence I came, And all concurd to make me happie first, That so great hap might make me more accurst.
Happie liu'd I whilst parents eie did guide The indiscretion of my feeble waies, And Country home kept me from being eide, Wher best vnknown I spent my sweetestdaics: Til that my friends mine honor sought to raise To higher place, which greater credit yeelds, Deeming such beauty was vnfit for feelds. From Country then to Court I was preferr'd, From calme to stormes, from shore into the deepes: There where I perish'd, where my youth first err'd, There where I lost the flowre which honor keepes; There where the worser thriues, the better weepes; Ah me (poore wench,) on this vnhappy shelfe, I grounded me and st awaie my selfe. For thither com'd, when yeeres had arm'd my youth, With rarest proofe of beautie euer seene: When my reuiuing eie had  the truth, That it had power to make the winter greene, And flowre affections whereas none had beene; Soone could I teach my brow to tyrannize, And make the world do homage to mine eies.
For age I saw, (though yeeres with cold conceit, Congeald their thoughts against a warme desire,) Yet sigh their want, and looke at such a baite. I saw how youth was waxe before the fire. I saw by stealth, I fram'd my looke a lyre. Yet wel perceiu'd, how Fortune made me then The enuie of my sexe, and wonder vnto men. Looke how a Comet at the first appearing, Drawes all mens eies with wonder to behold it; Or as the faddest tale at suddaine hearing, Makes silent listning vnto him that told it, So did my speech when Rubies did vnfold it. So did the blazing of my blush appeare, T'amaze the world, that holds such sights so deere. Ah beauty Syren, faire enchaunting good, Sweet silent rhetorique of perswading'eies: Dombe eloquēce, whose power doth moue the bloud, More then the words, or wisdome of the wife; Still harmony, whose diapason lies Within a brow, the key which passions moue, To rauish sence, and play a world in loue.
What might I then not do whose power was such? What cannot women do that know their power? What women knowes it not (I feare too much) How blisse or bale lies in their laugh or lowre? Whilst they enioy their happy blooming flowre, Whilst nature decks them in their best attires Of youth and beautie which the world admires. Such one was I, my beautie was mine owne, No borrowed blush which bank-rot beauties seeke: That new-found shame, a sinne to vs vnknowne, Th' adulterate beauty of a falsed cheeke: Vilde staine to honour, and to women eeke, Seeing that time our fading must detect, Thus with defect to couer our defect. Impietie of times, chastities abator, Falshood, wherein thy selfe thy selfe deniest: Treason to counterfeit the seale of nature, The stampe of heauen, impressed by the hiest. Disgrace vnto the world, to whom thou liest. Idoll vnto thy selfe, shame to the wise, And all that honour thee idolatrise.
Far was that finne from vs whose age was pure, When simple beauty was accounted best, The time when women had no other lure But modestie, pure cheeks, a vertuous brest. This was the pompe where with my youth was blest. These were the weapons which mine honor wun In all the conflicts which my eies begun. Which were not small, I wrought on no meane obiect, A Crowne was at my feet, Scepters obeide me, Whō Fortune made my King, Loue made my subiect, Who did command the Land, most humbly praid me, HENRIE the second, that so highlie weigh'd me, Found well (by proofe) the priuiledge of beautie, That it had powre to counter-maund all dutie. For after all his victories in FRAVNCE, And all the triumphes of his honor wun: Vnmatch'd by sword, was vanquisht by a glaunce, And hotter wars within his brest begun. Wars, whom whole Legions of desires drew on: Against all which, my chastitie contends With force of honour, which my shame defends.
No armour might be found that could defend, Transpearcing raies of Christal pointed eies: No stratagem, no reason could amend, No not this age; (yet old men should be wise.) But shewes deceiue, outward appearance lies. Let none for seeming so, thinke faints of others, For all are men, and all haue suckt their mothers. Who would haue thought a Monarch would haue euer Obeyd his hand-maid of so meane estate; Vultur ambition feeding on his liuer, Age hauing worne his pleasures out of date, But hap comes neuer, or it comes too late, For such a daintie which his youth found nor, Vnto his feeble age did chaunce a-lot. Ah Fortune, neuer absolutelie good, For that some crosse stil counter-checks our luck; As heere behold th' incompatible blood, Of age and youth was that whereon we stuck: Whose lothing, we from natures brests do suck, As opposite to what our bloud requires. For equall age, doth equall like desires.
But mightie men, in hiest honour sitting, Nought but applause and pleasure can behold: Sooth'd in their liking, carelesse what is fitting, May not be suffred once to thinke the 'are old: Not trusting what they see, but what is told. Miserable fortune to forget so farre The state of flesh, and what our frailties are. Yet must I needes excuse so great defect For drinking of the Lethe of mine eies, H'is forc'd forget himselfe, and all respect Of maiestie, whereon his state relies: And now of loues, and pleasures must deuise. For thus reuiu'd againe, he serues and su'th, And seekes al meanes to vndermine my youth. Which neuer by assault he could recouer. So well incamp'd in strength of chast desires: My cleane-arm'd thoughts repell'd an vnchast louer. The Crowne that could commaund what it requires, I lesser priz'd then chastities attires. Th'vnstained vaile, which innocents adornes, Th'vngathred Rose, defended with the thornes.
And safe mine honour stood, till that in truth, One of my sexe, of place, and nature bad, Was set in ambush to intrap my youth. One in the habite of like frailty clad. One who the liu'ry of like weakenes had. A seeming Matron, yet a sinfull monster, As by her words the chaster sort may conster. She set vpon me with the smoothest speech That court and age could cunningly deuise: Th'one autentique made her fit to reach, The other learnt her how to subtelise. Both were enough to circumuent the wise. A document that well might teach the sage, That ther's no trust in youth, nor hope in age. Daughter (said she,) behold thy happie chaunce, That hast the lot cast downe into thy lap, Whereby thou maist thy honor great aduance, Whilst thou (vnhappie) wilt not see thy hap: Such fond respect thy youth doth so inwrap. T'oppose thy selfe against thine own good fortune, That points thee out, & seemes thee to importune.
Doost thou not see, how that thy King (thy Ioue,) Lightens forth glory on thy darke estate: And showres down gold & treasure from aboue, Whilst thou doost shut thy lap against thy fate? Fie fondling fie, thou wilt repent too late The error of thy youth; that canst not see What is the fortune that doth follow thee. Thou must not thinke thy flowre can alwaies florish, And that thy beauty will be still admired: But that those raies which all these flames do nourish, Canceld with Time, will haue their date expired, And men will scorne what now is so desired. Our frailties doome is written in the flowers, Which flourish now, and fade ere many howers. Reade in my face the ruines of my youth, The wracke of yeeres vpon my aged brow, I haue beene faire, (I must confesse the truth,) And stood vpon as nice respects as thou; I lost my time, and I repent it now. But were I to begin my youth againe, I would redeeme the time I spent in vaine:
But thou hast yeers, and priuiledge to vse them, Thy priuiledge doth beare Beauties great seale, Besides, the law of nature doth excuse them, To whom thy youth may haue a iust appeale. Esteeme not Fame more then thou doost thy weale. Fame, (wherof ye world seems to make such choice,) Is but an Eccho, and an idle voice. Then why should this respect of honor bound vs, In th' imaginarie lifts of reputation? Titles which cold seueritie hath found vs, Breath of the vulgar, foe to recreation: Melancholies opinion, Customes relation; Pleasures plague, beauties scourge, hel to the faire, To leaue the sweet, for Castles in the aire. Pleasure is felt, opinion but conceau'd, Honor, a thing without vs, not our owne: Whereof we see how many are bereau'd, Which should haue reap'd the glory they had sowne! And manie haue it, yet vnworthy, knowne. So breathes his blast this many-headed beast, Whereof the wisest haue esteemed least.
The subtile Citty-women, better learned, Esteeme them chast enough that best seeme so: Who though they sport, it shal not be discerned, Their face bewraies not what their bodies do; Tis warie walking that doth safeliest go. With shew of vertue, as the cunning knowes, Babes are beguild with sweets, & men with showes. Then vse thy tallent, youth shall be thy warrant, And let not honour from thy sports detract: Thou must not fondly think thy selfe transparent, That those who see thy face can iudge thy fact, Let her haue shame that cannot closely act. And seeme the chast, which is the chiefest arte, For what we seeme each see, none knowes our hart. The mightie, who can with such sinnes dispence, In steed of shame do honors great bestow: A worthie author doth redeeme th' offence, And makes the scarlet sinne as white as snow. The maiestie that doth descend so low, Is not defilde, but pure remaines therein, And being sacred, sanctifies the sin.
What, doost thou stand on this, that he is old? Thy beautie hath the more to worke vpon. Thy pleasures want shall be suppli'd with gold, Cold age dotes most when heat of youth is gone: Enticing words preuaile with such a one. Alluring shewes most deepe impression strikes, For age is prone to credite what it likes. Heere interrupt she leaues me in a doubt, When loe began the combat in my blood, Seeing my youth inuirond round about, The ground vncertaine where my reasons stood; Small my defence to make my partie good, Against such powers which were so surelie laid, To ouer-throw a poore vnskilfull Maid. Treason was in my bones, my selfe conspiring, To sel my selfe to lust, my soule to sin: Pure blushing shame was euen in retiring, Leauing the sacred hold it glori'd in. Honor lay prostrate for my flesh to win, Whē cleaner thoughts my weaknes gan vpbray Against my selfe, and shame did force me say;
Ah ROSAMOND, what doth thy flesh prepare? Destruction to thy daies, death to thy fame; Wilt thou betraie that honor held with care, T'entombe with blacke reproch a spotted name? Leauing thy blush the colours of thy shame? Opening thy feet to sinne, thy soule to lust, Gracelesse to lay thy glorie in the dust? Nay, first let th' earth gape wide to swallow thee, And shut thee vp in bosome with her dead, Ere Serpent tempt thee taste forbidden Tree, Or feele the warmth of an vnlawfuli bed; Suffring thy selfe by lust to be misled; So to disgrace thy selfe and grieue thine heires, That Cliffords race should scorne thee one of theirs. Neuer wish longer to inioy the aire, Then that thou breath'st the breath of chastitio: Longer then thou preseru'st thy soule as faire As is thy face, free from impuritie. Thy face, that makes th'admir'd in euerie eie, Where Natures care such rarities inroule, Which vs'd amisse, may serue to damne thy soule.
But what? he is my king and may constraine me, Whether I yeeld or not, I liue defamed. The world will thinke authoritie did gaine me, I shall be iudg'd his Loue, and so be shamed. We see the faire condemn'd, that neuer gamed. And if I yeeld, tis honourable shame, If not, I liue disgrac'd, yet thought the same: What waie is left thee then (vnhappie maid,) Whereby thy spotlesse foote, maie wander out This dreadfull danger, which thouseest is laid, Wherein thy shame doth compasse thee about? Thy simple yeeres cannot resolue this doubt. Thy youth can neuer guide thy foote so euen, But (in despight) some scandale wil be giuen. Thus stood I ballanc'd equallie precize, Til my fraile flesh did weigh me downe to sin; Till world and pleasure made me partialize, And glittering pompe my vanitie did win, When to excuse my fault my lusts begin. And impious thoughts alledg'd this wanton clause, That though I sinn'd, my sinne had honest cause.
So well the golden balls cast downe before me, Could entertaine my course, hinder my way: Whereat my retchlesse youth stooping to store me, Lost me the gole, the glorie, and the day. Pleasure had set my well school'd thoughts to play, And bade me vse the vertue of mine eies, For sweetly it fits the faire to wantonise. Thus wrought to sin, soone was I traind from Court, T'a solitarie Grange, there to attend The time the King should thither make resort, Where he Loues long-desired worke should end. Thither he dayly messages doth send, With costlie Iewels (Orators of Loue,) Which (ah too well men know) do women moue. The day before the night of my defeature, He greets me with a Casket richly wrought; So rare, that arte did seeme to striue with nature, T' expresse the cunning work-mans curious thought; The mysterie whereof I prying sought, And found engrauen on the lidde aboue, Amymone, how she with Neptune stroue.
Amymone, old Danaus fairest Daughter, As she was fetching water all alone At Lerna: whereas Neptune came and caught her, From whom she striu'd and strugled to be gone, Beating the aire with cries and piteous mone. But all in vaine, with him she's forc'd to go, Tis shame that men should vse poore maidens so. There might I see described how she lay, At those proude feet, not satis-fied with prayer: Wayling her heauie hap, cursing the day, In act so pitious to expresse despaire. And by how much more grieu'd, so much more faire. Her teares vpon her cheekes (poore carefull gerle,) Did seeme against the Sunne christall and pearle. Whose pure cleer streams, (which so fair appears;) Wrought hotter flames, (O miracle of loue,) That kindles fire in water, heat in teares, And makes neglected beautie mightier proue, Teaching afflicted eies affects to moue; To shew that nothing ill becomes the faire, But crueltie, which yeelds vnto no prayer.
This hauing viewd, and there with something moued, Figured I find within the other squares, Transformed Io, Ioues decrelie loued, In her affliction how she strangely fares. Strangely distress'd (O beautie, borne to cares.) Turn'd to a Heiffer, kept with iealous eies, Alwayes in danger of her hatefull spies. These presidents presented to my view, Wherein the presage of my fall was showne, Might haue fore-warn'd me well what would ensue, And others harmes haue made me shun mine owne. But fate is not preuented, though fore knowne. For that must hap, decreed by heauenly powers, Who worke our fall, yet make the fault still ours. Witnes the world, wherein is nothing rifer, Then miseries vnkend before they come: Who can the characters of chaunce decipher, Written in cloudes of our concealed dome? Which though perhaps haue been reueald to some, Yet that so doubtfull, (as successe did proue them,) That men must know they haue ye heauens aboue thē.
I saw the sinne wherein my foot was entring, I saw how that dishonour did attend it, I saw the shame whereon my flesh was ventring, Yet had I not the powre for to defend it. So weake is sence when error hath condemn'd it. We see what's good, and thereto we consent, But yet wee choose the worst, and soone repent. And now I come to tell the worst of ilnes, Now drawes the date of mine affliction neere. Now when the darke had wrapt vp all in stilnes, And dreadfull black had dispossess'd the cleere, Com'd was the night, (mother of sleepe and feare;) Who with her Sable-mantle friendly couers, The sweet-stolne sports, of ioifull meeting Louers. When loe, Iioy'd my Louer, not my Loue, And felt the hand of lust most vndesired: Enforc'd th'vnprooued bitter sweet to proue, Which yeelds no mutuall pleasure when tis hired. Loue's not constrain'd, nor yet of due required. Iudge they who are vnfortunately wed, What tis to come vnto a loathed bed.
But soone his age receiu'd his short contenting, And sleepe seald vp his languishing desires: When he turnes to his rest, I to repenting, Into my selfe my waking thought retires: My nakednes had prou'd my sences liers. Now opned were mine eies to looke therein, For first we taste the fruit, then see our sin. Now did I find my selfe vnparadis'd, From those pure fields of my so cleane beginning: Now I perceiu'd how ill I was aduis'd, My flesh gan loathe the new-felt touch of sinning, Shame leaues vs by degrees, not at first winning. For nature checks a new offence with loathing, But vse of sinne doth make it seeme as nothing. And vse of sinne did worke in me a boldnes, And loue in him, incorporates such zeale, That iealousie increas'd with ages coldnes, Fearing to loose the ioie of all his weale, Or doubting time his stealth might else reueale, H'is driuen to deuise some subtill waie, How he might safeliest keepe so rich a praie.
A statelie Pallace he foorth-with did build, Whose intricate innumerable waies, With such confused errours so beguild Th'vnguided entrers with vncertaine straies, And doubtfull turnings kept them in delaies, With bootlesse labour leading them about, Able to find no waie, nor in, nor out. Within the closed bosome of which frame, That seru'd a Center to that goodlie round: Were lodgings, with a Garden to the same, With sweetest flowers that eu'r adorn'd the groūd And all the pleasures that delight hath found, T'intertaine the sence of wanton eies, Fuel of loue, from whence lusts flames arise: Heere I enclos'd from all the world asunder, The Minotaure of shame kept for disgrace, The Monster of Fortune, and the worlds wonder, Liu'd cloistred in so desolate case: None but the King might come into the place, With certaine Maides that did attend my need, And he himselfe came guided by a threed:
O Iealousie, daughter of Enuy' and Loue, Most wayward issue of a gentle sire; Fostred with feares, thy fathers ioyes t'improue, Mirth-marring Monster, borne a subtile lier; Hatefull vnto thy selfe, flying thine owne desire: Feeding vpon suspect that doth renue thee, Happie were Louers if they neuer knew thee. Thou hast a thousand gates thou enterest by, Condemning trembling passions to our hart; Hundred eyed Argus, euer-waking Spie, Pale Hagge, infernall Furie, pleasures smart, Enuious Obseruer, prying in euery part; Suspicious, fearefull, gazing still about thee, O would to God ye loue could be withuot thee. Thou didst depriue (through false suggesting feare,) Him of content, and me of libertie: The onely good that women hold so deere, And turnst my freedome to captiuitie, First made a prisoner, ere an enemie. Enioynd the ransome of my bodies shame, Which though I paid, could not redeeme the same.
What greater torment euer could haue beene, Then to inforce the faire to liue retir'd? For what is beauty if it be not seene? Or what is't to be seene, vnlesse admir'd? And though admir'd, vnlesse in loue desir'd? Neuer were cheeks of Roses, locks of Amber, Ordain'd to liue imprison'd in a Chamber. Nature created beauty for the view, (Like as the fire for heat, the Sun for light:) The faire do hold this priuiledge as due By ancient Charter, to liue most in sight, And she that is debarr'd it, hath not right. In vaine our friends from this, do vs dehort, For beauty will be where is most resort. Witnes the fairest streets that Thames doth visite, The wondrous concourse of the glittering Faire: For what rare women deckt with beauty is it, That thither couets not to make repaire? The solitary Country may not stay her. Heere is the center of all beauties best, Excepting DELIA, left t'adorne the West.
Heere doth the curious with iudiciall eies, Contemplate beautie gloriouslie attired: And herein all our chiefest glorie lies, To liue where we are prais'd and most desired. O how we ioie to see our selues admired, Whilst niggardlie our fauours we discouer. We loue to be belou'd, yet scorne the Louer. Yet would to God my foot had neuer mou'd From Countrie safetie, from the fields of rest: To know the danger to be highlie lou'd, And liue in pompe to braue among the best, Happie for me, better had I beene blest; If I vnluckilie had neuer straide, But liu'd at home a happie Country Maide. Whose vnaffected innocencie thinks No guilefull fraude, as doth the Courtlie liuer: She's deckt with truth, the Riuer where she drinks Doth serue her for her glasse, her counsell giuer: She loues sincerely, and is loued euer. Her daies are peace, and so she ends her breath, (True life that knowes not what's to die til death.)
So should I neuer haue beene registred, In the blacke booke of the vnfortunate: Nor had my name enrold with Maides misled, Which bought their pleasures at so hie a rate. Nor had I taught (through my vnhappie fate,) This lesson, (which my self learnt with expence) How most it hurts that most delights the sense: Shame followes sinne, disgrace is duly giuen, Impietie will out, neuer so closely done: No walls can hide vs from the eie of heauen, For shame must end what wickednes begun; Forth breaks reproch when we least think theron. And this is euer proper vnto Courts, That nothing can be done, but Fame reports. Fame doth explore what lies most secret hidden, Entring the closet of the Pallace dweller: Abroad reuealing what is most forbidden. Of truth and falshood both an equall teller. Tis not a guard can serue for to expell her. The sword of iustice cannot cut her wings, Nor stop her mouth from vtt'ring secret things.
And this our stealth she could not long conceale, From her whom such a forfeit most concerned: The wronged Queen, who could so closely deale, That she the whole of all our practise learned, And watcht a time when least it was discerned, In absence of the King, to wreake her wrong, With such reuenge as she desired long. The Laberinth she entred by that threed, That seru'd a conduct to my absent Lord, Left there by chance, reseru'd for such a deed, Where she surpriz'd me whom she so abhord. Enrag'd with madnes, scarce she speakes a word, But flies with eager furie to my face, Offring me most vnwomanly disgrace. Looke how a Tygresse that hath lost her whelpe, Runs fiercely raging through the woods astray: And seeing her selfe depriu'd of hope or helpe, Furiously assaults what's in her way, To satisfie her wrath, (not for a pray;) So fell she on me in outragious wife, As could disdaine and iealousie deuise.
And after all her vile reproches vs'd, She forc'd me take the poison she had brought, To end the life that had her so abus'd, And free her feares, and ease her iealous thought. No crueltie her wrath would leaue vnwrought, No spightfull act that to reuenge is common; (No beast being fiercer than a iealous woman.) Here take (saith she) thou impudent vncleane, Base gracelesse strumpet, take this next your hart; Your loue-sick hart, that ouer-charg'd hath beene With pleasures surfeite, must be purg'd with arte. This potion hath a power that will conuart To nought, those humors that oppresse you so. And (Gerle,) Ile see you take it ere I go. What stand you now amaz'd, retire you backe? Tremble you (minion?) come dispatch with speed; There is no helpe, your Champion now you lack, And all these teares you shed will nothing steed; Those daintie fingers needs must do the deed. Take it, or I will drench you els by force, And trifle not, least that I vse you worse.
Hauing this bloodie doome from hellish breath, My wofull eyes on euery side I cast: Rigor about me, in my hand my death, Presenting me the horror of my last; All hope of pitie and of comfort past. No means, no power, no forces to contend, My trembling hands must giue my self my end. Those hands that beauties ministers had been, They must giue death that me adorn'd of late, That mouth that newly gaue consent to sin, Must now receiue destruction in thereat, That bodie which my lust did violate, Must sacrifice it selfe t'appease the wrong. (So short is pleasure, glory lasts not long.) And she no sooner saw I had it taken, But foorth she rushes, (proud with victorie,) And leaues m' alone, of all the world forsaken, Except of Death, which she had left with me. (Death and my selfe alone togither be.) To whom she did her full reuenge refer. Oh poore weake conquest both for him and her.
Then straight my conscience summons vp my sin, T' appeare before me, in a hideous face; Now doth the terror of my soule begin, When eu'ry corner of that hatefull place Dictates mine etror, and reueales disgrace; Whilst I remaine opprest in euery part, Death in my bodie, horror at my hart. Downe on my bed my loathsome selfe I cast, The bed that likewise giues in euidence Against my soule, and tels I was vnchast, Tels I was wanton, tels I followed sence. And therefore cast, by guilt of mine offence, Must heere the right of heauen needes satisfie, And where I wanton lay, must wretched die. Heere I began to waile my hard mishap, My suddaine, strange vnlookt for miserie. Accusing them that did my youth intrap, To giue me such a fall of infamie. And poore distressed ROSAMOND, (said I,) Is this thy glory got, to die forlorne In Dezarts, where no eare can heare thee morne?
Nor any eye of pittie to behold The wofull end of thy sad tragedie; But that thy wrongs vnseene, thy tale vntold, Must here in secret silence buried lie. And with thee, thine excuse togither die. Thy sin reueal'd, but thy repentance hid, Thy shame aliue, but dead what thy death did. Yet breathe out to these walls the breath of mone, Tell th'ayre thy plaints, since men thou canst not tell. And though thou perish desolate alone, Tell yet thy selfe, what thy selfe knowes too well: Vtter thy griefe where with thy soule doth swell. And let thy hart pittie thy harts remorse, And be thy selfe the mourner and the Corse. Condole thee here, clad all in blacke dispaire, With silence onely, and a dying bed; Thou that of late, so flourishing, so faire, Did glorious liue, admir'd and honoured: And now from friends, from succor hither led, Art made a spoyle to lust, to wrath, to death, And in disgrace, forc'd hecre to yeeld thy breath.
Did Nature (O for this) deliberate, To shew in thee the glory of her best; Framing thine eye the star of thy ill fate, And made thy face the foe to spoile the rest? O beautie, thou an enemy profest To chastitie and vs that loue thee most, Without thee how w'are loath'd, and with thee loft? O you that proude with libertie and beautie, (And ô may well be proude that you be so,) Glitter in Court, lou'd and obseru'd of durie; O that I might to you but ere I goe Speake what I feele, to warne you by my woe, To keep your feet in pure clean paths of shame, That no inticing may diuert the same. See'ng how against your tender weaknes still, The strength of wit, of gold, and all is bent; And all th' assaults that euer might or skill, Can giue against a chaste and clean intent: Ah let not greames worke you to' consent. The spot is forde, though by a Monarch made, Kings cannot priuiledge a sinne forbade.
Lock vp therefore the treasure of your loue, Vnder the surest keyes of feare and shame: and let no powers haue powre chast thoughts to moue To make a lawlesse entry on your fame. Open to those the comfort of your flame, Whose equall loue shall march with equall pace, In those pure waies that lead to no disgrace. For see how many discontented beds, Our owne aspiring, or our Parents pride Haue caus'd, whilst that ambition vainely weds Wealth and not loue, honor and nought beside: Whilst married but to titles, we abide As wedded widowes, wanting what we haue, When shadowes cannot giue vs what we craue. Or whilst we spend the freshest of our time, The sweet of youth in plotting in the aire; Alas how oft we fall, hoping to clime; Or wither as vnprofitably faire, Whilst those decaies which are without repaire, Make vs neglected, scorned and reprou'd. (And ô what are we, if we be not lou'd?)
Fasten therefore vpon occasions fit, Least this, or that, or like disgrace as mine, Do ouer-take your youth to ruine it, And clowde with infamie your beauties shine: Seeing how many seeke to vndermine The treasurie that's vnpossest of any: And hard tis kept that is desir'd of many. And flie (ô flie,) these Bed-brokers vncleane, (The monsters of our sexe,) that make a pray Of their owne kind, by an vnkindly meane; And euen (like Vipers,) eating out a way Th'row th'wombe of their owne shame, accursed they Liue by the death of Fame, the gaine of sin, The filth of lust, vncleannes wallowes in. O is it not enough that we, (poore wee) Haue weaknes, beautie, gold, and men our foes, But we must haue some of our selues to bee Traitors vnto our selues, to ioyne with those? Such as our feeble forces doe disclose, And stil betray our cause, our shame, our youth, To lust, to follie, and to mens vntruth?
Hatefull confounders both of blood and lawes, Vilde Orators of shame, that pleade delight: Vngracious Agents in a wicked cause, Factors for darknes; messengers of night, Serpents of guile, diuels, that do inuite The wanton taste of that forbidden tree, Whose fruit once pluckt, will shew how foule we be. You in the habite of a graue aspect, (In credite by the trust of yeeres,) can shoe The cunning wayes of lust, and can direct The faire and wilie wantons how to goe, Hauing (your lothsome selues) your youth spent so. And in vncleannes euer haue beene fed, By the reuenue of a wanton bed. By you, haue beene the innocent betraid, The blushing fearefull, boldned vnto sin, The wife made subtile, subtile made the maid, The husband scorn'd, dishonoured the kin: Parents disgrac'd, children infamous been. Confus'd our race, and falsi-fied our blood, Whilst fathers sonnes, possesse wrong Fathers good.
This, and much more, I would haue vttred then, A testament to be recorded still, Signd with my bloud, subscrib'd with Conscience pen, To warne the faire and beautifull from ill. And ô I wish (by th'example of my will,) I had not left this sin vnto the faire, But dyde intestate to haue had no heire. But now, the poison spread through all my vaines, Gan dispossesse my liuing sences quite: And nought respecting death, (the last of paines,) Plac'd his pale colours, (th'ensigne of his might,) Vpon his new-got spoile before his right; Thence chac'd my soule, setting my day ere noone, When I least thought my ioies could end so soone. And as conuaid t'vntimely funerals, My scarce cold corse not suffred longer stay, Behold, the King (by chaunce) returning, fals T'inconnter with the same vpon the way, As he repaird to see his deerest ioy. Not thinking such a meeting could haue been, To see his Loue, and seeing beene vnseene.
Iudge those whō chance depriues of sweetest treasure, What tis to lose a thing we hold so deere: The best delight, wherein our soule takes pleasure, The sweet of life, that penetrates so neere. What passions feeles that hart, inforc'd to beare The deepe impression of so strange a sight, That ouer whemls vs, or confounds vs quite? Amaz'd he stands, nor voice nor body stcares, Words had no passage, teares no issue found, For sorrow shut vp words, wrath kept in teares, Confus'd affects each other do confound: Oppress'd with griefe, his passions had no bound. Striuing to tell his woes, words would not come; For light cares speak, whē mighty griefs are dombe. At length extremity breakes out a way, Through which th' imprisoned voice with teares attended, Wailes out a sound that sorrowes do bewray, With armes a-crosse, and eies to heauen bended, Vaporing out sighes that to the skies ascended. Sighes, (the poore ease calamity affoords,) Which serue for speech whē sorrow wanteth words.
O heauens (quoth he,) why do mine eies behold The hatefull raies of this vnhappy funne? Why haue I light to see my sinnes controld, With blood of mine own shame thus vildly done? How can my sight endure to looke thereon? Why doth nor blacke eternall darknes hide, That from mine eies, my hart cannot abide? What saw my life, wherein my soule might ioy, What had my daies, whom troubles stil afflicted, But only this, to counter poize annoy? This ioy, this hope, which Death hath interdicted; This sweet, whose losse hath all distresse inflicted; This, that did season all my sowre of life, Vext still at home with broiles, abroad in strife, Vext still at home with broiles, abroad in strife, Diffention in my blood, iarres in my bed: Distrust at boord, suspecting still my life, Spending the night in horror, daies in dread; (Such life hath Tyrants, and this life I led.) These miseries go mask'd in glittering showes, Which wise men see, the vulgar little knowes.
Thus as these passions do him ouer-whelme, He drawes him neere my body to behold it. And as the Vine married vnto the Elme With strict imbraces, so doth he infold it. And as he in his carefull armes doth hold it, Viewing the face that euen death commends, On sencelesse lips, millions of kisses spends. Pittifull moutla (saith he) that liuing gauest The sweetest comfort that my soule could wish: O be it lawfull now, that dead thou hauest, This sorrowing fare-well of a dying kisse. And you faire eyes, containers of my blisse, Motiues of loue, borne to be marched neuer, Entomb'd in your sweet circles sleepe for euer. Ah how me thinks I see Death dallying seekes, To entertaine it selfe in Loues sweet place; Decaied Roses of discoloured cheekes, Do yet retaine deere notes of former grace: And vglie Death sits faire within her face; Sweet remnants resting of vermillion red, That Death it selfe doubts whether she be dead:
Wonder of beautie, oh receiue these plaints, These obsequies, the last that I shall make thee: For loe, my soule that now alreadie faints, That lou'd thee liuing, dead will not forsake thee,) Hastens her speedie course to ouer-take thee. Ile meete my death, and free my selfe thereby, For (ah) what can he doe that cannot die? Yet ere I die, thus much my soule doth vow, Reuenge shall sweeten death with ease of minde: And I will cause poste ritie shall know. How faire thou were aboue all women kinde. And after-ages monuments shall finde, Shewing thy beauties title, not thy name, Rose of the world that fwoetned so the fame. This said, though more desirous yet to say, For sorrow is vnwilling to giue ouer,) He doth represse what griefe would else bewray, Least he too much his passions should disouer. And yet respect scarce bridles such a Louer. So faire transported that he know not whither, For Loue and Maiestied dwell ill togither,
Then were my funerals not long deferred, But done with all the rites pompe could deuise, At Godstow, where my bodie was interred, And richly tomb'd in honourable wise, Where yet as now scarce any note descries Vnto these times, the memorie of mee, Marble and Brasse so little lasting bee. For those walls which the credulous deuour, And apt-beleeuing ignorant did found; With willing zeale, that neuer call'd in doubt, That time their works should euer so confound, Lie like confused heapes as vnder-ground. And what their ignorance esteem'd so holy, The wiser ages do account as follie. And were it not thy fauourable lynes Re-edified the wracke of my decayes, And that thy accents willingly assignes Some farther date, and giue me longer dayes, Few in this age had knowne my beauties praise. But thus renew'd, my fame redeemes some time, Till other ages shall neglect thy rime.
Then when confusion in her course shall bring Sad desolation on the times to come: When mirth-lesse Thames shal haue no Swan to sing, All Musique silent, and the Muses dombe. And yet euen then it must be knowne to some, That once they flourisht, though not cherisht so, And Thames had Swannes as well as euer Po. But here an end, I may no longer stay thee, I must returne t'attend at Stigian flood: Yet ere I go this one word more I pray thee, Tell DELIA, now her sigh may doe me good, And will her note the frailtie of our blood. And if I passe vnto those happie banks, Thē she must haue her praise, thy pen her thanks. So vanquisht she, and left me to returne To prosecute the tenor of my woes: Eternall matter for my Muse to mourne, But (ah) the world hath heard too much of those, My youth such errors must no more disclose. Ile hide the rest, and grieue for what hath beene, Who made me known, must make me liue vnseene. FINIS.
