6817 99841080 5639
ARISBAS, Euphues amidst his slumbers: Or Cupids Iourney to Hell. DECYPHERING A MYRROR of Constancie, a Touch-stone of tried affection, begun in chaste desires, ended in choise delights: And emblasoning Beauties glorie, adorned by Natures bountie. VVITH THE TRIVMPH OF TRVE Loue, in the foyle of false Fortune. By I. D. Est aliquid leuibus depingere seria gis. Imprinted at London by Thomas Creede, for Thomas Woodcocke, and are to be sold at his shop in Paules Church-yard. 1594.
TO THE RIGHT VVORSHIP∣full Maister Edward Dyer Esquire, the Maecenas of worth, and mirror of all admi∣red perfections. WEll might Telamonian Aiax (Right worshipfull) a Peere of the peerlesse Iliade, and owner of the seuen-fold target, stout∣ly oppose himselfe to inuading Hector, that vaunted his drea∣ded prowesse, backed by succor of the gods, and strongly repulse the thick-darted Troian fires from their endaungered nauy, the sole staie of their then-doubted return, hauing for his vigo∣rous arme so massy a bulwarke, & for his valiant heart so man-like a bodie. And (si magnis com∣ponere parua licebit) in like sort I, shrouded vn∣der the shadow of your worships winges, haue therfore the more boldly aduentured to thrust into the open light, this mine abortiue issue, the frute of some fewe idle houres, sith after many thoughts, I could not excogitate any more plea∣sing
recreatiō wheron I might bestow times of leasure, hoping that for the common good li∣king which all men conceiue of you, and for the generall good speeches which all men vse of you, they will the better censure of my dooing, when they see your worshippes name to whose worth this worthlesse Pamphlet is entitled, stā∣ding in the front as a strong fort of defence, to shield me from the descanting verdites of such vnfriendly readers, which conceiting the Au∣thors entent amisse, may wrest his meaning by wrōg cōiectures, & frō the sowre cēsures of the ouer-curious Moralists of our age, which glory to be termed the new-vprearers of the lōg ago confuted Stoical Apathy, although these harsh ensuing lines merit no such high protectiō, sith they are not ouer-curiously labored: for I deem it mere folly to make a trifle a labor, or my plea∣sure my paine: and they may be tearmed the worke of a slumbring, rather then of a wakefull Muse: yet I haue obserued that Poetical method in my discourse, which the best & most appro∣ued Authors of the ancientest and most famous languages haue alwaies vsed & allowed, begin∣ning in Medio, & afterward at occasions, vnfol∣ding former accidents. Howsoeuer, if these the
saplesse frutes of greene youth, & pithlesse blos∣somes of a simple Authors vnripe wit, purchase such fauor & acceptance as I desire, though they deserue not, I shall be emboldened to raise my Muses note that now yeelds harsh Musick, to an higher key, a fairer frute of my better ordred va∣cant houres, & manifest my dutie to your wor∣ship in some matter of greater import, then a su∣perficiall toye: for I iudge it the extremitie of folly to trouble the worlde with heapes of tri∣fles. But fearing to grow offensiue through te∣dious interrupting of your worshippes serious affaires, and humbly crauing pardon of mine audacious enterprise, I ende, wishing to your worship manie daies of happinesse in this life, and heauen in the other life. Your Worships most firmely deuoted in all dutie and seruice, Iohn Dickenson.
To the Gentlemen-Readers. LEarned and curteous Gentlemen, Al∣though the whitest Swanne & sweetest of Apolloes musicall birdes, hath put an endlesse periode to his euer-liuing lines, being preuented by vntimely death the Herauld of ouer-hastie destiny, though he the honour of Art & hope of Armes, Mineruaes nourse-childe, and beloued Secretary to the sacred Muses, was in the spring-time of his glorie, raised from below to reigne aboue: yet as his heroique spirit disrobed of the perishing habit of mortalitie, swiftly passing through the inferior orbes, hath ascended to the Em∣pyre heauen, participating eternall ioyes in the habitation of the blessed, and doth with happier eyes view the glorious light of the Deitie, and resting in that blisfull seate of his re∣pose, wōders at heauens huge frame, wherto his high thoghts did alwaies honourably aspire: So his Fame winged with de∣sert, suted in robes of immortalitie, vanquishing death, try∣umphing ouer time, and nothing staied by triuiall stoppes, towres to the cloudes, and not comprehended in smal limits, fils the eares of all men with oft-rebounded ecchoes of his praise, & ouerspreading Europe, nay the worldes wide conti∣nent, as did the flourishing vine which seemed to dismaid A∣styages in his ill-presaging dreame, to couer Asia with a spa∣tious shade. If you demaund whom I meane, euen he it is to whom I wil ascribe no other titles, thē the world hath allotted, though I cannot duly affoord them as he deserues them, yet take thē as I haue placed them in this English distich, a testimonie of
the reuerent affection which I beare to the memorie of such a famous Worthie. Sweet Astrophil the solace of my pen, Wonder of worth, and Peere of peerlesse men. But who can adde to that which is infinite? or what pen can sufficiently expresse his praise which exceeds the praises of al pens, especially of mine, whose slender wit treating such an ample subiect, feeles want in plentie, raunging in a large field of copious matter, and being engulfed in an Ocean of conceit, lies there ouerwhelmed? But some may demaund wherto this tendes, to whom I answere thus briefly, framing mine owne Apologie▪ I hope that it shall not minister iust occasion of offence to any, that my blushing Muse reueren∣cing the steps wherein he traced, and houering aloofe with awe-full dread, doth yet at last warily approach, and carefully obserue the directiōs of so worthie a guide, & in part, glance at the vnmatchable height of his heroique humor. Did not Statius charge his Thebaide to attend with like reuerence, on the loftie foote-steps of the royall Aeneide? But to conclude, I shall be full heire of mine hope, and shall esteeme it no small good hap, if you grace mine endeuours with fauourable doome, and accept my good-will in lieu of currant performance. Thus Gentlemen, committing my Pamphlet to your friendly view, and submitting my selfe to your curteous censures, I end, wishing to you al, seueral good fortunes, and concluding my resolution in this harsh Epi∣gramme, hatched in codde humour: Quaeris delicias, faeetiasque, Festiuosque iocos? habes quod optas, Faecunda Astrophili petens fluenta, Late mellifluis referta iuis. Quaeris dulce melos, sales; & omnes Verborum veneres? habes quod optas,
Foecunda Astrophili petens fluenta, Passim nectareis adaucta lymphis. Quaeris suauiculi nouos lepores, Gazas ingeni▪ tenes quod optas Faecunda Astrophili petens fluenta, Lauro & littorea superba myrto. Illi Pierides fuere curae: Illum Pieridesque Gratiaeque Curant. Quin petis illius fluenta, Queis tot lacteoli canunt olores? At me saeuior, insidere terrae Cogit Calliope, negatque vela: Exemit tamen infimo illa vulgo, Et sperare dedit placere posse. I. D.
Arisbas, Euphues amidst his slumbers, or Cupids Iour∣ney to Hell. THe Sunne soiourning in his winter mansion, had disrobed Arcadia of all her pleasures, & disgarnished Vestaes man∣tle of delightes variable choise, where∣with Flora had in plentie poudred the freshnesse of her earst-gréen hue. Night suted in a duskie robe of pitchie darke∣nesse, besieged the globe with long shadowes, while Phoe∣bus wanting wonted vigor, did by darting his scarce reflec∣ted beames affoord smal comfort to the earths encrease. So that Arcadia earst the souereigne seate of all content, and sole place of worlds perfections, séemed now a patterne of the auncient Chaos, wherin all things (if things) were con∣founded. Feldes flourelesse, trées leauelesse, ground heate∣lesse, brookes streamelesse, springs vnhanted, groues vnha∣lowed, augmented this hue of horror, blemish of Europes Paradise. The mayden huntresse Arcadiaes patronesse, did sildome trace the plaines guarded with her troupe of vir∣gin-knights, to fixe shafts on the flying beasts, whose wont was in time of heauens more milde aspect, to grace the fields with her daily presence, and when her brothers scortching heat tirde her limbs with faintnesse, to bath her chaste bodie in some pleasant brooke. Nor did the wanton Satyres lightly skipping on the painted meades, painted I meane by Natures workemanship, vaunt their bodies agilitie to the Fairy wood-Nymphs. Pan Arcadiaes Presi∣dent, pent vp himselfe in his winter-lodging, and the other
rurall powers, séeing their glories date ended for that yeare, shrouded himselfe in the place of his wonted repose. In this season, a season wel fitting his melancholy thoghts distracted with moodie passions, Arisbas the mappe of For∣tunes mutabilitie hauing lost his dearest Ladie, left his Country, abandoning the state of a Prince, the hope of a Crowne, the succession of a kingdome, wandred in middest of winters rage, surcharged with sorrowe, lamenting his losse, séeking his loue, loathing his life, since liues solace, loues swéetnesse, had but one and that an hopelesse obiect, whose want made him an haplesse abiect: while rough Bo∣reas winters Hench-man mustering legions of stormes, scourged the plaines with a troupe of tempests, and aimed his violent blasts at the tallest trées to loppe their heights pride, and combatting with his companions, filled the aire with dreadfull noise of their tumultuous encounter, the in∣fortunate Prince in whose minde Loue martialled milli∣ons of striuing passions, wandring alone, (if he be alone) whom Fancie tosseth in a boundlesse Ocean of perplexing thoughts, ceased not his trauaile till the weathers intem∣perate furie calmed by heuens milder influence, tooke truce with Tyme, & sealed the attonemēt with a sodain change. But when Phoebus renuing his yéerely taske, and denying longer residence to stormy winter, had pierced earthes en∣trailes with comfortable warmth, opening a fruitfull pas∣sage for the issue of her wombe, to cloath Pomonaes bran∣ches with Natures bountie, and diapre her owne mantle with Floraes sense-alluring pomp. Arisbas entred the fron∣tiers of Arcadiaes maine continent, where séeing the late hue of horror turned to an heauen of eies happinesse, he re∣doubled many sighes drawne from the depth of his wofull hearts centre: for remembring that Tellus was erst dis∣mantled, the trées bereaued of their blossomes beautie, earthes naturall defects anatomized by Time, in the place where frostie Hyems had displaied her ycie trophies, he la∣mented to thinke that these the tokens of worlds mutabi∣litie,
had recouered their former flourish by ye yeres timely alteration, but his desperate fortune had no hope of an hap∣pie spring to calme the winter of his woe. Drowned in this déepe meditation, he procéeded pensiue, but he had not walked farre, when he espied a faire broade Oake, whose spatious branches enuirond the ground lying vnderneath with a shady circle. There hée determined to rest awhile his bodie wearied by long iourneyes, and somewhat dis∣burthen his soule by displaying his sorrowes. Thether he came, downe he sate, and fixing his eyes on the starrie con∣caue, began thus to vtter passionate complaints, not limi∣ting his laments with distinct clauses, for his mone admit∣ted no methode. INiurious heauens (quoth hée) hath your influence effec∣ted this misfortune? Iniust Gods, haue you enuying earth so rare an ornament, beautified the seate of your a∣bode with worlds wonder? Vngentle Cupid, hast thou déeming my Timoclea fairer then thy Psyche, renewed thy doting humor? if so, then wert thou cruell in thy change, but more in thy choise, enforcing mée to loue whome thy selfe didst like. I haue wandered through the earth, aug∣menting the springs with streames of my teares, filling the woods with rebounding Ecchoes of my woes, tracing the plaines with restlesse steps, yet haue I mist Timoclea, and not finding her, haue lost my selfe. I haue blamed heauen, searched earth, accusde the Gods, and shall Hell excéede the scope of my passions impatience? May I not surmise that Pluto affecting a second wonder, hath perfor∣med a second rape? If so, then most cruell Monarch of the Ghosts, be thy Proserpine as iealous as I am ioy-lesse. Doest thou triumph in the possession of so péerelesse a pray, and may not I lament the losse of so matchlesse a myrror? Should I excuse thy fury, or accuse thy folly? (if it be folly to be blinded by so faire an obiect, the worth of whose per∣fections words can not vtter, and thoughts scarce compre∣hend.)
O that I might equall Orpheus in arte as I excéede him in anguish: the powerfull vertue of his heauenly tunes, amased furious beastes, stayed fluent streames, raysed stones, assembled trées, mouing sense in senselesse things. Descending to the silent vauts of Acheron, hee caused ghosts to grone, shadowes to sighe, effecting relen∣ting thoughts in hels remorselesse iudges: but were I his péere in that profession, I would do more, enforcing the tyrant not touched then with such a sympathy, to leaue his lust, and graunt me my loue. Tush Arisbas, these are fancies, and therefore follies. Timoclea is yet lost, and if not found in Arcadia, then for euer lost. But aye me, what comfort can Arcadia affoord, from whose coasts the windes fury did violently driue her? Hath then the Sea gréedie of such rare gaine swallowed her, not satisfied with Helle, nor glutted with Hero? No, but Neptune desirous of change, hath receyued her into his watrie Palace, and crowned her Empresse of his liquide Monarchy, com∣maunding the Sea-Nymphs to attend on her, the Sy∣rens to delight her with the swéetenesse of their enchaun∣ting harmonie, Dolphins to wafte her Chariot, Phocae to gard her, and the Tritons to sound her Maiestie. Whe∣ther doe I wander? Is this to rest? Leaue Arisbas, nay, procéede Arisbas, cease to suppose, begin to sorrow, aye me, wretched me, haplesse, hopelesse, what meanes may I now conceite, what deuise may now be plotted? Héereat hée stopt, and opening the floud-gates of his eyes, distilled a showre of teares, supplying his speaches with déepe sighes. But resoluing to procéede, hee behelde as hee loo∣ked aside, one somewhat neere him, which was by birth an Arcadian, and by his habit seemed a Shepheard, who ouerhearing the last wordes of the Princes complaints, and ayming (though amisse) at the occasion of his sor∣rowes, thought that béeing a stranger hée lamented the losse of his way, to which imagination applying his words, hée began thus:
Friend, (for so I may tearme you without offence) the day is almost spent, and the night dangerous for such as you are, or at least seeme to bée, I meane a stran∣ger, Accept then a simple lodging in my Cottage, with such homely fare, as Shepheards houses yeelde, and when to morrowes Sunne shall display his faire (though late forcelesse) beames, you may prosecute your enten∣ded iourney, wherein, if my directions may further you, you shall finde me ready to afford them. Arisbas wondering at such rare humanitie harbou∣red in those contemptible wéedes, made a long pause as if he had enioynde his mouth to perpetuall silence, at last shapt this reply. Friend, (for so your proffered courtesie bindes me to tearme you) muse not that sobs interrupt my wordes, or sorrowes season my discourse, which onely comfort my fates haue assignde mée. What I was, I list not now repeate: what I am, you sée, I grieue. A lodging in your Cottage I gladly accept: your countrey fare ile thanke∣fully receiue. Your directions will be as néedefull as my distresse is notable. My bodie wearied much through tra∣uaile, requires longer rest then one nightes repose. My minde wrapped in a Chaos of confusions, expects ease by earnest conference. I haue a secret to disclose, a sorrowe to disciphre, which while I smother in priuate passions, I shall in stead of comfort reape discontent, but by discoue∣ring my fortune, I may discharge my fancie. And if this double fauour doe procéede from you, then in requitall of your courtesie, first, I beséech Iupiter Xenius, the patrone of hospitalitie, and protector of strangers, to blesse your la∣bors, prosper your attempts, & enrich your store with hea∣ped plentie. Next, I vowe by that bright lampe heauens ornament, that if fortune (as she is neuer stable) rayse me from so lowe an ebbe to the wonted height of my good hap, I will remunerate your kindnesse with most ample re∣compence. For knowe, that I can by birth challenge what
may beséeme a Prince to clayme. Euery Shepheard is not a Swayne, nor all priuate that séeme poore. Damon (such was the Shepheards name) séeing maie∣stie in his lookes, grauitie seated in disguise, royaltie suted in base attire, gathered by these probable coniectures, that he could be of no meane degrée: mooued therefore with a déeper remorse, he curteously intreated him to repaire to his simple lodging, and remayne there till fortune should conuert her frowns into fauors, protesting, that though he could not entertaine him as the qualitie of his condition required, yet he would supply in good will the disabling defects of his lowe estate. Which wordes wrought such chéerefulnesse in the heart of Arisbas, that he yéelded him millions of thanks, and accompanyed him to his house: which, when he entred, he found not gorgeously embost, yet gayly trimmed, not courtly, yet comely, though home∣ly, yet handsome, and he was kindly welcommed by Da∣mons wife, who gréeted him with a merry countenance, being by her husband certified of his fortune. Soiourning there some small time, he sought by sundry meanes to a∣bolish the impression of his sorrowe, but being vnable to finde ease in ease, he resolued to depart, and finish his search by finding his loue, or ending his life. Thus ready to effect his resolution, he determined to enforme Damon at full of his estate, knowing that he being both borne and brought vp in Arcadia, could not be ignorant of such acci∣dents as fortune there had acted. As they walked together on a day through Damons ground conferring of sundry matters, the heate growing excessiue, they hasted to a coole shade, & there sate downe. Arisbas loth to omit so méete oc∣casion, séeing opportunitie friend to his desire, began thus. Friend Damon, sith many respects shorten my intended residence, I haue resolued with speede to leaue you, though for euer bound to loue you, my fortune enforceth the one, your courtesie causeth the other. But before my departure, I will disclose to you a secret, which may moue
you to meruaile, and me to melancholy. A secret so rare, so ruthfull, that euery periode may effect a passion, each clause a corrosiue, wherein you shall sée a world of wonders plotted by loue, and perfourmed by fortune. For know, that you haue lodged a Prince, whose maiestie masking in disguise of miserie, droupt in a lower ebbe then might séeme a decorum in my former dignitie. If you muse at this, then marke the rest, and lend attentiue eare to my tale. Cyprus of all neighbour Iles the noblest, is my fathers Kingdome, the succession of whose estate, right of birth, and title of inheritance, will by due claime after his decease, transferre to mée. But what auailes it to be inuested with a diademe & want delight? When the date of my nonage was expired, hee desirous to linke me in some honou∣rable alliance, determined to prouide a wife with an ample dowrie, and large hopes of future good haps. Many Prin∣ces of Ionia, and Péeres of Europe, desirous to insert them∣selues into so royall a kinred, and to haue interest in so noble a Familie, offered their daughters with large por∣tions. But onely the Prince of Lemnos sped in his suite, whose allyance my Father accepted, shadowing his pre∣tence which was aymed at hoped profit, for the match was concluded with this condition, that if the Prince dyed without heire Male (as he then had none, nor may by any likelihoode hope of any) then the enioying of his estate, and possession of his Crowne, should in right of his daugh∣ter descend to mée. This compact thus subtilly contriued, was by agréement of both our Parents confirmed, so that nothing wanted to finish the bargaine and strengthen the contract, but my consent, whereof my Father seeming to conceiue no doubt, made me priuie to his proceedings, commanding me to deliuer my resolution in briefe and playne tearmes. I, who misliking his choise, would not conforme my thoughts to an others direction, perceiuing the old mans drift, yet dissembling my intent, answered
in effect thus, that my yeares were fewe, my experience small, my affections frée, a sole life best fitting my fancie. Yet did I in humilitie submit me to his disposing, onely crauing a little respit to summon my senses, and conceite a change, desiring him to impute the not liking of so ho∣nourable an estate, to the imperfections of my youth. He suspecting no fraude in these faire speaches, thought it sufficient that I was so flexible, and referd the times appointment to mine owne choise. But I déeming nothing more dishonourable then to measure affection by money, or leuell the eye, fancies herault, at a gainefull, though inglorious obiect, pronounced lucre an heresie in loue, and estéeming such mercenary thoughts méeter for a pea∣sant than a Prince, would rather neuer marry then so marre. For should I wed mine owne woe? Should I ac∣cept her a spouse, whose beautie I beheld not, whose beha∣uiour I knewe not, of whose worth I was vncertaine, be∣cause it was vnséene? How could that loue be constant, that affection permanent, which had no déeper roote then the parents naked consent, no surer seale then a bare salu∣ting at the first fight? Yet, (such was the inclination of my youth) I earnestly desired to fixe my fancy on some fortunate obiecte worthie of a Princes fauour. Many both gorgeous and gallant Dames attended in my Fathers Court, yet none fit, though all faire. While fancy com∣menced such tumults in my thoughts, there arriued in Cyprus a noble Epirote, surnamed Aristophon, a man noble in déede, graced with all ornaments which nature might afford, or vertue challenge. He was banished from his natiue soyle by tyrannous doome of his vnnaturall Souereigne, being falsely accused to attempt an innoua∣tion in the State, and plot some treacherous practise with the King of Macedon. For it was vniustly surmised by some, and beléeued by all, that he had conspired to betray to him the countrey of Ambracia, whereof he was Presi∣dent, and had annexed it by force of Armes to the Crowne
of Epirus. Although his integritie should haue cleared him from such a crime, yet, (as it commonly happens) in∣nocencie oppressed by iniurie could not preuaile: leauing therefore his vnkinde countrey, despairing of returne, yet bearing with manlike patience the burthen of his exile, he repaired to my Fathers Court, who reléeued him with princely liberalitie, allowing him an honourable pension for maintenance of his estate: for hauing oft employd him in weightie affaires, and finding him fortunate in at∣chieuements, he perceiued by these experiments that he was garnished with all glories of nobilitie, graue in coun∣sell, valiant armes: of dauntlesse courage, spotlesse truth. But leauing this digression, I will returne to the propo∣sed entent of my discourse. Hée brought with him his daughter and onely childe named Timoclea, a creature endued with such ornaments of the bodie, graced with such qualities of the minde, that it seemed nature and ver∣tue concurring in one, had conspired to make her a péere∣lesse proofe-péece of their vnited perfections: and though fortune fretting at their fauours so largely bestowed sought to crosse their courtesies with her cruelties, yet could she not blemish the bright-shining worth of so fa∣mous a wonder. But as a small cloude in a cleare day may somewhat stayne, not wholy stop the Sunnes light, so fortunes malice did rather darken then drowne her merits, in whose Iuory browes Chastitie sate enthronizde as gardian of her lookes, Modestie teinting her chéekes with a vermilian dye of Virgin-red maiden-blushes, em∣blasond her a map of mirrors. Maiestie whiche beautie claymed, birth challenged, loue commaunded, guided her gestures with such decent proportion, as Iuno wanted in the pride of her glorie, or Minerua in the prime of her pompe. These gifts these glories did so enchaunt, enthrall, enforce me, that hauing scarce viewde her, I vowde her mine, or my selfe not mine owne, such déepe impressions were wrought in mine affections. Loue hauing wonne
and wounded me with mine owne weapons, finding an easy entrance into mine heart through mine eyes, the au∣thors of my disease, and discouerers of my desire, disgari∣sond my thoughts of wonted fancies, conuerting my so∣lace into sobs, my delights into despaire. I vnable to su∣steine so grieuous a burthen, perceiuing that the more I stroue to allay the heate, the more those smothered cinders reuiude in quenchlesse flames, Flames which Aetna-like boild in my brest, resembling the horrors of Mount Ghi∣belloes firie rage, which vomits millions of vapors, and darts heapes of sulphur from the glowing centre, being I say torturde with troubles, I resolued to finde ease for my loue, or end for my life, suing to her bountie which had vn∣done me by her beautie. I am so briefe in relating my for∣tunes, as I was then loth to defer the execution of mine enterprise that so highly concernd the hope of my good hap. Finding her on a time in company with other, I singled her from the rest, my intent not suspected by any. When we were alone, I hauing awhile dallyed with common deuises to enterteine her with varietie of talke, in the end though I could not Orator-like paynt my passions in figu∣ratiue tearmes, nor contriue them with rhetoricall con∣ceipts, yet did I playnely discouer my affection, protesting my present loue, vowing my future loyaltie, producing causes, desiring comfort, alleadging her worth, my wants, seasoning my words with many sighes. She in a cho∣lerike humor (but it was a pretty choler) framde a cour∣teous yet cruell answere, courteous in her words, enterla∣ced with reuerent speaches, cruell in that vnkinde repulse, yet kinde rebukes, not omitting to insert the respect of her owne honor, and the regard of her fathers safetie: but concluding her friendly anger in a calmer veine, she prof∣fered in submission all seruice loue excepted and her ho∣nour reserued. Although the last clause afforded sufficient matter for a fresh reply, yet did her constancie so confound me, that being vnable to vtter one word, I brake off our
parle abruptly, and summoning my fancies to a retreate, I resolued to attempt a second onset, wherein being like∣wise vanquished by her vertues, yet rather animated then amated (these kinde conflicts kindling not quenching my flaming passions) I attached a third onset: but hauing therein receiued a sharper foyle, I proceeded to a fourth, of all most fatall, for she taunted me with contemptuous tearmes, and yéelding a full denyall, sealed with a storme of frownes, she departed, leauing me amid my discon∣tent plunged in a sea of dangerous conceipts, musing on my mishaps, meditating on her rigor, desperate of all hope, destitute of all delights: but my passions were such that I could not conceale them vndiscouered: such my sorrows, that I could not smother them in silence: thus therefore I vttred part of my griefe in an extemporall Sonet. Arisbas his Sonet. SHould I accuse mine eyes that boldly gazed On that fayre obiect not to be obteyned, Or blame the worth in Europes wonder blazed, That them to looke and me to loue constreyned? Eyes for excuse alleadgde preuailing reason, Heart in extreames on fancies wrong exclaymed: Hopes sun-shine clowded like obscurest season, Yeelds to despeire at my misfortunes aymed. Nature too lauish outward graces planted, Vertue too friendly inward bounties sowed: Yet those faire eyes of courteous looks are scanted, And angels hue on tygres thoughts bestowed. Tush, loue which not alike did wound vs both, Is cause, that I my death-like life doe loath.
But not satisfyed thus to haue expressed my sorrowe, I did in an odder veine pen an Elegie without methode or good matter, but as it was I will rehearse it. Arisbas his Elegie. FAint wel I may for I feele enfeebling faintnes about me, faintnes vpon my lims heart to beset to besot. Loue is a God but a cruell God but a boy but a wanton blinde but boldly triumphs, proud to be tearmd a tyran. What shal I do? shal I sue to the gods that lodge in Olympus? there loue seated aloft vaunts to be Lord ouer all. Heau'n yeelds small comfort: him, they do tremble obeying, and themselues enthralde cannot alas me release. What shal I doe? shal I sue to the pow'r whome Cyprus adoreth, loues loue-worthy mother though not a friend to Cupid? Her doth he wound and smiles when her hap Cytherea be∣waileth, how then will he for her yeeld to releeue another? What shal I then? shal I sue to the boyish God that hath hurt mee, hurt and harmd me so, that little is my reliefe? Then wil he vexe mee more til heart more heauily languish, torne as Prometheus fruteful vnhappy liuer. What shal I then? ile sue to the saint whose lookes me be∣reaued of liues blisse through loue, loue the decayer of hope, O that beautie so rare (but I blush to blame such a bountie) should staine fairest hue with such a blot such a blur. Yet wil I try, to the saint wil I pray and sue to be succord, in whose choise it rest mee to relieue to release. If you mislike eyther of them, or both of them (as well you may) accept this for a currāt excuse, that troubled thoughts
thwarted with sorrowe, can hatch no pleasant conceipts seasoned with swéetnesse, and where sadnesse houers, no Muses harbour, but to our purpose. This melancholy (whereof I spake before) procured a grieuous maladie, which she at the first supposed feigned, knowing that I would plot all sleights, and leaue no subtilties vnassaide to circumuent her, but when the Physicions report, my Fathers sorrowe, the generall rumor bruted through the Courte had assured her of mine estate, she thinking it enough to cause but too much to continue my danger, came with her Father to visit me. How then I was affected, I refer to their censures whose fortunes haue resembled mine. All the powers of my bodie being transferd into mine eyes the contriuers of my then-séeing discontent, were employed in viewing her outward glories, and va∣luing her inward graces. When I remembred her last tearmes, I trembled at each thought, but weighing that being endued with all vertues, she could not want that of clemency hauing the other of courtesie nor be voide of gentlenesse being garnished with far-deriued gentilitie, I supposed this the fittest time to spéede if now I spake. When her father tooke leaue, I craude his daughters longer presence vnder pretence of passing away the time, she not vnwillingly assented though smelling the drift of my demaund, and he both accepted and ratified my re∣quest, commaunding her to tarrie. When we were alone, I pleaded in effect thus, though not so boldly as before, First, I alleadged that my present sicknesse so dangerous, my former vowes so serious, might warrant the truth of mine vnfeigned passions. Next, that I meant not to disho∣nour her by affecting her, sith I craude onely to make her my lawfull spouse, which fauor if she would vouchsafe to afforde, I vowed to incurre all hazards for the preseruing of her honor, protesting to leaue Cyprus, to frustrate the pretended mariage with the Prince of Lemnus his daugh∣ter, and liue with her the onely blissefull heauen of my
life, and stay of mine happinesse, as banisht in some other countrey till my Fathers anger were appeased and his consent obteyned, whose royall estate to me as eldest by right belonging, when I should by succession in that farre-renowned Kingdome fully enioy, I promised to inuest her with a Diademe, and Crowne her Quéene of my coun∣trey, as she was already souereigne of my content. I en∣ded my plaints with an humble petition, desiring her to pittie mine estate, accept my seruice, and compassionate my sorrowes, sith in loue-diseases they onely can heale which causde the hurt. She showring a streame of siluer-teares from those christall fountaines bright lamps of loues light, such as might beseeme Venus to shead on her déere Adonis, Aurora on her Sonne Memnon, shapt this answere. Pardon (dearest Lord) the follies of a selly mayde, or rather weigh with indifference the causes of her coynesse, for so you tearme my denyall, which if folly had effected, or disdeigne caused, I had merited more blame then a world of punishments might expiate. But sith the respect of my Fathers safetie, and the regard of mine owne ho∣nour moued me to be so rigorous in my replyes, I hope to finde the more fauour in the offer of my satisfaction, which with all submission I humbly present. As it grieues me to be the author of your present danger, so it glads me not a little that in me it rests (as you affirme) to cure your discontent, and be the happy author of your health, wherein if mine endeuors may further you, I will not faile in diligence, nor be slacke in my deuoire, but with this condition, that you obserue your promise of preser∣uing mine honour from all preiudice: then leauing all, and onely louing you, I will for euer liue with you, but if you violate that vowed couenant, then is the bargaine cancelled by so heinous a forfeit. These words conteining such comfort, affoording such content to my halfe-withered hope, did so relieue my fain∣ting
spirits, that they recouered their wonted vigor, and I my former strength, being within short time restored to mine health by this good hap. I foorthwith conceiued meanes for our escape, hauing before decréed to passe into your Arcadia, and to remayne there vntill my Fathers anger were appeased, knowing that in such affaires de∣layes import more then ordinarie dangers, fearing my Fathers too hastie pracéeding in that ill-pleasing match with the Lemnian Princes daughter. Being loth to defer time, or dally with fortune, I obserued this order in per∣fourmance of my plotted enterprise. Disguising my selfe, I went on an euening t he Hauen (for the Court was then kept at Famagosta) there I met with a Rhodian, which hauing shipt his fraught, was readie to hoise sayle, and determined to touch in the maine of Greece before his arriuall at Rhodes. Conferring with him a while of triuiall matters, in the end I disclosed my purpose, fei∣ning my selfe an Arcadian, and that my Father enforced to flye his countrey, had long liued in Cyprus, spending the remnant of his life in banishment with mée and my poore sister (for so I tearmed Timoclea) his vnhappy chil∣dren, the hopelesse companions of his exile, that being now dead, he left vs séely Orphanes, and to vs such small substance as hée had, that wée bereaued by death of our dearest comforte, not knowing howe to mainteine our selues in a strange place with so small a portion, were desirous to reuiewe our natiue soyle, and returne to our deceassed fathers friends. Procéeding, I tolde him that I knewe none fitter to transport vs then himselfe, prote∣sting to pay whatsoeuer he would reasonably demaund, if he would vndertake it as well he might, hauing occa∣sions to touch in the maine of Greece, sith in what part soeuer of the continent wée were set on lande, wée might haue easy passage thence into Arcadia. Hée beléeuing my feined tale, séeming to pittie each clause of my discourse, or perhaps tickled with desire of gaine, offered himselfe
most willingly to vndertake it, but requested a round summe, which I granting, gaue him part in hand, with sufficient assurance for the rest. Thus the bargaine being solemnly knit betwéene vs, hée wilde mée that I should come with my supposed Sister the next night very late, béeing the time prefixed for his departure, and tolde me secretly in friendly sort, as one stranger to an other, that hée had aboord certayne vnlawfull and vncustomed wares, the sale whereof would be very gaynefull to him, but if it were reuealed, would worke his vtter vndoing, which caused him attempt meanes to launch thence by stealth. Nothing could chance more espondent to my wish, who desired to depart priuily. Leauing him therefore and returning to the Court, I repaired to Timoclea, certified her of my procéedings in all points, willed her to remem∣ber her vowed promise and plighted faith, enfourmed her of all things néedefull to be done. She not failing mine expectation, promised her readinesse at the appointed time. I leauing her, packt such treasure as I could gather in haste, and attended the assigned houre, which being come, taking her with me, I came to the Hauen, and béeing spéedily conueyed aboord, found all things ready, anchors weighed, sayles spread at our comming: within short space we got out of the Hauen, and before morning were farre enough from the coast of Cyprus. Foure dayes wée sayled merrily, hauing a lusty gale in the poope, which draue vs gallantly forward. On the fift day towards eue∣ning we descryed land, the shores delightfull hue affoor∣ding vs a pleasant prospect. Our maister iudging it some part of Greece, supposing that I which had feinde my selfe natiue in the continent, could not be ignorant of the coast, desired me to goe on shore, search the land, and bring him word whether I knewe the countrey. I of all most desi∣rous to leaue the sea, fearing pursuite of my fathers po∣wer, condescended to his request. Being set on land, pa∣cing vp and downe a while, I was drowned in viewe of
those delights which that fertile soyle yéelded, déeming that it was Arcadia, or some place bordering on it, partici∣pating like pleasures with it. Then began I to conceit varieties of imagined blisse, iudging this a fit place for mée and my Timoclea to rest in a while, till she had reco∣uered her health, being much impaired by her sea-iour∣ney. Hetherto Fortune séemed friendly to mine attempts, but now, least she should be vnlike her selfe, she obscurde the sun-shine of my happinesse with clouds of her incon∣stancie, for the wauering Goddesse doomd my solace to be thwarted with eternall sorrowes. In a moment the windes raysing the Sea in billowes, secluded mée from returne. He which attended my comming in the Boate, fearing to be intercepted by the storme, rowed backe in haste, leauing me, yet did hée hardly escape drowning. I though too late weighing the weathers change, hasted backe, but missed the Boate, and him that guided it. Then I beheld the Ship tossed amid those tempestuous waues, sometimes hoised to heauen, presently plunged in the Oceans deapth. Accursed eyes the vnhappy beholders of my dearest Timocleas troubles whereof she was vn∣worthy, I too worthy which brought her to this perill, for whose danger drouping more then dreading mine owne, I made signes to them aboord, which answered me with the like, intimating as I did guesse their desire and readi∣nesse to take me in when the storme should ceasse. I somewhat comforted with this colde hope, sate downe néere the shore looking for a calme. Dayes light decli∣ning, nights darkenesse shadowed the earth, but in this obscuritie of all things I continued my abode, expecting dayes returne. But when Phoebus posting from the An∣tipodes had remounted the Easterne hill, and burnished heauen with his glittering beames, I hoping to see my wished obiect, viewed onely the voyd Sea. What should I then do? exclaime? I did it: accuse? whome? the Gods? I would not: Fortune? I durst not, for I hoped her fa∣uour
might be regayned. But ay me, my hope was force∣lesse, because frutelesse. The windes fury was asswaged, but no Ship séene, no hope of returne. I spent the second night in this bootelesse expectation, which being past, and day restored, I summond my thoughts to consult, and de∣termind sith vaine sorrowe without search could not a∣uayle, to séeke her my lost loue, and finde her if the earth affoorded her. Rising in this resolution, and hasting by the coast, hauing mine eyes alwayes towards the Sea, I came to a desolate and almost dispeopled Hauen, where finding a Cretan Pinnesse ready rigd, and furnished for departure, I spéedily embarqued my selfe therein, but neither in my passage at Sea, nor in my search on land after my arriuall, could I finde any certaintie of my de∣sire. Passing thence by Ship to Rhodes, I had like suc∣cesse, for expecting there most comfort, I found least con∣tent. Though there discouraged, yet I drouped not, but proceeded: no Ile in the Ionian or Aegaean Seas was by me vnséene or vnsearched. Failing in these, I came by Sea to Hellespont, thence to Epirus, thence to Ma∣cedon, then forward into Thessaly, from Thessaly to Thrace, enquiring diligently in all the Port townes of these Prouinces, and not finding any comfort, not hea∣ring any newes of what I most desired, I entred into Arcadia, and met happily with you amid my laments. Thus haue you heard the summe of my sorrowes briefe∣ly related, whereto if you can affoord such ease as I expect, you shall not onely saue the life and salue the ho∣nour of a distressed Prince, but make him of all most fortunate. Héere words melted into teares, teares that made a periode to his plaints. Damon halfe in a passion after some pause replyed thus. The strangenes of your discourse hath so amazed me, that I scarce knowe howe to answere. I should deriue my beginning from crauing pardon for so homely en∣terteyning so great a personage: but the ignorance of
your estate affoords sufficient matter of excuse to shield mée from reproach. Yet if the sequele of my report doe in any sort satisfye you, I request that the solace which you get thereby, may in part recompence those former defects. When our last Autumne the yeares most desired sea∣son, had rendered Earths tribute with heaped plentie of encrease, Aegon and Damaetas, both Arcadians, by pro∣fession Shepheards as I am, walking on the downes not farre from the Sea, while Titan posting to plunge his firie Chariot in Thetis lappe had gladded Oceanus with his returne, walking I say and ouerlooking their Swaynes that gathered the flockes to pen them in the foldes, they sawe a farre off one running towards them, séeming by signes to request their tarriance. At his approach they behelde him a goodly youth of comely feature, and endued with such rare beautie, as is séel∣dome séene in any of our sexe. The selly lad breathlesse with running, speachlesse, and almost heartlesse through feare, fell downe at their féete. They hauing graunted him some respit to settle and recouer himselfe, gently tooke him vp and courteously demaunded his estate, and the cause of his ill hap. He which panting for breath stop∣ped oft in his tale, and could not make a long discourse, briefely told them, that hauing by hard fortune left his Countrey, he was taken by Pirats, amongst whome he had long led a miserable life, being most barbarously handled, they sometimes alluring him with faire promi∣ses, sometimes terrifying him with sharpe menaces, but no way able to winne him to their wills, or moue him to satisfye their beastly lust. Oft he cursed his worthlesse beautie, so he tearmed it, that had caused that wretched bondage, wherein he had endured so many troubles, con∣tinuing resolutely in his chast constancie. Thus much he discouered, and desired them to question no farther of his estate, but earnestly besought one of them, whome
it should so please, to enterteyne him as his seruant, and promised to doe his duetie with all deuoire of dili∣gence. Aegon the wealthier of the two, a man of ap∣prooued honestie enterteined him, tooke him home, and since that time hath vsde him not as a seruant but a sonne, for hauing no childe he purposeth to make him his heire. When the fame of this wonder, and the fortune of his arriuall was bruted through the countrey, Aegons house was frequented with troupes of Arcadians lusty Gal∣lants, and dainty Girles. Ranished with the viewe of so rare a creature, they all sayde that eyther Hyalus béeing retransformed, had returned to grace Arcadia, or Cupid shrowded in disguise of mortall shape, was come to fire their hearts with newe flames. Thus was this wonder admired of all, loued of Shepheards, and liked of Lasses. Happy séemed the Swayne that could enioy his company, prowde was the Girle that could for a louers glaunce receiue a friendly looke. Among the rest, Dorylus an Heard-man, doting more déepely then became a Neateheard, assaying all meanes possible, yet finding no meanes possible to compasse his desire, at last resolued to woe him with offers, try him with presents, and tempt him with gifts: for déeming loue a couetous humor, hée thought this the onely point for his purpose. Béeing in so odde a veyne, presuming to fore∣sée his owne successe, he plotted his supposed fortune in a Poeme, which béeing common in euery Shepheards mouth, I will nowe recite, that you may iudge howe cunningly he could contriue his fancy in a fiction.
Cupids iourney to Hell. LOue leauing heau'n gan post to Stygian lake, And being landed on the farther shore, For Plutoes palace did his iourney make, To view his vncles Court and royal store. Thus hauing crept from mothers sight by stealth, He welcom'd is with pompe by bloodlesse ghoasts: And hels grim tyran greeting him with health, His royalties to powre-full nephew boasts. Hauing viewd each strange hue of monstrous shape, They feasted with great iollitie in hell: And sawc'd their meate with store of pressed grape, Till wine did wit and sense from them expell. Sleepe causde by fumes to their ore-charged braines, Did seaze on both: first Pluto tooke a nap: Next, Cupid (thus his quaffing moode constraines) Laie downe to rest him, dreading no mishap. In hast the fondling from his shoulders threw, His deare bought quiuer and his fatall bowe: Faire Proserpine came in and at the view, Forthwith exclaimde, these, these haue wrought my woe. These, these causde me depriude of wonted ioy, T'inhabit Hell these firde the leachers lust: But sith they are misguided by a boy, I will commit them to an others trust. This said, came Plutus headlong tumbling in, Plutus the god of Coyne blinde as the other:
Whom with faire words the guilefull queene did win, T'vsurpe those gifts and seeme loues second brother: At first he fearde, at last he was delighted, With vsing them and smiled oft to thinke: How mens affections by those shafts excited, Obeide his doome which loue with gold did linke. Cupid awaking miss'd the dreaded signes Of godheads might: strange passions did him tosse: He wreathes his armes in folds and them vntwines, Thus childishly he mones his haplesse losse. He wept, he fled, in hell he durst not hide him, Grieude with the murmure of so many soules, Neere heau'n he dares not come least Venus chide him. What should he do whom Fortune thus controules? Foule fall the wagge that lost so rare a iewell Long may he lurke that could no better gard His fathers toile, his mothers pride, the fewell, Which for hearts wracke, eyes glaunses haue preparde. Sith then the god of gaine vsurps loues roome, I will with gifts make sute for gracious doome. You may perhaps doubt the coherence of this deuise, thinking it straunge that Plutus stumbled in headlong at that instant, no former cause of his hastie comming being pretended: but marke my briefe report, which being heard, his inuention may séeme plausible. In this the last and worst time wherein men carry gol∣den thoughts though it be an iron age, Plutus perceiuing the generall desire of wealth setled in all hearts, thought himselfe so great a god as the best, since his giftes were so estéemed of the most. Meaning therefore more benignely
to expresse his bounties royaltie, he lent the vse of his chief seruants to sundrie his well-willers, pretending those the onely acceptable sacrifice to obtain his fauour, their names were Couetousnesse, Deceit, Periurie, and the Séede of all mischiefe, that Arch-sinne Vsurie. Hauing thus prepared a path-way, he fancying greater glories due to his diuellish deitie, discouered himself in the West, supposing that these Coyne-cormorants, these Money-mongers his godheads chiefe pillers, would runne in heapes to adore him, and fill the earth with Temples erected in honor of his name: But his hope wanted successe, for these odde companions hea∣ring that his iollitie had ascended from his infernall lod∣ging to frollike with them, contriued meanes to catch him, and hauing layd hold on him, they hampred him so, euerie one catching a péece, that he erst in hell a god, was now on earth a prisoner, mangled and martired by those his fauou∣rites, locked in great chests strengthned with yron barres, kept so close that the poore god was almost stifeled, gasping oft for breath, but being blinde, he felt no want of light, though closed in darkenesse where the glorie of his former beautie was blemished by rust. But when Saturnes blacke sonne had sent his poursiuant Death to seaze on these huck∣sters for whome a stately bath was prepared in euer-bur∣ning Phlegeton, the children not liking their fathers close fingring, restored Plutus to his libertie but with his losse, for they brought him from prison to torture, setting him on the racke, stretching his ioyntes so, that he possessed more roome then Tityus, whose bodie couered so many acres, for they made him reach or rather retch to the benefites of all those whom they glutted with inordinate giftes, and they had almost dismembred him, for they drew him so rie and sucked ye marrow so néere (the quintessence of  substance being bestowed on the basest though best-sing commo∣dities) that the leane god had nothing  but skin & bone. At last, winding himselfe from their, he met in this per∣plexitie with his olde friend Fruitie, which being an
expert Chirurgian set him togither againe: hauing reco∣uered his legs, away he trotted amaine wingd with feare, dreading euer that some of those mad companions were at his héeles, and neuer thought himself secure vntill he came to hell, but he left his seruant Treasure behinde him on the earth, with a thousand curses to them which kept it: Of which one was, that they should neuer be quiet in minde: Another, that the brats of Vsurers should be alwaies sicke of the loose disease, neuer able to holde any thing long. Thus haue you heard the cause of his headlong stum∣bling in, but here I will presume to comment on the con∣ceit of Dorilus. Plutus did gladly cept this offer of Proser∣pina, hoping thereby to recouer his seruant Treasure, for which purpose he vsed to wound louers after Cupids fashi∣on, with the gold-tipped shafts, but he pierced the hearts of their beloued obiects with leaden headed arrowes, though garnished with a thin couerture of golde, which intimated that they carried Mercinary affectiōs, not vouchsafing them any fauour which brought them no fée. But belike the god himselfe ment to share stakes, and by that kinde of tribute which they paied, to recouer in part his seruant Treasure, through them to whom he had bene the author of so profita∣ble a profession. Hereat Arisbas smiled, and Damon ending this his first merry digression, procéeded thus on a second. This was not his first experience of repulsed affection and vnregarded passions, for before this wonders arriuall, he extremely doated on Palma a faire shepheardesse, which was more delighted with obseruing Dianaes orders, then accepting his offers. He halfe in despaire, pend a conceit as he thought persuasiue, thinking that could moue her, which did rathr mad her, and thus it was.
Dorylus his Ode, in English Sapphiques. TEll me thou fairest of al earthly creatures Faire by thy vertue, by thy beautie blessed, Tell me what moues thee to refuse my seruice sleightly regarded? Loue of a sole life to be like Diana May perhaps moue you, but I wish ye would not: Would not or could not, but I hope ye will not, stil be resolude so. If to the Forrests, to the shadie thickets, Fancie doth moue thee to repaire alone thus, If to the wide woods, to the craggie mountaines, or to the vallies, Then wil I speed mee to the groues vnhanted, Where Satyres sport them to the Fairie wood-Nymphs▪ Nimbly now skipping, then againe reposing, neare to the fountaines. Like not a sole life: Venus is reuenging, Feare ye not frownings of an angrie goddesse? Scorne not her hests then: be no foe to Nature, Loue is a pleasure. Beautie decaieth, yet is no chiefest Grace of a Virgin, yet it is required: Life is vncertaine. Who can hold a shadow Lost in a moment?
Such was his conceit wherein he sped not as he expec∣ted the issue of his fortune, yet loth to disgrace himselfe, to salue that suspition which might intimate want of perfec∣tions in him, he thus feined the cause of that repulse. Dorylus his Ma∣drigal. Loue vowde himselfe my friend and chose his time To wound faire Palma: Cynthia him espide, As wantonly the god did climbe To fit his aime, and sware to worke his smart, If he presum'd to pierce so chaste an heart: And therewithall from Mayden side She drew a shaft: away the god gan flie With wings fast wau'd, nor durst the wanton scant Or slacke his course amid the skie, Thus he his will and I my wish must want. But let vs returne to his last wooing: hauing thus descanted ndeceiuing hope, hée attempted to effect his deuice, but failing in the execution, being reiected with seuere lookes, finding frownes in stead of fauours, he felt such déepe impression of sorrow, that since that time of his repulse, he hath led a discontented life, spending his daies in pensiue meditations. His fortune or rather misfortune not so rare as by his laments made ruthfull, is memorized by vs in a prouerbial byword: for we term il successe in loue the destinie of Dorylus. Thus you haue heard, what I can discourse concerning this wonder, a name well fitting his perfections, modestie of behauiour, maiestie of lookes, come∣linesse not common, fairenesse of face, eyes lyke Starres, browes sometimes furrowed with prettie frownes, yet alwayes beauties bowre: frownes resembling those
siluer steppes in the milke-white way leading to Ioues palace, chéekes cherrie redde, yet was this louely tincture circled with a mayden white, such neate proportion of all parts, that I want a world of tearmes to emblason their perticular praises, and will therefore ende with this affer∣tion, which I dare auouch against all men, that Nature in framing him hath wronged her owne sexe, bereauing it of so great a glorie. Arisbas galled to the quicke with Damons wordes, ho∣uering betwéene hope and feare, knew not how to surmise, what to suppose, for he felt a worlde of melancholy moti∣ons mustring tumults in his fancie. Weighing the report of that wonders beautie, he thought it could be no other then his Timoclea, but when he remembred the diuersitie of the sexe, he was againe discouraged, till hope rescuing his drouping passions with timely succours of happie com∣fort, bad him imagine that as loue doth oft effect rare stra∣tagems, so he might proue his power miraculous in this one thing, shadowing the sexe for his auaile. Being in these dumpes he held a session in his thoughtes, whereto he assembled all his powers, and therein resolued to ryd himselfe of this doubt by a spéedie view of that far-renow∣med wonder. For this purpose hée enquired of Damon the name and distance of the place where hée remained, who answered, that hée dwelt farre of in the Southerne parts of Arcadia, and that it were lly to wearie himselfe with a néedelesse iourney, sith if hée woulde continue his abode but nine dayes, hée might with lesse trauaile, and in a full assembly view him at ease. The Prince demanded how, The shepheard after a long pause beganne thus, gracing his relation with an vnexpected discourse. When our Country was haunted with the almost-daily presence of heauens high inhabitantes, though now bereaued of so great a good through our owne ingratitude. (For Iupiter courted Calisto in Dianaes shape, robbing her of her dea∣rest Iewell, and Apollo mastered or rather martyred by
Cupid, for his high contempt pursued swift Daphne win∣ged with chaste desires.) There liued in Arcadia a most faire Ladde famous as the rest, I may well terme him faire, a terme too slen∣der to emblazon his beauties woorth. Much I muse (yet I néede not muse, for Iupiter possessed Ganimede alreadie) that he made not him a praie for his pleasure. But sith I cannot fully expresse his perfections, I wil rehearse to you the description of him couched by an Arcadian pen-man, in a briefe Ode, a conceit wel knowne to all shepheards, and by them oft recited. The description of Hyalus in an Ode. GAnimede th'Idaean boy, Second glorie of the day: Phrigiaes wonder fathers ioy, Loues content, oues wishfull pray, Blith Adonis beauties treasure, Venus darling, Fancies fire, In whose lookes were heauens of pleasure, Fruite too faire of foule desire: Both these would, though both were rare, Both the mirrors of their time: Blush if they should make compare, With this wonder of our clime.
In whose eyes loue lodgd his darts, But he did with glaunses ayme them, That hee might subdue all hearts, And his owne by conquest clayme them. Such his face such was his stature, Locks resembling burnisht golde, That his like, astonisht nature, Framd not since of earthly moulde. Nature at her selfe amazed, O what influence then did guide her, Sith in want such worth was blazed, Worth which heau'ns haue since denide her? May not then this louely boy, For he was a louely creature, Well be tearmd Arcadiaes ioy, Blest in bearing such a feature? Well he may and if not he, Who should then our wonder be▪ Such and so many were his perfections, that he could not fully describe them, much lesse I discouer them. He was affected by many, admirde by all. Shepheards doted on him, Lasses droupt for him, all liked him, for who could not loue him? It is the custome of Arcadians to rest in some shade when Sommers scortching heate annoyes them. Being shrowded from the Sunne, they spend the time in discoursing on their owne or their fellowes for∣tunes, Shepheards I meane, men of their owne profes∣sion, whether natiue in Arcadia or no: as in memorizing the worth of Astrophell, praising the perfections of Phillis, lamenting the losse, commending the loyaltie of Amyn∣tas, mourning for the death, yet misliking the disdeine
and pride of Amaryllis, pitying the distresse of the forlorne Shepheard, the vnhappy admirer, though happy herauld o her worth. But if Hyalus by hap came by (as oft he did) they would abruptly breake off these discourses, and fol∣low him gréedily, gazing on so glorious an obiect. Nor was this vniformitie of affections only in humane hearts, for the rurall powers were touched with like simpathy: Pan sighed to sée him, remembring by him his Syrinx, though of an other sexe. The Hamadryades flocked to view him, wishing him one of their troupe. Faunes, Siluans, Sa∣tyres, séeldome séene before, were oft beheld by men, while they left the hallowed groues to gaze in the open fields on that eye-Syren, alluring not with the sound, but at the sight. Amongst other, Pomona, Goddesse and patronesse of fruite did so deepely affect him, that Venus could not more dote on her Adonis. She desirous to winne him with ouer-cloying kindnesse, fed him with Apples, gaue him Plums, presented him Peares. Hauing made this entrance into her future solace, she would vse oft his company, kisse him, coll him, check him, chuck him, walke with him, wéepe for him, in the fields, neere the fountaines, sit with him, sue to him, omitting no kindes of dalliance to woe him, winne him, feyning to droupe, to dye for him. But he which would not listen to loues lore, nor obey his hests, nor abide his lawes, tooke no pleasure in her passions, loathed her embraces, liked not these amorous combats, and oft shunning her sight, would repaire to the vnhappy Shepheard, disdaind by Ama∣ryllis, and sit with him and sing, tying his angels voyes to the obseruations of musick, recording the skilfull Swaines swéete ditties in heauenly notes: for he loued him for his pleasing grace in passionate Sonets. While these things chaunced, Zephyrus that glads Arcadia with friendly gales, sawe him, and sighed for him: nor did hée only sée him, but by oft breathing coole gales into him, felt the many swéetes lodged in that louely subiect. While he
thought of no fellowe in his affection, his passions were moderate, but when he knew that Pomona was his riuall, he loath to brooke a partner in his pleasure, or a compani∣on in his content, resolued to sequester his delight from hazard of surpazing, and thus effected his resolution. As on a day Hyalus parched with sommers heate, and tyrde with faintnesse, reposed his weary lims on a gréene banke, Zephyrus not omitting this oppertunitie, gently heaued him from the ground, and softly conueyed him musing much, into the worlds Westerne coasts, wafting this wonder to the fortunate Ilands, the blessed soyle not annoyde with rough blasts, nor ouerwhelmd with immo∣derate raynes, but sometimes (though seldome) touched with a superficiall moysture of showres. There he layde him downe in a medowe on a bed of floures, gathered a∣gainst his comming by his ayrie seruants, to whome be∣fore he had intimated his intent. When the boy was layde, being in a pretie chafe, he scolded and exclaymed, though not knowing whome he might accuse. Zephyrus which felt fresh coales kindled in his heart by this louers combat, spake thus. Scolde not my wanton with thy friend, whose name if thou desire, know that it is he which for thy sake hath oft mantled Arcadia with Floras pride to delight thine eies, & comforted thée with a pleasing coole in extreame heate, to relieue thy faintnesse, euen Zephyrus, Lord of the Westerne blasts, whome if thou canst affect, thou shalt want nothing which the world can affoorde: try me, trust me, employ me, impute to me thy desires, thy delights. This sayd, resoluing himselfe into ayre, he diued into his dearling, on his eyes, on his lips he seazd, he surfeited: then raysing him thence, he carried him to his Palace, a most pleasant coole edifice. There Hyalus re∣sted long, not wanting his will in any wish. He was ser∣ued by vnséene attndants that waited with diligence on their Lords dearling. Varietie of daintiest fare, choise of wines, change of meates, store of delicates, were plenti∣fully
brought or rather blowne in at appointed houres, tables couered, all things furnished with more then princely magnificence, yet no seruitour appearing, diuine melodie on windie instruments fild his eares with conti∣nuall charmes of harmonious sounds. Oft he walked a∣broade to viewe the perfections planted in that soyle, and being weary or wanton, roade backe in an ayrie Chariot. But all this could not content him, who wanting his wonted companions, seemed to leade a life voyde of com∣fort. Hée did therefore so importune Zephyrus with chil∣dish complaints, that he vnable to deny him any thing, graunted the boyes most earnest desire, and ratified his graunt with spéedie performance. Truce was taken, and the composition sealed with many kisses: the summe of their agréement was, that Hyalus after his arriuall in Arcadia, should shunne the sight of Pomona, and leaue all other that pretended loue. On these conditiōs he was con∣ueyd backe, and layd in the place whence he was lifted. The rumor of his returne being bruted abroade, the Ar∣cadians throngd in thicker troupes then before to sée him, for measuring the worth of his presence by the griefe of his absence, they could not glut themselues with gazing on him. So soone as Pomona heard these happy tidings, she erecting tropheys in her fancy, vowde to preuent like future misfortune. Hauing gotten a sight of him, she ran, he ran, he fled, she followed, and followed so fast, that she ouertooke him in his course, and stayd him from starting: then she began thus. Shun not thy friend fond wagge which hath sought thée, sobd for thée, grieud to loose thée, glad to finde thée. At first I thought that Iupiter misliking Ganimede that now growes stale, had taken thée to sup∣ply his roome, or Venus chosen thée her second Adonis: But when I heard that Zephyrus had done this, I was the lesse discouraged, knowing my selfe able to encoun∣ter such an aduersary, and beard so bas  riuall in the pride of his hope. Now I haue got thée, and beshrow me wan∣ton
if I watch not your wiles, and kéepe you not in a surer garde. This sayd, she tooke him by the hand, and led the blushing boy to her mansion, where she locked him vp close prisoner, restraind his former large libertie, allowed him only to walke in her Orchards, and féede on her fruites. O beautie nourse of bondage, faire ill, sowre swéete. O most preposterous estate of all things, that he should be captiue to them whome his lookes had conque∣red. Vngentle Fortune, what malice did selly Hyalus merite, that hauing perfections worth, he should féele pleasures want? was he therefore faire that he should be infortunate? this by the way, but ile procéede. Zephyrus renewing his olde wont, romde through Arcadia, and missing his choise, marueiled at the change. Did he vio∣late his vowe? tush, he was a childe that could not value the vertue of an oath. Was he vrged by others? why not? for he was faire. Did he loue an other? he might, for he was yong. Thus dreading many doubts, he swallowed his discontent, but when he knewe that Hyalus was Po∣monaes prisoner, he was so enraged with furious passi∣ons, that he ruminated on nothing saue reuenge, and being vnable to hurt so power-full a riuall, vowd to inflict vengeance on the whole countrey of Arcadia. In this im∣patient humour, he hasted to the Northren regions, and méeting there with Boreas, saluted him thus. Father of stormes, salue now the sorrowes of vnhappy Zephyrus, thy brother in nature, thy equall in substance: helpe me, and for euer haue me a friend, a fauourer. I haue in one in∣iurie receiued more wrongs then I can reckon. Vnmind∣full, vnthankfull Arcadia not weighing the many fauours by mée affoorded, withholds from me my loue, my life, my hope, my heauen: but if thou powre thy plagues on that vnkinde soyle, and oppresse the inhabitants with outra∣gious furie of thy blasts, my riuall may repent her rash∣nesse, and I recouer my losse: Do it then deare fellowe, and for this courtesie I will for euer rest at thy com∣maund,
let thy tryall of affection moue thée to weigh my affliction. Boreas replide with a rough voyce. Brother Zephyrus, though our blasts doe oft effect contrarieties in the ayre, yet are not we contrary in our thoughts. I haue heard thy cause, and will auenge thy quarell, scourging the continent with such a storme of whirle-windes em∣battaild against themselues, raysing in their tragedies the tropheyes of my mercilesse fury, that the world hea∣ring report of this ruthfull accident, shall repute thy cause highly reuenged. I vowe to thée by the Scepter of our King, not to defer the execution of thy desire. Zephyrus comforted with these words, yéelded him many thanks, and returned to the West. Boreas forthwith issude from his icy prouince with a troupe of tempests and inuaded Arcadia, where he wrought so many mischieues in a moment, that no eye could viewe them tearelesse. Groues were disgarnished of their shrubs, fields disfurnished of their floures: trées, some torne, some rent vp by the rootes, cattaile violently carried from the places where they fed, and tumbled headlong downe the cliffes, men stagge∣ring, could not stay their steps, leauing therefore their wonted walkes they housed themselues. The Arca∣dians grieued with so many incommodities, imputed these afflictions to the anger of the Gods, whose wrath they sought to appease by Sacrifice. Repairing for coun∣sell to the Delphin Oracle, they receyued this answere, that they should sue to Aeolus, for he onely could ease them, whose altars they loaded with many oblations, omitting no vsuall solemnities. The God pitying their distresse, checked Boreas for his vnruly rage, and limited his boistrous furie with appointed boundes, commaun∣ding him not to touch the pompe of Flora, or the hope of Syluanus, not to wrong the harmelesse Husband-men, or hurt the selly Shepheards, but afflict onely the places of Pomonaes charge, which thing he did. The amorous Goddesse séeing a generall tranquillitie, and all other
places quiet, saue where she was president, was forced to bridle her affection, and release her prisoner, least for a fickle humor she should loose her honor. Hyalus set frée, raunged in a childish rage, but being weary with wan∣dering, he rested néere a pleasant Spring, and hauing wept fréely, slept soundly. In this sléepe, strange sléepe, the late sexe was changed, and of a faire boy a fairer maide fashioned. Awaking and musing much at this me∣tamorphosis, she was in the midst of her dumps raisde with a strong gale, & carried to a place néere the streights of Thermopyles, where was a Temple dedicated to Aeolus, wherein the louely maide was consecrated a Priest to that God, and continued there the whole tearme of her life a spotlesse virgin. Our auncestors desirous to celebrate the remembrance of this rare accident with eternall honor, appointed the day of her change to be for euer, memorizd in a yearely feast called Parthenia, where∣in the Priest of Aeolus accompanyed with the fairest of the youth of both sexes, offers a noble Sacrifice, disposing all things with due Ceremonies. Which done, they compassing the aultar in a ring, sing a solemne Hymne in prayse of that God. This did our auncestors institute, and their progeny hath by long successe of time obserued their deuoute orders. This feast must be solemnized nine dayes hence, whereat doubtlesse you shall sée this wonder one of that louely Chorus. Arisbas delighted with this talke, and cheered with hope-full courage, thanked Damon for his discourse, and resolued to tarry the néere-appro∣ching time, and desirous in the meane while to rid him∣selfe of wonted pensiuenesse, in a veine halfe rude halfe ready, he fashioned these thrée fancies, for taking truce with sorrowe, yet not wholly sorrow-lesse, he felt more comfort, though no full content. But take them as he wrote them, wherein if all be not currant, impute it to his thoughts which were not clearde. If this passe with fa∣uour, the other followe with like hope.
The strife of Loue and Beautie. LOue was arm'd with fatall bowe, Shafts which mother did bestowe, Mother gaue, but Father framde, Father, Mother, both were blamde. Wanton Goddesse did beguile Husband with a feigned smile: For a kisse she did obtaine (Labor neuer spent in vaine,) That her Sonne by Vulcanes trade Might the chiefest God be made. Thus she wonne him to her will, (Wily worke of womans skill) But the boy more proude then wise, Waues his wings and foorth he flyes. Soone as he on earth had lighted, Thus the fondling was despighted. As he vaunted vncontrolde Thinking all that glisterd golde, Terming in a foolish thought Which his selfe-conceipt had wrought, Heau'n his foote-stoole, Gods his marke, Men his obiects, earth his parke, Gods and men his hunting game, Beauty natures deareling came: Beautie clad in natiue hue, Whome the Graces did endue With rich plentie of their gifts, Beautie cause of witty shifts: Beautie with whose worth delighted, Poets haue sweet hymns endited: Faire as is the ruddy morne, Leauing restfull bowre forlorne.
Morne dide with Vermilion red, Rising from old Tithones bed. Thus this fairest of all faire Deind to grace the liquide aire: Passing by where loue did stand, Holding powre-full bowe in hand▪ Not saluting as she went, Him that rag'd in discontent. Boyling wrath must issue finde, Wrath that boilde in troubled minde▪ For the ease of whose vnrest, Thus his furie was exprest. Loue said he was Beauties better: She said Loue was Natures debter. Loue exclaimde on Beauties pride, Which all duties force denide. She said Loue receiude no wrong, Where no dutie did belong. None might craue peculiar right, Sith they were of equall might. He said beautie nere preuailed, But where Loue the heart assailed. Beautie for it selfe admired, His shafts causde to be desired. For where Loue bred no remorse, There had beautie litle force. Psyche was more faire then any: Loude of few, though likde of many. Yet so likde that not affected: Sisters sped, but she reiected. Yet, quoth Beautie Psyche gainde Cupids heart to her enchainde. Where was then his wonted might? Vanquishde by a womans sight? Thus fell Loue into a trip: Thus she galde him with a quip.
He said twas his owne procurement, She said it was her allurement. Loue said beautie pleasde the eie, But he wrought hearts sympathie. She said heart when eye had viewde, Was by beauties force subdude. He said beautie soone decaide: She said loue no longer staide, Then while beautie was in prime: Thus did both giue place to time. Cupid grieude with these replies, Framde by her in taunting wise: Sware by dreadfull Stygian lake, (Greatest vow that gods can make) That he would no more descend, Till he did this quarrell end: Vowing by his godheads might, Beauties darlings to despight. Thus he saies, and vp he flies Swiftly through the Empyre skies. If men might this strife decide, As by men it should be tride, Then would all agree in one, Beautie can preuaile alone: Beautie able to enthrall, Eyes and heart, and thoughts and all: Yet three powers in one assenting Stroke mine heart, heart soone relenting. Eyes saw beautie and admirde it, Loue saw heart, through eyes he firde it, But faire lookes did first constraine Cupids shafts to shape my paine. Fairer Vertue beauties iewel, Bad mee not pronounce Loue cruel. Loue that forc'd me to affect, Beauties worth by Vertue deckt:
Then ô three of all the chiefe, Ease at last my loathed griefe. His second inuention followes thus. CVPIDS PALACE. PAphos now a worthlesse name, Wants the grace of wonted Fame. Fishie Cnidus not frequented, Samos highly discontented, Discontented with the misse, Of so great a former blisse, Where from altars did arise, Odors sweete, with louers cries: Breathing sighes from hearts amaine, Sad reporters of their paine. Barraine be Idalian hill, Vnadornd by Natures skill. Dry be Acidalian spring, Circled with no euening ring: Of the Fairy wood-Nymphs tripping, And on greene grasse lightly skipping, Where sweete Amorets were chaunted, While it was by goddesse haunted: Be they of all bounties reft, Sith they are by Venus left. Loues coy queene forgetting quight, Iles could yeeld her queint delight, Deeming earthly mansions drosse, Former solace, future losse, Haunts the palace of her sonne, Worke of wonder lately done: Daily guest she there remaineth, And of loue to Loue complaineth. Now no more to rule she deignes, Yoked Swans with siluer reines,
As she did from earth ascend, (Earth which erst she did commend) And returnd through liquide aire, Gliding to Ioues royall chaire. Vulcan staide from framing thunder, That he might erect this wonder. Wanton boy would neuer cease, Wily mother grant no peace, Till by this the strife were ended, Feined strife by them pretended. Top is close, the fourme is round, Seated on an azure ground: No doore seene, yet doores each-where, Entries close, yet many there. For one colour teinteth all, Turrets, doores and gyring wall: Clammy stuffe the colour beareth, (Halfe white, halfe red hue it weareth) Such as in Asphaltis lake, Did Chaldaean workemen take: For that high-entitled frame, Honord with first Empires name: On the top with triumphs fild, Stockdoues mothers birds did build. Right side was with windowes dight, To receiue th'infused light: Light so cleare, so bright, so faire, As in clearest open aire. There the roofes are rich embost, Wals adornd with equal cost: Workes engraude of queint deuise, And enchasde with gemmes of price. There his bow of beaten gold, Worth a world of wealth vntold: And shafts pointed with like mettle, Wily wag thought meet to settle.
Pleasure gardian of this roome, Author of each happie doome: Loues Vicegerent on that side, Vaunts the worth of heau'ns chiefe pride. Fancies on her steps attend, Such as do her fauours send, Or affoord the fruites of pleasure, When delight by loue they measure. These serue when the god doth strike, Both hearts with one shaft alike. Not that one should sue in vaine, And the other dart disdaine. But a mutuall passion wrought, In one sympathie of thought: Or when hope of hap vnproued, Plots the praise of things beloued. Pyrocles such fancie knew, Fancie giuing Loue his due, Which did on Philoclea looke, Bathing in a Christall brooke. He disguisde a virgin seemd, And his name was Zelmane deemd. O how sweetly did he praise, In those lines those louely laies, All perfections in her planted? For his pen no praises wanted. Tresses of her Ambre haire, Wauing in the wanton aire. Rubie lips and corall chin, Soft, smooth, Alablaster skin. Angels ookes, hands lily white, Eyes subduing at the sight. Left side hath no windowes made, Darker then Tartarian shade. There was bowe of fatal yue, Acting horrors that ensue,
And his arrowes with leade tipt, Which in Stygian poole were dipt. Sorrow keeps this seate of terror, Mirthlesse hag the whelpe of error. Fancies do on her attend, Fancies which despaire do send: When one shaft poore heart doth shiuer, Drawne from loue-enforcing quiuer: But a second tipt with lead, Strikes affections vigor dead: In an other heart not moued, With remorse of paine vnproued. These do on repulses muse, And Loues rigor oft accuse. And soft sounds like minutes breath, Sighes by turnes from vnderneath. But ô God the most diuine, Sith Timocleas heart and mine Were with equall wound opprest, And with fairest Fancies blest: End these sowres with sweete conclusion, Least thy godhead seeme illusion. His third inuention not treating of loue, but shadowing the worth of Poesie in a fiction, was thus: The worth of Poesie. IMpute it not prophane impietie, Dread god of Delos, and chaste virgin-troupe: To him that, in vnpitied miserie That doth enforce his wearied muse to stoupe, And him all cheerlesse abiect-like to droupe, Reueales those holie secrets of your hill, That do concerne defence of depest skill.
Vnder the couert of a Laurell tree, Vpon the mount where learned Muses dwel: Rare monuments of worth enshrined bee, The workes of Laureate pens, workes which excell, Cherish'd by comfort of Castalian well: There rest they safe: though safe, yet once assailde By three mishaped elues, which fled and failde. There laie enrolde in euerlasting lines, Epique records wrapt in heroique stile: There laie enclosde in those eternall shrines, Sweete Hymns and Odes that lyriques did compile, And Elegies, and Epigrams sharpe file, With th'other graces of a laureate quill, Whence hony sweets do copiously distill. Pale enuy Beldame-like with staffe vpholding Her cursed limbs, came first and tooke a sitting, In lothsome signes her deadly teene vnfolding, Neare to that hallowed place how il befitting, How much annoyd through her contagious spitting, T'infect the tree that did those branches nourish, And kill the roote whose moisture fed their flourish? From depth of poisnous mawe the monster fierce Did belch foule gobbets with an hell of snakes, Wallowing in lothsome filth, that did empierce The teinted ground: Forthwith the Laurell shakes, For whose decaie the hag that vomit makes, Which sinking downe corrupted roote and all, With Christall drops that from the spring did fall. Soone as the erst-greene began to perish, And witherd branches could no longer couer Those antique rolles, or them with safetie cherish, A second hag still darknesse silent louer:
Obliuion hight, slow hag did slily houer, Suted in duskie robe of pitchie staine, Like to an hanging cloude that threatens raine. Well did this name of Lethe her beseeme, Which oft forgot her selfe and her entent: Eftsoone she staid, as doubting what to deeme: Then forth she stept: nor long she forward went, But staid againe, as musing what was ment. But being come, she towards her gan rake Those monuments, that prize her praie to make. Then Ignorance that doth Arts glory blot, Ran to the tree to get a Laurell wreath, Before the branches by that fatal spot Were wasted cleane, that rose from vnderneath: Nor would she stop, nor did she stand to breath, Till tree was toucht: thus did the sot desire, The highest praise of laureate Poets hire. She thought it meete her pupils to inuest With lasting bay: and in that fairest place To lodge their lines, where worthier workes did rest, But when they were repulst with deepe disgrace, She hirde those hags both glories to deface. Those elues of horror which did yeeld their helpe, The one despaires, the other darknesse whelpe. O bane of blisse, gainst worthiest wits pretended, O lucklesse lot ô iniurie of time: Foule-fall the hags that such ill hap entended, And haggish brood enuying honors prime: When high-plum'd Muse through Empyre skies doth climbe: And curses all which holy Poemes hold, Light on the hags that stop those mines of gold.
O who could harbour such inhumane thought, Though he Hircanian Tygres milke did sucke? Heart more flint-hard then beating waues haue wrought On sea-washt rockes, reward from arte would plucke, And guerdonize desert with direst lucke. Stand they good Gods dull stones ay-vnremoued, That such despight by censure fell approued. Fame gliding from on high did there alight, Viewde their attempts, and rested on the tree: The earth was circled with a glorious light, (Such light as mortall eye could neuer see) Forcing the elfe which had those hags in fee, To troth with apish pace vnto some caue, The halfe-lost vse of daseled eyes to saue. The winged Goddesse moude with high disdaine, So shrill a note from siluer trompet sounded, That slowe obliuion posted thence amaine, Whose eares that strange vnwonted noise confounded, Eares where small helpe for memory was grounded. Pale enuy fled surprizde with doubtfull feare, Whose witherd cheekes with wrinckles furrowed were. The filth boild vp: the leaues wexd greene againe: The Lawrell flourisht in her former hue: Fame bade Desert for euer there remaine With light and sound, to shield a Poets due, By safe defence from wrongs that might ensue. Thus I record that future age may tell, Loe this is he that wisht to Poets well. Although he aymde his conceipt at the merits of Grecian and Romane labors onely there preserued in a golden clo∣sure of perpetuitie, vnder that ay-greene ay-glorious trée, euer faire, because euer fresh, whose lasting flourish dated
with eternitie, and cherished by the Christal-flowing Ca∣stalian spring, such labors as either record the worth of those ancient Heroes, marshalling their stately blasons in maiestique methode with such successe of acceptance and admiration, as when an high-pac'd Muse treading a lofty march, leades honor enchaind in an Epique pen, grac'd with the furtherance of historique Clio, or treate the tra∣gical tropheyes of the cothurnate Muse, vttering clamo∣rous complaints, and enwrapping complotted practises of bloud and reuenge in the swelling pompe of hautie Iam∣biques, which yéeld matter for the Chorus to complaine, warbling sorrowes with variable soundes: or the faire blossoms of affection displayde in elegies, with the faceti∣ous grace of sharpe-cutting conceiptfull Epigrams, limi∣ting delight in compendious swéetnesse: with Satiricall reprehensions, heauenly Hymns, and the pleasing solace of harmonius Odes, not the least studie of a Lyrique pen-man, with Eclogues, and the fruites of Thaliaes fauors suted in meanest robes. Though he I say aymde his con∣ceite at these onely, yet may I auer with like truth, that the like moderne taskes publishd since by men of sundry nations especially in the Latin tongue, absoluing all parts of poesie in seueral perfections, were likewise registred in that holy refuge of such happy reliques. But the Muses blusht, and Phoebus frownd at the strict bounds of their bounties, whose fauors were limited with these two lan∣guages. For which restraint of their worth they prouided this remedie, that the diuine Entheos inspiring such sap, such swéetnesse, should be afforded to other nations, which decrée being once ratified, conceiptfull Italians obteind first place of this priuiledge, and did diuinely absolue each aboue-named part with seuerall perfections: their names I néede not to relate, being famously knowne through Europe to the most. Poesy wauing thence her golden wings beyond the Alpes, though returning, establisht an habit of high humors in France, the happy nourse of many
rare spirits, which likewise with no lesse praise haue in liuely colours expressed all perfections of Poetry, and these being in like sort famous, néede not to be by me memorized. To these adde the labors of Castilian pens. But in Albion the wonder of Ilands louely Thamesis, fairest of the faire Nereides loues sea-borne Quéene ado∣ring, vaunts the glory of her maiden streames, happy harbour of so many Swans, Apollos musical birds, which warble wonders of worth, and chaunt pleasures choise in seuerall sounds of sweetnesse, pleasant, passionate, loftie, louely, whose matchlesse notes, the faire Nymph kéeping tyme with the billowing of her Chrystall waues, carrying to the Ocean with her ebbe, doth there echo them to her astonisht sisters which assemble in those vast flouds by timely confluence. Baetis grac'd with many bounties, Po, and Arno, garnishd with many pleasures, Rhone, and Araris, enriched with many royalties, yet none of these may vaunt more heauens of happinesse then Thamesis, in harbouring such Swans, such swéet∣nesse. Yet many most worthy monuments of heauenly wits wanted the honor and safetie of this seate, for they were drowned in the abysse of Lethes silence, es∣pecially of the most ancient Graecian Authors, as Or∣pheus, Linus, the first Musaeus, Aratus, Nicander, Theog∣nis, Phocilides, and most of all the nine Lyriques, and Elegiacke and Comicke Poets, and some taskes of tra∣gique pens, with the precious predictions of the tenne Sybills, and many of the Romane Worthies. Little re∣maines of graue Ennius, who vaunted though vaine-gloriously the transmigration of great Homers soule, séeking aduantage by that one poynt of Pythagorean doctrine to bositer his owne ambition, but though he were rude in stile (which was the fault of his time) yet was he graue in matter, and in this meriting praise, that being one of those that brake the first yee, he rowsde the following rare spirits. But worse hap befell the
rare Smyrna of learned Cinna, and sugred passions of sweete Gallus, and of those other both Gréeke and Ro∣mane workes, many are blemishde with some blurs: so that it was high time that Phoebus and the Muses should vndertake their protection, and become their pa∣trones. But leauing this digression, let vs returne to the matter. Thus spent hée some houres in these meditati∣ons, but when the long-expected day of his desire ap∣proached, Damon taking his princely guest with him, iourneyed to Sicyone, néere whose suburbs that solem∣nitie was euer celebrated in a faire fielde hallowed for that yearely vse. At their arriuall in the Citie, they founde there innumerable Grecians, both natiue of the continent, and Ilanders, whome awfull zeale of pure deuotion had induced to be present at those holy rites: (such they tearmed them.) The next morning (for their expectation lasted but one night) Arisbas and his hoste, leauing their lodging betimes, went to the place, and there prouided themselues an easy roome without the rayles: for within them none might stand, the Priest and his necessary attendants excepted: with them infi∣nite troupes of the assembled strangers hasted to pre∣uent Titan, who shaking his deawy lockes on the mountaines, posted from the watry cabbin of Nereus, to be an eaely viewer of these solemnities. But ere he had measured a tenth proportion of his daily pace, the Priest sute in a long sky-colourde robe, a wreath of Poplar branches, though consecrated to Alcides, en∣compassing his Temples, came forward, and with him the ordinarie Ministers, the inferior assistants to his office, clad in their Ceremoniall robes, each attending on his seuerall charge. Some caried syluer basons to re∣ceiue the bloud, some fumigations, one the knife, an other the hallowed fire, brought from the euer-glowing altar of Delphos, euery one somewhat, and two the chiefe
of them led the sacrifice, a yong milke-white Heifar crow∣ned with a garland of floures, whose frée necke had not felt the heauie yokes bondage: Next these, came the most loue∣ly traine, consisting of the fairest of both kinds, flourishing in the prime of their youth, and in the pride of their beau∣tie, clad all in long white robes trailing after them, wea∣ring on their heads garlands of odoriferous floures. They obserued a rare methode in their comely march, pacing two and two, a faire boy and a girle. In one thing the weaker sexe, those wonders of beau∣ties worth excelled, whose amber tresses waued so on their shoulders, marshalled with swéet equalitie of distance, that Phoebus féeling contrary passions, did both sigh and smile to sée them. But in this, the worthier kinde farre ouermat∣ched the oth, in the front of whose rancke that wonder whereof Damon made late report was placed the first, as of all the irst, who turned the eies of the beholders from notng the procéeding, to gaze on his perfections. Aris∣bas hauing before lost himselfe in a desert of despaire, & now finding an issue for hi hope, was so rauished with ye sight, that he could scarce conteine himselfe from leauing his sta∣tion, and running to embrace (as wel he might.) For Arca∣diaes triumph was his Timoclea. Thus it séemed, thus he supposed, not gessing at randon, but gathering by likelihood of his loue: yet stil he doubted because he dreaded. The full triall of this séeming truth, was deferred till the solemni∣ties were ended, which thus they prosecuted. All the traine being come within the railes, a general silence mixed with reuerence possessed all men. The sacrifice being prepared after the vsuall maner, the accustomed sprincklings & other ceremonies dispatched, that noble offering was layd on the altar & the wood kindled by the consecrated fire. And forth∣with the faire Chorus cast into a ring began their hymne. In the same moment of time a shril harmony of winde-in∣struments, sounding miraculously in ye aire, not drowning with ouer-loude noise, but consorting with the musicke of
those well-agréeing voices in a fit key, made diuine melo∣die. And for a second testimony of the gods kind acceptance of their deuotions, a stronggale snatched vp the sacrifice, and swift as thought bereaued their eyes of that obiect, be∣fore the Hymne was ended, which I haue here added. The Hymne sung to Aeolus. MOst iust auenger of Arcadiaes wrong, Dread God, high Regent of the worlds wide frame, Enricht with titles of adored name, To thee these rites, these honors do belong: At whose dire frownes th'amazed earth hath trembled. Patrone of harmelesse men in haplesse age, Restrainer of thy furious seruants rage, Accept th'intents of vs in zeale assembled. Worker of wonders in the continent, Prince of the aire, distinguisher of time: The calme relieuer of our troubled clime, To thee these duties pure deuotion sent. We celebrate as ancestors before vs, With yearly thanks best fruites of swaines degree, The miracle and mercies shewde by thee, Which Countries natiue plentie didst restore vs. And our succeeding progenie shall know From fathers mouth, the debt which children owe. Scarce were the accustomed ceremonies finished, when Arisbas leauing his station entred within the railes, & run∣ning with hasted steps to the louely leader of that beauti∣ous troupe of angel-faced boyes, after many embraces sea∣soned with a mixture of swéete kisses, began thus aloude: Deare of all the dearest, if not mistaken, luckily met, hap∣pily found: thée haue I sought, successesse on sea, on land, in the groues, on the plaines, in the Iles, on the maine, wea∣rying the world with iteration of my woes. Now haue I
found thée, if thée, then am I fortunate: but if eyes deceiue me, hope faile me, then may I iustly impute this mishap to the extremitie of fortunes malice, which séemed to ease me with a shadow of not-being solace, that she might plunge me in a déeper sea of sorrowes. Wen Timoclea (for shée it was) sawe her Arisbas, and heard him speake, chiming in her eares charmes of vnthought pleasure, how she was af∣fected I refer to their censures, which after sowre crosses enioy swéete comfort: blushing at her discouerie, yet reioy∣cing at this happie accident, she replied thus, gracing her proeme with a maiden-blush. Doubt not dearest Lord the assurance of your hope, I am that Timoclea sought by you so much, that haue sighed for you so oft, whose truth hath had many tryals in troubles, yet vanquishing all distresse, she beholds you, secure from danger. Thinke not this disguise of mine attire, and dissembling of my sexe, any reproach to the modestie of a maydens behauiour, for I haue plotted this chaste pollicie to preuent all perils of lustfull violence, and preserue mine honour inuiolate, that I might restore my selfe to you with the same dowry of virgins dignitie, for which you at the first affected me. This sayd, they shedding teares, enterchaungeable tokens of their mutuall ioy, re∣compenced the long want of loues delight, with swéete kis∣ses, and Damon supplying the time of their solace, stood vp, and in a large discourse dilated the fortunes of Arisbas, and the successe of his loue agréeing in effect of sense, with the former relations, whose tale being ended, Timoclea prose∣cuting the discouery of loues strange aduentures, procéeded thus. Sith those things are reuealed which I thought that the gods and our selues onely had knowne, I will likewise in this assembly publikely relate the many changes of ad∣uerse chances, from ill to worse by me endured. Thus then deare Lord, and you strangers and friends, receiue a briefe rehearsall of my troubles, & in hearing my discourse, dread souereigne of my soules blisse, weigh the many dangers of thy dear too dearly-bought Timoclea. When that il-boding
tempest first cause of our ensuing cares had secluded thée from the sea, mée from the shore, our ship was dangerously tossed on the troublous waues, and though within no small space a timely calme had quieted the waters rage, yet the vngentle windes, lucklesse instruments of fortunes spight, kéeping their wonted quarters, draue vs far from the con∣tinent with continued aduerse blasts. After long tumbling on the floud, we descried a litle desolate Iland, and packing on all the sailes, made towards it amaine, when sodeinly the Pilot causing them to strike the late-spred sailes, kept aloofe from ye coast, and willed the boat-swain to sound the depth, for he vehemently feared to be driuē on some shelues in that vnknowne current, but finding all sure in the safe∣tie of a wide chanell, we approached néerer. There was a small créeke on the South side, making shew of an harbor, seeming then a fitte hauen for our weather-beaten vessell. Thereinto we entred, bearing in close with the point, and hauing anchord, the chiefe gouernour of the ship went on land with the stoutest of his Marriners to search the coun∣try, and to finde fresh acates, but he returned failing in his purpose, only supplying our want of fresh water & fewell, and bringing aboord with him a fewe straunge ill-tasting birds which they had taken among the cliffes: leauing this comfortlesse coast, we made againe to sea, & on the seuenth night from our departure thence, we were engulfed amōg the Cyclades by the windes thwarting alteration, fitly re∣sembling the crosse course of fortunes whéele in peruerting humane actions. In one of those Ilandes, the Gouernour finding a fit hauen, caused his ship to be had into a dock, and there he set his men on worke to stop leakes, and new trim her sore-bruised sides. I vnwilling and vnable through my want to attend the issue of his delaies, left him, resoluing to embarque in some other vessell sailing neare Arcadia. But remembring how many dangers were incidēt to our sexe, and to how many perils my beautie though small was subiect, I sought to procure my safetie and preuent al drea∣ded
ils by this disguise. Hasting to the next port, I found there a Merchant of Hellespont readie to hoise saile for By∣zantium: with him I bargained for my passage: he accepted mine offer & taking me with him, after a dayes tariance in ye hauen, lanched ayded by a prosperous winde. But though heauens fauoured me, yet hard hap stil followed me. Mark an other instaunce of fatall spight. On a faire calme day though a foule storme in mine estate, the ilot mistaking his course, stemmed the ship on a rock, and he cruel winds continuall furtherers of fortunes spight, draue her on with such violence, that she was there split. In this generall ex∣tremitie of life, each tooke what was next his hand to su∣staine him in that hazard: I nimble through feare, got a great péece of the maine Mast, and thereon committed my safetie to the seas curtesie, and though euerie surge threat∣ned ouerwhelming, each waue menaced death, yet I not daunted in these dangers kept mine hold. Oft I beheld the Dolphins mounting on the waters vneuen superficies, but at my approach they would cease their sport, in kind regard of my ruth, not raising the billowes with their tumbling, but gently on either side following me thus floating, sée∣ming to waft me with wary eyes as carefull of my safetie. The day being farre spent, I discried a sayle Westward, and (such was my hap I know not how to terme it good or ill) it made toward the coast on which I was thus tossed, when I saw it some what néere, I made signes to them a∣boord, expressing my danger and imploring their aid. They desirous to saue me (for sometimes miscreants féele passiōs of pitie) sent two of their fellowes in the long boat to fetch mée, who rowing to mée, tooke mee vp (thus one affection wrought an other) & carried mée aboord with them, where, hoping for solace, I found sorrow. Being in the sea, though euer dreading to be swalowed by the surges, yet was I free: In the ship though sae from such perils, yet was I priso∣ner to wretched Pirats from whose remorslesse hearts all compassion was exiled.
Yet, me they sought to win by allurements, hoping that I deceiued by their pretended kindnesse, would sooner yéeld to their filthie desires. The same night they frolliked with great iollitie for ioy (as they saide) of obteining me: when the wine had fired their enflamed lust, they sollicited thogh successesse, their former motions, and stroue so long for kis∣ses but got none, that they left their kindnesse towards me and fell to contention among themselues. Their Captaine enuying them, the publike possession of his priuat pleasure though but supposed, déeming me a praie fitter for himselfe and iudging a common good not currant, appeased the fraie through his authoritie, & did countermaund their passions, but priuately he would assaile me with all the engines of loue-plotted pollicies, adding cruell threats to kind words, sometimes entreating, sometimes menacing, now suing, then swearing, to obtaine his will, or augment my woe: now praying, then protesting to enioy me, or enioyne me perpetuall slauery. I hearing him in these tearmes, fed his humor with vaine hopes, coining new occasions of delaies, prefixing a time, promising, that expired, to yéeld to al kinds of dalliance which he would vse, limiting my feined profer with his condition, that till then he should cease from pro∣secuting his intended desires. He accepting this answer for an high fauour, protested to obey my doome, and obserue the propounded conditiō. But ere time winged with thoughts swiftnesse had touched the prefixed point of my then-immi∣nent perill, I was happily freed from feare of his force, and deliuered from dread of that danger by Anaxander, a vali∣ant Gentleman of Sparta, who hauing charge of a Galley scoured those seas, being sent by the Ephori, and bounde by strict commandement to execute seuere iustice on such ma∣lefactors which infested the seas with piracies, and landing oft on the coast of Laconia, for raged the Country, tooke rich pillage, & committed many spoils. But Anaxander méeting this neast of théeues, part of that accursed societie, encoun∣tred them, and hauing after small fight bourded them, put
all that crue of caitiues to the sword, accounting mercy to such offenders an high blemish of iustice. Me onely he sa∣ued, & with gentlemanlike compassion pittied my distresse. You may perhaps suppose that now my sorrowes were en∣ded, and I in protection of this worthie patron, without the compasse of fortunes reach: but if you so thinke, your iudge∣ments faile: these my sea-fortunes & those vnstaied waues, do in most liuely sort expresse the vncertaintie of worldes wauering, as by attending the sequele, you may easily con∣ceipt. When the report of this exploit was bruted to the eares of those other monsters, (for the minde of man degenerating from the decorum of humanitie becomes monstrous, com∣plotting mischiefes excéeding the vildenesse of beastes, and the bodie the mindes instrument, slaue to that tyrannicall gouernment, wherein affections rule and reason obeyes, effects them) they I say hearing this, lamented the ill hap of their fellowes, especially the Captaines death, whome they affected for his valure, and admired for his villanies, to them séeming vertues. But cōuerting their mones into mad fury, they confederated themselues in a bloudy league, vowing extreame reuenge on that worthie Gentleman whome they opprobriously tearmed the proud Iusticier of Lacedaemon. They had got togither sixe vessels, & Resicles a Cretan was Admirall of this accursed fléete: fortune sil∣dome foe to worst attemptes, suted their expectation with hoped successe. For méeting the Spartan Galley, they en∣compassed her, and commencing a bloudie broile, after long fight laid vs aboord, slue them all, and not satisfied with this butchery, exercised more barbarous crueltie, mangling the dead bodies into many péeces. Here againe I escaped death reserued by fortune, for a second brunt of dishonour which likewise I preuented, not touched with the least spot of re∣proach. The souldiers of Resicles taking me, brought me to their Captaine, who fancying in his fond thoughts a world of future imagined pleasures, entertained me kindly, and
wooed me with many curtesies, I filled him with vaine hopes, limiting my consent with delaie of time as I vsed the other before, and meane while plotted meanes for my escape, which thus I effected. At the very time wherin the feast of Thesmophoria was celebrated at Eleusis with my∣sticall obseruations by the Priests of Ceres, Resicles hauing left his fellow-Pyrats which dispersed themselues to pur∣chase booties, tooke a vessell of Samos returning from Syria, a rich prize. The day ensuing, he & his accursed companions applied themselues wholly to myrth and belly-chéere for ioy of their good fortune, seeming to celebrate the Baccha∣nals in their disordred dyet, dyet I terme it, because they oft vsed such excesse. When the wine had preuailed, and fumes ascending from their stomaches had besieged their ouer∣whelmed braines, summoning their distempered senses to rest, they laie as drowned in a sléepie charme, without feare or regard, in euery corner some. The winde and sea the one quiet, the other calme, did fauour them: fortune their com∣mon friend did not annoy them with approach of enemies: for if a tempest had bene raised, or the foe assailed them, doubtlesse they had receiued a full reward of their dissolute demeanours. I iudging this a fit time for my escape, slily conueied my selfe into the long boat, and cutting the roape rowed so well as I could, to the shore which was not farre off: leaping on land, I left my boat to the seas direction, and running with hasted steppes discryed two Arcadians, both which are now present, the one a friendly relieuer of my di∣stresse. I entreated their tariance by signs, and being come to them, was kindly comforted by them. Since which time I haue remained in this Country, where what fortunes I haue felt, most Arcadians can relate. Thus haue I contriued the rehearsall of my troubles into a briefe discourse. Timoclea would faine haue procée∣ded, but a generall murmure of admiration raised by the whole assembly hindred her entended purpose. Aegon stood vp, & suing for silence by signes, hauing obtained audience
spake thus. Country-men and friends, doubtlesse the disco∣uery of this rare secret and due guerdon of loues long-suf∣fering patience, was deferred to this time by iust presci∣ence of the immortall powers. For next the rare hap of Hyalus whose memory we now celebrate, what other acci∣dent could so directly fit the feast of Parthenia? As his sexe was miraculously changed from a faire ladde to the fairest girle that euer liued in Arcadia, so this lampe of royaltie, the Paragon of womans perfections, found in this place at this time, the onely occasion of disclosing of her disguise, and being supposed by all the mirror of our sexe, may now be tearmed the wonder of woman-kinde. The whole assem∣bly applauded his words, arguing hereby, that they confir∣med his opinion by their cōsenting censures. Many floures were throwne on those two louers, the floures of true af∣fection, and each departing, filled his natiue prouince with report of this rare accident: so that the miraculous meta∣morphosis of Hyalus was almost drowned in obliuion. Arisbas hauing repossessed his Loue the staie of his life, thinking it high time to glad his aged father with his re∣turne, whose discontent (as he not vainly supposed) his de∣parture had bred, taking with him his dearest Timoclea, with Damon and Aegon, tarrying litle in Arcadia, hasted to the next hauen, and there embarqued for Cyprus, where arriuing in the hauen of Famagosta, he found a wonderfull change. For the aged King dispairing of his eldest sonnes safetie, had matched Anaxilas the second brother of Arisbas, with the Lemnian Princes daughter, whose father decea∣sing immediatly after the marriage, he in right of his wife reigned Prince of Lemnos. Arisbas nothing discontent with these newes, sent one to certifie his father of his ar∣riuall. The old King replenished with incredible ioy, was transported into a trance: recouering himself, he hasted his aged steps towardes the hauen and méeting his sonne by the way, fel on his necke shedding many teares, swéete ar∣guments of his high content. Arisbas preparing to craue
pardon of his departure, was preuented by his oft redou∣bled fatherly welcomes and embraces: with like kindnesse he entertained trembling and blushing Timoclea, & spake curteously to Damon and Aegon. Returning to the palace he tooke great delight in hearing his sonne relate the trou∣bles and daungers with oft changes of Fortune endured by him and his dearest Timoclea, and iudging it inex∣piable impietie to hinder the successe of so rare affection resolued to giue loue his right and marrie them honou∣rably. For this purpose hee sent Herauldes to all the Ilandes adiacent, and Prouinces scituate in the maine of Greece, which published in his name leaue and libertie of accesse to all whom soeuer, especially strangers of account which would repaire to his Court, and be present at the nuptiall of his son, & honour him in such princelike exerci∣ses as might best beséeme the worth of that intended so∣lemnitie, not omitting to expresse the time. These messa∣ges had such successe, that besides a troupe of meaner per∣sons, the most worthie Heroes of Greece appeared at the appointed time, & being present at the ceremonies of Hy∣mens rytes, gaue honourable testimonie of their perfour∣mance. The Cyprian Kings second sonne then soueraigne of Lemnos, and his faire Princesse, were part of that royall assembly, whereat the Nobles of Cyprus did glister in al∣most-kingly pompe. Forthwith many honourable sportes and déeds of chiualry were exercised, in which Arisbas and Anaxilas were chiefe challengers, suted both in purest white, mounted both on milke-white Coursers, richly ca∣parrasoned. The old King entending farther fauour to his sonne, and desirous to disburthen himselfe of the heauie charge of gouernment, and inuest his age with ease, sur∣rendred his estate, & resigned ye regiment to Arisbas, whom he caused to be adorned with the royall Diademe, and he entending like fauour to his dearest Timoclea, caused her to be likewise crowned Queene of Cyprus. These second solemnities thus finished, the princelyke
strangers and others departed, bruting an honourable re∣port of the Cyprian Courts royaltie. Damon and Aegon hauing receiued rare entertainment and rich rewards for their former courtesies, shipped themselues for Arcadia. Fortune ending frownes with fauours, did thus absolue the catastrophe of this roial Comedy, which was yet imper∣fect. The old Cing of Epirus deceasing, his sonne Sostratus a man of milder disposition, succéeded him in the Crowne, who remembring the former good seruice of banished Ari∣stophon, and knowing his innocencie, sent immediatly af∣ter his coronation, an honourable Ambassage to conclude a league with the yoong King of Cyprus, and reduce thence guiltlesse Aristophon from exile. The Ambassadour was royally receiued and entertained in the Court of Cyprus, and hauing declared the cause of his comming, sped in both his demands. For the league of amitie betwéene those two mightie Princes was solemnely concluded by oath, and Aristophon desirous to laie his bones in the mother-soyle that brought him forth, was soone persuaded to return. Ta∣king his leaue therfore of ye old prince, the yong King & his daughter raised to such royall estate, he returned into his Country, hauing with him the other Péere of Epyrus, and a noble man of Cyprus sent by Arisbas, to cause King So∣stratus to sweare likewise, that the league might be confir∣med by their mutuall othes. Such was the successe of this rare oft-thwarted loue which my ouerbold penne hath pre∣sumed thus rudely to discyper, If any decorum be omitted, or indecorum committed, I can not otherwise excuse it (curteous Gentlemen) then by your fauours which wil (I hope) beare with such imperfections, & not impute it to mine owne desert, which was loth to pollish a toy, whereon I neuer bestowed more la∣bour, then sometimes an idle houre of recreation. FINIS.
