7100 99856874 22514
VARIETIE OF LVTE-lessons: Viz. Fantasies, Pauins, Galliards, Almaines, Corantoes, and Volts: Selected out of the best approued AVTHORS, as well beyond the Seas as of our owne Country. By Robert Douland. Whereunto is annexed certaine Ob∣seruations belonging to LVTE-playing: By Iohn Baptisto Besardo of Visonti. Also a short Treatise thereunto appertayning: By Iohn Douland Batcheler of MVSICKE. LONDON: Printed for Thomas Adams. 1610.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIP∣FVLL, WORTHY, AND VERTVOVS Knight, Sir Thomas Mounson. SYR, the gratefull remembrance of your bountie to me, in part of my Education, whilst my Father was absent from England, hath embouldned me to present these my first Labours to your worthi∣nes, assuring my selfe that they being Musicall will be acceptable to the Patron of Musicke, and being onely out of duety Dedicated, you will daine to receiue them as a poore Testimonie of his gratitude, who acknowledgeth himselfe for euer vnable by his vttermost seruice to merit your Fauours. All that I can is to pray to Almighty God for the health and prosperitie of You and Yours, which I will neuer cease to doe. Your Worships in all duety, Robert Douland.
To the Readers whosoeuer. GEntlemen: I am bold to present you with the first fruits of my Skill, which albeit it may seeme hereditarie vnto mee, my Father being a Lutenist, and well knowne amongst you here in England, as in most parts of Christendome beside. I am sure you are not ignorant of that old saying, Labore Deum omnia vendere: And how perfection in any skill cannot be attained vnto without the waste of many yeeres, much cost, and excessiue labour and industrie, which though I cannot attribute to my selfe, being but young in yeeres, I haue ad∣uentured like a desperate Souldier to thrust my selfe into the Vant-gard, and to passe the Pikes of the sharpest Censures, but I trust without daunger, because we finde it true in Nature that those who haue loued the Father, will seldome hate the Sonne. And not vnlike in reason that I should distast all, since my meanes and helpes of attaining what I haue, haue beene extraor∣dinary. Touching this I haue done, they are Collections gathered together with much labour out of the most excellent Authors, as well of those beyond the Seas, as out of the workes of our owne Countrimen. The Treatise of fingering I thought no scorne to borrow of Iohn Baptisto Besardo of Visonti, being a man generally knowne and honoured for his excellencie in this kinde. But what∣soeuer I haue here done (vntill my Father hath finished his greater Worke, touching the Art of Lute-playing,) I referre it to your iudicious censures, hoping that that loue which you all generally haue borne vnto him in times past, being now gray, and like the Swan, but singing towards his end, you would continue the same to me his Sonne, who in the meane time will consecrate my best indeuours at the shrine of your fauours, and shall euer remaine obliged vnto you for your curtesies to the vttermost of my power. Robert Douland. Thomas Smith Gent: In Praise of the Worke. WHere Merit far surmounts the pitch of Praise, The Good-worke there, transcends the reach of Words; This Worke is such: then good-words cannot raise Their waight so high as these Heau'n-scaling Cordes: Then let their vertue their owne glory raise, Least it be said a Smith hath forg'd their praise.
NECESSARIE OBSERVATIONS BELONG∣ING TO THE LVTE, AND LVTE-playing, by Iohn Baptisto Besardo of Visonti: with choise varietie of LVTE-lessons, partly Inuented, and partly Col∣lected out of the best AVTHORS, by Robert Douland, and Iohn Douland Batcheler of MVSICKE. HEEre thou hast (gentle READER) a fashion of practi∣sing on the LVTE, such as I could gather out of the Obseruations of the famous and diuine Laurencinus, others, and mine owne: comprehended in few rules, which I haue heere set out with as much care and diligence as I possibly could, by which thou mayest more easily obtaine the right practise on the LVTE. Take therefore this worke of mine in good part, who∣soeuer thou art that readest it, with a minde to profit thy selfe: yet thinke not I set it forth to the end to draw thee away from the liuely teaching of thy Maister, (whose speach doth farre exceede all writing,) or pre∣sume to teach those which are Maisters in the ART these triuiall wayes, but I offer helpe to young beginners, and such as oftentimes want a Teacher, which it will not be vnpleasing for them to vse, when they finde themselues wea∣ried with those difficulties which lightly befall young learners. Neither would I haue thee thinke that in this I detract from the other, differing wayes, which other men doe vse, not vnfitly, so that there be reason for them, and an easie gracefulnesse in them. For a man may come to the same place diuers wayes; and that sweet Harmony of the LVTE (the ha∣bit whereof wee doe daily affect with so great trauaile) may strike our eares with an elle∣gant delight, though the hand be diuersly applyed. Yet know as I am free from all such ambition, so, that I would with all my heart haue giuen thee the habit and power to play well, rather then the meanes of learning to play, if it were possible to be had without labour. Whosoeuer therefore will vse these our rules, if hee be wholie raw in the Art, aboue all other things let him perswade himselfe, that the knowledge of this ART though it be hard, yet it is easilie to be obtayned by him that is in this sort conditioned. First, if hee haue no great defect, and haue that naturall desire towards MVSICKE, which hath beene the founder of excellencie in euery ART; Secondly, if hee stint himselfe in his learning with such labour and exercise that is moderate, and continuall, not such vnreasonable paines as many doe weary themselues with: Thirdly, if he be patient for a good long time, for commonly this brings vs whether wee will or no to the highest of the SCIENCES. To
these if hee adioyne the industrious and liuely instructions of a Teacher, that is a good Ar∣tist, hee cannot but hope for a reasonable habit in a short time. If therefore thou shalt be thus qualified and minded, and want a Teacher (whom indeed I would rather wish thee.) To chuse a LVTE for a learner.First and formost chuse a LVTE neither great nor small, but a midling one, such as shall fit thine hand in thine owne iudgement. Yet I had rather thou didst practise at first on a LVTE that were somewhat greater and harder, vnlesse thy hand be very short: because that is good to stretch the sinewes, which are in no sort to be slackned. For there are which do sometimes without a LVTE forceably pull and lengthen their fingers. Others there are that laying their hand on a Table, or some like thing, doe spread their fingers as broad as they can possibly. Others there are that oftentimes annoint their fin∣gers with oyle of Tartar. Though I know the vse thereof is good to make a nimble hand; rather by the often report of many others; then by any approued experience of mine owne. Howsoeuer, it is most necessarie at least for the beginner to handle the LVTE often, yet ne∣uer but when thy Genius fauours thee, that is, when thou feelest thy selfe inclyned to MV∣SICKE: For there is a certaine naturall disposition, for learning the ARTS naturally infu∣sed into vs, and shewing it in vs rather at one time then another, which if one will prouoke by immoderate labour, he shall fight against Nature. Therefore when thou shall finde thy selfe aptlie disposed, and hast time and opportunitie, spare no paynes, yet keepe this course. What lesson to begin withall.Chuse one Lesson thy selfe according to thy capacitie, which giue not ouer by loo∣king ouer others, or straggling from one to another, till thou haue got it reasonably perfect, and doe not onely beginne it by going through it to the end at first sight, but examine each part of it diligently, and stay vpon any one point so long (though thou play it ouer a thousand times) till thou get it in some sort. The like you shall doe in all parts of the said Song, till you shall finde your selfe prettily seene in it. It will not little help you to get it without booke: for whilst the minde is busie searching here and there for that which is written, the hand is more vnapt to performe the Note, and all the difficultie the LVTE hath, which for the most part is imputed to the fingers, should rather be attribu∣ted to the varietie of the Rules, which are in this respect to be obserued, all which doe ra∣ther depend vpon the minde, then on the hand. And although most men doe vse themselues at the first to the hardest Lessons, that after∣wards they may haue the easier passage, yet would I not perswade young beginners so, for feare least such difficulties should cause a loathing in them, and consequently a giuing ouer of their practise: but I had rather an easier Lesson were set them at first, which is not intri∣cate by reason of many Gripes or stops (as you call them) and in displaying whereof one shall not neede to lay his fingers crosse the necke of the LVTE. And this I would haue vsed vntill the hand be a little brought in vre. And in this Lesson I would not haue many or di∣uers changes of the Time: for I haue knowne by experience that this hath been more hard to many then all the rest. Wherefore in taking such Lessons be diligently carefull in mar∣king both your hands, which being they are the chiefe and indeed the instrumentall parts of this practise, therefore for the vse of them take these precepts hereafter set downe: be∣ginning first with the left hand, because that is as it were the mother of the Melodie, the other doth vnfold the Melodie conceiued, and so sounds it to our Eares. For vsing of both hands to∣gether.Wherefore take speciall heede, lest the right hand touch the Stringes before the left hand stop them, and carrie your left hand so in holding the necke of the LVTE with a good grace, your thumbe must be set vpon the middest on the backe of the necke, which must likewise with the other fingers as they goe vp and downe vpon the LVTE be gently moued and follow them the way they goe. Now if you would know with which finger euery letter is to be stopped, first enquire diligently whether the letter be it selfe alone, or ioyned with other letters: For if it be alone, then this order must absolutely be kept. The first Finger must serue to stoppe B, the second for C, the third and fourth for D. alwayes, so that the fourth finger serue the fift or fourth string, and the third finger the other strings, as for example:
But if the letters be set in Stoppes lower then D. then keeping the same order with your fingers you must goe lower with your hand, and that letter which stands neerest the Bridge must be stopped with the little finger and the other letters which are aboue with the other fingers, as you may see in these examples: And in this other. Also if such letters singly placed beyond the fret D shall happen to be in more strings then two (as for example in these Diminutions following) and no A put amongst them,A Diminution is a Crochet, Quauer, &c. they must be stopped with the fore-finger laid ouer halfe the fret of that letter which is nee∣rest B,Of laying the finger crosse fret. or with the fore-finger laid ouer the whole fret. The finger must be laid ouer halfe the fret if the Diminution goe no farther then three strings: ouer the whole if you strike more or all the strings. This Rule will seeme more plaine perhaps out of the examples which follow: An example, wherein the first finger is to be laid ouer halfe the fret E. onely in the three first strings, where A. is none of the Letters. An example, wherein the fore-finger must be laid ouer all the strings in the fret C.
In these examples you see the finger is laid ouer the letter which is neerest B, the fourth finger stoppes that letter which is farthest from B, the other fingers stoppe the midle frets in their order. But if the letter that we doubt of, be placed not alone but with one or more other let∣ters, which coniunction we for this time will call a griffe, then the difficultie is greater, neither can any thing certainely be prescribed in this case, but that which vse and cu∣stome doth teach vs, yet so farre as I can I will prouide that thou shalt not be destitute of helpe.For Griping of stops in B. First, keep this rule, that how oft soeuer two Bs happen to be on two strings which stand close together, let them be stopt together with the toppe of the finger. Yet vnder∣stand this onely of the first, second or third stringe: for if two Bs stand together in the o∣ther stringes (namelie the Base stringes) then they must be stopped not with the toppe of the first finger, but with the same finger laid ouer the whole fret. The second Rule is, that whensoeuer two Bs are sounded on two Strings, that are not close together, but haue the Letter A, betwixt them or more Letters, then let such Bs be stopped with the fore-finger, and second finger. The third Rule is, that whensoeuer the said Bs shal happen to be on two or more strings, betwixt which is no A, but some other Letter, or a line or more vacant: wherein after∣ward some other Letter then A shall be set, then the fore-finger must be laid ouer the stop B. Let these examples serue for all the parts of this Rule. And because it is impossible to set downe in writing particularly all these things, which we shall finde by daily vse, necessarie to concerne this Chapter, I haue placed here cer∣taine of the common griffes or stops, wherein are one B or many, which must be stopped eyther laying the finger flat ouer the Fret, or otherwise, which you may easily perceiue, if they be written together in more places then two, in such forme as you see them here marked.
Where marke that the finger must be laid crosse the Fret often; nay, very oftentimes, (though you finde but one Letter of a kinde in that Fret,) that the other may be the swift∣lier stopped, which cannot by any certaine Rule but onely by vse be learned. And know besides the same griffes the Letters differ not, yet are not stopt alwaies after the same sort, by reason of former or subsequent stops, which thing thou must diligently marke. For the letter C I thinke there is no lesse controuersie about it: for some men doe stop two Cs in the same Fret: when no Letter but A goes with them, with the second and third finger very ele∣gantly: I alwayes stop it with the first and second finger, vnlesse it happen that B be in the same griffe, for then of necessitie must the two Cs be stopped with the second and third fingers. But if the said two Cs, and with them other letters then A, you must lay your finger crosse the fret, though not alwayes yet most an end, if those letters be vnder C which other∣wise should according to the Rule be stopped with the second finger, vnlesse it chance that after the griffe wherein it is played, another C follows immediately in some other string: Because to the end the first, namely, the Letter which is set in some Base may the better be held, it must needs be stopped with the first finger. And this shall suffice for the Letter C: more and more certaine Rules you shall gather by vse and practise, yet haue I set downe some examples, lest the obscurenesse of these things I haue deliuered might hinder thee. And many other besides which must be done in this manner. For the Letter D, I said before it must be stopped with the third and fourth fingers: there∣fore the Rule will hold in my opinion, whether two Ds being in one stop haue no other Let∣ter betwixt them; or haue one Letter or more betwixt them: yet thus that the D on the lesse strings be stopped with the fourth finger, and the D on the great strings, with the third finger: and if happily three Ds come together, you may for the most part vse the second, third and fourth fingers, or lay your finger crosse the Fret, as those stops which goe before or follow will beare it: of this Rule let this also be an example.
The same order you may keepe in the lower Frets, onely in them for the most part (and very often) were vse to lay the finger crosse the Fret for more easinesse. Of Holding.Therefore I will now speake of holding the fingers vpon a string, which is in this part ve∣ry necessary: because nothing is more sweete, then when those parts (the mothers of Harmonie) are rightly combined, which cannot be if the fingers be sodainely taken from the strings: for that voyce perisheth sodainely, when the stopping thereof is ended. And besides, nothing is more vncomely, then to haue the left hand moued vp and downe often, and by that meanes to occasion too much motion of the arme, which is with all care to be auoided. Besides, by staying the fingers on a string you shall so easily run vp and downe vpon the necke of your LVTE at your pleasure, that the very handling of it, (after a little labour and time patiently borne) will be no more troublesome to you then a pleasant walke. Therefore keepe your fingers in what strings soeuer you strike, (especially when you strike the Base) whilest the other fingers are stopping other stops, and remoue them not till another Note come, which doth immediately fall vpon another Base, or some other part. And if you may, hold the Base and the Treble together, if there be certaine middle Notes to be expressed: but if you may not for want of more fingers, take away that finger for the most part which stops the Treble: for it were better that Note perish then a Base. Generally take this for a Rule, the fingers must not be taken from the strings, without it be necessary: yet take heed whilst you play Diminutions, that one Note giue place to another, and be not held with the Note following. Thus much for the staying of the fingers on a string, and of the vsage of the left hand, shall suffice for their vse which are meerely ignorant, to be slightly spoken, whereof one cannot deliuer such plaine and certaine precepts, as he may of the right hand, the vse whereof to my power I will now set downe. For the vse of the right hand.First, set your little finger on the belly of the LVTE, not towards the Rose, but a little lower, stretch out your Thombe with all the force you can, especially if thy Thombe be short, so that the other fingers may be carryed in a manner of a fist, and let the Thombe be held higher then them, this in the beginning will be hard. Yet they which haue a short Thombe may imitate those which strike the strings with the Thombe vnder the other fingers, which though it be nothing so elegant, yet to them it will be more easie. Now choosing one of these kindes, learne first to strike the strings more hard and cleare, whether they be one or more that are to be stricken: and that you may strike them with the right fingers, marke whether one string or more strings then one are to be stricken: if more then one, keepe this rule, let two strings which stand close together be stroken with the Thombe and fore-fingers: if two strings be distant one from another so that there be one or two strings betwixt them, strike them with the Thombe and middle finger: strike also three strings, with the Thombe, the fore-finger and middle finger: foure strings with all the other fingers (excepting the little finger,) if more be to be stroken (as oft there be) keeping the same order with your fingers, let the Thombe and the fore-finger strike each of them two strings, if so many be to be stroken. To know how to strike single strings, being found amongst full stops.Now that you may know with which finger you must strike those notes which are found alone without the Griffes, examine diligentlie the measure that each hath to it allotted, and if a letter be set immediatlie after any Griffe, which letter is of the same measure with the Griffe, then when you haue played that Griffe, you must needes begin the Note following with your fore-finger at all times, and afterwards vse the Thombe if you meet a third note, and so goe forwards by degrees, keeping such order with the Thombe and fore-finger, so that as long as you play in that measure you begin nothing with the thombe twise to∣gether, nor follow with the fore-finger twise together, till you come to a letter or Griffe where the measure chaunges; which letter (if it were alone) must needes be stroke with the Thombe at all times. But if after the griffe you finde a Note which hath ouer it any change of time, then hauing played that Griffe, begin the Note following with the Thombe, stay∣ing a while vpon the said Griffe or Note going before, as the nature of the time shall re∣quire. Yet failes that rule when the time going before hath a pricke put to it: for then it must be precisely obserued, that after (which hath a pricke adioyned) the Note following though it be measured with a new measure, must be strooke with the fore-finger, and the
other notes with the thombe and fore-finger, one after another. Yet is theran exception in this exception: for when you finde a Griffe measured with a pricke, as for example  and there follow it many Notes, the first whereof is , or if you meet with such a one  and after it such a one , although the measure with a pricke doe goe before, yet must that which followes, contrarie to this rule, begin with the Thombe. For example of this Rule and o∣ther things which I haue formerly propounded, let this suffice: for the better vnderstan∣ding whereof, note that the letters which you shall finde without a pricke added to them, must be stroke with the right hand Thombe:Wherefore the numbers be∣fore the letters serueth. those which haue a pricke set by them or vn∣der them, with the fore-finger, the other numbers doe shew the application of other let∣ters played together: the number of 2. signifieth the middle finger: the number of 3. the next finger. The Example of the first Rule. Example of the second Rule. Example of the third Rule. Example of the fourth Rule. An Example of an exception from the fourth Rule. These things being well obserued,Of playing with the two fingers. know that the two first fingers may be vsed in Dimi∣nutions very well insteed of the Thombe and the fore-finger, if they be placed with some Bases, so that the middle finger be in place of the Thombe, which Thombe whilst it is oc∣cupied in striking at least the Bases, both the hands will be graced, and that vnmanly mo∣tion of the Arme (which many cannot so well auoide) shall be shunned. But if with the said Diminutions there be not set Bases which are to be stopped, I will not counsell you to vse the two first fingers, but rather the Thombe and the fore-finger: neither will I wish you to vse the two fore-fingers, if you be to proceede (that is to runne) into the fourth, fift or sixt string with Diminutions set also with some parts.A good Note. Besides you shall know that low letters placed in the Bases, from the fourth Chorus to the ninth, if they be noted with this time  may more fitly, nay must all be strooke with the Thombe, and most commonly so they are stroken, although this time  be put to them, as you shall more easily see in the example following:
I could wish you take as much paines in marking the Measures, as in the other former rules, especially if you be a beginner be not too hastie in handling the LVTE, for I dare promise you faithfully and without deceit, that nothing is more fit to second this businesse then patience in the beginning: for nothing can be gotten in an instant, and you must not thinke to play your lessons presently at first fight, for that is impossible. Wherfore take no other care but onely to strike all the Griffes and Notes that are in the middle betwixt them well and plainely, though slowly: for within a while, whether you will or no, you will get a habit of swiftnesse. Neither can you get that cleere expressing of Notes, vnlesse you doe vse your selfe to that in the beginning: which cleane deliuery euery man that fauours Mu∣sicke, doth farre preferre before all the swiftnesse and vnreasonable noyse that can be. This more I will tell you, you must be carefull when you beginne to learne to carry your body comely, and the right hand stedely. Some there be that binde their right hand with a napkin or girdle whilst they play vpon the LVTE, that they may seeme to moue nothing but their fingers & ioynts, which you must vse so that in running they may seeme scarcely to be moued: in like sort must you vse the Thombe and the fore-finger. You should haue some rules for the sweet relishes and shakes if they could be expressed here, as they are on the LVTE: but seeing they cannot by speach or writing be expres∣sed, thou wert best to imitate some cunning player, or get them by thine owne practise, one∣ly take heed, least in making too many shakes thou hinder the perfection of the Notes. In somme, if you affect biting sounds, as some men call them, which may very well be vsed, yet vse them not in your running, and vse them not at all but when you iudge them decent. Take this for a farewell: that this diuine Art, which at this time is by so great men fol∣lowed, ought to be vsed by thee with that great gracefulnesse which is fit for learned men to vse, and with a kinde of maiestie: yea, so that thou haue any skill in it be not asha∣med at the request of honest friends to shew thy cunning: but if thou chancest to get an ha∣bit of perfection, prophane not the Goddesse, with making thy selfe cheape for a sleight gaine. I haue set downe no rules▪ for transposing out of Musicke to the Scale of the LVTE, because you haue that deliuered in the most elegant field of Emanuel Adrianus, an excel∣lent Musitian, and in many other Bookes. Therefore take in good part this one Methode of practising on the LVTE howsoeuer it be: composed in such sort as an ingenious man, and one that professeth another Art could attayne vnto: receiue it I say with as kinde a heart as I offer it with, and so I shall be ready hereafter to furnish thee with some other worke of mine owne more serious. Farewell. FINIS.
OTHER NECESSARY Obseruations belonging to the LVTE, By IOHN DOVLAND, Batcheler of Musicke. For Chusing of Lute-strings. WHen wee take in hand to instruct or teach a man on the LVTE, wee doe suppose that hee knoweth before (be hee neuer so rude) what a String, a Fret, a Stop, a Stroke, &c. meaneth: therefore it were not conuenient for a Teacher to stand vpon euery small point and matter that may be thought appertayning to the Art of Lute-playing, but to leaue and let passe ouer some things, as apparant of themselues, or easie to be discerned of euery learner, by Nature, Sense, Reason, or common Experience, and therefore we will onely entreat and giue resolution of those things which are most needfull: of which chusing of Lute-strings is not the least, Ordinarily therefore wee choose Lute-strings by the freshnesse, or new making: the which appeares vnto vs by their cleere and oylinesse, as they lye in the Boxe or bundle; yet herein we are often deceiued, for Oyle at any time will make strings looke cleere, and therefore this tricke is too too commonly vsed to them when they are old. Now because Trebles are the principall strings wee neede to get, choose them of a faire and cleere whitish gray, or ash-colour, and take one of the knots in your hand, but let it not be too small, for those giue no sound, besides they will be either rotten for lacke of sub∣stance, or extreame false. Also open the boutes of one of the ends of the Knot, and then hold it vp against the light, and looke that it be round and smooth: but if you discerne it to be curlie, as the thread of a curled Cypris, or horse hayre, (which you may as well feele as see) then refuse them, although they be both cleere and strong, because those strings were not well twisted, and therefore will neuer be true on the Instrument. For trying the strength of these strings, some doe set the top of their fore or middle finger on one of the ends of the Knot, which if they finde stiffe, they hould them then as good; but if it bend as wee say, through a dankish weakenesse, then they are not strong. Some againe doe take the end of the string between their teeth, and then plucke it, and thereby if it breake faseld at the end, then it is strong, but if it breake stubbed then it is weake. This Rule also is houlden for the breaking of a string betweene the hands. The best way, is to plucke out an end of the string (if the seller will suffer you, if hee will not assure your selfe that those strings which hee sheweth you are old or mingled,) and then looke for the cleernesse and faults before spoken, as also for faseling with little hayres. And againe looke amongst the boutes, at one end of the Knot, that the string be not parted, I meane one peece great and another small, then draw it hard betweene your hands, to try the strength, which done, hould it vp againe against the light betweene your hands, and marke whether it be cleere as before; if it be not but looke muddie, as a browne thread, such strings are old, and haue beene rubbed ouer with oyle to make them cleere. This choosing of strings is not alone for Trebles, but also for small and great Meanes: greater strings though they be ould are bet∣ter to be borne withall, so the colour be good, but if they be fresh and new they will be cleere against the light, though their colour be blackish. Now againe some old strings will hould well the stretching betweene your hands, yet when you set them on the Instrument they will sticke, (and rise by starts) in the Nut, and there breake, euen in the tuning: the best remedy when the strings sticke so, is to rub the
little nickes of the Nut, (in which the string slides) with a little Oyle, Waxe, or black lead. If you desire to choose strings that are not false, that the maker cannot promise you; but there is a rule for the knowledge thereof by sight after the string is drawn out, which being it is so ordinarie and so well knowne, I hould it not fit to trouble you with the relation. Some strings there are which are coloured, out of which choose the lightest colours, viz. among Greene choose the Sea-water, of Red the Carnation, and of Blew the Watcher. Now these strings as they are of two sorts, viz. Great and Small: so either sort is pact vp in sundry kindes, to wit, the one sort of smaller strings (which come from Rome and other parts of Italy) are bound vp by certain Dozens in bundels; these are very good if they be new, if not, their strength doth soone decay: the other sort are pact vp in Boxes, and come out of Germany: of these, those strings which come from Monnekin and Mildorpe, are and continue the best. Likewise there is a kinde of strings of a more fuller and larger sort then ordinary (which we call Gansars.) These strings for the sizes of the great and small Meanes, are very good, but the Trebles are not strong. Yet also there is another sort of the smaller strings, which are made at Liuornia in Tuscanie: these strings are rolled vp round together, as if they were a companie of horse hayres. These are good if they be new, but they are but halfe Knots. Note there is some store of these come hither lately, and are here made vp, and passe for whole Knots. For the greater sorts or Base strings, some are made at Nurenburge, and also at Straesburge, and bound vp onely in knots like other strings. These strings are excellent, if they be new, if not, they fall out starke false. The best strings of this kinde are double knots ioyned together, and are made at Bologna in Lumbardie, and from thence are sent to Venice: from which place they are transported to the Martes, and there∣fore commonly called Venice Catlines. The best time for the Marchant is to prouide his strings at Michaelmas, for then the string-makers bring their best strings which were made in the Summer to Franckford, and Lypzig Martes. Contrarily at Easter they bring their Winter strings, which are not so good. Of setting the right sizes of Strings vpon the Lute. FOR the well ordering and setting on the right sizes of strings vpon the Lute, the sen∣ces of Seeing and Feeling is required. Wherefore first haue consideration to the great∣nesse or smalnesse of the Instrument, and thereby proportionably size your strings, ap∣pointing for the bigger Lute the greater strings, and for the lesser Lute the smaller strings, which being so thought on, first set on your Trebles, which must be strayned neither too stiffe not too slacke, but of such a reasonable height that they may deliuer a pleasant sound, and also (as Musitions call it) play too and fro after the strokes thereon. Secondly, set on your Bases, in that place which you call the sixt string, or Γ vt: these Bases must be both of one bignes, yet it hath beene a generall custome (although not so much vsed any where as here in England) to set a small and a great string together, but amongst learned Musi∣tions that custome is left, as irregular to the rules of Musicke. But to our purpose: these double Bases likewise must neither be stretched too hard, nor too weake, but that they may according to your feeling in striking with your Thombe and finger equally counter∣poyse the Trebles, yeelding from them a low or deepe sound, distant from the Trebles an Interuall called Disdiapason. Now the Base being ordered, proceede to the Tenor, which strings must be so much smaller then the Base, that they may reach a Diatessaron higher, that is, a fourth, or to say better, foure Notes higher: that being done, strike the Tenor with your Thombe, and the Treble with your fore-finger both together, and you shall heare them sound the Interuall Diapason cum Diapente. Thus as the sounds increase in height, so the strings must decrease in greatnesse. Likewise by the contrary, for those Acces∣sories, which are the seauenth, eight and ninth string, &c. keeping the former counterpeise, as if they were equall things waighed in an euen Ballance.
Of fretting the Lute. ALthough it may be thought we doe not herein keepe a good Decorum, because our discourse is first of fretting the Lute, rather then of Tuning, which is most commonly vsed: yet for that we meane this to Schollers, and not Maisters (seeing both these things are so needefull) I haue rather chosen this subiect first, hoping hereby to make the easier in∣duction to Tuning: which part is not the least, and of most desired, because between Fretting and Tuning there is Simphonie by Antiphonie, that is to say, through the winding vp and letting downe of the strings, an Accord riseth from Discord, so as of contrary Notes is composed a sweet Tune, which doth concurre and after a sort of meeting together, bring foorth by their agreement that sound which pleaseth the Eare. Wherefore as that famous Maister in Musicke Andreas Ornithoparcus, saith in lib. 1. cap. 3. of his Micrologus: a voyce is compact of a Key and a Sillable: euen so here the sounds on the Lute, by which a Tenor of Notes may be expressed) are compact of a stoppe and a stroke; whose distincti∣on is shewed by Strings called of the auncient Musitions Pthongos, and also by Frets cal∣led Nerui, Glarianus lib. 1. Dedocha. Now these frets of late yeeres were but seauen in num∣ber, as witnesseth Hans Gerle Lutenist, Citizen and Lute-maker of Nurenburge, (for so he stileth himselfe in his booke of Tableture, printed 1533.) and so the seauenth fret (accor∣ding to the Monochord in the Diatonike order) rested vpon the Diapente. Yet presently after there was added an eight fret: for my selfe was borne but thirty yeeres after Hans Gerles booke was printed, and all the Lutes which I can remember vsed eight frets, and so ended at the Semitonium cum Diapente. But yet as Plautus saith, Nature thirsting after knowledge, is alwayes desirous to inuent and seeke more, by the wittie conceit (which I haue seene, and not altogether to be disalow∣ed) of our most famous countriman Mr. Mathias Mason Lutenist, and one of the Groomes of his Maiesties most honourable Priuie Chamber, (as it hath ben told me,) inuented three frets more, the which were made of wood, and glued vpon the belly, and from thence a∣bout some few yeeres after, by the French Nation, the neckes of the Lutes were lengthned, and thereby increased two frets more, so as all those Lutes which are most receiued and disired, are of tenne frets. Now to place these frets aright, whereby wee may make vse of these various sounds by them caused, there is two wayes: the one is the deuine sence of Hearing, which those that be skilfull doe most vse, and according to the opinion of the Stoiks, is a Spirit reaching from the Vnderstanding to the Eares, and thereby (after the Instrument is tuned open) doe set them in their order; yet as Caluisius in de initio & progressu Musicis saith, the sence of Hearing of all others deceiueth most, and cannot discerne and iudge of the sounds in the smaller Interuals. To this agreeth Valla Placentinus in lib. 2. cap. 3. of his Musicke, wherein hee writeth that those sounds must be censured and ponde∣red with naturall Instruments, and not by the Eares, whose iudgement is dull, but by wit and reason. Now the certaintie thereof was first sound out (as Petrus Comester in Historia Scholastica saith) by Iubals waighing of his brother Tubals Hammers: but most Authors attribute this vnto Pithagoras, (the sonne of Mnesarchus a Samian borne) the first author of the name of Philosophie, who flourished in the time of Cambices king of Persia, seauenty yeeres after the captiuitie of Babilon ended: when Tarquinius superbus the last King of the Romaines raigned: more then sixe hundred yeeres after the destruction of Troy; and fiue hundred yeeres before the birth of Christ, and the manner of it was thus. Pithagoras searching af∣ter a certaine distance of Interuals, left the iudgement of the Eares, and went to the rules of Reason: for hee would not giue credit to mans Eares, which are chaunged partly by Nature, partly by outward accidents: as for example, let a companie of Lutenists, Violists, &c. which be skilfull, play each after other, and you see euery one as the Instrument com∣meth to him, Tune according to the iudgement of his owne Eare. Besides, Pithagoras was giuen to no Instruments, amongst which commonly there groweth much varietie and
vncertaintie, being that euen now if you will regard the strings, the Ayre being moyst dulles their sound, or dry, makes them dry, or by some other accident doth chaunge the state of their former constancie. Now being all other Instruments were subiect to the same, hee accounting all these things to be of no waight nor truth, did with great toyle studie a long time how hee might learne the firme and constant course of Concords. Meane while (as God would haue it) passing by the Smith shops, hee heard the beating of their Hammers, and that of diuers sounds there was as it were one consent. Wherefore ama∣zed at this, hee set to that worke which he had long intented, and pondering long thought that the strength of the strikers did make the diuersitie of the sounds: which that it might be more euident vnto him, hee bad them change hammers, but the propertie of the sounds was not in the Armes of the strikers, but in the hammers which were chaunged: wherefore marking that, hee takes the waight of the hammers, and being by chance there fiue ham∣mers, they were found to be duple in waight, which answered themselues, according to the concord of a Diapason, and that which was duple to the least, hee found to be a Sesqui∣tertia to another, to whom it sounded a Diatessaron. And againe hee found that the same duple was a Sesquialter to that, with which it was ioyned in a Diapente concord. Now those two, to whom the former duple was proued to be a Sesquitertius and Sesquialter, were found to keepe a Sesquioctaua proportion one with another betwixt themselues: and the fift hammer which was a discord to all of them was reiected. Whereas therefore before Pithagoras his time, the Musicall concords were called partly Diapason, partly Diapente, and partly Diatessaron, which was thought the least of all Concords. Wherefore Pi∣thagoras was the first that by this meanes found out by what proportion this diuersitie of sounds was ioyned together. And to make that which is spoken more plaine, let there be for examples sake of ham∣mers foure waights, which let be comprehended in the numbers vnder-written, 12.9.8. and 6. Those hammers which waigh 12. and 6. pounds, did strike a Diapason, or eight Con∣cord in the duple the hammer that waighed 12. to the hammer of 9. pound waight, and farther the hammer of 8. pound, to the hammer of 6. pound, according to the Sesquitertia proportion, were ioyned in a Concord of a fourth, or in a Diatessaron: then the 9. pound hammer to that of 6. and of 12. to 8. did mingle a fift or Diapente, in the Sesquialtera pro∣portion. Againe, the hammer of 9. to that of 8. did sound in a Sesquioctaua proportion. Wherefore returning backe againe from hence, and searching by manifold tryals, whether the whole nature of Concords did consist in these proportions, and so fitting the waights (which answered the late found proportions) to strings, hee iudged of their Concords by his Eare. Then ouerseeing the doublenesse and halfe of the strings length, and fitting the other proportions, he gat a most true rule out of his manifold experience, and was exceed∣ingly ioyed that hee had found that which in all things answered with the truth: hitherto are Boetius his words. Thus the Interuals being found out by waight and number, wee will endeauour to set them downe by measure: whereby the ignorant may perceiue by this vndiuided Trinitie, that the finger of God framed Musicke, when his Word made the World. Wherefore take a thinne flat ruler of whitish woode, and make it iust as long and straight as from the inward side of the Nut to the inward side of the Bridge, then note that end which you meane to the Bridge with some small marke, and the other end with the letter A. because you may know which belongeth to the one and to the other: then lay the ruler vpon a Ta∣ble, and take a payre of compasses and seeke out the iust middle of the Ruler: that note with a pricke, and set the letter N. vpon it, which is a Diapason from the A. as appeareth by the striking of the string open. Secondly, part the distances from N. to D. in three parts, then the first part giues you the seauenth fret from the Nut, making a Diapente: in that place also set a pricke, and vpon it the letter H. Thirdly, deuide the distance from the letter H. to the letter A. in eleauen parts: two of which parts from A. giues the first fret, note that with a pricke, and set the letter B. thereon, which maketh a Semitone. Fourthly, diuide the di∣stance from H. to the letter A. in three parts, one of which parts from A. vpward sheweth the second fret, note that with a pricke, and set the letter C. vpon it, which maketh a whole
Tone from A. Fiftly, diuide the distance from N. to A. into two parts, there the first part sheweth you the first fret, sounding a Diatessaron: in that place also set a pricke, and vpon it the letter F. The sixt fret which is a G. must be placed iust in the middest betwixt F. and H. which maketh a Semidiapente. Seuenthly, diuide the distance from the letter B. to A. in three parts, which being done, measure from the B. vpwards foure times and an halfe, and that wil giue you the third fret, sounding a Semiditone: mark that also with a prick, & set thereon the letter D. then set the fourth fret iust in the middle, the which wil be a perfect ditone: then take one third part from B. to the Bridge, and that third part from B. maketh I. which soundeth Semitonium cum Diapente, then take a third part from the Bridge to C. and that third part maketh E. which soundeth Tonus cum diapente, or an Hexachordo maior. Then take one third part from D. to the Bridge, and that third part from D. maketh L. which soundeth Ditonus cum Diapente. Now take your LVTE, and lay it vpon a Table vpright, and set the Ruler edgewise, betweene the nut and the bridge, and thereby set little marks vpon the necke of the Instrument euen with those on the ruler, because those are the places on which your frets must stand. Thus haue you the perfect placing of your ten frets, which taketh away that scruple by which many are deceiued, when they say the frets are false. Note here also, wee doe not try the frets, as wee trie the strings: but (now knowing their places) size them rightly, for which any kinde of string will serue, I meane whether they be true or false, new or old, onely take heed that you set not a great fret where a small one should be, & so by contrary: for euery fret doth serue as a Magade: therefore doe this; let the two first frets neerest the head of the Instrument (being the greatest) be of the size of your Countertenor, then the third and fourth frets must be of the size of your great Meanes: the fift and sixt frets of the size of your small Meanes: and all the rest sized with Trebles. These rules serue also for Viols, or any other kinde of Instrument whereon frets are tyed. Of Tuning the Lute. BEing there is such Symphonie by Antiphonie, which proceedeth through the winding vp and letting down of the strings, as is abouesaid, and therein affirmed by Plutarch, to be one kinde of wisedome, which (saith he) is called MVSICKE. I wish those who assume vnto themselues the name of Maister, (by instructing of others) to prouide and finde out some good and necessary rules for the tuning of the LVTE, not onely for their owne ease, but also for the Scholers present good, because it is most needfull. Againe, though the Maister be neuer so diligent, painefull, and industrious, yet three things are required in the Scholer, necessary for the obtaining, thereof, viz. Nature, Reason, and Vse: because this Harmony dependeth of Science and humane Art, which the vnderstanding retaineth by Musicall habit. And from hence it is, that in MVSICKE not onely the sense, but also vn∣derstanding is weakened. Wherefore I exhort all Practitioners on this Instrument to the learning of their Pricke-song, also to vnderstand the Elements and Principles of that knowledge, as an especiall great helpe, and excellent worker in this Science, and soone attained, if the Teacher be skilfull to instruct aright: for which purpose I did late∣ly set forth the Worke of that most learned Andreas Ornithoparcus his Micrologus, in the English tongue Also the duty of the Lute-master is to teach them the Γ vt vpon the Instrument, that thereby they may both discerne those degrees which are continuall, and also those discreet Interuals, which belong to the tuning of an Instrument. Now this intellect appeareth vnto vs commonly by the subtile sense of Hearing (which is of so great price, that Plotinus, the chiefe of the Platonicall familie, maketh it like the beautie of the Soule.) For which cause, some haue set forth Rules to approue the agreement of Concords by Vnisons and Octaues, which indeede is true, when the Instrument is tuned, but by what order those strings must be let vp or downe, to shew the finding out thereof, I haue not seene declared by any. Therefore according to
mine owne experience: first, let the Scholer practise to set euery one of the paires in an vnison, which being well vnderstood: Secondly, let him tune his Bases and one of his Tenors in the Vnison: Thirdly, let him raise the sounds of the Base, by stopping thereon, and then make the Tenor sound open, to that sound which was stopt in the Base: this rule must be followed betweene the Base and the Tenor vntill the Tenor be in the Vnison with the Base in the letter F: and then tune both the Tenors together, but, suppose you haue tuned your Tenor too high, then you shall finde it in some of those places aboue the F, as in G, H, &c. Wherefore let it downe againe to F. This same course must be kept through out, onely excepting between the Contratenor and the great Meane, in which the same course aboue said must be vsed, that the great Meane may be in the Vnison with E in the Contratenor, and so by this vse the LVTE being tuned, you shall heare these Interuals or spaces in the table vnderneath, and very quickly learne to tune the LVTE by your eare, without stopping, and also place the frets according to the gene∣rall custome.
Fantasies for the Lute. Fantasie. 1 Composed by the most famous Diomedes of Venice: Lutenist to the high and mightie Sigismundus, 2o. King of Poland.
Fantasie. 2 Composed by the most famous, the KNIGHT of the Lute.
Fantasie. 3 Composed by the most famous Iacobus Reis of Augusta: Lutenist to the most mightie and victorious Henricus 4. French King.
Fantasie. 4 Composed by the most famous and diuine Laurencini of Rome.
Fantasie. 5 Composed by the most Artificiall and famous, Alfonso Ferrabosco of Bologna.
Fantasie. 5 Composed by the most famous Gregorio Huwet of Antwerpe: Lutenist to the most high and mightie Henericus Iulius, Duke of Brunswicke, &c.
Fantasie. 7 Composed by Iohn Douland, Batchelar of Musicke.
Here endeth the Fantasies.
Pauins for the Lute. Pauin. 1 Here beginneth the Pauins: of which the first was made by the most magnificent and famous Prince Mauritius, Landgraue of Hessen, and from him sent to my Father, with this inscription following, and written with his GRACES owne hand: Mauritius Landgrauius Hessiae fecit in honorem Ioanni Doulandi Anglorum Orphei.
Pauin. 2 Composed by the most famous and perfect Artist Anthonie Holborne, Gentleman Vsher to the most Sacred Elizabeth, late Queene of England, &c.
Pauin. 3 Composed by the most excellent Musition Thomas Morley Batcheler of Musicke, and Organist in the Chappell of the most Sacred Elizabeth, late Queene of England, &c.
Pauin. 4 Composed by the right perfect Musition Daniell Batchelar: one of the Groomes of her Maiesties Priuie Chamber.
Pauin. 5 Sir Iohn Langton his Pauin. Composed by Iohn Douland Batcheler of Musicke.
Pauin. 6 Composed by the most Artificiall and famous Alfonso Ferrabosco of Bologna.
Pauin. 7 Sir Tho. Monson his Pauin. Composed by Robert Douland.
Here endeth the Pauins.
Galliards for the Lute. Galliard. 1 Here beginneth the Galliards: the first whereof is commonly knowne by the name of the most high and mightie Christianus the fourth King of Denmarke, his Galliard.
Galliard. 2 The most sacred Queene Elizabeth, her Galliard.
Galliard 3 The Right Honourable Robert Earle of Essex, high Marshall of England, his Galliard.
Galliard. 4 The Right Honourable Ferdinando Earle of Darby, his Galliard.
Galliard. 5 The Right Honourable the Lady Rich, her Galliard.
Galliard. 6 The Right Honorable the Lady Cliftons Spirit.
Galliard. 7 Sir Thomas Monson his Galliard.
Here endeth the Galliards.
Almaines for the Lute. Almaine. 1 Here beginneth the Almaines: the first whereof is commonly knowne by the name of Mounsiers Almaine.
Sir Henry Guilforde his Almaine.
The first of the Queenes Maskes. The second of the Queenes Maskes.
The last of the Queenes Maskes.
The Witches daunce in the Queenes Maske. Sir Iohn Smith his Almaine.
Here endeth the Almaines.
Corantoes for the Lute. Coranto. 1 Here beginneth the Corantoes: the first whereof is commonly knowne by the name of Mounsier Ballard his Coranto. Coranto. 2 Iohn Perrithon his Coranto.
Coranto. 3
Mounsier Saman his Coranto. Coranto. 4
Mounsier Saman. Coranto. 5
Coranto. 6 Coranto. 7 Here endeth the Corantoes.
Voltes for the Lute. Here beginneth the Voltes. Volt. 1
Volt 2
Volt. 3
Volt. 4 Volt 5
Volt. 6
Volt 7 FINIS.
