7872 33150830 28773
By the Kynge and Quene, WHere it is of late brought to the knowledge of the kynge and Queenes Maiesties, that many wycked and vngodly persons, some of purpose to stirre vnquietnes and seditions amonges their Maiestyes good & fayth∣full subiectes, and others because they maye thereby make theyr owne gaynes & vtter the corne & other thynges at the greter pryces, haue cōtra¦ry to their bounden dewtyes spred and caused to be spred rumours, of the decreynge or fall of the coygne or monyes commenlye called testous of which rumour thus maliciously and vnmercyfully begon & spred abrode much contention hath growen amongest their Maiesties good subiects, the pryces of grayne and other thinges be vncharitably enhaunsed and many other great inconueniences haue arisen, and greter be like to aryse yf spedy remedy be not prouided herein. Lyke as their Maiesties be hartely sory that any man to whome god hath geuen aboundaunce of thynges, should in this vnmercyfull sorte in thys tyme of darthe wherewith it hath pleased almighty God, presently to plage the world, for the synnes & wickednes therof seke vpon thys pretence theyr owne gaynes with so great an iniury and oppression of ther pore nedy neigh bours. So doth their Maiesties by this their proclamation straitelye charge and commaund al their sub∣iects of what sorte or degre soeuer they be, that they and euerye of them in all their traffiques, byinges and sellynges do quietly and obediently receyue vtter and paye aswel the said coyne or monye called te∣stons as all other coygnes or monyes, of what sorte soeuer the same be, accordyng to there iust valuations heretofore by theyr maiesties aucthoritie proclaymed & published, vpon payne of their maiesties vtter in∣dignatyon and most sharpe punyshment by imprysonment and fyne at their maiesties plesure. And their Maiesties further strayghtly charge and commaund vppon like paynes al Maiors, Baylytes, Sheryfes Iustyces of peace, and all other offycers in all the countyes, Cyties, townes, and other places of this there maiesties Realme, aswell within liberties as without, that they and euery of them, take diligent care and forsee within the lymyttes of their charges and offices that this their maiesties plesure be in al things wel obeyed and obserued, And that the markets in all places, may be from tyme to time sufficiently furnished with corne and other necessary victualls, causyng such as shalbe found disobedient or offenders in any the premysses to be furthe with commytted to warde, and further ponished accordynge to theyr maiesties lawes, and theffect of this their proclamation, not fayling as ther maiesties doth specyally truste them, and as they wyll aunswere for the contrary at their vttermost peryls. From Saynte Iames the .xxii. of December. 1556. God saue the kyng and the Quene. Excusum Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi Typographi Regiae Maiestatis. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.
