B1656 12626904 64670
THE DOCTRINE OF A General Resurrection: WHEREIN The Identity of the Rising Body is asserted, against the Socinians and Scepticks. IN A SERMON PREACH'D Before the UNIVERSITY, at St. Mary's in OXFORD, on Easter-Monday, Apr. 5. BY THO. BECONSALL, A. M. and Fellow of Brasenose College. OXFORD: Printed by Leon. Lichfield, for GEORGE WEST, Bookseller, An. Dom. 1697.
THE PREFACE. THE Biass of Humane Nature towards those things we in any Sence call our Own, is so notorious and remarka∣ble, that it often influences our Judgments in the Affairs of States and Kingdoms, no less than Families and private Persons. But certainly there's a Parental kind of Affection exercis'd towards the Off-spring of our own Minds, as well as that of our Bodies, that often transports us into over-weening Fond∣nesses, and unaccountable Partialities. Hence writing of Books, or publishing of Thoughts from the Closet, or Pulpit, is by the rest of the World generally pronounc'd a piece of Affecta∣tion and Vanity, founded in an Opinion of some extraordinary intrinsick Worth or Merit. Men are not content to conceive and bring forth in a private Apartment, and view and
admire their own Productions; but height of Admiration sends 'em forth into the open World, to exercise the same Faculties in o∣thers, no doubt with an Intention, that the Praises of all should be return'd back on the Original. I must confess this is a Censure, which may sometimes carry a great deal of Truth in it, tho' at last it seems to be a very uncharitable Truth; unless every short-sight∣ed Mortal can pretend to be a Searcher of the Heart and Reins, or unless no Attempts of this kind could be acted by any other Mo∣tive, that is truly Just and Honourable. But however this Doctrine may prevail in common Cases, certainly the special Obli∣gations I'm unfortunately under, in doing Justice to my self and others, will at this time free me from the Imputation of it. It has been more than once represented, how much I lie under the Displeasure, not to say the Reproaches of some Men, for shamefully Mis-representing the Author of the Essay concerning Humane Understanding, for brand∣ing his Notions of Identity, with little less than the Imputation of Heresy, whilst at last I was forc'd to have recourse to 'em, to estab∣lish my own Hypothesis: This is a Charge form'd on a transient Delivery of a Sermon,
and for the Truth of the greatest part of it, I submit it to every Ingenuous Reader, upon a View on both sides. But certainly it seems to reflect as much Positiveness and Presumption on its Authors, as it industriously fixes Folly and Disgrace on me. It might have been considered who presides in the University-Church, to censure all such notorious Miscarriages, and conse∣quently they might at least have expected a Reprimand from Authority, before such a severe Sentence had passed upon me. This would have given them, not only an Oppor∣tunity to express their Resentments or In∣dignation, but added weight and force to 'em. As the Case stands, I'm not now to be a Judge; I can only declare, I'm as yet so un∣happy to be wholly unsensible of any Mis∣representations, and consequently of any Injustice committed against Mr. Lock. And therefore being so highly charged, I thought the best Expedient to set both sides to Rights, to put the one into a Condition of Vindica∣ting himself, and the other of being Inform∣ed of an Errour, was to publish the whole Discourse, which (as far as concerns Mr. Lock) I've done without the least Alterations. Having said thus much, give me leave
to offer something by way of Pre-caution. I can safely declare, I am acted by no Personal Prejudices, no more than Unchristian Designs, for this Author is as absolute a Stranger to me, as I am to him. The Subject I was en∣gag'd on, directed me to the Controversy, and the Duty I owe to what appears to me to be Truth, and especially a Fundamental Christian Truth, obliged me to enter the List with those that have advanc'd Positions, that apparently shake or over-turn it; and per∣haps the Duty and Obligations are justly heightned in an Age, when the Assailment of the most important Articles of Faith is be∣come so exquisitely Fashionable. But now, if in the Defense of Truth, it at last appears, that I have done this Author the least Injustice, ei∣ther in mis-representing, or mis-applying his Sence or Notions, I shall heartily and freely make him Satisfaction, and that too as pub∣lick, as he or his Friends shall think fit to make my Mistakes.
A Sermon, &c. JOH. Chap. V. ver. 28, 29. The hour is coming, in the which All that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth: They that have done good, unto the Resurrection of Life; and they that have done evil, unto the Resurrection of Damnation. THE present Solemnity has engaged me on a Sub∣ject, which as 'tis the support and glory of the Just and Faithful, so it has always been the con∣tempt and laughter of the Impious and Unbe∣lieving. Its true, the Learned have often attempted to trace the Foot-steps of a general Resurrection, from certain Resemblances in the Book of Nature, or from certain Do∣ctrines advanced (I know not how) in the Schools of Phi∣losophers. Thus the Earth hath been represented as a kind of Grave or Sepulchre to the Vegetable World, where the vital Powers are sealed up, and stifled all the Winter, and yet at Spring are actuated, expand, and send forth a live∣ly Verdure: Thus every Grain of Corn, that ministers Life and Sustenance to our own Species, must suffer Death, in order to receive a new vital Principle. Thus the Do∣ctrine
of Transmigration, in the Schools of Plato and Py∣thagoras, has been sought to, to speak out that of the Resurrection: And the Doctrine of a general Conflagra∣tion among the Stoicks, must usher in the Restitution of all things. These are Arguments, by no means the Product of any Modern Wits; but of the earliest Apologists and Advo∣cates for the Faith. As if the Doctrine of the Resurrection had been legible, in the very Frame and Constitution of Nature; and to deny it in the Old Schools of Philosophy, were to renounce their own avowed Principles. But yet for all this its well known, the most powerful Assailants of the Christian Faith, made their greatest Efforts against this Christian Bulwark. It did not become the subject of Drollery and Ridicule to the Stoicks at Athens alone, but it engaged the Wit and Malice too, of Lucian and Celsus, of Julian and Caecilius. In a word, when it came to the Test, neither the most improved Doctrine of Transmigration, nor of the Soul's Immortality, nor of a future State, was sufficient to introduce the Belief of it: For the whole Tribe of Gentile Philosophers, tho' otherwise sufficiently distinguish'd in their Notions and Principles, do here unani∣mously conspire to pronounce it Absurd and Impossible, and its Professors, for this very reason, Vile and Despicable. In a word, Tho' the Doctrine of a Resurrection, particu∣larly that of the Just, had obtain'd in the Jewish Schools, except those of the Sadducees, yet the Notion of it was vastly different from that Glorious Resurrection, which the Christian Institutions ratify and establish, for none of 'em could ever arrive to a strict numerical Resurrection; and therefore its in this sence One of those Doctrines, which stands to the Jews a stumbling-block, and to the Greeks foolish∣ness. But notwithstanding these extravagant Insults, its to those that believe, The power of God, and the wisdom of God. Its a Doctrine as powerful in the Evidence of it, as it has been mighty in its Successes; and tho' we cannot
assert it from the established Course of Nature, nor desire to rake it up out of the Rubbish of Heathen, or Jewish Traditions, yet it rests upon an unshaken Foundation, even a sure word of Prophecy, unto which we shall do well to take heed; for we have before us the words of Him, that is become The Lord of Life and Glory, and has the Keys of Hell and Death: He it is that assures us, The hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth: They that have done good, unto the Resurrection of Life; and they that have done evil, unto the Resurrection of Damnation. This famous Passage is almost universally allowed to be a Description of a general Resurrection. Indeed the Learn∣ed Bishop Pearson observes, that it strikes so closely at the Socinian Notion of a Resurrection, that some of 'em are forc'd to apply it to a Spiritual Resurrection, and pro∣nounce the Grave to be the Regions of Heathen Ignorance and Impiety, and the Reception of the Gospel, to be the Resurrection from 'em. But we must do Socinus, and the most considerable of his Followers, Crellius and Schlictin∣gius, a piece of Justice here; for tho' they will not allow the words to prove the Identity of our Rising Bodies, yet they reject the conceit of a spiritual Resurrection, and assign the same Arguments against it, that are advanced by this Eminent Prelate. Since then we are thus far agreed, that the thing pointed at is a General Resurrection, we may venture to affirm, that they instruct us in two im∣portant Circumstances of it; first, the Extent, and second∣ly, the Manner of it. Here's a distinction of Allotments, Life and Damna∣tion, and they are founded in distinct Works and Actions, good and evil, and both imply distinct Classes of Persons, the Righteous and the Wicked, and consequently a Resur∣rection of both: The Wicked must certainly bear a part in the Resurrection, for every Soul that sinneth, and every
Body that dyeth, and is committed to the Dust, must rise again: Yes, as surely as he dyeth and enjoys a Sepulchre, he must be forced from his Lodgment, and rise again; for neither the Grave, nor Rocks, nor Mountains shall cover, much less secure him, since all that are in the Graves must come forth: Thus we have the Extent of the Resurrection. Again, If we demand with what Bodies shall we come? Why certainly since our Resurrection is to be made from the Grave, and since our Bodies, even Flesh and Blood were committed to the Grave, the very same Bodies will rise again; the Substance will not be changed, tho' the Quality's altered: And thus we have the Manner of the Resurrection, for All that are in the Graves shall come forth. I shall endeavour to assert both these important Truths, and that in Opposition to the Adversaries of 'em. I begin with the First, I mean the Extent of the Resur∣rection. As for the Extent of it, the Socinian Doctors are not yet agreed, tho' the most Judicious declare for a general Resurrection. Its observable Smalcius, the Author of the Racovian Catechism, only describes the Resurrection of the Just, without taking the least notice of that of the Wicked; whilst others allow the former, but expresly deny the latter. But an impartial Reader, one would think, could not have wished for a clearer Decision of this matter, than our Saviour's words afford us, when we are told, That all that are in the Graves shall come forth, part to the Resur∣rection of Life, and part to the Resurrection of Damnation. So that he that disputes the Truth of a general Resur∣rection, must allow no distinction between the Righteous and the Wicked, no more than their future Allotments; or he must deny the Wicked the most common Office of Hu∣manity, that of Burial, or excuse it, by asserting an im∣mediate Annihilation: For if the Wicked at the point of Death, do not immediately vanish into soft Air, or if Man∣kind do not usually judge before-hand, and thereupon deny
'em the Office of Burial, or if the Allotments of Life and Damnation are not indiscriminately ascertain'd (to affirm any of which would be a gross and palpable Absurdity) then the Wicked must come forth of their Graves, and make their Resurrection, tho' a most Fatal one, even the Resurrection of Damnation. We may add to this leading Authority another of St. Paul's, and its the more con∣siderable, since this great Apostle industriously pursues our Saviour's Methods in Representing it, and that too with re∣spect to the Universality, Design and Manner of it: For we must all appear (no doubt from our Graves) before the Judgment-seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his Body (no doubt in that very Body they were committed) according to that he hath done, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5.10. But to conclude this Argument from express Authorities of Scripture; the Divine Author of the Book of Revelations hath so accurately described a general Resurrection, that he seems to have industriously Ransackt all the Corners of the World, in order to advance a Chal∣lenge, to produce one single Mortal, that has not his Sum∣mons to it. And I saw the dead, both small and great, stand before God (no doubt with that very Part about 'em, for which they were once esteem'd Dead-men) and the Sea gave up the dead which were in it, and Death and Hell gave up the dead which were in them, Chap. 20. ver. 12, 13. Here we see the Prince and Peasant, the Infant and Man of Years, must obey the Summons of a general Resurrection; and all the Repositories of Art and Nature, are forc'd to surrender up their Dead, or disgorge the Mortal part of 'em: And will any Socinian pretend to contrive a shelter for the Wicked? I'm afraid he'll leave himself, as well as them, miserably expos'd, especially when the Text assures us, That the very Heavens shall flee away, and there shall be no place found for them, ver. 11.
But farther, not to rest any longer in Generals, I shall endeavour to prove it from the Nature of the Thing, and that too in its particular Instances. And First, As for the Resurrection of the Just, its on all hands agreed, that they are virtually raised in Christ, for since the Head is risen, and as such styled, The first-born from the Dead, the Mem∣bers that are united to him, by a spiritual, vital Principle, his holy Spirit, shall certainly be raised, for He that raised Christ from the dead, shall also quicken our mortal Bodies, by his Spirit that dwelleth in us, Rom. 8.11. Again, Christ is expresly styl'd, The first-fruits of our Resurrection. And as the First-fruits offered to God, consecrated, or blessed the whole Lump, so this First-fruit having purchased to himself a vital Principle, by fulfilling the Divine Com∣pact, it will be convey'd to all those that have an interest in him; so that the Resurrection of the Just, or Faithful, is in a spiritual Sence, or the way of Grace, derived from that of our Saviour, as absolutely as Light or Warmth from the Sun, in the way of Nature. But then here's the Foun∣dation of the Miscarriages of our Adversaries, the Rock which they carelesly split upon: For since they are not able to discern any such Connexion, between the Resur∣rection of our Saviour, and that of the Wicked, they are apt to imagine, he can have no just Right or Title to it, and consequently there's no real Foundation for it. But the Mistake is extremely obvious: For as our blessed Sa∣viour became a Mediator between God and Man, and this Mediation, in the original Design of it, extends to all the Sons and Daughters of Adam, he challenges an unquestion∣able Right of Dominion over the whole Species, upon the Performance or Execution of it; For to this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living, Rom. 14.9. This is so clear, that it extends even to Heathens and Unbelievers, for by virtue of it he becomes their proper Judge, and as he's their
Judge, he can rightfully summon 'em from their very Graves, in their proper Bodies or Persons. And there∣fore he hath an uncontroulable Authority to rouze even once the most potent Sinner, and oblige him to account for his Actions, with those Eyes, and Hands, and Heart, that so grosly dishonour'd him. And since in the distribution of Rewards and Punishments, he has signified a special re∣gard to the Body, as well as Soul, we might without St. Paul's express Declaration conclude, That there shall be a Resurrection, both of the just and unjust, Act. 24.15. It is true, they move upon a different Foundation; the first is an Act of infinite Grace and Mercy, an Act that carries the most joyful Invitations in it, for its the glorious Con∣summation of Christ's Espousals with his Church; but the second, an Act of sovereign Power and Justice, and im∣plies a kind of forcible Entry on the Tombs of the Wicked, who shall be haled forth, to receive the Sentence of Dis∣obedience in a personal and bodily Appearance. And thus much for the Extent of the Resurrection. I proceed to examine the Second General, which re∣spects the Manner of it; and 'tis, That we shall all be raised in our own proper Bodies: And for the clearing of this Argu∣ment, I shall first evince it from the Nature of the Thing from Scripture, and Antiquity. And for as much as the Resurrection of our own proper Bodies will appear from these Authorities, I shall in the Second Place, endeavour to state the Nature of Humane Identity, and consequently the Identity of our rising Bodies; and from both these conclude what is proper to be Believ'd, and make some re∣turns to the Possibility of such a Resurrection. And First, That we shall All be raised in our own proper Bodies: This is a Position which the Socinians unanimously reject; Its true, Schlictingius places humane Identity purely in the Identity of a Rational Spiritual Soul; and tho' he doth not expresly deny the Resurrection of the Body, yet he
makes the Identity of the Body no way material in the Resurrection. See Comment on Rom. 8. v. 11. As for the Nature of humane Identity, I shall speak to it in its proper place; and therefore I shall prosecute my present Design, and prove, that the Christian Faith is, We shall be raised every one in his own proper Body. And first this is indisputably evident from the very No∣tion of a Resurrection, and the receiv'd use of the Word. Now certainly a Resurrection is the restoring a dead Creature to its former State of Life, by a Re-union of its first Principles. The constituent Principles of a Man are a Soul, and a Body, and Death primarily consists in the Separation of 'em; or rather, as Death is the Fore-runner of Corruption, in the Dissolution of one, or both of 'em: If therefore Lazarus, or any other Person is to be raised again, those Two numerical Principles of which he was originally compounded, must be united; and then, and not till then, is Lazarus raised from the Dead. The No∣tion sufficiently discovers it self in the Case of Lazarus, and our Blessed Saviour; where the Body was not dis∣solved, and the same is absolutely required, where the corruptible Principle is actually dissolved. Man is cer∣tainly compounded of a corruptible, and incorruptible Principle, the incorruptible Principle cannot suffer Death, or Dissolution, and therefore Men are chiefly said to be Dead, in respect of their corruptible Principle, that usu∣ally suffers Corruption; certainly then if any particu∣lar Person is to be raised from the Dead, that Principle which properly dies, and is corrupted, is to be restored to its former State, and united to the incorruptible Princi∣ple, without which there can be no Resurrection. For if the corruptible Principle, which properly dies, and is dissolved, is not restored, but a new one formed, or created in the room of it, and united to the incorruptible Principle, it may be properly esteemed a new Production,
but by no means, a proper Resurrection; and to assert the contrary, is to confound received Terms, as well as No∣tions. In a word, when a new Body is formed out of the common Mass of Matter, and united to the Soul of any particular Person, its in reality no more but the Pythagorean Transmigration, which tho' perform'd after a new man∣ner, yet by no greater a share of Divine influence, than that which gives a plastick Power, to form a Body in the Womb, and unites a particular Soul to it. Shall the So∣cinians then, those pretending Masters of Reason, call this a Resurrection? This is to obtrude a Notion contrary to the sence of Mankind, when the great Argument for reject∣ing the true Resurrection, is because they cannot reconcile it to their scanty Measures of Reason. But that, what hath been hitherto asserted, was the true Notion of a Resur∣rection, not only the Testimony of Scripture, and Chri∣stian Antiquity, but the joint Suffrage of the Learned Heathens abundantly assures us: For it was on this account the Doctrine of the Resurrection was loaded with so much Contempt and Scorn; when they considered so many va∣rious Transmigrations of Matter, they esteemed it im∣possible for Omnipotence it self, to range every Particle into its own peculiar Place and Order, so as to restore and make up every individual Body. Hence it was they triumphed in their Barbarities exercis'd upon some of the Martyrs of Christ, since they designedly committed 'em to the Jaws of wild Beasts, to defeat (as they thought) Omnipotence, and infinite Truth at the same time, in dis∣abling him from performing what he had solemnly pro∣mised. Indeed had the Resurrection, in the most strict and proper Sence of it, implied a Restitution of the same individual Body, it could not have extorted such severe Censures from most of the Learned Heathens; for since they allowed the Immortality of the Soul, and a natural Tendency to assume a new Vehicle, they might easily al∣low
that Omnipotence could without any difficulty pre∣pare a new Body, if that had been sufficient, (as the So∣cinian would have it) to give it the Denomination of a Resurrection. For in a word, This would have passed off as a specious kind of Transmigration, and consequently a Doctrine that would have met with a very easy Re∣ception in most of the Greek Schools. But to proceed: Let us in the next place examine what Scripture says to this Matter, whereby we shall prove our main Design, as well as confirm this very Notion. And first from the Pas∣sages already cited on another Argument, where the Re∣surrection is said to be made from the Grave, from the Sea, and Hell, and Death; where the Dead are said to stand before God, and Death and Hell are said to give up their dead. See Rev. 20: 12, 13. Joh. 5.28. I think its in∣disputably evident, the Holy Spirit directs us to the cor∣ruptible Principle, the Body, which alone suffers Death, and is committed to the Grave, and consequently the Re∣surrection must imply a Restitution of this very Principle, in Conjunction with the incorruptible Principle, the Soul. Indeed it seems absurd, to send us to all the Repositories of the Dead, to establish the Belief of a Resurrection, if a new Corporeal Part is to be framed, or rather if the Mortal Part, that was laid in the Prison of the Grave, is not to be given up again, and actually restored. The Ar∣gument is so obvious and convincing, that neither Socinus nor Crellius, upon these Passages of Scripture, are able to make any other Reply, but Non sequitur, or it does not appear, that the rising Body is the same numerical Body with that which fell. Its true, Socinus appeals to a Passage of St. Paul, which proves nothing (as will appear by and by) but what we freely grant, that our corruptible Bodies▪ cannot inherit Incorruption. See Comment o Joh. 5.28. And therefore it concludes nothing against the present Argument.
But the Identity of our rising Bodies is evinced from yet more express Authorities of Scripture; in one place we are assurred, that the holy Spirit shall quicken our mortal bodies, Rom. 8.11. In another, that our Saviour shall change our vile bodies, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, Phil. 3.21. In a third, that This corruptible shall put on incorruption, 1 Cor. 15.53. Here we have the Notion of a Resurrection asserted in express Terms, as well as the Identity of the rising Body. For is it not that mortal corruptible Principle, or that Body which suffered Corruption in the Grave, that is said to be quickened, or restored to Life? Crellius I know has the Face to affirm, that they are not our mortal Bodies, that are quickened, but new ones assigned us. [See Comment on the Place.] But can a new Body, substituted in the room of my mortal Body, without Solecism and Nonsence, be called my mor∣tal Body, or this New Body quickened, the quickning of my mortal Body? But to proceed, the remaining Passages car∣ry the Absurdity higher: Can a new Body, as to Matter or Substance, plac'd in the room of my corruptible Body, be fairly reconciled with this Corruptible? Or can my corruptible Principle, or dead Body, tho' never to be resto∣red, be said to put on Incorruption, only because my Soul is after a certain Period united to a new incorruptible Body, diametrically distinct from my corruptible Body? My Soul, in such a case, puts on Incorruption, but by no means my corruptible Body, that still rots and moulders in the Dust. Again, our vile Bodies may be fashioned, or changed into the likeness of Christ's glorious body, by reducing 'em from a natural, to a spiritual, and from a corruptible, to an in∣corruptible Frame; but if perfect new Bodies are to be fashioned and substituted, then our vile bodies are not the things fashioned or changed into the likeness of glorious bodies, but exchanged for 'em. We therefore freely grant, that the Substance is transform'd by a Change of Qualities, from
natural to spiritual, and from corruptible to incorruptible Bodies: And this is all the Apostle intends, when he tells us, That flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of Heaven. A great Truth no doubt, as it is encompassed with hu∣mane Infirmities, and corruptible Qualities; for the Close of the Verse gives us the sence of the whole, nor corruption inherit incorruption. [1 Cor. 15.35. the place cited by Socinus.] But now we have gone thus far, it would be highly absurd to affirm, that a vile corruptible Body puts on Incorruption, or is fashioned or changed into a glorious Body, when it remains in an eternal State of Corruption. Therefore, the Resurrection, which changes a vile and corruptible Body into a glorious and incorruptible one, must imply a Resti∣tution of the corruptible Principle, and consequently the same numerical Body is the undoubted Subject of the Re∣surrection. But farther, that I may not dwell too long on this Ge∣neral, I shall only have recourse to Scripture for one Ar∣gument more; its The Resurrection of our Saviour's Body: Now its well known, the History of all the Evangelists, the Print of the Nails in his Hands and Feet, and of the Spear in his Side, demonstrate, That our blessed Saviour rose in that very Body which was Crucified, Dead and Bu∣ried; but now its on all hands agreed, that our Saviour was a Type and Pattern of our Resurrection; yes, he's more to the Righteous, for its Christ's the first-fruits, after∣wards they that are Christ's at his coming. The Apostle all along carries the Analogy between him and us, and there∣fore As Christ rose in his own proper mortal Body, so we shall all rise in ours. The Socinians are pressed here, and therefore endeavour to evade the force of it, by pretend∣ing, That tho' our Saviour rose in his Crucified Body, yet upon his Ascension he received a glorious and spiritualized Body. But this Evasion proves nothing, unless it appear from Scripture, that Christ deposited his Crucified Body, and
assumed a new Body in the room of it. But this is a Con∣ceit that's destitute of all Foundation from Scripture, and indeed so much, that I do not find any Socinian that peremptorily asserts it. Therefore this Glorified Body can be nothing but the Crucified Body, refin'd, adorn'd and beau∣tify'd, and its no more but what we allow in the Resur∣rection of our vile mortal Bodies, for they shall be fashion∣ed like unto his glorious Body: Therefore as Christ the First-fruits is risen in his own proper Body, so shall every one of us be raised in our own proper Bodies at his coming. Thus far it appears, that the current of Scripture, as well as the nature of the Thing, declares for the Identity of the Rising Body. But that we may confirm the one, and not be mistaken in the Sence of the other, give me leave to reflect a little the Sentiments of the Primitive Church. And because it would be impertinent in this place, to produce particular Passages of Authors, I shall only endeavour to represent this Argument in a few Observations. And first its evident, the Suffrage of the Primitive Church determined for the Resurrection of the same Body; since the Belief of this very Article was the great Prop to the Constancy and Per∣severance of Martyrs and Confessors. Their very Perse∣cutors observ'd it in 'em, and they resolutely attested the Power and Efficacy of it at the place of Martyrdom. They were perswaded, that the very Hairs of their Head were all Number'd, and should one Day be restored to 'em; and therefore they powerfully bore up under the Cruel∣ties of their Executioners, tho' torn piece-meal by Racks and Saws, or devoured by wild Beasts. Again, its well known, the grand Objection from the various Transmi∣grations of Matter, was in Being in the first Ages of the Church, and taken notice of on both sides; and the Hea∣then Persecutors (as was observed before) took care to improve it, by exposing the Faithful to the Ravage of
wild Beasts. Its well known, the Fathers fix the Resur∣rection of the Body on the Justice of God, in the distri∣bution of Rewards and Punishments. Its well known, they contended for the Resurrection of the Flesh, and ex∣pound most of the fore-cited Passages of Scripture, of that very Body and Flesh, that was committed to the Grave; nay, which is more than all this, the Style of most of the ancient Creeds was, I believe the Resurrection of the Flesh. And therefore since these are unquestionable Truths, we must conclude, that the Doctrine of a numerical Resur∣rection constantly prevail'd in the Primitive Church. Give me leave to add but one word more. The Judg∣ment of the Primitive Church, for a numerical Resur∣rection, is indisputably evident from the Censures that passed upon Origen; since we find him more than once condemned as Heretical, (sometimes by Councils) for asserting, that we shall, make our Resurrection in an Ae∣thereal Body, or rather that our rising Body is only form∣ed from a seminal Principle of the corruptible Body. Upon the whole then it appears, that the Voice of Reason, Scripture and Antiquity, jointly declare for the Resurre∣ction of the same Body, and therefore we have all the Authorities which a Matter of this Nature is capable of, that we are not mistaken in our Notions of it: Therefore we must not only believe, that we shall all be raised in our own Bodies, but Earnestly contend for this Faith, as origi∣nally delivered to the Saints. And now since it is concluded, the Resurrection we are to make will be a Resurrection of the same Body, it re∣mains that we Enquire into the Nature of its Identity, or wherein this Sameness consists. And that we take just Mea∣sures of the Identity of the rising Body, I think it will be necessary to offer something concerning the Nature of Humane Identity, or which is all one, the Identity of a hu∣mane Person, because the Identity of the rising Man will
certainly be formed upon the same Rules and Principles with that of the living Man. And first, since Man, or which is the same thing, a humane Person, is certainly a Being compounded of Two distinct Principles, an animal, and a spiritual Principle, a Soul, and a Body; I cannot comply with a late Reformer of Humane Ʋnderstandings,See Mr. Lock's Essay concerning Humane Ʋderstanding, Book 2. Chap. 27. Sect. 15.20.26. that places Personal Identity purely in Consciousness, or a Faculty of Re∣flecting on our own Thoughts and Actions, and ascribing 'em to our selves as such. I shall take liberty to con∣sider it, because this Author speaks of it only as applied to a humane Person, and expresly applies it to the Resur∣rection (no doubt) as an Expedient to solve the difficul∣ties of it. Its true, for as much as Consciousness is an incommuni∣cable Property of every intelligent Being, it will easily be granted, that there cannot be personal Identity without Consciousness; but we can by no means allow, that Con∣sciousness is the sole Principle, or Foundation of personal Identity, as this Author plainly asserts. Indeed he gives it such an absolute Sovereignty in this Affair, and discovers such an over-weening Fondness for the Notion, That the little Finger cut off from the Body, if Conscious, must be the same Person, Sect. 17. That Consciousness inhabiting suc∣cessively several Bodies, must be all One and the same humane Person: That Two distinct Consciousnesses acting in the same Body, one by Night and the other by Day, must make a Night-man and a Day-man, and Two distinct Persons, Sect. 22. In a word, he fairly suggests, That Transmigration is a Do∣ctrine no way absurd, but very probable, and a good piece of Christian Platonism. And in plain terms, That Socrates after this Life can no way be the same Man, but by Consciousness, Sect. 20. Now certainly, as for the Doctrine of Trans∣migration, it will be readily allow'd to be a good Piece of Platonism, but he that owns himself an Advocate for it,
renders his Christianity justly suspected. For whosoever admits the Resurrection of the same Body, must pronounce Transmigration extravagantly absurd; for certainly, if Socrates's Soul has successively inform'd, presided, and acted in several Bodies, there will be as great a Contest at the Resurrection, which Body shall be Married to Socrates's Soul, as the Sadduce foolishly supposed, when he demanded Whose Wife shall she be of the Seven? As for the Identity of Socrates's Resurrection, I hope to make it appear, that it does not consist in Consciousness. But to return, Personal Identity can never consist in Consciousness, tho' we take Person for an Intelligent Being, without any regard to any particular Substance wherein it exists; since it is only a reflex Act, or Faculty of an Intelligent Being, and supposes several Faculties antecedent to it, whereas the Identity of any Being must arise from the first Principles of its Ex∣istence. But now its evident, Person implies an Intelligent Being, with regard to the particular Substance, and the Parts and Principles of it, whereby it exists; for otherwise I would fain know, how its possible to distinguish a Hu∣mane, an Angelick, and a Divine Person. Mr. Lock will reply, That they are only to be distinguisht by distinct Principles of Consciousness; but thus far every particular Humane Person is distinguisht; and consequently there must be something else than Consciousness, to distinguish the several species of Persons. I am sure an Angelick, and Humane Person must be distinguisht by diversity of substance, as well as Consciousness, in as much as the one is a pure Spirit, the other a Substance compounded of Spirit and Matter, or an animal and spiritual Part. These are Positions that answer to the most uncontroverted Idea's or Notions of a humane Person. But now if a humane Person, in the true Notion of it, implies an Existence of the animal, as well as the immaterial or spiritual Part, the Identity of a humane Person, or which is the same thing, Personal Iden∣tity,
as apply'd to a particular Man, must consist in the Identity of the animal, as well as immaterial Part, wherein∣soever that happens to consist; and consequently Consci∣ousness, which is only a Property of an immaterial Soul, and in the Judgment of Mr. Lock, may be Communicated to any new Body, or animal Part, cannot reach the Iden∣tity of a humane Person. In one word, I dare appeal to all the world, Whether Mr. Lock, throughout his whole Chapter of Identity, doth not speak of personal Identity, as apply'd to a humane Person; and certainly Consciousness, which may exist with the Soul in a state of Separation, can never be the adequate Principle of personal Identity, unless we can imagine, that the Body contributes nothing to the making up of a humane Person; or indeed, that it is not an essential Principle as well as the Soul. I am sure such Notions, such Assertions as these, would have done signal service to the Sect called , that resolv'd our Sa∣viour's humane Nature into mere Phantasm; for if Con∣sciousness is alone sufficient to constitute the Identity of a humane Person, or if the animal Part of a humane Person is not an Essential, as well as the Soul, it was unpardon∣able Injustice in the Primitive Church, to pronounce this Set of Men Hereticks. I remember Mr. Lock very learned∣ly assures us, that Person is a forensick Term, apply'd to a Being capable of judicial Punishment, as well as Rewards: But certainly such a Person, in the Judgment of the Bench, contains an animal Part in the Idea of it, as well as Con∣sciousness; else the Person may be conscious of a Thou∣sand Crimes, and stand Convicted too, and yet defy the Judicial Power in inflicting personal Punishments. But to conclude this Argument in a few words, if Consciousness is the sole Principle of personal Identity, suppose we should find it, at the general Resurrection, United to a little Finger, to an Indian Tortoise, or a Body made up of the Remains of Heliogabalus's Hogs, (Instances of his own culling) it
may be the very ingenious Author of the Essay concerning Humane Ʋnderstanding Risen from the Dead, or the very same numerical Person he was in the Land of the Living. I am sure all this literally agrees with his own Language, when he tells us, Sect. 26. in the Name of an Apostle, That at the great Day every One will be the same by Consciousness, in whatever Bodies they shall appear, or Consciousness adheres to. If therefore he'll be content to make his Resurrection on these Terms, I leave him to enjoy his beloved Notion, so that he'll allow others to expect a Resurrection according to the Catholick Faith. And now I am ready to accuse my self, for dwelling so long upon a single Notion: But yet I think it was absolutely necessary to my present Un∣dertaking, which is to state the Nature of humane Iden∣tity, or which is the same thing, personal Identity, as ap∣ply'd to a humane Person, to assert the Catholick Doctrine of the same Rising Body; and in a word, to rescue it from downright Socinianism in a new Dress. For what is all this but to act the Socinian in Masquerade, or under the Disguise of new Names, rather than Notions; for if Consciousness alone constitutes the Identity of the rising Person, what doth it differ from the Socinian Notion, that places the Identity of a humane Person in the same Individual Spirit, and allows the rising Body to be formed of common Matter. I shall not peremptorily affirm, that this is a Notion which deserves the Name of Heresy; but certainly, if Origen's Notion of an Aethereal Body, or a Se∣minal Principle, was justly condemned as Heretical, I am sure it must be a signal Favour to exempt Consciousness thus apply'd, from as severe a Censure. Thus we see the wonderful Product of free Thinking, when it acts with∣out the least regard to the Canon of Scripture. But to return to the Decision of the Nature of Humane Identity: As for the spiritual Principle, the Soul, tho' it doth by no means consist in Consciousness, yet its abun∣dantly
concluded, it consists in the same individual intel∣ligent Spirit. The remaining Difficulty then is to fix the Identity of the Animal Part, the Body; and certainly the Identity of the animal Part must in one word consist In a sit Construction and Organization of certain Particles of Mat∣ter, whereby one common Principle of Life is begun, continued, and the Integral Parts of the Man are perfected and maintain∣ed. If it be demanded, Which are the Integral Parts of a Man, certainly they are either to be measured by this com∣mon Principle of Life, as they are more or less serviceable to the Maintainance of it, or at least from the received Idea of the animal Part. Under the first Head are to be reduc'd the Vessels and Instruments of Concoction, and the Elaboratories of the Blood and Spirits, or Vehicles of Life, such are Nerves, Veins and Arteries. Under the se∣cond are the Skin, Flesh, Bones, and their Appendages, and even Shape and Proportion; for tho' as to Bones and Flesh, there may be no express Standard, with respect to Weight, Dimension, or Number, no more than in Nerves or Arteries, yet its impossible to make up the Idea of the animal Part of a Man, without something of each of these; for we can no more conceive a humane Body, with∣out Flesh and Bones, than without Life: Feel, for a Spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have, and the same is to be said of Figure and Proportion, since it would be absurd to pronounce a Tortoise, or a little Finger, the animal Part of a Man, or humane Person. This is a Truth so indisputa∣ble, that were the Body of the Author of the Essay of Hu∣mane Ʋnderstanding, transform'd into a Tortoise, or little Finger, and Consciousness joined to it, I'm perswaded he would scarce think himself the same humane Person, unless it was done when his Brain was exceedingly warm'd with this uncouth Notion. Again, as to those fleeting Par∣ticles, whether vital Spirits, or other more subtle Parts, that are carried off by more nice and delicate sorts of
Evacuation, tho' we cannot esteem 'em integral, constitu∣ent Parts of a Man, because humane Identity is not de∣stroy'd by the loss of 'em, yet they are justly to be esteem∣ed proper Appendages of every particular Man; inasmuch as during their abode in the Body, they were instrumental to the carrying on of Life and Action, and often ministred to a Man's Vices, as well as Virtues. And now having fixt the Identity of the Animal Part, in this Life, together with its Integral Parts and Appen∣dages, it will be easy to determine wherein the Identity of the rising Body, and consequently of the whole Man con∣sists, and how it may be preserved. And, first, I think we are not obliged to proceed upon the Aristotelian Principles of Generation and Corruption, which pronounce every little Transmutation of Matter, a total Destruction of the Individual, and tho' the same Particles are re-collected and formed into a Being of the same Model, yet make it to be a new Individual. With submission then, the most direct Method to assert the Identity of the rising Body, is to resolve it into its first Principles, Dust, for dust we are, and unto dust must we return; and certainly Dust must be the Materials of the rising Body. If therefore there are sufficient Materials of this kind left in the Chambers of Nature for each respective Body, its the special Business of Omnipotence to form 'em into the integral Parts of a humane Body, and in this Sence, Give to every seed its own body. But as for the Original of this Stock of Matter, I do not think it necessary, that Socrates's rising Body should be wholly compounded (as some would have it) of those Particles which are the remains of So∣crates's dead Body, for its certainly sufficient, if to these a supply be called in from any evaporated Particles, that were once real Appendages of Socrates's living Body.
Secondly, It cannot be sufficient to establish the Identity of Socrates's rising Body, if it only enjoys so many Par∣ticles of his animal, or dying Body, as serve to make up the Bones and principal Vessels, and the rest (as others contend) by a plastick Power, or seminal Principle, made up from forreign adventitious Matter. In a word then, I think its absolutely necessary, that all the necessary inte∣gral Parts of Socrates's rising Body, even Flesh and Blood, should be made up of the Particles of Socrates's dying Body, or at least of those evaporated ones of his living Body; and and when Substance, Life, Lineaments, and the Propor∣tion of a humane Body are formed out of the aforesaid Mass of Matter, God may add what Embelishments he pleases from the stock of common Matter, and yet Socrates's Body is undoubtedly raised, and when the individual Soul or Spirit of Socrates is united to this rising Body, Socrates is certainly raised the same Man, and the same Person he was in the Land of the Living. And thus much for the Nature of humane Identity, as well in the Resurrection, as before it. From hence we may, in a few words, discover what is fit to be believed concerning the Resurrection of the Body, and remove the Sceptick's mighty Objection advanc'd a∣gainst it. And as to the first, I think we may leave the School-men sweating in the midst of Objections and Answers, about Hairs and Nails, the State of Infants, and Adam's Rib too, for I do not think it Matter of Faith to determine, whether Children shall rise grown Men, or whether we are to enjoy the same Number of Ribs, Nails, or Hair, or whe∣ther they shall be compounded of forreign Matter, or no. We may in general conclude, that it seems most agreable to the infinite Wisdom of God, to restore at least the Elect, or Blessed, in the utmost Perfections of humane Nature. But Secondly, From the Premises it may justly be pre∣sum'd pursuant to the ancient Faith, that we are to believe
the Resurrection of the Flesh; for tho' no certain quantity or proportion can be prescribed, yet Man was originally Created in Flesh and Blood, and its to be esteem'd as much an integral Part, as Nerves and Arteries, and consequent∣ly an Identity is to be observed in this, as well as in other Cases. I know there are Two Passages in St. Paul's fa∣mous Discourse on the Resurrection, which seem to inter∣fere with it; where we are told, that Flesh and Blood can∣not inherit the Kingdom of God, and the Body is said to be sown a natural body, but raised a spiritual body. The first of these hath been in some measure reply'd to, and the second is certainly to be expounded the same way; Its sown a natural body, , or an animal body, or a Body that is to be supported by Food, Sleep and Warmth, and carries the Seeds of Corruption in it; but its rais'd a spiritual body, refin'd, or freed from its corruptible Qualities, or from that continued Flux of Parts, whence the Imperfections and Infirmities of an animal Body are derived; or again, its not a Body of that gross Allay, which our animal Bodies were Created in, since its Parts will be wonderfully attenuated, refin'd and spiritualiz'd, and in a word, fa∣shioned after the manner of a glorified Body. So that here seems to be no Foundation to reject the Resurrection of the Flesh; I'm sure it cannot be that of Corruption, for that Almighty Arm, that raises the Body out of the Dust, can by the same Act, render Flesh and Blood incorruptible, as well as the most refin'd Particles of Matter. And thus much for what is proper to be believed. In the last place we come to make a return to the Sceptick. Does he with Triumph, and a scoffing Infideli∣ty demand, How can these things be, after such repeated Transmigrations of Matter? The Reply is easy, when we have demanded what he can by no means reject: And First, Will he allow that the evaporated Particles of the
living Body, as well as those of the dying Body, may be fit Materials for the rising Body? Will he allow the re∣ceived Doctrine of Nutrition, that scarce the Fiftieth Part of what is eaten, turns to real Nourishment, or is assimilated and consubstantiated with the several parts of the feed∣ing Body, so that the rest is cast forth into the Draught, or common stock of Matter? Will he allow, that the prin∣cipal parts of those Bodies that are expos'd to the Mouths of wild Beasts, such as Bones, Ligatures, Cartilages, and almost the whole Genus of Vessels, are very unfit Ma∣terials for Food; will he allow, that the devouring Ani∣mal may live so long, as to disgorge most of his Prey, I say, to disgorge by insensible Evacuations most of those Particles that turn'd to real Nourishment? Will he allow, that the Parts of the glorified Body may be attenuated to that degree, that half the Matter which made up the Ani∣mal Body, may serve to give it all the Features, Linea∣ments and Proportions of a humane Body? Lastly, When Infidelity industriously exposes the Bodies of his Saints to Ravage or Spoil, to defeat the Engagements of the Al∣mighty, will he allow that this All-wise All-powerful Being may for that time invert the Course of Nature, and send forth the greatest part of that Matter, which would o∣therwise have turn'd to Nourishment? These are all Con∣cessions, which the original Notices of a God, and the common Principles of Philosophy, will warrant and con∣firm. But now since all these must be allowed, tho' the most avowed Sceptick, or Infidel turn Tyrant and Devil too, and exert his utmost Wit and Malice, in defeating the Designs of the Almighty; in a word, tho' he out-do the most improved Cruelties of former Persecutors, and tear Infants from the Womb, to sacrifice to Wolves and Tygers; yet after Wit and Malice, and Cruelty have spent themselves, there will still be Materials enough for Omnipotence to perfect his own Designs, in a glorious and triumphant Resurrection.
And thus I have in some measure performed what I at first engaged in. But certainly this is a very vile way of Practising upon our Faith; Suppose we were not able to form any manner of an Hypothesis, to represent the Possi∣bility of a General Resurrection, must the clearest Revela∣tions be rejected, and the Fact pronounced impossible, be∣cause we are not able to form a Modus, to demonstrate the Possibility of it. Certainly this is to measure Om∣nipotence, by the shallow Projections of a finite Under∣standing. But before any Man pretends to fix Impossibili∣ties upon reveal'd Matters of Fact, he must be able to give an exact Account of the various Modes, by which its impossible for on All-wise and an All-powerful God, to execute and perform 'em. Till this is done, to pronounce any thing of this Nature impossible, is the heighth of Impudence, Folly and Presumption; And shall any Man pretend to trace the different Workings of Omnipotence, when he's baffled in every little Phaenomenon in natural Causes; a finite Understanding is not able to comprehend the one, and nothing less than Knowledge, as extensive as infinite Power, is able to fathom or unravel the other. Let no Man then be Bubled out of his Faith, by such ex∣travagant Pretences: But let him consider, that God who comprehends the dust of the Earth in a measure, and weigheth the mountains in scales, and the hills in a ballance, can not only Marshal together, all the dispersed Particles of each re∣spective Body, but reserve such a Stock of each in the Chambers of Nature, as will enable him to answer, and make good his Promises. And since he has plainly assured us, that we shall All rise in our Bodies, let not any seem∣ing Difficulties shake our Faith, but rather let his infinite Power and Wisdom answer and remove them; for we may be sure of this, that his infinite Power and Wisdom will conspire to assert his Veracity. In a word, It ought to be considered, that the sacred Canon expresly place's
the Article of a general Resurrection upon the Infinite Power of God; and therefore tho' the Doctrine of future Rewards and Punishments, may not discover the necessity of the same rising Body, yet in as much as it resolves it self into the Infinite Power of God, it ought to be looked upon as a special Attestation of the Divine Authority of the Gospel Institution: And consequently we may conclude, that God will find out Methods to accomplish his own De∣signs, so that neither the Power of Hell, Death, nor the Grave shall be able to baffle and defeat 'em. And then we need not fear, but God will give to every Seed his own Body, and in the same act, change our vile Bodies, that they may be fashioned like unto his glorious Body, according to the mighty working whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself.
A Postscript. SInce the Composure of this Discourse, there's an At∣tempt made to over-turn the Numerical Identity of the Rising Body: [See Latitudinarius Orthodoxus, de Myste∣rio Resurrectionis, Cap. 7. Sect. 3.] And tho' a great deal is offered ——— from the Justice and Wisdom of God, yet I think there's nothing considerable, besides the Argument drawn from the Instance of Seed or Grain, given by St. Paul upon the Subject; and because it seems to clash with the Hypothesis I have advanc'd, I think my self obliged to make some Return to it. The words are these: But some man will say, How are the dead raised up? and with what Body do they come? Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickned except it die? And that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be, but bare grain, it may chance of wheat, or of some other grain: But God giveth it a body as it hath pleased him, and to every seed his own body, 1 Cor. 15. ver. 35, 36, 37, 38. Upon the words we may very justly premise, that the Apostle argues by way of Allusion and Example, and therefore the Parallel is to be carried no farther than the Design and Scope of the Apostle's Argument; for when Instances come up to the main Design of an Argument, tho' in other Cases there's an apparent Disparity, they have serv'd the Intention of 'em, and to extend 'em farther is Illogical and Ʋnjust. Again, there can be no force in Alluding Instances, when apply'd beyond their primitive
Design, if the Application is inconsistent with other ex∣press Positions of Scripture. This is a Limitation so just and reasonable, that where any Doctrine is express and clear, its to be a Rule or Interpretation to any Allusion that seems to interfere with it; especially as long as the Inter∣pretation concludes any things, and is not forced and unna∣tural. This I offer, because I hope I have produc'd express Authorities of Scripture, which prove the numerical Iden∣tity of the Rising Body, beyond all dispute or controul: But now for the Apostle's design, I think its only to repre∣sent the Nature of that Change, which is to be made on our mortal Bodies at the Resurrection: How are the Dead, or how is the Mortal Part of 'em Raised up? With what Bodies do they come? How shall these mortal Bodies be chang'd, alter'd, or model'd? The Instances represent a a Change, but its only in Qualities and Perfections, not in Matter or Substance; this is apparent from the whole Cata∣logue of Instances, which ought to be uniform and con∣sistent. As one sort of Flesh differs from another sort of Flesh in Frame and Contexture, and consequently in Qualities and Dispositions; so doth the rising Body differ from the mortal Body, as the Glory of the Sun, Moon and Stars is vastly diffe∣rent, so is the Glory and Perfections of the rising Body from those of the mortal Body; and the leading Instance is ap∣parently subject to the same Application. The Seed sown, viz. of Wheat, or some other Grain, is sensibly different from the Product of it: The first is but bare Grain, the second Grain with Root, Blade and Ear to it; and no doubt the difference between the Rising and Mortal Body is as visible, as to its Frame and Qualities, for its God that models our mortal Bodies, or gives them Bodies as it hath pleased him. And its plain, the Parallel is design'd thus far, and no far∣ther, for thus it is expresly apply'd: So also is the Resur∣rection of the dead. It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incor∣ruption:
it is sown in dishonour, it is raised in glory: it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power: it is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body. Here's indeed a very considerable Change, but its a change of the same Body, and conse∣quently a change of Contexture, Quality, or Disposition, not a change of Matter and Substance; and therefore its absurd to carry the Parallel any farther: For tho' the Pro∣duction of Corn supposes only a seminal Principle in the Seed, whilst the greatest share of Matter is adventitious, and only prepared by proper Vessels; yet it can be no Ar∣gument that our rising Bodies are to be made up of adven∣titious Matter, unless it were expresly apply'd thus far: Besides, this Instance of Seed can be carried no farther, than those of the Sun, Moon and Stars, and the different kinds of Flesh; and as these cannot, without Absurdity and Non-sence, be apply'd to represent any thing, but the different Qualities and Perfections of the rising Body; so that of Seed cannot, by the Rules of Logick, or right Reason, ex∣tend any farther. Upon the whole then, the Identity of the Rising Body is established on the clearest Authorities of Scripture, and there's nothing in the Argument before us, that can be thought to invalidate, or weaken the force of 'em: The re∣fore what is before asserted, concerning the Identity of the Rising Body, is still in force, and may be esteem'd conso∣sonant to the Canon of Scripture, and the Catholick Faith. FINIS.
