B3780 12494822 62471
A CONFERENCE WITH Mr. CLAUDE MINISTER OF CHARENTON, CONCERNING The Authority of the CHURCH. By JAMES BENIGNE BOSSUET, Bishop of Meaux, Councellor to the most Chri∣stian King, and formerly Preceptor to the DAUPHIN: First Almoner to the DAUPHINESS. Faithfully done into English out of the French Original. Publisht with Allowance. LONDON, Printed for Matthew Turner at the Lamb in High-Holbourn, 1687.
ADVERTISEMENT. I Had no intent to publish either this Conference▪ or the Instructions, it was accompany'd with. They both had for their Object the Conversion of a par∣ticular person, and having wrought their Effect, there was no obligation to make any farther noise about 'em. But as I was not  to publish the Re∣cital of it, so neither did I affectedly strive to keep conceal'd. I gave a Copy to Mdemoiselle de Duras, who requested it  but just  I consented with∣out difficulty to the communicating it to some Gentle of the Pretended Refor∣med Religion, that desir'd to see it: because 'twas thought, it might be instru∣mental to their Conversion. The same Motive  to impart it to some other of these Gentlemen, either by my self, or by the Interposition of Friends. Thus it pass'd into several hand  Copies taken, than I knew of  they were spread  they were alter'd:  the Relation, I had made, or turn'd it according to their  'twas printed at Tholoze from a very corrupt  I can no longer forbear giving it to you, as I had my self set it down with great Fidelity and Exactness. At my coming forth from the Conference, I related it entirely to the Duke and Dutchess of Richlieu in the presence of the  Tstu. The particular zeal, they had for the Convers of Mademoiselle de Duras, made them desire me so to do I had before  to them the precedent Conversations. The next day. I made the same Recital to some of my particular Friends, amongst whom was the Bishop of Mirpoix. I was full of the matter, and related it naturally. All those Gentlemen  me to put it in writing, whilst 'twas fresh in my memory, alledging several Reasons, to perswade me, that this Labor would not e . I believ it . I was  to write with the same swiftness, which is usual, when one  dw facts, that are present, without troubling ones self about the Style: and these Gentlemen observ'd in the written Narrative the same sinplicity, they, had discern'd in my recounting it by Word of Mouth. Mademoiselle de Duras acknowledg'd my Report to be exactly true, and I hope, those, that shall read it without , will have the same Opinion of it. Several Copies of my Relation being dispers'd, as I have told you, one  into the hands of Mr. Claude, as himself avrs; and he on his side together with an Answer to the Instructions, I had particularly given Mademoiselle de Duras, gave abroad a Relation of the Conference, very different from this of mine. To speak freely, what I think, his Relation is neither for his Credit, nor min: We hold in it round about long Discourses, languishing, inipid, and inconsequent enough.  Mr. Claude's Relation we often return back, to what we had left, without perceiving how we get  again: We did not act in that mannr,
and our Dispute was consequential and close enough. In this sort of Contests men naturally grow hot, as in a kind of wrestling: and so the sequel is more animated, than the Beginnings. Men try one another, and if I so speak, in the first Blows, that are given: when they have a little explain'd themselves, when they think, they have discover'd, where each Party places the Difficulty, and found, as I may say, one anothers weak sides, all, that follows, is more lively and pressing. Whe∣ther all this be as natural in Mr. Claude's Discourse, as in mine, the Reader shall be Judge. As his is turn'd, many will scarce believe, but that it has been adjusted and trimm'd up on the perusal of mine. But I will not stay upon these Reflexions. 'Tis with Discourses, as with Pictures, in which every one cannot discern, what is Original, and, as I may say, from the first hand. Nor will I here make use of the odious Reproach of Insincerity. One does not always, so ex∣actly remember either the things, that were said, or the Order, in which they were deliver'd: We often confound in our Minds our After-thoughts, with what we indeed said in the Dispute; and one is frequently found to have chang'd the Truth without any Design of lying. What I shall say of Mr. Claude, the same he may say of me. Our Conversation was in private, and neither of us can pro∣duce indifferent Witnesses: thus every one will judge of the Truth of our Reci∣tals, according as himself is prepossess'd. I pretend not to draw any Advantage from the Success of the Conference, which was follow'd by the Conversion of Ma∣demoiselle de Duras: 'tis a Work of GODs, for which we ought to give him thanks: 'tis an Example for those, that are well dispos'd, but not an Argu∣ment for the Obstinate. The Catholicks will look on this Change in one man∣ner, and the Pretended Reformed in another. So that, should Mr. Claude and I set our selves, each of us to justify his Relation, the Result would be only a Dispute, with which the Publick has nothing to do. And what great matter is it, will the Reader say, which the two had the better? The Cause resides not in these two men, who would appear extremely vain, and so of little Credit, if they would have every one, whether Friends or Adversaries, believe them equally their Word. In these Altercations the best Course, a prudent Reader can take, is to search into the Bottom of the Matters, and without regarding the per∣sonal Facts, to consider the Doctrin, laid down by each Party. The Subject, treated of in all this Relation, is no less clear, than important. 'Tis the Authority of the Church. Our Adversaries make little account of this Dis∣pute, being always heard to say, that we must come to the Bottom, setting aside as an unnecessary Formality, all the Arguments drawn from the Authority of the Church: as if it were not an essential Part of the Bottom to examin, by what Authority and what Means JESUS CHRIST would have Christians resolve themselves on the Disputes, that should spring up in his Church. Catholicks pre∣tend, that this Means is to hear the Church it self. They pretend, that a parti∣cular
Member ought not to resolve but with the whole Body, and that be hazards all, when he resolves any other way. They pretend, that to know, in what Church we ought to stay, we need only know, which it is, that was never accus'd of being form'd by separating it self; that was extant before all Separations; from which all others have separated. Without going forth of our House, our very Parents will shew us this Church.Deut. xxxii. v. 7. Ask thy Father, and he will shew thee, thy Elders, and they will tell thee. According to this Rule whoever can shew a whole Church, a whole Society of Pastors, the Be∣ginning of its Being, and a Time, whensoever, during which it was not, has convinc'd it of not being a Church truly Christian. This is our Pretention, and we pre∣tend not, that this Question is about a simple Formality. We averr, that it con∣cerns a fundamental Article, contain'd in these words of the Creed, I believe the holy Catholick Church: an Article besides of such importance, that it carries with it the Decision of all the rest. But as this Point is decisive, so it is no less clear, and it cannot be long spoken of, but one side or other will shew their weak∣ness. Let us say better: when a Catholick, never so little instructed, undertakes a Protestant upon this Point, this Protestant, how able and subtil soever, will find himself reduc'd, not always indeed to hold his Peace; but, what is no less strong than Silence, to say nothing, when he shall attempt to speak, but visible Absurdities. This is, what here befell Mr. Claude thrô the sole Defect of his Cause: for 'twill appear, that he defended it with all possible Skill, and so subtilly, that I fear'd for those who heard him: for I know, what St. Paul writes of such Dis∣courses. But in fine we must boldly say: The Truth gain'd a manifest Victory. What Mr. Claude avows, ruins his Cause: The Places, where he stood without an Answer, are indeed such, as suffer none. And to the end it may not be said, I assert, what I please: or that I now desire, what I ere while disclaim'd, to be believ'd on my own word: two things will shew, whatever Opinion may be had of me, that in this Point I must necessa∣rily he believ'd. The first is, that relying on the force of Truth, and his Promise, who said,Luk. xxi. v. 15. that he will give us a Mouth and Wisdom, which our Adversaries shall not be able to resist, where-ever Mr. Claude shall say, that he has not acknowledg'd, what I make him acknowledge in the Re∣cital of the Conference, I engage my self in a second Conference to draw again from him the same Acknowledgment; and where-ever he shall say, that he was not without an Answer, I will force him without any other Argument, but those, he has already heard, to Answers so visibly absurd, that any men of good Sense shall acknowledge, he had far better have been silent, than have made use of them. And for fear it should be said; for in an Affair, that concerns the Conversion of Souls, we must, as much as may be, prevent all Objection: for fear then once
again it should be said, that Mr. Claude engag'd himself in these Inconveniences by ill management, I on the contrary affirm, that this Advantage is so inherent to our Cause, that there is no Minister, no Doctor, no man living, but must in the same manner sink under the like Arguments. Those, who will make trial of it shall see, that this is no vain Promise. If any one says, I presume too much on my strength; now that I examin my self in the presence of GOD, if such a Presumption had made me speak, I should disown all, I had said. Instead of promising my self any Advantage, I should esteem my self already vanquisht by trusting only to my own Arm, and my own Weapons: and so far should I be from defying the strong, as David that, I should rank my self among those,Ps. 63. of whom the same David sings, that the Arrows of Children have pierc'd them, and their own Tongue, too weak to defend them, is in fine turn'd against themselves. The Instruction, I offer in general to the Pretended Reformed, I particularly offer those of the Diocess of Meaux, whom I am above all the rest oblig'd to bear in my Bowels. Those, that shall refuse this Christian Instruction, no less peaceable, fraternal and paternal, than concluding and decisive, I shall say to them in the words of St. Paul with sorrow and groaning, there being no comfort in the loss of ones Children and Brethren,Acts. xx. v. 26. I am pure from the Blood of them all. This is the first thing, which will shew, that I impute nothing to Mr. Claude, which might give me any Advantage. The second is, that Mr. Claude himself in the midst of what he opposes against me, and amongst all the Turns, he gives our Dispute, still acknowledges at last, what was in contest between us, or else shifts it off in such a manner, as plainly shews, he cannot entirely disown it. But this will be better understood by those, who, after the Instructions and the Con∣ference, shall read the Reflexions, I make on Mr. Claudes writing. Some Attention is requisite, to comprehend the whole sequel of these Instructions: for whatever Easiness it has pleas'd GOD to let us find in a matter, in which he shews the most ignorant, as well as the most learned, the plain way of Sal∣vation, yet would be not discharge any one of the Attention, he is capable of; and since the following Discourses had their Rise from the XIX and XX Articles of my Exposition, the reading of these two Articles, which will take up but half a quarter of an hour, will facilitate the Vnderstanding of all this Work, thô I moreover hope, that it is of it self sufficiently intelligible. Besides, the Reading of them will not be unuseful to Catholicks, who ordina∣rily too much neglect Books of Controversy. Grounded on the Faith of the Church, they are too careless in perusing such Works, by which their Faith might be con∣firm'd, and in which they might find means to reduce the Erring. This was not the Vse in the first Ages of the Church: the Treatises of Controversy, written by
the Fathers, were sought after by all the Faithful, Conversation being one of the Means, propos'd to us by the Holy Ghost for the gaining of Ʋnbelievers, every one endeavour'd to render his profitable and edifying by such Reading. The Truth in∣sinuated it self by so sweet a Means; and Conversation won those, whom a pre∣meditated Dispute would perhaps but have made more averse. But to the end the Works, we make of Controversy, may be read, as those of the Fathers were, let us endeavour, as the Fathers did, to fill them not only with exact and found Do∣ctrine, but also with Piety and Charity; and let us, as much as we can, correct the Dryness, not to say the Sourness, which is too often found in such Books.
A TABLE OF THE ARTICLES. CONFERENCE. I. THE Preparation to the Conference, and particular Instruction. p. 1 II. The Conference. p. 20 III. The Sequel of the Conference. p. 49 REFLEXIONS. THE first Reflexion, on Mr. Claude's Answer to the Acts extracted from the Discipline of the Pretended Reformed. p. 58 Second Reflexion, on one of the Propositions, acknowledg'd by Mr. Claude in the Con∣ference, and on the Examen, he prescribes after the Churches Judgment. p. 64 Third Reflexion, on another Proposition, acknowledg'd by Mr. Claude in the Confe∣rence: an Explication of the manner of instructing Christians, and that the Churches infallible Authority is necessary for the knowing and understanding the Scripture. p. 73 Fourth Reflexion, on Mr. Claude's objecting the same Difficulty to us about the Church, as we do to him about the Scripture. p. 76 Fifth Reflexion, on Mr. Claude's alledging here the Practice of the Greek Church, and the like: which is only to embroil the matter, and not to resolve the Difficulty. p. 78 Sixth Reflexion, on Mr. Claude's reducing, as much as he can, this Dispute to the Instruction of Children. p. 82 Seventh Reflexion, on Mr. Claude's saying in his Relation, that I appear'd embar∣rass'd in this part of the Dispute. p. 86 Eighth Reflexion, on another Proposition, acknowledg'd by Mr. Claude in the Con∣ference, where is shewn the manner, how all false Churches have been establisht. p. 88 Ninth Reflexion, on the Churches Visibility: that Mr. Claude opposes not the Do∣ctrin, I have explain'd, till he has first fram'd himself a false Idea of it. p. 91 Tenth Reflexion, on the Pretended Reformeds Confession of Faith; that it acknow∣ledges no Church, but what is visible, and that Mr. Claude satisfies not this Difficulty. p. 95 Eleventh Reflexion, on Mr. Claude's own acknowledgment of the Churches perpe∣tual Visibility: the surprizing Doctrin of this Minister. p. 99. Twelfth Reflexion. Two of Mr. Claude's principal Objections, resolv'd by his Doctrin. p. 104 Thirteenth and last Reflexion. Mr. Claude's Doctrin shews the Gentlemen of the Pretended Reformed Religion, that there is no Salvation for them, but in the Roman Church. p. 107
A CONFERENCE WITH Mr. CLAUDE Minister of CHARENTON, Concerning the AUTHORITY of the CHURCH. MADEMOISELLE de DURAS,I. The Prepa∣ration to the Confe∣rence, and particular Instruction. being in some Doubt about her Religion, caus'd me to be ask'd by several Persons of Quality; Whether I were willing to Confer with Mr. Claude in her Presence. I answer'd, I should very readily do it, if I saw that such a Conference were necessary for her Salvation. She afterwards, by the Duke of Richelieu, invited me to be at Pa∣ris on Tuesday the last of February 1678. and to enter into Conference the next day with this Minister, on the Subject she would speak to me about. This was to intimate to me, that she was willing to see me before the Conference. Being with her on the Day appointed, she acquainted me, That the Point, she desir'd to have clear'd with her Minister, was that of the Churches Authority, which seem'd to her to include the whole Controversy. She appear'd to me not likely to come to a Resolution without this Conference, so that I judg'd it ab∣solutely necessary.
I told her, she had indeed great Reason to lay her princi∣pal and whole Stress on this Article, which in effect compre∣heded the Decision of all the rest, as she herself had well observ'd; and endeavour'd to make her yet fuller understand the Importance of this Article. 'Tis a thing, said I to her, ordinary enough with your Ministers to brag, That they cannot be deny'd to believe the Fundamentals of the Faith. They say, that we believe all they believe; but that they believe not all we believe. Their Meaning by this is, That they have kept all the Fundamentals of the Faith, and rejected only what we have added to them. They draw thence a great Advantage, and pretend that their Doctrine is secure and indisputable. Mademoiselle de Duras remembred very well, she had often heard them use such Discourses. I will make, proceeded I, but one Remark upon this; which is, that, instead of granting them to believe all the Fundamentals of the Faith, we shew, that there is one Article of the Creed, they believe not, which is that of the Universal Church. 'Tis true, they say with the Mouth, I be∣lieve the Catholic or Universal Church, as the Arians, Macedoni∣ans, and Socinians say with the Mouth, I believe in JESƲS CHRIST, and in the Holy Ghost. But as there is reason to accuse them of not believing these Articles, because they be∣lieve them not, as they ought, nor according to their true Sense: so if we shew the Pretended Reformed, that they be∣lieve not, as they ought, the Article of the Catholic Church, we may truly say, that in effect they reject so important an Article of the Creed. Mademoiselle de Duras had read my Treatise of the Exposi∣tion, and told me, she remembred, that she had seen some∣thing in it, like to what I now said: but I answer'd, my Intention in that Treatise was to mention things very briefly, and that 'twas fit she should now see them a little more at large. You must know then, said I to her, what is meant by this Expression, The Catholic or Universal Church; and upon this I began to lay for my Ground, that in the Creed, which was only a bare Declaration of the Faith, this Term must be taken in its most proper, and most natural Signification, and such, as is most used amongst Christians. Now all Christians by the Name of the Church understand a Society, making Profession to be∣lieve
the Doctrine of JESƲS CHRIST, and govern it self by his Word. If this Society makes this Profession, 'tis con∣sequently visible. That this was the proper, and genuine Signification of the Word Church, such as was known by every one, and us'd in common Discourse, I desired no other Witnesses, than the Pre∣tended Reformed themselves. When they speak of their Ecclesiastical Prayers, of the Churches Discipline, of the Churches Faith, of the Pastors and Doctors of the Church, they mean not the Prayers of the Predestinate, nor their Discipline, nor their Faith; but the Prayers, Faith, and Discipline of all the Faithful, assembled in the exterior Society of GODs People. When they say, That a Man edifies the Church, or that he scandalizes the Church; that they receive one into the Church, or exclude one out of the Church, all this is undoubtedly under∣stood of the exterior Society of GODs People. Thus they explain it in the form of Baptism, when they say, that they are going to receive the Child into the Fellowship of the Christian Church; and when for this cause they oblige the Godfa∣thers and Godmothers to instruct the little one in the Doctrin re∣ceived by GOD's People, as it is, say they, summarily compris'd in the Confession of Faith, which we all have: And again, when they ask of GOD in their Ecclesiastical Prayers, to deliver all his Churches from the Throat of the ravening Wolves: And yet more expresly in the Confession of Faith, Article XXV. when they say, That the Order of the Church, which was established by JESVS CHRIST, must be sacred; and therefore that the Church cannot subsist, if there be not in it Pastors, who may have the charge to Teach: And in Article XXVI. That none ought to dr aside, but that all together ought to keep and maintain the Ʋnity of the Church, submitting to the common Instruction: And in fine, in Article XXVII. That we must carefully discern, which is the true Church; and that it is the Company of the Faithful, which agree to follow GODs Word, and the pure Religion, that depends on it. Whence they conclude Article XXVIII. That where GODs Word is not received, nor any Profession made of subjecting themselves to it, and where there is no use of the Sacraments, one cannot, to speak properly, judge, that there is a Church. 'Tis evident by all these Passages, and by the common Practice of the Pretended Reformed, that the proper, natural, and
generally us'd Signification of the Word Church, is to take it for the exterior Society of GODs People, amongst whom thô there be found some Hypocrites and Reprobates; their Malice, say they, cannot efface the Title of the Church, Article XXVII. That is, The Hypocrites, mix'd in the Exterior Society of GODs People, cannot take from it the Title of the true Church, provided it be always vested with these exterior Marks, the making Profession of GODs Word, and the Use of the Sacraments, as is said in Article XXVIII. This is the Acceptation of the Word Church, when we speak simply, naturally, and properly, without Contention or Dis∣pute; and if this be the ordinary manner of taking this Word, we have reason to say, that 'twas in this Sense, the Apostles made use of it in their Creed, where they were to speak in the most ordinary and simple manner, as being to inclose in few Words the Confession of the Fundamentals of the Faith. In effect, this Word Church has in the common Discourse of all Christians been taken to signify this exterior Society of GODs People. When by this Word Church is intended the Socie∣ty of the Predestinate, 'tis so express'd, and they say the Church of the Predestinate. When by this Word is meant the Assembly and Church of the First-born,Heb. xii. v. 23. which are written in Heaven, 'tis ex∣presly nam'd, as we see in St. Paul. He takes here the Word Church in a less used Signification, for the City of the Living GOD, the Heavenly Jerusalem, where is an innumerable company of Angels, and Spirits of just Men made perfect; that is, for Hea∣ven, where the holy Souls are gathered together. Wherefore he adds a word to mark out this Church; that is, the Church of the First-born, who have preceded their Brethren in Glory. But when we use the word Church simply without adding any thing, the common Practice of all Christians, not excepting the pretended Reformed themselves, takes it for to signify the As∣sembly, the Society, the Communion of those, that confess the true Doctrin of JESUS CHRIST. And whence pro∣ceeds this Custom of all Christians, but from the Holy Scri∣pture? where we see in effect the word Church commonly taken in this Sense; so that this cannot be deny'd to be the ordina∣ry and natural Signification of this Word. The word Ecclesia (which we render Church) originally sig∣nifies an Assembly, and was principally attributed to the As∣semblies, heretofore held by the People for the discussing of
publick Affairs. And this word is us'd in this Sense in the nineteenth Chapter of the Acts, when the People of Ephesus were assembled in Fury against St. Paul:Act. XIX. v. 32. v. 39. v. 40. the Assembly (Ecclesia) was confus'd. And again: If ye enquire any thing concerning other Matters, it shall be determin'd in a lawful Assembly (Ecclesia.) And in fine. When he had thus spoken, he dismiss'd the Assembly (Ecclesiam.) This was the use of the word Ecclesia (Church) amongst the Greeks, and in Gentilism. The Jews and Christians after∣wards made use of it to signify the Assembly, the Society, the Community of GODs People, which makes Profession to serve him. There is none, but knows that famous Version of the Seventy, who translated the old Testament into Greek some Ages before the coming of JESUS CHRIST. Of above fifty Passages, where this Word is found to be made use of in their Translation, there is not any one, in which it is not taken for some visible Assembly, and very few, in which it is not taken for the exterior Society of GODs People. In this sense also St. Stephen makes use of it, when he says, that Moses was in the Church in the Wilderness,Acts VII. v. 38. with the Angel which spake to him, calling by this name Church, according to the Usage re∣ceiv'd amongst the Jews, the visible Society of GODs Peo∣ple. The Christians took this word from the Jews, and kept it in the same Sense, using it to signify the Assembly of those, that confess'd JESUS CHRIST, and made Profession of his Doctrine. This is, what is simply call'd the Church, or the Church of GOD and JESUS CHRIST: And of above an hundred Passages, where this word is made use of in the New Testa∣ment, there are scarce two or three, where this Signification is contested by the Ministers; and even in the Places, where they contest it, 'tis manifest, they do it without reason. For Example, they will not have this place of St. Paul, where he says,Eph. V. v. 27. that JESƲS CHRIST presented to himself a glori∣ous Church, not having Spot, or Wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it is holy, and without Blemish: This Place, I say, they will not have it possible to be understood of the visible Church, nor yet of the Church on Earth, because the Church, so consider'd, is so far from being without Blemish, that it stands in dai∣ly need of this Prayer, Forgive us our Sins. And I say on the
contrary, that to affirm, this glorious and unspotted Church is not the visible Church, is manifestly to contradict the Apostle. For see,v. 25, 26. of what Church St. Paul speaks: 'Tis of that, which JESƲS CHRIST loved, and gave himself for it: that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of Water, by the Word. This Church, washt in Water, and purify'd by Bap∣tism; this Church, sanctify'd by the word of Life, whether by that of Preaching, or by that, which is made use of in the Sacraments, this Church is without doubt the visible Church. The holy Society of the Predestinate is not excluded from it, GOD forbid: They are the most noble part of it; but they are compris'd in this whole. They are there instructed by the Word, they are there purify'd by Baptism; and often al∣so some of the Reprobate are employ'd in these Ministeries. They must then be consider'd in this Passage, not as making a Bo∣dy apart; but as making the fairest and most noble part of this exterior Society. 'Tis this Society, which the Apostle calls the Church. JESUS CHRIST without doubt loves it: for he has given it Baptism; he has shed his Blood to assemble it; there is not any one either call'd, justify'd, or baptiz'd in this Church, who is not called, justify'd, and baptiz'd in the Name, and by the Merits of JESUS CHRIST. This Church is glorious, because she glorifies GOD, because she declares to all the Earth the Glory of JESUS CHRISTs Gospel and Cross. This Church is Holy, because she always, constantly, and without varying, teaches the holy Doctrin, which continually brings forth Saints in her Unity. This Church has neither Spot nor Wrinkle, because she has neither any Error, nor any evil Maxim; and moreover because she instructs and contains in her Bosom the Elect of GOD, who, thô Sinners on Earth, find in her Communion exterior Means to purify themselves, so that they shall one day come in a most perfect Estate before JESUS CHRIST. This perhaps is the only Place, in which it may with some shew of Probability be said, That the word Church, taken simp∣ly, signifies something else than the exterior Society of GODs People; and yet you see, how clear it is, that it ought to be understood as all the others. But should this Passage, and two or three more, have a Sig∣nification either Doubtful, or even different from this, yet are all the other conformable to it. For what is there more fre∣quent,
than such Expressions as these, That the Church must be edify'd, that the Church has been persecuted, that GOD is praised in the midst of the Church, that she is saluted, that she is visited, that there are Pastors and Bishops establisht to govern her, and other like, the number of which is infinite? It cannot then be deny'd, that this is the ordinary Significa∣tion of the word Church, and consequently that, which is to be follow'd in so plain a Confession of Faith, as is the Apostles Creed. In this Sense was it taken by a whole great Council,Conc. Ni. post Symb. the first and holiest of all the Universal Councils, when condemn∣ing Arius, it pronounc'd in this manner: The holy Catholic and Apostolic Church anathematizes all those, who say, That the Son of GOD was drawn out of nothing. 'Tis JESUS CHRIST himself, who taught us to be∣lieve the Church in this Sense. For to found this Church, he came forth from the invisible Bosom of his Father, and rendred himself visible to Men; he assembled about him a So∣ciety of Men, that acknowledg'd him for their Master: This is, what he call'd his Church. To this Primitive Church the Faithful, who afterwards believ'd, congregated themselves, and thence sprung the Church, which the Creed terms Catholic or Universal. JESUS CHRIST us'd the word Church to signify this visible Society, when he said himself, that we must hear the Church.Mat. xviii. v. 17. Tell it unto the Church: And again when he said: Thou art Peter,Mat. xvi. v. 18. and upon this Rock I will build my Church: and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. Why, said I, Madam, why will not they of your Religion understand here by the word Church, the Society of those that make Profession to believe in JESUS CHRIST and the Gospel, since it is certain, that this Society is in effect the true Church, against which Hell could never prevail, neither when it made use of Tyrants to persecute her, nor when it set false Doctors on work to corrupt her? Hell shall not prevail against the Predestinate; 'tis cer∣tain: For if it cannot prevail against this exterior Society, with much greater Reason shall it not prevail against the E∣lect of GOD, who are the purest and most spiritual part of this Church. But by the same Reason, that it cannot pre∣vail against the Elect, it cannot prevail against the Church,
which teaches them, in which they confess the Gospel, and receive the Sacraments. 'Tis this exterior Society, in which the Elect serve GOD, that we ought to understand by the word Church, and at the same time admire the invincible Force of JESUS CHRIST's Promises, who has so supported the Society of his People, thô weak in comparison of the Infidels, which environ'd it without; thô torn by Heretics, who divided it within, that there has not been so much as one sole Moment, in which this Church has not been seen by the whole Earth. But the Pretended Reformed have not dar'd to retain this na∣tural Sense of the Gospel. For, that they might establish themselves, they have been forc'd to say in their Confession of Faith, Article XXXI. That the State of the Church was inter∣rupted, and that they were fain to raise it up again anew, because it was in Ruine and Desolation. In effect, when their Church was set up, it entred not into Communion with any other Church, then extant on the Earth; but was form'd by breaking with all the Christian Churches, which were in the World. They have not then the Consolation, which the Catholics have to see JESUS CHRIST's Promise visibly accomplisht, and maintain'd, during so many Ages. They cannot shew a Church, which has ever been, since JESUS CHRIST came to build it on the Rock; and to save his Word, they are oblig'd to have recourse to a Church of the Predestinate, which nei∣ther themselves, nor any else can shew. But JESUS CHRIST would shew something illustrious and clear, when he said, that his Church, maugre the Opposition of Hell, should be always invincible: he would, I say, shew something clear and resplendent, which might serve in all Ages for a sensible and palpable Assurance of the immutable Certainty of his Promises. And in effect, let us consider, when he spake this Word: Thou art Peter,Mat. xvi. v. 18. and upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. 'Twas, when having askt his Apostles, Whom say ye, that I am? Peter in the Name of them all answer'd him, Thou art CHRIST the Son of the living GOD. Upon this illustrious Confession of Faith, which Flesh and Blood had not dictated, but the Heavenly Father had reveal'd
to Peter; upon this illustrious Confession of Faith, I say, is founded both St. Peters Dignity, and the Churches immoveable Firmness. This Church, which confesses JESUS CHRIST to be the true Son of GOD, is that, against which Hell shall never prevail, and which shall subsist without Interruption, mau∣gre all the Efforts and Artifices of the Devil. It appears then clearly, that the Church, of which JESUS CHRIST speaks in this place, is a confessing Church, a Church, that publishes the Faith, and consequently an exterior and vi∣sible Church. See also what he adds: And I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven:Ibid. v. 19. And whatsoever thou shalt bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven: And whatsoever thou shalt loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. Whatever is to be understood by these Words, whether Preaching, Ecclesiastical Censures, or the Ministery of Priests in the Sacrament of Penance, as Catholics understand them, 'tis still certain, That here is an exterior Ministery given to this Church: 'Tis then this Church, which confesses the Faith, and confesses it principally by the Mouth of St. Peter: 'Tis this Church, that uses the Ministery of the Keys: 'Tis she, that shall always be on the Earth, without Hells ever being able to prevail against her. And because JESUS CHRIST would have her alwaies vi∣sibly subsist, he has cloth'd her with sensible Marks, which are always to continue. For see, how he sends his Apostles, and what he says to 'em at his ascending into Heaven: Go ye therefore and teach all Nations,Matt. xxviii. v. 19, 20. baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: And lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the World: Teaching with you, baptizing with you, instructing with you my Faithful to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded, consequent∣ly exercising with you in my Church an exterior Ministery: 'Tis with you; 'Tis with those, who shall succeed you; 'Tis with the Society, assembled under their Conduct, that I shall be from this present even to the Consummation of the World; alway; without Interruption: For there shall not be any one Moment, in which I will leave you, but thô absent in Body, I will be always present by my Holy Spirit. In Consequence of this Word, St. Paul also tells us, that the Ecclesiastical Ministery shall last without any Discontinuance,
till the general Resurrection. He that descended, is the same al∣so that ascended up far above all Heavens,Eph. iv. v. 10, 11, 12, 13. that he might fill all things. And he gave some, Apostles: and some, Prophets: and some, Evangelists: and some, Pastors and Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, for the Edifying of the Body of CHRIST: Till we all come in the Ʋnity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of GOD, unto a perfect Man, unto the measure of the Stature of the fulness of CHRIST; That is to say, till we have attain'd the Perfection of JESUS CHRIST, glorify'd in Body and Soul: This is the Term, which GOD has set to the Ecclesiastical Ministery. The Pretended Reformed will not have the visible Church to be that, which is call'd JESUS CHRISTs Body: Which is then that Body, where GOD has establish'd some Apostles: some Prophets: and some Pastors and Teachers? Which is that Body, where GOD has plac'd several Members, and different Graces,Rom. xii. v. 4, &c. The Grace of Ministery, the Grace of Teaching, the Grace of Exhortation and Consolation, the Grace of Ruling? Which, I say, is that Body, if it be not the visible Church? But that, which makes the Pretended Reformed unwilling to acknowledge, that the Body of JESUS CHRIST, so much recommended in the Scripture, can be the visible Church, is their being constrain'd to say, that the visible Church some∣times ceases to be upon the Earth; and they have an Hor∣ror to say, that JESUS CHRISTs Body is not always, for fear of putting JESUS CHRIST once again to death. 'Tis then without Difficulty this Assembly of Pastors and People; 'tis this Church compos'd of so many divers Mem∣bers, by whom so many Holy Ministeries are exteriorly ex∣ercis'd; 'tis this that is called JESUS CHRISTs Body; 'twas to this Body, assembled under the Ministery of Pastors, that he said at his ascending into Heaven; Lo, I am with you al∣way, even unto the end of the World. He then, that descended, is the same that ascended, to the end he might fill all things, Heaven by his Person and his visible Presence, Earth by his Spirit and his invisible Assistance, both the one and the other by his Truth and his Word. And, 'twas for to continue (at his ascent into Heaven) this Assistance, promis'd to his Church, that he plac'd some Apostles, some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers: A thing, which must last till such time, as the Work of GOD is entirely accomplish'd, till we are
all perfect Men, and till the whole Body of the Church be arriv'd at the Fulness and Perfection of JESUS CHRIST. Thus JESUS CHRISTs Work is eternal on the Earth. The Church, founded on the Confession of the Faith, shall always be, and always confess the Faith: Her Ministery shall be e∣ternal: She shall bind and loose even to the end of the World, Hell never being able to hinder her: she shall never disconti∣nue the Teaching of Nations: The Sacraments, that is, the exterior Liveries, with which she is clad, shall last for ever. Teach and baptize the Nations,1. Cor. xi. v. 26. and I shall be alway with you. As often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do shew the Lords Death till he come. With the Supper shall last the Con∣fession of the Faith, the Ecclesiastical Ministery, and the exte∣rior and interior Communion of the Faithful with JESUS CHRIST, and of the Faithful amongst themselves, till such time as JESUS CHRIST comes. The duration of the Church, and of the Ecclesiastical Ministery has no other Limits. 'Tis not then only the Society of the Predestinate, that shall subsist for ever; 'tis the visible Body, in which the Pre∣destinate are included, which preaches to them, which teaches them, which regenerates them by Baptism, which nourishes them by the Eucharist, which administers to them the Keys, which governs them and keeps them united under Discipline, which forms JESUS CHRIST in them: 'Tis this visible Body, that shall subsist for ever. And 'tis for this reason, that in the Apostles Creed, where the Grounds of the Faith are propos'd to our Belief, we are at the same time taught to believe in the Father, and in the Son, and in the Holy Ghost, and to believe the Holy Catho∣lic Church, and the Communion of Saints: The interior Communion by Charity, and in the Holy Ghost, who ani∣mates us, I acknowledge it; but at the same time also the exterior Communion in the Sacraments, in the Confession of Faith, and in all the exterior Ministery of the Church. And all, that we have now said, is included in this Word, I believe the Ʋniversal Church. We believe her at all times; she is then always: We believe her at all times; she always then teaches the Truth. Your Ministers will have us believe, that 'tis one thing to believe the Church, that is, to believe, that she is; and ano∣ther thing to believe or give credit to the Church, that is, to
believe all her Decisions. But this is a frivolous Distinction. He, who believes, that the Church always is, believes, that she is always confessing and teaching the Truth. 'Tis to this Church, which confesses the Truth, that JESUS CHRIST has promis'd, Hell shall not prevail against her. The Truth then shall never fail to be confess'd in her; and consequently in believing, that she is, we are assur'd, that she is always credible. In effect, the retaining some Points of JESUS CHRIST's Doctrine is not sufficient to preserve the Name of Church: For then the Arians, the Pelagians, the Donatists, the Ana∣baptists, and the Socinians would be of the Church. They are not however: GOD forbid, that we should call this Confu∣sion by the Name of Church! The Church must not then only keep some Truth: She must keep and teach all Truth; else she is not the Church. Nor is it to any purpose to distinguish the fundamental Ar∣ticles from the others. For all, that GOD has reveal'd, must be retain'd. He has reveal'd nothing to us, that is not very important for our Salvation.Isai. xlviii. v. 17. I am the Lord, which teacheth thee profitable things. In the Faith then, which the Church teaches, must be found the fulness of the Truths, reveal'd by GOD: Otherwise she is no longer the Church, that JESUS CHRIST founded. That particular Persons may be ignorant of some Articles, I easily confess; but the Church conceals nothing of what JESUS CHRIST has reveal'd: And therefore the Faithful, who are ignorant of certain Articles in particular, confess them nevertheless all in general, when they say: I believe the Ʋni∣versal Church. This, said I, is the Church, which your Ministers know not. They teach you, that this visible and exterior Church may cease to be upon the Earth; they teach you, that she may err in her Decisions; they teach you, that to believe this Church, is to believe Men: But 'tis not in this manner, that the Church is propos'd to us in the Creed. 'Tis there pro∣pos'd to us to believe her, as we believe in the Father, and in the Son, and in the Holy Ghost; and therefore the Faith of the Church is joyn'd with the Faith of the three Divine Persons. These things having been said at several times, but almost in
this Order, I added, that our Doctrin on this Point was so true, that the Pretended Reformed, who deny'd it, could not wholly reject it: That is, their Synods acted in such a man∣ner, as shew'd, that they requir'd (as well as we) an abso∣lute Submission to the Authority and Decrees of the Church. Here I let Mademoiselle de Duras see the four Acts of the Gentlemen of the Pretended Reformed Religion, which I have taken notice of in the Exposition, Article XX. She had read them there; but I caused her to read them in the very Book of the Discipline. The first is taken out of the Vth. Chapter, Title of Con∣sistories, Article XXXI. Where 'tis said, That Disputes about Doctrine should be determin'd by GODs Word, if it might be in the Consistory; if not, the matter should be brought before the Col∣loquy, thence to the Provincial Synod, and in fine to the National, where the full and final Resolution should be made by GODs Word, to which if any one refus'd to submit with an express disclaiming of his Errors, he should be cut off from the Church. 'Tis not then, said I, to GODs Word alone precisely, as such, that the full and final Resolution belongs, since after it is propos'd, an Appeal is permitted; but to GODs Word, in as much as explicated and interpreted by the Churches last Judgment. The second Act is taken out of the Synod of Vitré, related in the Book of the Discipline. It contains the Letter of Mission, which all the Churches make, when they send Deputies to the National Synod: See the Terms of it. We promise before GOD to submit our selves, to whatsoever shall be resolv'd in your Holy Assembly, being perswaded, that GOD will preside in it, and guide you by his Holy Spirit in all Truth and Equity, thrô the Rule of his Word. This Perswasion, said I, if it be grounded only on an human Presumption, cannot be the matter of so solemn an Oath, by which they swear to submit to a Reso∣lution, they do not yet know: It cannot then be founded but upon an express Promise, That the Holy Ghost will preside in the last Judgment of the Church; and Catholics say no more. The third Act, which is found also in the same Book of the Discipline, is the Condemnation of the Independents on their saying, That every Church ought to govern it self without de∣pendance on any one in Ecclesiastical Matters. This Proposition was in the Synod of Charenton declar'd as prejudicial to the
State, as to the Church. 'Twas there judg'd, That it open'd the Door to all sorts of Irregularities and Extravagances, took away all Remedies, and made way for the forming as many Religions, as Parishes. But, said I, whatever Synods are held, if we do not believe our selves oblig'd to submit our Judgments to them, we cannot avoid the Inconveniences of the Independents, and the leaving a Door open for the setting up as many Religi∣ons, I do not say as there are Parishes, but as there are Heads. We must then come to this Obligation of submitting our Judgment to what the Catholic Church teaches. These three Acts are taken out of the Book of the Disci∣pline, printed at Charenton in the year 1667. The fourth is found in a Book of Mr. Blondes's, Intitled Actes Autentiques, printed at Amsterdam by Blaeu in the year 1655. 'Tis a Resolution of the National Synod of Sainte Foy 1578. which names four Ministers to meet at an Assembly, where was to be treated a Re-union with the Lutherans, by framing a Formulary of Profession of the common Faith. Power was given to these Ministers to decide all Points of Doctrin and others, that should be brought into Deliberation, and to consent to this Confession of Faith, even without communicating any farther about it with the Churches, if the Time permitted not to do it. From this Act I concluded two things: One, That the whole Synod trusted their Faith in the Hands of four private Persons, a thing far more extraordinary, than to see particulars submit to the whole Church: The other, That the Pretended Reformed Church is yet but little assur'd of her Confession of Faith, since she consents to the changing it, and that in Points so important, as are those, that make the Dispute with the Lutherans, one of which is the Reality. If the Pretended Reformed hop'd, that the Lutherans would return to them, there was no need of a new Confession of Faith. What was then intended, was, That both the one and the other continuing in their Senti∣ments, there should be fram'd a Confession of Faith, in which both Parties might agree; which could not be done without adding or suppressing something essential in a Confession of Faith, which they give us, as teaching only the pure Word of GOD. Mademoiselle de Duras acknowledged to me, that having seen in my Treatise these Acts and my Reflections, which are the
same with these I now made, she knew not what to answer to 'em; and that therefore she desir'd to hear what Answer Mr. Claude would make, as well upon these Acts, as upon the other Difficulties, that regarded the Authority of the Church. I told her, That thô those of her Religion acted, as holding the Churches Authority infallible and indisputable; yet 'twas true, That they deny'd this Infallibility: and I added, That 'twas a constant Maxim in her Religion, That every private Person, how ignorant soever, was oblig'd to believe, That he could understand the Holy Scripture better than all the Coun∣cils, and all the rest of the Church together. She seem'd asto∣nisht at this Proposition. But I added, That there was yet believ'd in her Religion something far more strange; which was, That there is a Point of Time, when a Christian is ob∣lig'd to doubt, whether the Scripture was inspir'd by GOD; whether the Gospel is a Truth or a Fable; whether JESUS CHRIST was a Deceiver, or a Teacher of the Truth. When she appear'd yet more amaz'd at this Proposi∣tion, I assur'd her, that both this and the other, I just before mention'd, were necessary Consequences of the Doctrin, re∣ceiv'd in their Religion, concerning the Churches Authority; and that I doubted not, but I could force Mr. Claude to own 'em. I declar'd to her the Reasons of my Assertion, and shew'd her at the same time what a Mark of Falsity 'twas amongst them, to see, how on one side they deny'd, that we must be∣lieve without examining, what the Church decided; and that on the other they were fain, for the establishing of Order, to attribute to the Church the Authority, they had deny'd her. She let me know, that she understood this Discourse; and that she remembred, she had read it in my Book; but that, thô she saw not any way to answer it, she could scarce be∣lieve, but that 'twas answer'd in her Religion. The Countess de Roye came to tell her, that Mr. Claude, who had promis'd to meet me the next day, could not do it, having receiv'd a Prohibition. Mademoiselle de Duras testify'd a very great Discontent at this Proceeding. I would have retir'd and left her with her Sister; but she requested me to repeat what I had just before represented to her. I did it in a few words, and answer'd some Objections, that were made me.
The next Morning Mademoiselle de Duras came to my House with a worthy Person of her Religion, whom I knew, nam'd Mr. Coton. She had made use of him to engage Mr. Claude to the Conference, and he brought her word, that Mr. Claude had accepted it. She desir'd me to repeat, what I had said the day before. I did so, and Mr. Coton confess'd, he knew not what to answer, and that he had a great Passion to hear Mr. Claude upon this Point. He and Mademoiselle de Duras made me some Objections concerning the frequent Revolts of the People of Israel, who had so often forsaken GOD, the Kings and all the People, as the Holy Scripture speaks; during which, the publick Worship was so extinct, that Elijah thought him∣self the only Servant of GOD, till he learnt from GOD him∣self, that he had reserv'd to himself seven thousand men,1 Kin. xix. v. 18. which had not bow'd the Knee unto Baal. To this I answer'd, That for what regarded Elijah, there was no difficulty, since 'twas apparent from the very words, that it concern'd only Israel, where Elijah prophecy'd, and that the Divine Worship was so far from being at that time extinct in Juda, that 'twas there under the Reign of Josaphat in the greatest lustre, it had been since Solomon's time. The thing pass'd for manifest, and I observ'd only, how little Sincerity there was in the Ministers to produce still this passage, after the Cardinal du Perron had given it so decisive an Answer. As to what hapned in Juda it self, I would yet make the Objection stronger than they had propos'd it, by considering the State of GODs People under Ahaz,2 Kin. xvi. 2 Chron. xxviij. who shut up the Temple, caus'd Ʋrijah the Priest of the Lord to sacrifice to Idols, and fill'd all JERƲSALEM with Abominations; and afterwards under Manasseh,2 Kin. xxi. 2 Chron. xxxiij. whose Impieties transcended those of Ahaz. But to shew, that all this made nothing to the question, I desir'd 'em only to observe, that Isaiah, who liv'd during all the Reign of Ahaz, for all these Abominations of the King, of the Priest Ʋrijah, and almost all the People, never separated from the Communion of Juda, no more than did the rest of the Prophets, who liv'd at the same time, and in all the other: which shews, that there is always a People of GOD, from whose Communion 'tis never lawful to sepa∣rate. 'Tis written also,2 Kin. xxi. v. 10. that in the time of Manasseh, GOD spake by the Mouth of all his Prophets, and threatned this impious
and all the People. But these Prophets, who reprehended and detested the Impieties of this People, separated not from the Communion. And to see into the bottom of the Matter, we must, said I, consider the Constitution of the ancient People. It had this peculiar to it self, that it was multiply'd by carnal Generation, by which as well the Succession of the People, as of the Priest∣hood was kept up; that this People bore in their Flesh the Mark of the Covenant, to wit, Circumcision, which we do not read to have been ever discontinu'd; and so, thô the Priests, and almost all the People should have prevaricated, the State of GODs People subsisted always in its exterior form, whether they would or no. Nor could there fall out any interruption in the Priesthood, which GOD had ty'd to Aaron's Family. But 'tis not so with the new People, whose exterior Form consists in nothing, but the Profession of JESUS CHRISTs Doctrine: so that if the Confession of the true Faith should be extinct for one only Moment, the Church, which has no Succession but by the continuance of this Profession, would be wholly extinct without any possibility of ever rising again either in its People, or Pastors, but by a new Mission. I added besides, that I would not say, the true Faith and true Worship of GOD could be wholly abolisht in the Peo∣ple of Israel, so that GOD had no more any true Servants on Earth. But I find on the contrary, first that 'tis clear, that, maugre the Corruption, GOD still reserv'd to himself a suffici∣ent Number of Servants, who participated not in the Idolatry. For if it were so in Israel, which was schismatical and separa∣ted from GODs People, as GOD himself declar'd to Elijah, it must with far greater reason have been so in Judah, which GOD had reserv'd to himself for the perpetuating his Peo∣ple and Kingdom till the Time of the Messias. When there∣fore it is written, that the King and all the People had forsaken GOD Law, it must not be understood of all the People with∣out exception, but of a great Part, and perhaps of the great∣est Part, which the▪ Ministers did not deny. Secondly, 'Tis not to be imagin'd, that GODs Servants and the true Faith were preserv'd only in secret; but that in all the succession of the ancient People, the true Doctrine always shone forth. For there was a continual Succession of Prophets, who instead
of adhering to the Peoples Errors, or dissembling them, ro up against them with force; and this Succession was so con∣stant, that the Holy Ghost fears not to say,2 Chron. xxxvi. v. 15. That GOD rose up night and morning, and daily admonisht the People by the Mouth of his Prophets:Jer. xi. v. 7. xxv. v. 3, 4. the forciblest expression, that can be imagin'd, to shew, that the true Faith was never so much as one mo∣ment without Publication, nor the People without advertise∣ment. And that 'twas so, we just now saw, how in all the Reign of Ahaz, Isaiah ceas'd not to prophesy: and under Ma∣nasseh, when the Abomination seem'd to be mounted to the highest, since neither the Penitence of that King, nor the Holiness of his Grandchild Josiah could revoke the Sentence given against this People, GOD always remembring the A∣bominations of Manasseh: in this time, I say, we have seen, that GOD made his Prophets speak; and that a great part of the People publickly follow'd them, appears, in that this im∣pious Prince fill'd Jerusalem with innocent Blood,2 Kin. xxi. v. 16. a certain sign, that he found a great resistance to his Idolatries. 'Tis also held, that he caus'd Isaiah to be put to Death, as his Predecessors had done the other Prophets, who reprehended them; and this History is conserv'd in the ancient Tradition, conforma∣ble to the Word of our Lord, who upbraids the Jows with having kill'd the Prophets, and to the Discourse of St. Stephen, who says,Mat. xxiii. v. 31, 37. Act. vii. v. 52. That there was not any Prophet but they persecuted. These Prophets made a part of GODs People; these Pro∣phets kept a considerable part both of the Priests and People in their Duty; these Prophets, who confirm'd their Mission by visible Miracles, hindred the Corruption from gaining all; and whilst a terrible Multitude, and perhaps the Gross of the Synagogue was drawn unto Idolatry, they kept the Tradition of the Truth in the People of Israel. Ezekiel, who appear'd a little after, shews it, when he speaks of the Priests the Levites,Ezek. xliv. v. 15. the Sons of Zadok, that kept the charge of the Sanctuary, when the Children of Israel went astra. They, proceeds he, shall come near to me to minister unto me, and they shall stand before me to offer unto me the  and the Blood, saith the Lord GOD. This Succession, not only that of the Flesh, but also that of the Faith and the Ministery, was conserv'd in those Priests and these Levites, whom GODs Grace and the Prophet's Preaching had retain'd in the Service.
And 'tis to be observ'd, That GOD never made this Mi∣nistery of the Prophets more illustrious, than when Impiety seem'd to have gain'd the upper hand; so that in the time when the ordinary means of instructing the People was not destroy'd, but obscur'd, GOD prepar'd the extraordinary and miraculous Means. To this may be added, That this extraordinary Means, to wit, the Prophetical Ministery, was before the Captivity in a manner ordinary with GODs People, where the Prophets made as 'twere an Order always subsisting, whence GOD continually drew Divine Men, by whose Mouth he spake loudly and publickly to all his People. From the Return of the Captivity to JESUS CHRIST, there was no more any publick and lasting Idolatry. We know what hapned under Antiochus the Illustrious; but we know also the Zeal of Mattathias, and the great number of true Be∣lievers, that joyn'd to his House, with the famous Victories of Judas Maccabeus and his Brethren; under them and their Successors the Profession of the true Faith continu'd to JESUS CHRIST. At last the Pharisees introduc'd into the Religion and Worship many Superstitions. As the Corruption was about to prevail, JESUS CHRIST appear'd in the World. 'Till his coming the Religion was preserv'd, the Doctors of the Law had many pernicious Maxims and Practices, which crept in and got ground by little and little: they became common, but they were not pass'd into Doctrines of the Syna∣gogue. Wherefore JESUS CHRIST also said:Mat. xxiii. v. 2, 3. The Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses Seat, All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do; but do not ye after their Works. He ceas'd not to honour the Ministery of the Priests: He sent the Lepers to 'em according to the Prescript of the Law: He frequented the Temple, and reprehending the Abuses, continud always joyn'd to the Communion of GODs People, and the Order of the Publick Ministery. In fine, the time of the Fall and Reprobation of the an∣cient People, foretold by the Scriptures and Prophets, came, when the Synagogue condemn'd JESƲS CHRIST and his Doctrine. But then JESƲS CHRIST had appear'd, he had begun in the Bosom of the Synagogue to assemble his Church, which was to subsist for ever.
'Tis then manifest, first, That there was always a visible Body of GODs People, continu'd by an uninterrupted Suc∣cession, from the Communion of whom 'twas never lawful to separate. Secondly, Always a Succession of High Priests and Priests descended from Aaron, and Levites issued from Levi; so that there was never any need of GODs raising up People in an extraordinary manner. Thirdly, 'Tis no less evident, That the true Faith has always been publickly declar'd, and that there cannot be any one moment assign'd, in which the Profession of it has not been as clear as the Light of the Sun: a thing, which shews, how much they are deceiv'd, who be∣lieve, that, for to keep up the exterior State of the Church, 'tis sufficient, that one can name from time to time pretended Teachers of the Truth. For if there be any Time, that the Profession of Faith has ceas'd in the Church, her Condition is so much worse than that of the Synagogue, as she loses from that moment the Succession, as I erewhile said. After I had spoken these things, there was some time em∣ploy'd in passing them over again: and in the mean time the Countess de Roye came to tell us, That Mr. Claude consented to the Conference, which, if I lik'd it, should be at her House about Three a Clock. I Was at the Rendez-vous,II. The Confe∣rence. where I met Mr. Claude. We began by mutual Civilities, and he on his part testify'd a great Respect. After this, I entred into the Matter, by demand∣ing the Explication of the four Acts, transcrib'd in my Book, and mention'd here before. After I had in few words explain'd the Difficulty, as it is propos'd in the Exposition, and repeated, what I had said to Mademoiselle de Duras, I added, That Mr. Claude ought to be so much the more ready to answer it, in that what I said, was not at all new to him, since in all appearance the Treatise of the Exposition had faln into his hands; and that 'twas a great satisfaction, in an Entertainment of the Nature of this, to be assur'd, there would be no Surprise. Mr. Claude took up the Discourse, and having reiterated all his former Civilities in terms yet more obliging, he declar'd at first, that all I had objected from their Discipline and Synods in my Treatise, and also at present, was very sincerely rela∣ted,
without any alteration of the Words: But for the Sense he desired Leave to tell me, That, thô there were, as I had observed, divers Degrees establisht in the Jurisdiction, the force of the Decision ought wholly to be refer'd to GODs Word alone. As to what I objected, That GODs Word had been propos'd in the Consistory, from which one might appeal, whence it follow'd, as I inferr'd, that the last Decision, from which there was no more appealing, belong'd to GODs Word, not taken in it self, but inasmuch as declar'd by the Churches last Judgment: This was not their Intent; for they held, That the Decision wholly appertain'd to GODs Word alone, which the Church in her Assemblies both first and last did but shew and point to: But that these divers Degrees had been establisht to give those, who err'd, leisure to bethink themselves. Wherefore they proceeded not at first by Excom∣munication, the Consistory hoping, that a greater Assembly, such as the Colloquy might be, and afterwards the Provincial Synod, compos'd of a greater number of Persons, perhaps more respected, or at least less suspected by the Gain-sayer, would dispose him to hear the Truth. That the Colloquy and the Provincial Synod us'd like Moderation thrô the same Reason of Charity; but after the National Synod had spoken, as 'twas the last human Remedy, there was no longer any thing to be hop'd, and that they proceeded also to the last Sentence, by making use of Excommunication, as the last Ef∣fort of the Ecclesiastical Power. That 'twas not thence to be concluded, that the National Synod held it self any more In∣fallible than the precedent Assemblies; but only, that, after all had been try'd, they came to the last Remedy. That for the Promise made before the National Synod, 'twas founded only on the Hopes they had, that the Assembly would follow GODs Word, and that the Holy Ghost would preside in it, which signify'd not, that there was an entire Cer∣tainty; and besides that the Word, being persuaded, was an honest manner of expressing a Condition without weakning the Reverence of so great an Assembly, or the favorable Presum∣ption, that ought to be had for their Proceedings. As to the Condemnation of the Independents, he pray'd me∣to observe, that touching the Authority of the Church and her Assemblies, there was something, in which those of his
Religion agreed with us, and something, in which they agreed with the Independents: With us, That Ecclesiastical Assemblies are necessary and useful, and that some Subordination must be establisht: With the Independents, That these Assemblies, how numerous soever, are not therefore Infallible. This being so, they were oblig'd to condemn the Independents, who deny'd not only the Infallibility, but also the Utility and Necessity of these Assemblies, and this Subordination. 'Tis in this, said he, that Independency consists. He added, That to maintain it, was in effect to overthrow Order, and make way for as many Reli∣gions, as there were Parishes, because all means of Agreeing were taken away by it. Whence he concluded, That thô they agreed Ecclesiastical Assemblies not to be Infallible Means, yet 'twas sufficient for the maintaining of them, and condemning the Independents, that they were useful ones. For the Synod of Sainte Foy, the Matter there agitated was either to render the Lutherans more tractable by making them, said he, approach to us; or however to establish a mutual Toleration; which oblig'd us not to suppress any thing in, or add any thing to the Confession of Faith, which was al∣ways held for unalterable. And that besides, thô full Power was given to four Ministers, yet I well knew, that such Acts were always subject to Ratification, in case the Proxies went beyond their Instructions: Witness the Ratifications necessary in the Treaties, agreed by the Plenipotentiaries of Princes, and other like Examples, in which there is always a Conditi∣on to obtain the Princes Ratification, a Condition, which, without being exprest, is naturally fixt to such Procurati∣ons. After he had said these things in a Discourse of sufficient length, very clear, and well compos'd, he added, That he Be∣liev'd me so equitable, as to acknowledge willingly, that, as in things, in which I should be to explain to him our Sentiments and our Councels, 'twould be fit, he should acquiesce in what I should tell him of them, so 'twas no less just, I should rest satisfy'd with his Explication of the Articles of their Disci∣pline, and Sentiments of their Religion, it being certain, that there was no other amongst 'em, but what he had now decla∣red to me.
I reply'd to this Expression, that, what he said, would be true, if it concern'd only the Explication of their Rites, if this Word might be us'd, and the manner of their Administring the Word or Sacraments, or holding of Synods; that in this I should believe him, as better Instructed; but that here I pre∣tended, it had hapned to them, as it does to all those, who are in Error; that is, to fall into Contradiction, and be forc'd to set up, what they had deny'd. That I knew, they deny'd any Obligation of submittingto the Churches Judgment without ex∣amining it; but that at the same time I pretended this Infalli∣bility of the Church to be so necessary, that even those, who de∣ny'd it in Speculation, could not forbear establishing it in Pra∣ctice, if they would keep any Order amongst them. Besides that, if the Question were here about shewing any Contradiction in the Sentiments of the Catholic Church, I should not pretend to ob∣lige him to receive the Explication, I should give him of her Sentiments and her Councels, but that it should then be free for him to draw from their Words such Inference, as he pleas'd; and I thought, he would not refuse me as much, to which he consented without Difficulty. I had no Design to insist much on the Synod of Sainte Foy, which would, I thought, cast me too far from the two Pro∣positions, the Acknowledgment of which I aim'd to draw from him. I only therefore answer'd, That I yielded to the Rea∣son, he alledg'd concerning the necessity of a Ratification, thô in matters of Faith such Powers and Trusts were alittle Extra∣ordinary; and besides, I was willing to believe, that the Sy∣nod had no Design, the Deputies should overturn all. But that, which toucht me, and which he seem'd not to have answer'd, was. That the Synod had doubted of their Confession of Faith, since they permitted the making of another; and I saw not, how this agreed, with what they farther told us, That this Confes∣sion contain'd nothing but the pure Word of GOD, in which every one knows, that there is nothing to be chang'd. As to what he said, That their Aim was only to reduce the Luthe∣rans to more equitable Sentiments, or however to establish a mutual Toleration, two things gainsay'd it. 1. That there was mention of a Power to decide all Points of Doctrin: Which manifestly concern'd the Reality, whence the Lutherans would never recede. 2. That to settle a mutual Toleration
there was no need of framing a Confession of common Faith, but only of Establishing this Toleration by a Synodal Decree, as had been done at Charenton. Mr. Claude answer'd, that the Point of Doctrin to be de∣cided was, Whether a mutual Toleration might be establisht, and that the Confession of common Faith would have done nothing else, but declar'd this Toleration: Which he deny'd not but it might be done in a Synod, as I must grant, that it might also be done in a Confession of Faith, where there should have been an express Article to that purpose. I answer'd him, That this could never be call'd a Confes∣sion of common Faith; and askt him, Whether he thought the Lutherans, or they, should have retrench'd any thing of what the one said for the Reality, and the other against it. He answer'd me, No. And then, said I, each party would have conti∣nu'd in the Terms of their own Confession of Faith, having no∣thing common but the Article of Toleration. There were, said he, many other Points, in which we agreed. 'Tis granted, an∣swer'd I; but 'twas not about these Points, the Accord was to be made: the Question was about the Reality, and some others, on which there could not be made a Confession of common Faith, except one of the Parties chang'd, or both agreed upon ambiguous Expressions, which each might draw to their own Opinions; a thing, that had been oft attempted, as Mr. Claude himself could not but owne. He granted it, and related also the Assembly of Marbourg, and some others, held for that purpose. I concluded then, That I had reason to be∣lieve, the Synod of Sainte Foy had a like Design, and that 'twould have been to mock the World to call that a Confession of common Faith, which should have made appear such ma∣nifest oppositions on so important Points of the Christian Do∣ctrin. To which I farther added, 'twas so much the more certain, That a Confession of Faith was, as I said, really in agitation, in that the Lutherans having already several times declar'd against a Toleration, there was nothing to be expect∣ed from them, but by the Means, of which I spake. The Matter rested there; and I only said, That every one need but consider, what he ought to think in his Conscience of a Confession of Faith, which a whole National Synod had con∣sented to change.
When Mr. Claude was saying, That the Oath of submitting to the National Synod included a Condition, I had interrupted him by putting in a word. Yes, said I, they hop'd well of the Synod, yet without certainty; and expecting the Event, they forbare not to swear, they would submit. Mr. Claude telling me here, That I interrupted him, and praying me to let him say all, I held my peace. But after the Affair of Sainte Foy was discuss'd, I said to him, That I thought it necessary, be∣fore we pass'd any farther, I should tell him in a few words, what I had conceiv'd of his Doctrin, to the end we might not speak in the air. I said then to him; You say, Sir, That these Words, Being persuaded, that GOD will preside in it, and guide you by his Holy Spirit in all Truth and Equity, thrô the Rule of his Word, are only an honest manner of proposing a Condition. He agreed it. Let us then, said I, reduce the Proposition in∣to a conditional one, and we shall see, what will be the sense of it. I swear to submit to all you shall decide, on this Sup∣position, or Condition, That, what you shall decide, be agreea∣ble to GODs Word. Such an Oath is nothing else but a mani∣fest Illusion, as signifying nothing, and being but what I might make to Mr. Claude, or he to me. But in this there would not be any thing serious; and 'tis to be observ'd, that some∣thing more particular must be aim'd at, since this Oath is on∣ly made to the Synod, which gives the final determination; thô in Mr. Claude's Sense there were as much Reason to make it to the Consistory, to which they ought to submit, as well as to the Synod, supposing, it has the Word of GOD for its Guide. In this place I held my peace a little, and seeing, that there was not a word said, I went on thus. But in fine then, Sir, if I well understand your Doctrin, you believe, That a private person may doubt of the Churches Judgment, even when she gives her final Determination. No, Sir, answer'd Mr. Claude, 'tis not to be said, That one may doubt, there being all the Likelihood in the World, that the Church will judge well. He, that says Likelihood, Sir, reply'd I immediatly, says a mani∣fest Doubt. But, said Mr. Claude, There is more: for JESUS CHRIST having promis'd, that those who would seek, should find; since 'tis to be presum'd, they will seek well, 'tis to be also believ'd, they will judge well, and in this assurance there
is something indubitable. But when there shall be seen in Councels Cabals, Factions, different Interests, it may with reason be doubted, Whether in such an Assembly there will not be mixt something human and doubtful. Pray, Sir, said I, let us set aside what is good for nothing but to throw dust in ones Eyes. All, you say of Cabals, Factions, Interests, is absolutely to no purpose, and consequently serves only to per∣plex. There is nothing, said Mr. Claude, more to the purpose. And I affirm, answer'd I, That your self will grant, there's nothing less to the purpose. For I ask you, Sir, Supposing there should appear in the Councel neither Factions nor Ca∣bals; supposing also one were assur'd, that there were not any, and that all pass'd in Order, must one receive the Decision without examining it? He was fain to answer, No. Whence I immediatly concluded: I had then reason to say, That all, you alledg'd, as very considerable, concerning Factions and Cabals, was in the bottom only an Amusement; and in fine, that a private person, a Woman, any ignorant Fellow, what∣ever he is, may believe, and ought to believe, that he may happen to understand GODs Word better than a whole Coun∣cel, thô assembled from the four quarters of the World; and than all the rest of the Church. Yes, said he, 'tis so. I re∣peated twice or thrice the Proposition, he had granted, ad∣ding still some stronger Circumstance; but evidently contain'd, in what was accorded. What, said I, better than all the rest of the Church together, and than all her Assemblies, thô compos'd of the holiest and most illuminated persons in the Universe? For all these are still but men, after whom, accord∣ing to your Doctrin, every one ought still to examin. A pri∣vate person shall believe, that he may have more Grace, more Light; in fine, more of the Holy Ghost than all the rest of the Church! All this must pass; and I might have added, more than all the Fathers, more than all the past Ages, reckoning immediatly from the Apostles times. But, proceed∣ed I, if it be so, how do you avoid the Inconveniences of the Independents; and what Means has the Church left to hinder the being of as many Religions, I do not say, as there are Pa∣rishes, but as there are Heads? We have, said he, Synods, which are Means to hinder so great Evils, Means not infal∣lible, but nevertheless profitable, as I have said. For thô a
Pastor, that preaches, is not infallible, his Ministery ceases not to be profitable, because he declares the Truth. But a great Assembly, compos'd of more persons, and those of greater Learning, will yet better make this Declaration. Methinks, Sir, reply'd I, That you refer all to Instruction: but this is not precisely either the Intention or Institution of Synods; for oftentimes one understanding private Person will give more In∣struction, than a whole Synod together. What must be ex∣pected from a Synod, is not so much Instruction, as a Decision by Authority, to which there is a necessity of yielding: for this is, what both the ignorant, who doubt, and the proud, who contradict, stand in need of. An ignorant private per∣son, if you leave him to himself, will confess to you, that he knows not, on what to resolve; and far from abating Pride in a Synod, you carry it to its highest Point, since you oblige a private person to believe, that he can understand the Scripture better than the Synod, and all the rest of the Church: and the Synod it self, thô assembled from the whole Church, being askt by him, whose Faith it examins, whether he is not ob∣lig'd to examin after the Synod, and whether it may not so fall out, that he, thô a private person, may understand the Scripture, better than all the Pastors assembled, the Synod, thô universal, must, according to your Doctrin, declare, That without doubt he may. Presumption, Sir, cannot go higher. And observe, if you please, that these Assemblies, which you propose as profitable Means, are no longer so, when every one may believe, that he has a better, and the only one, that can secure him, to wit, that of examining by himself, and be∣lieving only his own Judgment. This, Sir, is perfect Indepen∣dency; for the Independents neither refuse to hold Synods for their mutual Instruction, nor to receive these Synods, when they find, that these Synods say well. You know, they have held some. He acknowledg'd, they had held one, to frame their Confession of Faith. I matter not, reply'd I, whether one, or more; they do not then absolutely reject them, and they reject in them precisely no more, than you do, which is the obligation of submitting to them without examining. And upon this, to reduce my self in few words, see, what was my Argument. The Independents are very willing to have Eccle∣siastical Assemblies for Instruction; all, they will not have, is
the authoritative Decision, which you will no more have than they: you are then wholly conformable, and you ought not to have condemn'd them. You see not then, Sir, said Mr. Claude, That we deny not, but there is an Authority in Synods, such an one as the Paternal Authority, such an one as the Autho∣rity of Magistrates, such an one as the Authority, a Master has over his Scholar, and a Pastor ovr his Flock; all these Authorities have their use, and are not to be rejected under pretence, That the Fathers, Magistrates and Masters may be deceiv'd: 'tis the same then with the Authority of the Church. But, Sir, answer'd I, the Independents deny not the Authority of Magistrates, nor the Authority of Masters over their Scho∣lars, nor that of Pastors over their Flocks. They have Pastors, Sir, for whom they require no less than you, that there should be some Deference had; and much more will they not deny, but it ought to be had for a whole Synod. If then you accuse them of denying the Authority of Synods, you must add something to what they believe, and there is nothing to be ad∣ded, but what we believe, which is, That we must submit to them without examining. After this, for a little time we did nothing on both sides but repeat the same things. Which having caus'd Mr. Claude to ob∣serve, I said to him, In fine, Sir, we should dispute without end; every one has nothing more to do, but to examin in his Con∣science, and before GOD, whether he thinks himself capable to understand the Scripture better than all Councels, and all the rest of the Church, and how such an Opinion can agree with the Docility and Humility of GODs Children. I inculcated in few words, what a Pride it was for one to be∣lieve, he could understand GODs Word better than all the rest of the Church, and how after this, nothing hindred the being of as many Religions, as there are Heads. Mr. Claude here told me, he wonder'd, this Proposition should appear so strange to me, That a private person might believe, he might happen to understand the Holy Scripture better than the whole Church assembled; That the Case had hapned, and he could give me many Examples of it: The first in the Coun∣cel of Ariminum, where the Word Consubstantial was rejected, and Arianism set up. I interrupted him, saying: Whither do you carry us, Sir? From the Councel of Ariminum you will
bring us to the false Councel of Ephesus, to the Councel of Constance, to that of Basil, to that of Trent: When shall we have done, if we must here pass over all these Councels? I declare to you, that I will not engage my self in this Discussi∣on, since our Question may be determin'd by something more precise. But because you have mention'd the Councel of Ari∣minum, tell me, Sir, I beseech you, whether the Fathers of that Councel continu'd long in this erroneous Decision?I ought to have said equivocal and imper∣fect rather than erro∣neous. I believe indeed, Sir, said he,, That they quickly return'd. Say, say, Sir, answer'd I, that, assoon as the Emperor Constantius de∣clar'd Protector of the Arians, and Persecutor of the Faith∣ful, had permitted them to retire, these Bishops complain'd aloud of the Violence and Surprise, that had been put upon 'em. Oblige me not, Sir, to relate this Story, which you know as well as I, and acknowledge, That 'tis unjust to com∣pare a Councel, manifestly pack'd, with Assemblies held cano∣nically, and according to Order. Ha, Sir, reply'd Mr. Claude, do not we say, That the Councel of Trent was neither free nor canonical? You say it, Sir, and we deny it; and that is not the Question of this Dispute. The present Question is, to know, whether you can avoid Independency; and whether there be in your Doctrin any Remedy against this insupportable Presumption of a private person, who must believe, according to your Principles, that he can understand the Scripture better than the best assembled and best held universal Councels, and than all the rest of the Church together. Let us leave then, if you will, the Council of Ariminum; see here another indispu∣table Example: 'Tis the Judgment of the Synagogue, when it condemn'd JESUS CHRIST, and consequently declar'd, that he was not the Messias, promis'd by the Prophets. Tell me, Sir, would not a private person, who should then have believ'd our Lord to be the true CHRIST, have judg'd better, than all the rest of the Synagogue together? See then an in∣dubitable Case, in which one may without Presumption do, what you think so presumptuous. In effect, proceeded he, 'tis no Presumption, not to give to the Church, what belongs only to GOD alone. We cannot give him any thing greater, than to believe him blind-fold, as you would have us believe the Church. But you know, that St. Paul, at least as much in∣spir'd as the Church, forbears not to declare to the Corinthians,
That he will not have Dominion over their Faith.2. Cor. i. 23. The Church ought yet less to do it than he. We must not then believe her simply on her Word; we must examin after her, and make use of our Reason, as those of Beraea did, who examin'd the Scriptures,Acts xvii. v. 11. to see, whether the things were there, as St. Paul had preacht them. When Mr. Claude held his Peace, Here, said I, are many things: But we must first take in hand this indisputable Ex∣ample, you have propos'd to us. Upon this I remonstrated to him, That the Christian Church had great Priviledges above the Synagogue, even considering the Synagogue in the time of its greatest Glory: But not to mention this, 'twas a strange thing to compare the Synagogue falling, at the very Moment, when its Hardning and Reprobation was clearly markt by the Prophets, with the Christian Church, which was never to fall. But in fine, Sir, reply'd he, one might have then made to this private Person the same Argument, you make to us. To al∣ledge the Prophets was to no purpose, for 'twas concerning the Application of these Prophecies to JESUS CHRIST, that the Synagogue doubted. Thus a private Person could no more believe in JESUS CHRIST, without believing at the same time, that he understood the Scripture better than all the Synagogue; and this is the Argument, you make to us. There were but few People at the Conference, and they were all Hugonots, except the Mareschalless De Lorge. I saw two of these Gentlemen look on one another at this place with Complacence. I was toucht, that a Reasoning, so visibly ill, should make such an Impression on these Spirits; and I be∣sought GOD to grant me the Grace, that I might by some∣thing, that should be clear, destroy the odious Comparison, which was made of his always well-beloved Church with the faithless Synagogue at that very Moment, he had assign'd for her Divorce. You say then, Sir, said I to Mr. Claude, that the Argument I make, may authorise the Error of those private Persons, who condemn'd JESUS CHRIST on the Faith of the Syna∣gogue, and on the contrary condemn those of Presumption, who believ'd JESUS CHRIST alone before the whole Syna∣gogue. Yes, Sir, said he, the thing is so, repeating his Dis∣course
afresh. Let us see then, said I, whether my Argument has this unhappy Consequence. It consists, Sir, in saying, That, the Churches Authority being deny'd, there is no longer any exterior Means, which GOD can make use of to dissipate the Doubts of the Ignorant, and inspire necessary Humility into the Faithful. To the end such an Argument may be made con∣cerning the time, when JESUS CHRIST was condemn'd, it must be said, that there was not then any exterior Means, any certain Authority, to which one ought necessarily to submit. Now, Sir, who can say this, since JESUS CHRIST was upon the Earth, that is, the Truth it self, which appear'd visibly in the midst of Men, the Eternal Son of GOD, to whom a Voice from on high bare Witness before all the People,Matt. iii. v. 17. This is my well-beloved Son, hear ye him; who, to confirm his Mission, rais'd the Dead, heal'd those that were born blind, and wrought so many Miracles, that the Jews themselves confess'd, never any Man had done the like? There was then, Sir, an exterior Means, a visible Authority. But 'twas contested: 'Tis true, but 'twas infallible. I do not pretend, Sir, that the Churches Authority should never be contested; I hear you, you, Sir, who contest it: But I say, it ought not to be so by Christians. I say, That she is Infallible; I say, That there never was any time, when there was not on the Earth a visible and speaking Authority, to which Men were oblig'd to submit. Before JESUS CHRIST we had the Synagogue; when the Syna∣gogue was to fail, JESUS CHRIST himself appear'd, when JESUS CHRIST retir'd, he left his Church, to which he sent his Holy Spirit. Bring again JESUS CHRIST teaching, preaching, working Miracles, I have no longer need of the Church; but also take from me the Church, I must have JESUS CHRIST in Person, speaking, preaching, deciding with Miracles, and an infallible Authority. But you have his Word. Yes we have without doubt a Word Holy and Ado∣rable, but such an one, as suffers it self to be explicated and manag'd, how one will, and makes no Reply to those, that misunderstand it. I say, we must have an exterior Means of resolving Doubts, and this Means must be certain. And not to go over again the Reasons, already alledg'd, now there is nothing else requir'd but to answer your Objection concerning the Error of the Synagogue, I aver, you are so far from be∣ing
able to say, That there was not then a certain exterior Means, or speaking Authority, to which Men were oblig'd to submit their Judgments, that you must avow, there was one, the highest, and most infallible, that ever was, which is that of JESUS CHRIST; and so that there was never any time, when the Argument, I use against the Protestants, could less be made, which is, That they want an exterior infallible Means to determine Doubts about the Scriptures. After I had said this, I perceiv'd, there was no Reply to be made me. In effect, There was not a Word said to me up∣on it, thô I held my Peace, to hear what Answer would be made. I will not say, that Mr. Claude stood silent, 'tis an Effect not much to be expected in Conferences of this nature. He re∣peated something of what he had already said, and insisted afresh on what the Apostle himself had declar'd, That he had not Dominion over the Consciences. I was glad, that he return'd to this Passage, which I had an intent of Explicating at first; but was fain to go to what was most pressing, which was the Example of the Synagogue. This being done, I only askt Mr. Claude, whether the Apostles Meaning, when he said to the Corinthians, We have not Domini∣on over your Faith, was, that they must examin after him. He saw well, that it was not, and confest it. I concluded, Nor does the Church, Sir, pretend to have Dominion over the Faith, when she requires us to believe it in her Decisi∣ons, because she gives not this Authority to her self, no more than St. Paul did, but to the Holy Ghost, who inspires her. You equal then, said Mr. Claude, to St. Paul, Author of the Revelation, the Church, which is but the bare Interpreter. No, Sir, reply'd I, I equal not the Church to St. Paul; but I say, that to pretend, one ought to be Believ'd without ex∣amining, when one thinks to act only as an Instrument, of which the Holy Ghost makes use, is not to have Dominion over the Conscience, as the Example of St. Paul demonstrates. Besides, I pretend not to equal the Churches Authority to the Apostolical. The Apostles were Authors of the Revelation, as you have very well said; that is, they first receiv'd the Truths, which it pleas'd GOD to reveal: The Church is on∣ly the Interpreter and Depositary. But saving this essential
Difference between the Apostles and the Church, I say, That the Church is as much inspir'd to Interpret, as the Apostles were to Establish; and that holding the Grace of Interpretation from the same Spirit, which gave the first Revelation to the Apostles, she no more exercises Dominion over the Consciences in Inter∣preting, than the Apostles did in Establishing: But that both the one and the other cause the Holy Ghost to have Domi∣nion over them, according to the Measure, which is given to every one. It must be prov'd, said Mr. Claude, that the Church has receiv'd a like Grace. There's no need of pro∣ving, answer'd I immediately; 'tis sufficient to shew, that the Passage, you alledge, is not concluding. To this there was nothing said. But, if I remember well, Mr. Claude exaggerated a little, how strange it was, that we would oblige Men to believe the Church, like GOD himself, upon her bare Word, without making use, for the Interpre∣tation of Scripture, of the Reason, GOD has given us; that those of Beraea did not so; and that the Apostle, according to our Opinion, was much to blame for letting them examin his Preachings. I answer'd, That there was a very great Difference be∣tween the Faithful, already Children of the Church, and sub∣jected to her Authority, and those, that still doubted, whether they should enter into her Bosom: That those of Beraea were in this last Condition, and the Apostle would not by any means propose to 'em the Churches Authority, of which they doubted: But that the Faithful were not instructed in the same man∣ner after the Councel of Jerusalem. There the Apostles deci∣ded by Authority of the Holy Ghost:Act. XV. v. 28. Act. XVI. v. 4. It has seemed good, say they, to the Holy Ghost, and to us. What do Paul and Si∣las, Carriers of the Councels Letter after this? They went through the Cities, as 'tis in the Acts: What, to cause the Coun∣ce of Jerusalem's Decree to be there examin'd? 'Twould have been to examin after the Holy Ghost himself. What then? They went through the Cities, delivering them the Decrees for to keep, that were ordained of the Apostles and Elders which were at Jerusalem. See the Order: The Examen in the Councel; the Obedience without examining after the Decision; the Examen in those of Beraea, that is, in those, who, not being in the Church, have yet no Authority to regulate them: Sub∣mission
without examining in those, who, being already in the Church, are only to hear her Decrees. 'Tis their Hap∣piness to be in a Body, which, guided by the Holy Ghost, can never be deceiv'd, and by that means be deliver'd from the Danger of an Examen, the end of which would perhaps be Error. The Conference had already lasted four Hours. I already had from Mr. Claude's Acknowledgment one of the Propositions, I would make him confess, to wit, That every particular Per∣son ought to believe, he may understand the Holy Scripture better than the Universal Councels, and all the rest of the Church. He must yet own the other Proposition, no less Im∣portant; and see how GOD brought him to it. As he had spoken much of this Dominion of the Church o∣ver Consciences, repeating three or four times, That we gave her the Respect, which was due to none but GOD a∣lone, when we believ'd her without Examining, I told him, he need not make so strange of a thing, which they did, as well as we; and upon that I askt him, Whether a Believer at his first Receiving the Holy Scripture from the Church were oblig'd first to doubt, and after to examin, whether the Book, she put into his Hand, were truly inspir'd by GOD or no. If this Believer examins and doubts, he renounces the Faith, and begins the reading of the Gospel by an Act of Infidelity; and if he doubts not, he then receives, without examining, the Authority of the Church, which presents him the Gospel. To this see Mr. Claude's Answer. The Believer, you suppose, who has not read the Holy Scripture, and into whose Hands 'tis put, to speak properly, doubts not, he is ignorant: He knows not, what this Scripture is, which, he is told, is inspir'd by GOD. He has heard his Father, and those, who instructed him, say, That 'twas divinely inspir'd: He yet knows no o∣ther Authority but theirs; and as for what concerns the Scri∣pture, he knows not, what it is. Thus he cannot be said to be Unbelieving or Incredulous. And pray, Sir, said he, let me make you the same Argument upon the Church, as you make me upon the Scripture. The Believer, to whom the Churches Authority is propos'd, either believes it without examining, or doubts: If he doubts, he is an Infidel: If he doubts not, by what Authority is he assur'd? Is the Churches Authority a
thing evident of it self, and must be not find it by some Ex∣amen? This is your Difficulty, which you have to solve as well as I: either let us quit 'em both, or resolve 'em both together. I declare to you, that I will answer for the Scri∣pture, what you shall answer me for the Church. I understand you, answer'd I, but before I explain to you, how the Christian believes the Church, let us first settle the Matter, that is in question. Is it not evident, Sir, amongst you as well as amongst us, That, when the Holy Scripture is shewn to Children educated in the Church, 'tis shewn them, as a Book inspir'd by GOD; and I ask, whether they cannot, when they are caus'd to read something in it, make this Act of Faith: I certainly believe, that, what I am going to read, is GODs Word? Mr. Claude answer'd here, That those, of whom I spake to him, had yet no divine Faith concerning the Authority of the Scripture, but a bare human Perswasion, grounded on the Deference, they had for their Parents, and that they were but Catechumens. Catechumens, Sir? said I. You must not, if you please, speak so. They are Christians; they are baptiz'd; they have in them the Holy Ghost, and Faith infus'd; they are in the Covenant, according to you; they have receiv'd Baptism, as a Seal of the Covenant, to which they are admitted; and as the Covenant is seal'd in them by the exterior Seal of Baptism, the Holy Ghost seals it interiorly in their Hearts. Know your own Doctrin. Upon this, said Mr. Claude, you know, that one might dispute; but I own, what you say. And well then, answer'd I, if it be so, they are by the Grace of the Holy Ghost, and Faith infus'd, in condition to make an Act of Faith, when the Faith shall be preacht to them; and I ask, when the Scripture, acknowledg'd by the whole Church for a Word inspir'd by GOD, is shewn them, Whether they are not in condition to make with the whole Church this Act of Faith: I believe, that this Scripture is GODs Word, as I believe, that GOD is. Mr. Claude would never acknowledge this, but always an∣swer'd, That they had yet only an human Perswasion about the Scripture, and that Divine Faith came not to them, till they had read it. If they have, said I, but an human Perswasion, they have but a doubtful Perswasion; and consequently doubt of that, which is, according to you, the whole Foundation of the Faith: In one word, they are Infidels. No, said he, they
are barely ignorant; and you must also say as much of the Faith, one has in the Church: For 'tis not a matter of small difficulty, to discern, which is the true Church; and before one is in a condition to know it of ones self, one is ignorant of it; or one has at most but a bare human Perswasion on the Faith of ones Parents. Thus once again, what you shall say upon the Church, I will say to you upon the Scripture. Let us see, Sir, answer'd I, whether you will say it, or whether you will have reason to say it. You acknowledge then, That a bap∣tiz'd Christian, who has neither read the holy Scripture, nor heard it read, is not in condition to make this Act of Faith: I believe, that this Scripture is GODs Word, as I believe, that GOD is. Behold a terrible Inconvenience, that a Believer cannot make so essential an Act of Faith. 'Tis not so amongst us: For the Believer, who receives the Holy Scripture from the Hands of the Church, makes with the whole Church this Act of Faith: As I believe, that GOD is, so I believe, that this Scri∣pture is the Word of him, in whom I believe. And I say, that he cannot make this Act of Faith but by the Faith, he has al∣ready in the Authority of the Church, which presents him the Scripture. I must here, proceeded I, throughly explicate, but simply nevertheless, in what Order Christians are instructed con∣cerning the Truth of the Scripture. I speak not of Infidels, I speak of baptiz'd Christians; and I desire you to observe well this Distinction. There are two things here to be consider'd. The one is; who it is, that inspires us with the Act of Faith, by which we believe the Holy Scripture as GODs Word; and we say, that 'tis the Holy Ghost: On this we are agreed. The other thing to be consider'd, is, what exterior Means the Holy Ghost uses to make us believe the Holy Scripture; and I say, That 'tis the Church. That it is so, we need only see the Apostles Creed, that is, the first Instruction, which a Be∣liever receives: He has not read the Holy Scripture, and al∣ready he believes in GOD, and in JESUS CHRIST, and in the Holy Ghost, and the Universal Church. There is no mention made to him of the Scripture; but the believing the Universal Church is propos'd to him, as soon as the believing in the Holy Ghost. These two Articles enter together into his Heart, the Holy Ghost and the Church; because he, who be∣lieves in the Holy Ghost, necessarily also believes the Univer∣sal
Church, which the Holy Ghost directs. I say then, that the first Act of Faith, which the Holy Ghost puts in the Hearts of Baptiz'd Christians, is to believe with the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the Universal Church; and that this is the exterior Means, by which the Holy Ghost insinuates into Hearts the Belief of the Holy Scripture. If this Means is not certain, the Faith in the Scripture will consequently be doubt∣ful. But as the Catholic has always found this Means certain, there is not any Moment, in which he cannot say: As I believe, that GOD is, I believe, that GOD has spoken to men, and that this Scripture is his Word. And the Reason, for which he can at first make this Act of Faith, is, because he never doubted of the Churches Authority, and because this is the first thing, which the Holy Ghost put in his Heart with the Faith in GOD and in JESUS CHRIST. As to what you ask me, how he believes the Church, that is not precisely our Question: 'Tis sufficient, that we see, he always believes it, since 'tis the first thing, the Holy Ghost puts in his Heart, and the exterior Means, by which he makes him believe the Holy Scripture, The Scripture, of which he never offers to doubt, since he never doubted of the Church, which presents it to him. This, Sir, is our Doctrin, and be∣cause 'tis not yours, you necessarily fall into the Inconveni∣ence, I have noted: Because you believe not the Churches Authority, as a thing, which cannot fail, we shew you a Point of time, in which you cannot make an Act of Faith upon the Scripture, and consequently in which you cease to be a Be∣liever. Mr. Claude told me here, That the Child, who recited the Creed, spake like a Parrot, without Understanding, what he said; and so we ought not to insist much upon that: And be∣sides, that I affirm'd gratis, That to believe the Universal Church was the first Act of Faith, which the Holy Ghost put into the Heart of the Baptiz'd Christian, to insinuate to him by that means Faith in the Holy Scripture: In fine, That I answer'd not, what he askt me concerning the Church, nor how we began to believe her; for, said he, The Holy Ghost is the Principle, and not the Motive of Believing: That 'twas requisite therefore, I should explicate, how we believ'd the Church, and by what Motive; and that from my manner
of speaking it seem'd, as if we believ'd her by Enthusiasm, and without any Motive inducing us so to do. To this I answered, I pretended not, That the Church was believ'd by Enthusiasm; That for the acknowledging her there were divers Motives of Credibility, which the Ho∣ly Ghost suggested to his Faithful, as he pleas'd; That he was not ignorant of them, but they were not now in Question. Our Business now is, said I, to know, whether the exterior Means, which the Holy Ghost uses to make us believe the Holy Scripture, is not the Churches Authority. I speak not gratis, when I say, That this is the first thing, which the Holy Ghost puts in the Hearts of baptiz'd Christians; for in the Creed there is mention'd to them the Universal Church, and she is propos'd to their Belief, without speaking to them of the Scripture. 'Tis to no purpose to say, That Children repeat at first, like Par∣rots, both the Creed, and the Name of the Universal Church. Let us leave, said I, the Parrot, that speaks only by Memo∣ry: Let us come to the time, when the Christian has the use of Reason, and when he can make an Act of Faith. By what shall he begin, but by what he began to be instructed? He be∣lieves then the Universal Church, before he believes the Scri∣pture. In effect, make, I do not say a Child, but any Man whosoever, read the Canticle of Canticles, in which there is not the least mention of GOD, either good or bad: In good earnest, He believes this Book inspir'd by GOD, only because of the Tradition; First, of the Synagogue, and Secondly, of the Christian Church, that is in one word, through the Autho∣rity of the Universal Church. But let us keep to our Point. Let us consider the Christian in the Moment, when the Holy Scripture is propos'd to him as the Word of GOD. 'Tis the Holy Ghost, which makes him believe it; we are agreed on that Point: But we dispute about the exterior Means, of which the Holy Ghost makes use. I say, That 'tis the Church, since 'tis she in effect, which proposes to him the Holy Scri∣pture; since he believ'd the Church, before he heard of the Scripture; since at his opening the Scripture, he is in Condi∣tion to say: I believe this Scripture, as I believe, that GOD is. You say, That he cannot make this Act of Faith: He is then no Believer, and his Baptism is of no use to him. We must instruct him as an Infidel, saying to him: Here is the Scripture,
which I believe inspir'd by GOD; read it Child, examin it, see, whether it be the very Truth or a Fable. The Church believes it inspir'd by GOD; but the Church may be deceiv'd, and thou art not in condition to make with her this Act of Faith: As I believe, that GOD is, so I believe, that he himself inspir'd this Scripture. If this manner of Instructing strikes an Horror into Christians, and leads manifestly to Impiety, the Christian must be able at first to make an Act of Faith upon the Scripture, propos'd to him by the Church; he must consequently believe, That the Church is not deceiv'd in giving him this Scripture. A he receives from her the Scripture, he receives from her the Interpretation of it; and she no more exercises Dominion o∣ver the Consciences in obliging her Children to believe her Interpretations without examining, than she does in obliging us to believe, without examining, the Scripture it self. By this Argument, Sir, reply'd Mr. Claude, you would make every one conclude in Favor of his Church. The Greeks, the Armenians, the Ethiopians, we our selves, whom you believe to be in error; we are nevertheless Baptiz'd; we have by Baptism both the Holy Ghost and this Faith infus'd, of which you have been speaking. Every one of us has receiv'd the Holy Scripture from the Church, in which he was baptiz'd; every one believes his to be the true Church declar'd in the Creed; and at the first he even knows not any other. Now if, as we have receiv'd, without examining, the Holy Scripture from the Hand of that Church, in which we are, we must also, as you say, receive blindfold all its Interpretations; 'tis an Argu∣ment to conclude, That every one ought to continue, as he is, and that every Religion is good. This was in truth the strongest Objection, that could be made; and thô the Solution of this Doubt appear'd clear to me, I was in pain, how I might render it clear to those, who heard me. I spake with trembling, seeing it concern'd the Salvation of a Soul; and I besought GOD, who made me see the Truth so clearly, That he would give me Words to ex∣press it fully and plainly: For I had to do with a Man, who heard▪ patiently, spake clearly and strongly, and in fine pusht the Difficulties to the utmost points. I told him, I must first distinguish their Case from that of the Greeks, Armenians, and others, he had nam'd, who indeed
err in taking a false Church for the true; but believe at least, as indubitable, That the true Church, wheresoever she is, must be believ'd, and that she never deceives her Children. You are, said I to him, much farther off; for I can lay to your Charge, That you do not only, like the Greeks and Ethiopians, take a false Church for a true; but, what is undeniable, and what you your self confess, That you will not have us even believe the true. After this Distinction, which seem'd necessa∣ry to me, let us come to your Difficulty. Let us distinguish in the Belief of the Greeks, and other false Churches, what there is of Truth, what they have in common with the true Univer∣sal Church; in a word, what comes from GOD, from that, which comes from human Prejudice. GOD by his Holy Spi∣rit puts in the Heart of those, who are baptiz'd in these Churches, That there is a GOD, and a JESUS CHRIST, and an Holy Ghost. Hitherto there is no Error; all this is from GOD: Is it not true? He agreed it. They believe also, That there is an Universal Church: Are they not right in this, and is it not a Truth, reveal'd by GOD, that there is one indeed? I expected his Acknowledgment, and after he had given it, I added, That the Greeks and Ethiopians were dispos'd to believe without examining, whatever the true Church propos'd to 'em. This is, what you approve not, Sir; in this you are separated from all other Christians, who unanimously believe, That there is a true Church, which never deceives her Children. I, who believe this with them, reckon this Belief amongst the things, which come from GOD: But see, where the human Prejudices begin. This Baptiz'd, being seduc'd by his Parents and Pa∣stors, believes the Church, in which he is, to be the true, and attributes in particular to this false Church all, that GOD makes him believe in general of the true. 'Tis not the Holy Ghost, that puts this in his Heart: Is it not true? 'Tis with∣out doubt true. In this place he begins to believe amiss. Here Error begins; here the Divine Faith, infus'd by the Holy Ghost, begins to be lost. Happy are those, in whom the hu∣man Prejudices are joyn'd with the true Belief, which the Ho∣ly Ghost puts in their Heart. They are exempt from a great Temptation, and the terrible Pain, there is to distinguish that, which is from GOD in the Faith of their Church, from that, which is from Men. But whatever Difficulty Men have to
distinguish these things, GOD knows them, and distinguishes them; and there will be an eternal Difference between that, which his Holy Spirit puts in the Heart of the Baptiz'd, when he interiorly disposes them to believe the true Church, and that, which human Prejudices have added to it by fixing their Spirit to a false one. How these Baptiz'd may afterwards disentangle these things, and by what means they may get out of the Pre∣possession, that has made them confound the Idea of the false Church, in which they are, with the Faith of the true Church, which the Holy Ghost has put in their Hearts with the Creed, is not now in debate; and 'tis sufficient, that we have seen in all the Baptiz'd a Belief of the Church, which comes to them from GOD, distinguisht from the Thought, which comes to them from Men. This being so, I affirm, That to this Belief of the Church, which the Holy Ghost puts in our Hearts with the Creed, is fixt a firm Faith, That we must believe this Church as certainly, as the Holy Ghost, to whom the Creed it self immediately joins her; and that this Faith in the Church is the Cause, the Believer never doubts of the Scri∣pture. I stopt a moment, to ask, whether I were understood. Mr. Claude answer'd, That he understood me perfectly. And if it be so, said I to him, you ought to see the Inconvenience, into which your Belief casts you; and you ought also to see, That I am not in the same by mine. You not only say, That we must not believe a false Church, but that we must not even believe the true one without examining what she says; and in this you speak against all other Christians. Mademoiselle de Du∣ras interpos'd, saying: in this place: This is, what must be answer'd by, Ay or No. I said it indeed, answer'd Mr. Claude, and I did not stick to say it at first. So much the better, re∣ply'd I. We shall soon see, which of us two has Reason, and in the clear State, things have been put in by our reciprocal Discourses, the Truth will soon appear on one side or other. From the time, you lay it down for certain, That the Church, even the true one may deceive us, the Faithful cannot believe on the Churches sole Faith, That the Scripture is the Word of GOD. He may believe it with an human Faith, answer'd Mr. Claude, but not with a divine Faith. But human Faith, reply'd I, is always defective, and doubting: He doubts then,
whether the Scripture be inspir'd by GOD, or no. Mr. Claude here pray'd me to remember, what he had already said, That he was not in Doubt, but in Ignorance. As a Man, said he, not skill'd in Diamonds, being shewn one, and askt, whether he believes it to be good or bad; knows nothing of it, nei∣ther is he in Doubt, but in Ignorance. In like manner, when a Master teaches some Opinion in Philosophy, the Scholar, who understands not yet, what he means, has no formal Doubt, but is in a bare Ignorance. So is it with those, to whom the Holy Scripture is the first time given. And I, said I, affirm, That he doubts, and that he, who is not skill'd in Diamonds, doubts, whether that, which is presented to him, be good or bad, and that the Scholar with Reason doubts of all, his Ma∣ster in Philosophy tells him, till he sees it clear, because he be∣lieves not his Master Infallible; and by the same Reason, he, who believes not the Church Infallible, doubts of the Truth of GODs Word, which she proposes to him. This is call'd Ignorance, and not Doubt, still said Mr. Claude: And I made this Argument. To doubt is not to know, whether a thing be or not. The Christian, of whom we speak, knows not, whe∣ther the Scripture be true or no: He is then in Doubt. Tell me, what is it to doubt, but not to know, whether a thing be or no? To this there was no Answer, but that this Christian did not in any manner doubt of the Scripture, but was only ignorant of it. But, said I, he is not like an Infidel, who per∣haps never heard▪ any mention of it. He knows, That the Gospel of St. Matthew and St. Paul's Epistles are read in the Church as GODs Word, and that none of the Faithful doubt it. Can he believe with them as certainly, as he believes GOD is, That this Word is inspir'd by GOD? You have said, That he cannot make this Act of Faith: He, that cannot make an Act of Faith on an Article, propos'd to him, makes at least, as I may so say, an Act of Doubt. Mr. Claude still answer'd, That he was in a pure Ignorance. And well, let us leave con∣testing about Words: He does not Doubt, if you please; but he knows not, whether this Scripture be a Truth, or a Fable; he knows not, whether the Gospel be an History inspir'd by GOD, or a Tale invented by Men. He cannot then make an Act of Divine Faith upon this Point, nor say, I believe, as GOD is; that the Gospel is also from GOD. Do you not acknow∣ledg,
That he cannot make this Act, and that he has nothing but an human Faith? He again freely confess'd, That he knew nothing else. Well, Sir, 'tis enough. In fine then there is a Point of Time, when every Baptiz'd Christian knows not, whether the Gospel be not a Fable: This is given him to ex∣amin: See, to what we must come, when we are set to ex∣amin after the Church. We might discourse without end: But we have said all, that can be said on both sides, and we should do nothing but begin again. 'Tis for every one to examin in his Conscience, how he can maintain, That a Bap∣tiz'd Christian ought to have been a Moment without knowing, whether the Gospel be a Truth or a Fable, and that amongst other Questions, which one may make in ones Life, this also must be given him to examin. It appear'd to me, by the Countenance of Mademoiselle de Dwas, that she understood : I notwithstanding expected a little▪ And Mr. Claude rose up. Mademoiselle de Duras rose with us, and coming to us, said: I could wish, That, before you broke up, something might be said concerning the Separation. The thing is done, answer'd I. As soon as 'tis certain, That one cannot examin after the Church without falling into an insupportable Pride, no with∣out doubting of the Gospel, there is nothing more to be . Every one need only consider, whether he will doubt one Mo∣ment of the Gospel, and also, whether he finds himself capa∣ble to understand the Scripture better than all the Synods in the World, and than all the rest of the Universal Church. But since Mademoiselle desires some particular Instruction con∣cerning the Separation, I beseech you, Sir, give me a Moment more. I shall propose to you essential Facts, on which, f I be not deceiv'd, you must soon agree. I ask you, Sir, Whe∣ther the Arians separated from the Church, and whether their Sect, when it appear'd, was not new? They did not, said he, separate from the Church; they corrupted it. He set himself to represent with a great deal of Exaggeration, ow they drew with them the whole Church▪ 'Tis not so, Sir, said I, You know, That St. Athanasius, St. Basil, St. Gregory Nazianzen, and many other Holy Bishops held for the Truth, and that a great Body of People follow'd them. You know, That all the West, and Rome it self, notwithstanding the Fall of Liberius, was Or∣thodox. But let us leave all this, said I to him; in what Num∣ber
soever they separated, there was a Church before them, from which they brake, and against which they set up another Church. No, said he, They corrupted it. Ha, Sir, reply'd I: What Difficulty is this? Never any Hereticks separated but by corrupting some of the Churches Children, and separating with them from the Church, in which they had all been baptiz'd. But in fine, tell me, Sir, Was not the Sect of the Arians, and that Church, which is nam'd the Arian, new? If you mean, Sir, answered he, That Arius was the first, who spake against the Divinity of the Son of GOD, 'tis not true. Origen before him, and Justin Martyr said the same thing. Ha, Sir, said I: That a Martyr deny'd the Divinity of GGDs Son, is, what I shall never believe. As to Origen, you know, that he is alledg'd both for and against it: He is an ambiguous and suspected Author. But, Sir, let us leave uncertain Facts: And let us endeavour to find one, about which both you and I may a∣gree. That Sect, which after the Condemnation pronounc'd against Arius, join'd with this excommunicated Priest, and form'd a Church against the Church, was it not new? He could not but grant it. To prove its Newness, continu'd I, was there any need of ascending up to the Apostles, and could not one say to it: Church, separated from that other Church, in which Arius was born, and in which he receiv'd Baptism, you were neither yesterday, nor the day before? One might, said Mr. Claude. May one not say as much of the Macedonian Church, which deny'd the Di∣vinity of the Holy Ghost; of the Nestorians, who divided JESUS CHRISTs Person; of the Eutychians, that confounded his two Natures; and of the Pelagians, who deny'd Original Sin, and the Grace of JESUS CHRIST? Might one not say to them without ascending up to the Apostles: When you came into the World, you found the Church baptizing Children unto Remission of Sins, and praying for the Conversion of Sinners and Infi∣dels? What then all these Hereticks, and all the rest, whom you and we know, oppugned, was believ'd not only from the Apostles time, but yesterday and the day before, and at the time, when these Heresiarchs came, and they found the Church in this Belief. But, answer'd Mr. Claude, There are two ways of establishing Error; the one open, and the other secret and insensible. Stay, Sir, said I to him, we ought to propose evi∣dent Facts, which both Parties agree. I do not agree this
insensible way of establishing Error. Ha, Sir, said he, will you say, That you shall find praying to Saints, and Purgatory, in the Apostles times? No, Sir, answer'd I, I will say nothing a∣bout them, for you will not agree it; and I will say such things, as you may agree. Deal in the same manner with me. He, that shall draw most solid Advantages from Facts, granted by his Adversary, will have a great Argument, that the Truth is for him: For 'tis the Property of Truth to keep it self upon all sides, and to condemn Error by Facts, which Error it self acknowledges. And since you mention Prayer to Saints, you are sincere: is it not true, that Mr. Daillé grants us thirteen hundred Years Antiquity? Thirteen hundred Years, Sir, an∣swer'd he, is not the whole time of the Church. I agree it, said I to him; but in fine, my Adversary grants me already thirteen hundred Years; he gives me St. Gregory Nazianzen, St. Basil, St. Ambrose, St. Hierom, St. Chrysostom, St. Augustin. All these, said Mr. Claude, are but Men. Let them be Men, as much as you please: But in fine, we have from our Adversa∣ries Confession, thirteen hundred Years for Invocation of Saints, and Veneration of Relicks; for these two things were joyn'd together, as you know, Mr. Daillé asserts. And how much does Mr. Blondel grant for Prayer for the Dead? 'Tis true, said Mr. Claude, That this is the antientest Error of the Church. Fourteen hundred Years Antiquity, said I to him, is what Mr. Blondel yields us. I say not this, to create a Prejudice for the Truth of our Doctrin; that is not the matter in hand: But I say it, to shew, That we are not without Defence upon these Examples of Errors insensibly spread, since we already have by your Consent thirteen hundred, and fourteen hundred Years. Let us come then to▪ evident Facts, on which I may agree. For as for you, you agree, That the Arians, Nestori∣ans, Pelagians, and in one word, all Hereticks were establisht, as I have said. They found not any Church, to which they u∣nited themselves. They erected one, which was separated from all the other Churches, that then were. This is certain: Is it not manifest? I expected: Mr. Claude contradicted it not; I thought not my self oblig'd to press him any farther upon a thing evident, and already own'd. Now, said I to him, how were the Orthodox Churches establisht? When particular Per∣sons and People, for Example the Indians, were converted,
found they not a Church already establisht, to which they united themselves? He acknowledg'd it. Did you, went I on, find one in the whole World, to which you join'd your selves? Did you embrace the Greek, the Armenian, or the Ethiopian Church, when you forsook the Roman? Can we not mark you the precise Date of your Churches, and say to all that Church, to all that exterior Society, in which you are Minister, you were not yesterday? But, said Mr. Claude here, were we not of this Church? We went not out, we were driven out of it. We were Excommunicated in the Council of Trent. Thus we went forth: But we carried the Church with us. What Discourse is this, Sir, said I to him? If you had not been driven out, would you have staid in it? To what purpose then is that Com∣mand so often repeated amongst you, Go forth of Babylon, my People? Tell me sincerely, Would you have staid in the Church, if she had not driven ye out? No sure, Sir, said Mr. Claude. To what purpose then, answer'd I, do you say here, That you were driven out? Because, said he, it is true. And well, Sir, proceeded I, it is true: This is common to you (be not dis∣pleas'd at what I am going to say) this is common to you with all Hereticks. The Church, in which they receiv'd Bap∣tism, cast them forth, Excommunicated them. They would perhaps have willingly stay'd in it to corrupt and seduce; but the Church cut them off. And as to what you say, That you were in this Church, which cast you out, and that you carry'd the Church with you, what Heretick may not say as much? 'Twas not of Heathens, that the Ancient Hereticks compos'd their Churches; 'twas of Christians bred in the Church. You also have not form'd yours by amassing Ma∣hometans; I agree it: But in this you do not outgo the Ex∣amples of the ancient Hereticks, and they were all able to say as well as you, That they were condemn'd by their Adversa∣ries. For they were not made to sit amongst the Judges, when their Novelty was condemn'd. But, Sir, reply'd Mr. Claude, we agree not this Novelty. What is in the Scripture, is not new. Patience, Sir, I beseech you, said I to him: None of the Ancient Hereticks agreed the Novelty of their Doctrin; they all alledg'd the Holy Scripture for themselves: But there was one Novelty, which they could not deny; to wit, That the Body of their Church was not yesterday, and you granted
it. And well, in fine, said Mr. Claude, if the Arians, if the Nestorians, if the Pelagians had been right at the Bottom, they would not have been to blame in their Proceeding. To blame or not, said I to him, is not, Sir, the Bottom of the Question: But it still continues evident, That you have the same Pro∣ceeding with them, the same Conduct, the same Defences; in a word, That in forming your Church you have done, as all the Hereticks did, and we do, what all the Orthodox have done. Every one may judg in his Conscience, which he had rather resemble, and I have no more to say. Mr. Claude was not silent on this occasion, but told me, That this Argument was excellent in Favor of the Jews and Pagans, and that they might maintain their Cause by the Reason, I made use of. Let us see, said I to him, Sir, and remember, that you promise us the same Argument. The same, answer'd he, without doubt: The Jews and Pagans upbraided the Christ∣ians with their newness; you know it: The Writings of Celsus, and so many others, are Proofs of it. I agree it, said I to him, and is this all? And 'twas true, proceeded he, That Christia∣nity was new, if we regard it in the State immediately prece∣ding. What, said I to him, when JESUS CHRIST began to preach, could they say to him, as I do to you, That in the Church, he was born in, there was yesterday no mention of him non his Coming? What then was St. John Baptist, Anna the Prophetess, Simeon, the Wise Men, and the Priests con∣sulted by Herod, when they answer'd him, That the Place of his Birth was Bethlehem? Was there any one Moment, when CHRIST was not expected in the Church, where he was born; and so well expected, that the Jews expect him still? 'Tis very true, Sir, That there was a Necessity, this Novelty should once be seen to happen, and this Change by CHRIST, expected at CHRISTs Coming. But JESUS CHRIST is not therefore new.Heb. xiii. v. 8. He is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever. 'Tis true; answer'd Mr. Claude, but the Synagogue agreed not, That JESUS was the CHRIST. But, reply'd I, The Syna∣gogue condemn'd not St. John Baptist; but the Synagogue heard, without contradicting them, the Wise Men, Simeon, and Anna. JESUS CHRIST gather'd in the Synagogue, the then true Church, the Children of GOD, which it con∣tain'd. The Synagogue at last condemn'd him. But
JESUS CHRIST had already founded his Church. He gave it its last Form presently after his Death, and the new People follow'd the old without any Interruption: These are undeni∣able Truths. And for what concerns Paganism, 'tis true the Pagans upbraided the Christians with their Newness. But what did the Christians answer? Did they not shew, That the Jews always believ'd the same GOD, which the Christians ador'd, and expected the same CHRIST? That the Jews believ'd all this yesterday, and the day before, and always without Interrupti∣on? But, Sir, once again, said Mr. Claude, The Gentils agreed not all this. What, answer'd I, was there amongst them any one so unreasonable, as to say, That there never were any Jews, or that this People expected not a CHRIST, and ador'd not one sole GOD, Creator of Heaven and Earth? Did not they shew the Pagans the manifest Beginning of their Opini∣ons, and the Date, I do not say of the Authors of their Sen∣timents, but of their Gods themselves, and this by their own Histories, by their own Authors, and by their own Chronolo∣gy? Do you believe, That a Pagan could have made a Christi∣an confess, That the Christian Religion was new, or that there never was any Society, which had the same Belief, the Christi∣ans then had, as I make you own, That all the Hereticks, which you and I acknowledg for such, came in this manner, and that you have done, as they did? See, Sir, how you prove, That the Jews and Pagans might maintain their Cause by the same Argument, I use: None can ever do it, nor can ever any one deny the evident Fact, vvhich I affirm, That vve do, as all the Orthodox, and you, as all the Hereticks have done. Here the Conversation ended. It had lasted five Hours with a great Attention of the whole Assembly. We heard one another peaceably: We spake on both sides close enough; and except the beginning, vvhere Mr. Claude a little enlarg'd his Discourse, in all the rest he came to the Matter, and pre∣sented himself to the Difficulty vvithout Recoiling. 'Tis true, he aim'd rather to entangle me in the Inconveniences, in vvhich I engag'd him, than to shevv, hovv he could himself get out: But in fine, all this proceeded from the Cause; and he assured∣ly said all, that his could furnish him vvith upon the Point, to vvhich vve had confin'd our selves.
For my part I car'd not to go from it, since 'twas that which Mademoiselle de Duras desir'd to have clear'd. She appear'd to me toucht: I nevertheless retir'd, trembling, and fearing, lest my weakness might have put her Soul in danger, and the Truth in doubt. I Visited her the next day.III. The Sequel of the Con∣ference. I was glad to see, she perfectly understood all, I had said. This is, what I had promis'd her. I had represented to her, That amidst the im∣mense Difficulties, which the Spirit of Cavilling, and the Depth of the Christian Doctrin, had caus'd to spring up a∣amongst men, GOD would have his Children provided of an easy Means to resolve themselves in what concern'd their Sal∣vation; that this Means was the Churches Authority; that this means was easy to be establisht, easy to be understood, easy to be follow'd; so easy, said I, and so clear, that, if you shall not understand, what I shall say upon it, I am contented you believe me to be in the wrong. This in effect must be so, when the matter is well handled: But I durst not promise my self, that I had treated it, as I ought. I knew with joy and thanksgiving, that GOD had turn'd all to good. The Argu∣ments, that ought to affect, affected her. She could not com∣prehend, how an ignorant private Person could without an in∣supportable pride believe, he might happen to understand the Scripture better than all the Universal Councels, and all the rest of the Church. She saw as well as I, how weak the Exam∣ple of the Synagogue was, when it condemn'd JESUS CHRIST, and how little reason there was to say, That the particular persons, who believ'd well, wanted an Exterior Authority to resolve them, when they had in the Person of JESUS CHRIST, the greatest and most visible Authority, that can be imagin'd. I pass'd again over the Doubt, in which one must be touching the Scripture, if one doubted of the Churches Authority. She said, she never so much as thought, that a Christian might doubt one moment of the Scripture; and besides she perfectly understood, that Mr. Claude, rejecting the Name of Doubt, acknowledg'd the Thing in other terms: Which serv'd only to make appear, how hard this Matter was both to think and say, since being forc't to own it, he thought not fit to do it in simple Terms. For in fine not to know, whether a thing
be or no, if it be not to Doubt, is nothing. It appear'd then clearly, That the two Propositions, which were in debate, were establisht: And I shew'd Mademoiselle de Duras in few words, That her Church, by believing two such strange Things, had chang'd the whole Order of instructing GODs Children, practis'd at all times in the Christian Church. For this purpose I needed only repeat to her, what she had heard me say, and what she had heard Mr. Claude grant. GOD nevertheless put in my heart something more express, and I said to her, as follows. The Order of instructing GODs Children, is to teach them, before all things, the Apostles Creed: I believe in GOD the Fa∣ther, and in JESVS CHRIST, and in the Holy Ghost, the holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, the Remission of Sins, and the rest. As much as the Faithful believes in GOD the Father, and in his Son JESUS CHRIST, and in the Holy Ghost, so much does he believe the Universal Church, where the Father, where the Son, where the Holy Ghost is ador'd. As much, I say, as he believes the Father, so much does he be∣lieve the Church, which makes Profession to believe, that GOD, the Father of JESUS CHRIST, has adopted Chil∣dren, whom he has united to his Son. As much as he believes in the Son, so much does he believe the Church, which he has assembled by his Blood, which he has establisht by his Doctrin, which he has founded on the Rock, and against which, he has promis'd, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail. As much as he believes in the Holy Ghost, so much does he believe that Church, to which the Holy Ghost was given for a Teacher. And he, that says, I believe in GOD, and in JESƲS CHRIST, and in the Holy Ghost,Rom. X. v. 10. when he says, I believe, confesses: With the heart he believeth unto Righteousness, and with the mouth Confession is made unto Salvation, as St. Paul says, and he knows, that the Faith, he has, is not a private Sentiment. There is a Church, a Society of Men, which believes, as he does: 'Tis the Uni∣versal Church, which is neither here, nor there, neither at this time, nor at another. She is not confin'd to one only Country, like the ancient Judaical Church; nor is she to end, as that was;Dan. II. v. 44. C. 7. v. 14. and her Kingdom shall not pass to other People, as 'tis written in Daniel. She is at all times, and in all places, and so dispers'd, that whoever will come to her, may. She has no
Interruption in her Succession, for there is not any time, when one cannot say, I believe the Ʋniversal Church: As there is not any time, but one may say, I believe in GOD the Father, and in his Son, and in the Holy Ghost. This Church is Holy, because all, she teaches, is holy; because she teaches all the Doctrin, which makes Saints, that is, all the Doctrin of JESUS CHRIST; because she encloses all the Saints in her Unity. And these Saints must not only be united in Spi∣rit: They are exteriorly united in the Communion of this Church; and this is meant by the Communion of Saints. In this Universal Church, in this Communion of Saints, is the Remis∣sion of Sins. There is Baptism, by which Sins are remitted; there is the Ministery of the Keys, by which whatsoever is re∣mitted or retained on Earth,Matt. xvi. v. 19. John xx. v. 23. is remitted or retained in Heaven. Be∣hold then in this Church an exterior Ministery, which lasts as long as the Church, that is to say, always, since this Church is believ'd at all times, not as a thing, which has been, or must be, but as a thing, which actually is. See then, to what this Church is joyn'd, and what is joyn'd to this Church. She is joyn'd immediatly to the Holy Ghost, which governs her: I believe in the Holy Ghost, the holy Catholic Church. To this Church is joyn'd the Communion of Saints, the Remission of Sins, the Resurrection of the Flesh, eternal Life. Out of this Church there is neither Communion of Saints, nor Remission of Sins, nor Resurrection to eternal Life. Behold the Faith of the Church establisht in the Creed. It makes no mention of the Scripture. Is it, because it despises it? GOD forbid. You shall receive the Scripture from the Hands of the Church; and because you never doubted of the Church, you shall ne∣ver doubt of the Scripture, which the Church has receiv'd from GOD, from JESUS CHRIST, and from the A∣postles; which she always keeps, as coming from that Source, which she puts into the Hands of all the Faithful. Methought, this Doctrin, truly Holy and Apostolical, wrought the Effect, it ought to work: But there is, said I, one Word more. 'Tis what I said to Mr. Claude, and I reduce it now to this most plain Argument, which every one may e∣qually understand, I mean, the Learned as the Ignorant, and the private Person as the Pastor: The baptiz'd Christian, be∣fore he reads the holy Scripture, can either make this Act of
Faith, I believe, that this Word is inspir'd by GOD, as I believe that GOD is, or he cannot. If he cannot, he then doubts of it; he is reduc'd to examin, whether the Gospel is not a Fa∣ble: But if he can make it, by what means shall he do it? The Holy Ghost shall put it in his Heart. This is no Answer; for it is agreed, That Faith in the Scripture comes from the Holy Ghost. The Question is concerning the exterior Means, which the Holy Ghost uses, and there can be no other but the Churches Authority. Thus every Christian receives from the Church, without examining, this Scripture; as a Writing inspir'd by GOD. Let us go a little farther. Does the Church only give us the Holy Scripture in Paper, the Bark of the Word, the Body of the Letter? No, without doubt, she gives us the Spirit, that is, the Sense of the Scripture: For to give us the Scripture without the Sense, is to give us a Body without a Soul, a Let∣ter, which kills. The Scripture without its lawful Interpreta∣tion, the Scripture destitute of its natural Sense, is a Knife to cut our Throats. The Arian cut his Throat by the Scri∣pture misunderstood; so did the Nestorian; so did the Pelagian. GOD forbid then, That the Church should give us only the Scripture, without giving us the Sense of it. She receiv'd them both together. When she receiv'd the Gospel of St. Mat∣thew, and the Epistle to the Romans, and the rest, she under∣stood them: This Sense, which she receiv'd with the Scripture, she has kept with the Scripture; and the same exterior Means, which the Holy Ghost uses, to make us receive the Holy Scri∣pture, he uses also to give us its true Sense. All this comes from the same Principle; all this is the Sequel of the same Design. As then there is nothing to examin after the Church, when she gives us the Holy Scripture; so there is nothing to exa∣min, when she interprets it, and proposes its true Sense. Where∣fore you see, that after the Councel of Jerusalem, Paul and Silas, said not, Examin this Decree; but they taught the Church to observe, what the Apostles had judg'd. In this manner has the Church always proceeded. I would not believe the Gospel, says St. Augustin, were I not mov'd by the Authority of the Catholic Church.Ep. 5. Cont. Manich. And a little after: Those, whom I believ'd, when they said to me, Believe the Gospel, shall I not be∣lieve, when they bid me not believe Manicheus. This Society of
Pastors, establisht by JESUS CHRIST, and continu'd until now, giving me the Gospel, has also told me, That I must de∣test Hereticks and evil Doctrins; I believe both together, and by the same Authority. After this manner were Christians instructed in the primitive Times,Tertull. praescrip. adv. haeret. 18. 37. in which Hereticks were told, That they were not re∣ceivable to dispute of the Scripture, because without Scripture they could be shewn, that Scripture is not for them; that there is no∣thing common between them and Scripture. And observe, if you please, That all Christian Societies, ex∣cept the Churches newly reform'd, have kept this manner of Instructing, Mr. Claude and I said, That the Greek Church, the Ethiopian, the Armenian, and others, were deceiv'd indeed in believing themselves the true Church; but all at least be∣lieve, That there is nothing to examin after the true Church. There is no other manner of teaching the Faithful. If we tell them, That they may understand the Holy Scripture bet∣ter, than all the rest of the Church together, we nourish Pride, we take away Docility. None says it, but the Churches, which call themselves Reformed. Every where else they say, as we do, That there is a true Church, which must be believ'd with∣out examining after her. This is believ'd not only in the true Church, but also in those, which imitate the true Church. The Pretended Reformed is the only Church, which says it not. If the true Church, which soever she is, says it; the Pretended Reformed is not then the true Church, because she says it not. Let them not tell us: The Ethiopian says it, the Greek says it, the Armenian says it, the Roman says it; which shall I be∣lieve? If your Doubt consisted in choosing between the Roman and the Greek, 'twould be necessary to enter into this Examen. But now 'tis agreed in your Religion, That the Greek Church, the Ethiopian Church, and the rest, are in the wrong against the Roman; and if they were true Churches, you ought, in leaving the Roman, which, as you say, was not, to have sought Communion with them. They are not then the true Church. No more are you: For the true Church believes, That we must believe with∣out
examining, what the true Church teaches. You teach the contrary. You call your selves the true Church, and you say at the same time, That one must examin after you: Which is to say, That one may be damn'd in believing you. You re∣nounce then from that time the Advantage of the true Church. You are not the true Church: You must be left: 'Tis here the Beginning must be. If any one in leaving you be tempted to unite himself to the Greek Church, he shall be answer'd. Mademoiselle de Duras having heard these things, nothing seem'd to me capable to trouble her, but the Habit contracted from her Infancy, and the fear of afflicting her Mother, for whom, I knew, she had all the Tenderness, and all the Re∣spect, that such a Mother deserves. I also saw, she was con∣cern'd for the Reproaches, that were made her, of having hu∣man Designs, and especially of having delay'd the doubting of her Religion, till after a Donation, made her by her Mother. Your own Conscience, said I to her, best knows, in what Condition you were, when this Donation was made you; whe∣ther you had any Doubt, and supprest it in prospect of pro∣curing your self this Advantage. I did not so much as think of it, answer'd she. You know well then, said I to her, That this Motive has not any part, in what you do. Continue therefore in Peace; provide for your Salvation, and let Men talk: For this Apprehension of having human Respects impu∣ted to you, is it self a sort of human Respect, and that of the most delicate and most to be fear'd. She requested me to repeat in Mr. Coton's Presence, what had been said, through a Desire, she had, that he should be In∣structed with her. He was sent for; we agreed on the Facts. Mr. Coton with an extream Sweetness made me some Objecti∣ons about the Doctrin, I had explicated. I answer'd them. He told me, he was not exercis'd in Dispute, nor vers'd in these Matters. He said true; he refer'd himself to Mr. Claude. I pray'd GOD to enlighten him, and departed to return to my Duty. After another Conference, which Mademoiselle de Duras and I had at St. Germain in the Dutches of Richelieu's Apartment, she told me, That she believ'd her self in condition to take her Resolution within a little while, and that there was nothing more to do, But to pray GOD to conduct her well. The Suc∣cess
was such, as we wisht. On the 22. of March I return'd to Paris to receive her Abjuration. She made it in the Church of the Reverend Fathers of the Christian Doctrin. The Ex∣hortation, I made her, tended only to represent to her, That she was returning into the Church, which her Fathers had forsaken; That she would not henceforth believe her self more capable than the Church, more illuminated than the Church, and fuller of the Holy Ghost than the Church; That she would receive from the Church, without examining, the true Sense of the Scripture, as she receiv'd from her the Scripture it self; That she was henceforth going to build upon the Rock; and that her Faith must fructify in good Works. She felt the Consolation of the Holy Ghost, and the Assistance was edify'd by her good Example. The End of the Conference.
REFLEXIONS ON A Writing OF Mr. CLAUDE'S
REFLEXIONS On a WRITING of MR. CLAUDE'S. YOU have seen in the Advertisement, which is at the Beginning of this Book, That, after Mr. Claude had read my Recital, he made an Answer to the Instruction, I had given Mademoiselle de Daras, joyn∣ing to it a Relation of our Conference, which he had drawn up, as he affirms in that Writing, the next day after ou Meet∣ing. I receiv'd from several Places, and even from the remotest Provinces, this Writing of Mr. Claude's with his Relation: but the perfectest and most correct Copy, I have seen, was communicated to me by the Duke of Cheoreuse, who had it from a Lady of Quality of the Pretended Reformed Religion. I have seen also in the same Duke's hands a Declaration, sign'd by Mr. Claude, in which he owns all the Writing; so that it cannot be doubted, but 'tis his. I find many things in this Writing, which manifestly con∣firm all, that is read in mine. I pretend not to repeat here all these things, nor answer to those, in which Mr. Claude appears to me, through the weakness of his Cause, as little to agree with himself, as with us. To make such Remarks, a Writing must be in the Hands of all People, so that every one may see, whe∣ther the Passages are truly related, and the Sense and Conse∣quence well taken; in a word, it must be publick. It shall be so, when Mr. Claude pleases. In the mean time, I will make some Reflexions on things, about which I think he can∣not disagree, and which may very much assist the Pretended Re∣formed to take a good Resolution upon the Matter, we have treated.
The First REFLEXION On M. Claude's Answer to the Acts extracted from the Discipline of the Pretended Reformed. MY First Reflexion is upon the Answer, made by Mr. Claude, to the Acts, extracted out of the Discipline of his Churches. I made use of these Acts to shew, That 'twas so necessary for all private persons to submit in Matters of Faith to the Churches infallible Authority; That the Pretended Reformed, who reject∣ed it in speculation, were at the same time forc't to acknow∣ledge it in Practice. What is most pressing in these Acts, is, That to the National Synod alone, excluding Consistories, Colloquies, and Provincial Synods, is attributed the last and fi∣nal Resolution by GODS Word.Discip. ch. 5. Art. 31. vid. sup. p. 13. Discip. ch. 9. Art, 3. Observ. p. 144. vid. sup. p. 13. But because this is the last and final Resolution, the Churches and Provinces, sending Deputies to this Synod, swear solemnly to submit to whatever shall be conclu∣ded in that Assembly, being perswaded, that GOD will preside in it by his holy Spirit and his Word. Thus because they believe an en∣tire Submission, due to this supreme Sentence, when it shall be pronounc'd, they swear to it, even before 'tis given; 'tis to act consequentially. But if after a Promise, confirm'd by so solemn an Oath, they pretend, a Liberty is still left them to ex∣amin, I confess, I know not, what Words signifie, and there never was any mental Evasion, so full of Illusion and Equivo∣cation. It may well be believ'd without my telling it, That the Mini∣sters find themselves prest by so clear an Argument: In such Occasions, where the Truth is discover'd with so much evi∣dence, the more one perceives the Difficulty, the more also one finds himself embarrass'd. So there is nothing more visible than the Perplexity, which appears in Mr. Claude's Answer; I say even in his Answer, such, as himself sets it down in his own Relation. He is reduc'd to say, That they make this Oath, because one ought to presume well of such an Assembly; and more∣over,
That these Words, We  to submit to your Assembly, be∣ing perswaded, that God will preside in it, include a Condition, with∣out which the Promise, thus sworn, has not its Effect. This is all,1 Repl. p. 344. Chap. 35. p. 192. Nog. 2. p. ch. 23. p. 447. p. 298. Preserv. art. 15. p. 286. that can be answer'd. The Anonymus, who dedicated his Book to Mr. Conrare, first made me this Answer. Another Anonymus, whose Book is Entitled The Disguisement unmaske, made it after him. Mr. Noguier and Mr. de Bruyes, other Au∣thors, that answer'd the Exposition, had only this to say. Mr. Jurieux stuck to this Answer in his Preservative, only explica∣ting more plainly than the rest, That all this Perswasion, which serves for a Ground to the Oath, is a Clause of Civility, the Terms whereof must not be abus'd. Mr. Claude had no other Re∣ply, and this is the only one, which still appears in his Rela∣tion. Thus this so serious and solemn an Oath of all our Reformed and their Churches in a Body to their National Synod is reduc'd to this Proposition, which would be in the bottom but an insigni∣ficant Complement: We swear before GOD to submit to all, that you shall decide, if you decide by his Word, as we hope and presume, you will. But why then is not this great Oath pronounc'd in these Terms, but that they well saw, to reduce it to these Terms, would be to say nothing, and they would say, or at least seem to say something? For my part, the more I consider, what is said in the Dis∣cipline of the Pretended Reformed concerning this Oath of the Churches, the farther I find it from the sense, they would give it. I find first, as I have observ'd in the Conference, That this Oath is made only for the National Synod, that is, for the Sy∣nod, in which the last and final Resolution is to be made by GODs Word; and the National Synod of Castres has declar'd, That there should not be us'd in the Letters of Mission,Disc. ch. 9. Art. 3. Obs. p. 144. brought by the De∣puties of particular Churches to the Colloquies and Provincial Synods SƲCH ABSOLƲTE Clauses of Submission, as are inserted in the Letters of the Provinces to the National Synod. Why; but only to shew the Difference, there is between the last Decision, and all the rest? I effect, when I sought in what this Difference consisted, I found another sort of Submission for the Colloquies and Pro∣vincial
Synods. 'Tis, that those, who are accus'd to alter the sound Doctrin,Disc. ch. 8. Art. 3. are antecedently oblig'd to make an express Promise not to seminate any of their Opinions before the meeting of the Collo∣quy or the Provincial Synod. 'Tis a Rule of Discipline and Policy. But when they come to the Synod, in which this last and final Resolution is to be made, the particular persons indeed reiterate the same Promise; but they stop not there, the Churches in Body add this great Oath of submitting entirely to the Deci∣sion, being perswaded, that GOD himself will be the Author of it. A bare human Presumption, as Mr. Claude calls it, a Clause of Civility, as Mr. Jurieux stiles it, cannot be the matter and foun∣dation of an Oath: we also see, That not only private persons, but also Consistories and whole Provinces, perceiv'd in this Oath something stronger, than they will at present let us understand in it, insomuch that they made a great Resistance against it, which could not be vanquisht but by a long time, and the rei∣terated Decrees of National Synods. I see this Resistance continue till the year 1631. In this year and before I find almost continually in the National Sy∣nods whole Provinces censur'd, because their Deputation, or, as they term it, their Envoy had not this Clause of Submission. The Churches were difficultly brought to make an Oath, so little agreeable to the Doctrin, they were inspir'd with, and to swear, against the Principles of the new Reformation, such a Submission to an Assembly, which after all, whatever Name might be given it, was but an Assembly of Men, still (according to their Principles) liable to mistake: but they must pass through it. They said, they did nothing, if they did not at last oblige men to an absolute Submission; and that to leave them liberty to examin after the last and final Resolu∣tion, was to nourish Pride, Dissention, and Schism. Thus, against the Principles of the new Reformation, were they fain to give other Idea's, and 'twas resolv'd to stick unal∣terably to the Submission and Oath in the Terms, we have observ'd. The Reason, us'd by the Synod of Rochel to oblige the Pro∣vinces to this Clause of Submission to such things, as should be re∣solv'd in the National Synod, is, That 'twas necessary to the Validity of the Assemblies Conclusions. In the general to render the Acts
of an Assembly valid, 'twould be sufficient for those, of whom it should be compos'd, to have a Power of bringing to it the Suffrages of those, that send them; and the Deputies as well of the Colloquies, as of the Provincial Synods came always furnisht with such Powers. But there was something more strong requir'd for the National Synod; and since the last Reso∣lution was to be made, to render such an Act valid, and give it all its force, 'twas thought necessary it should be preceded by a Submission as absolute, as the Resolution ought to appear ir∣revocable. To this Decision of the Synod of Rochel that of Tonneins added,Ibid. That the Submission should be promis'd in proper terms to all, that should be concluded, and decreed WITHOƲT CONDI∣TION AND MODIFICATION. Now, this is no∣thing but a Clause of Civility, and a conditional Promise, that might be made, if they would, not only to the Provincial Sy∣nods, to the Colloquy, and Consistory, but also to every par∣ticular Minister. Nevertheless they neither make it to these particular Ministers, nor to this Consistory, nor to these Col∣loquies, nor to these Provincial Synods: why so, but to reserve something peculiar and proper to the Assembly, where the fi∣nal Resolution is to be made, after which there remains nothing but to obey? But if all, that is here particular and proper, be at the bottom only Words, was this worth employing the Churches of the new Reformation, and five or six of their National Synods? This is, what they ought to explicate, if they would say any thing: yet they speak not one word of it, thô this Diffi∣culty flies, as one may say, in their faces, and that I have started it expresly. In fine, To reduce my Argument in few words, every Oath ought to be founded on a certain and known Truth. Now this Promise made to the National Synod, and confirm'd by the solemn Oath of all the Pretended Reformed Churches, We swear and promise to follow your Decisions, being perswaded, that you will judge well; this Promise, I say, which way soever it be turn'd, has no Certainty, but in one of these two Senses. The first; We swear and promise to follow your Decisions, if we find, you judge well: a thing indeed very certain, but at the same time illusory, since there is no person on the earth, to whom
one may not say as much; and as I observ'd in the Conference, Mr. Claude may say it to me, as well as I to him. The Se∣cond, We are so perswaded, you will judge well, that we swear and promise to follow your Decisions; in which Case the Oath is false, if we are not throughly assur'd, that the Assembly, 'tis made to, cannot judge amiss. All, the Pretended Reformed have now to do, is to choose, which they will of these two Senses, one of which is a mani∣fest Illusion, and the other, which seems also the only natural Sense, clearly supposes the Churches Infallibility. Nor must they answer here, That this Submission respects only publick Order and Discipline; for in matter of Faith a Decision obliges to nothing less, than what the Apostle St. Paul says,Rom. 10. 10. To believe with the Heart, and confess with the Mouth. And our Reformed themselves understand it so, when they declare in their Discipline, That the Effect of this their National Synods last and final Decision is,Vid. sup. p. 13. That it may be acquiesc'd in from point to point with an express disowning of the contrary Doctrin. He then, who swears to submit to a Decision, that shall be made in an Assembly, swears to believe with his Heart, and confess with his Mouth the Doctrin which shall be there decided. But for the making this Promise, and confirming it with an Oath, 'tis requisite, the Assembly, 'tis made to, should have a Divine Promise of being assisted by the Holy Ghost, which is, That it should be infallible. Mr. Claude insinuated in the Conference, That there was in effect a Divine Promise, That those, who sought, should find; and that the Oath of his Churches might have its foundation in this Assurance. But he will never by this Answer get out of the Difficulty, he is in. For to render the Oath conforma∣ble to the Promise, it must be conditional, as the Promise is: and as JESUS CHRIST said, If you search well, you shall find, the sense of the Oath should also be, If you do your Duty, we will believe you; which would be to fall again into the pitiful Illusion, we have rejected. To the end then the Oath, we treat of, may be made with∣out rashness, it must be founded on an absolute Promise from GOD, on a Promise, which secures us even against the Infi∣delities of men, such as JESUS CHRIST makes his Church,
when he indefinitly and absolutely assures her,Mat. 16. v. 18. That the of Hell shall not prevail against her. As long as our Reformed shall persist in denying, That the Authority of the Churches Decisions is founded on this Pro∣mise, their Oath will be always an Illusion, or a manifest Rashness; and they will find themselves forc't either to defer more, than they are willing, to the Churches Authority, or to acknowledge, That they have by magnificent words impos'd on the Peoples Credulity: since that after having distinguisht the Churches last Decision from all the rest by so remarkable a Character, and so particular a Protestation of Submission, 'twill be found in the bottom, That this Submission, confirm'd by so singular an Oath, is of no other Nature or Kind, than what is naturally due to all Ecclesiastical Assemblies, and every lawful Pastor; that is, one may always proceed from it to new Doubts, and still examin, after the last Resolution, as after all the rest. 'Tis thus indeed according to the Principles of the new Re∣formation; but the Principles of the new Reformation have not been able to change the necessary Condition of Humani, which, for the hindring Divisions, and quieting Mens Min, requires a final Decision, independent of all new Examination, either General or Particular. The Christian Church is not exempt from this Law; and the more regular she is, the more her Constitution depend on an entire Submission of Mind, the more need she has of such an Authority. Wherefore from the very beginning of Christia∣nity, GOD himself has put into the Hearts of all true Christi∣ans, That they must no longer search nor examin, after the Church has determin'd. This inviolable Tradition has wrought its Effect in our Reformed, maugre their Principles. Nor do I wonder at it.Re. de  S. 29. St. Basil very wisely and very truly said, That Tradition made men speak more than they would, and inspir'd into them things, contrary to their Sentiments. And if our Reformed will not ow to Tradition this last and final Resolution, and this Submission so solemnly sworn: 'tis then Necessity and Experience, that has forc't them to it; 'tis because there must an End be put to the Doubts and Examinations of private per∣sons by an absolute Authority, if they will have Peace, and uphold Humility; 'tis that if they neither have, nor exercise
this Authority, they must make a shew of having and exerci∣sing it, and at least give the Idea of it; 'tis in a word, be∣cause one may indeed discourse and answer Arguments by Words, but the natural Ignorance, Infirmity, and Pride of Mans Mind requires other Remedies. The Second REFLEXION On one of the Propositions acknowledg'd by Mr. Claude in the Conference, and on the Examen, he prescribes after the Judgment of the Church. I Pretended to shew is the Conference, That by denying the Churches infallible Authority, one falls into these two In∣conveniences; and I said not into one of the two, but in∣evitably into both of them. The first is, That every particu∣lar person, how ignorant soever he may be, is oblig'd to be∣lieve, That he may understand GODs Word better than the most universal Synods, and all the rest of the Church toge∣ther. The second, That there is a time, when a Baptiz'd Christian is not in condition to make an Act of Faith upon the Holy Scripture; but that, whether he will or no, he shall find himself oblig'd to doubt, whether it be inspir'd by GOD. I have not seen any of the Pretended Reformed, in whom these two Propositions have not caus'd an horror, and who has not told me, he should be so far from ever believing them himself, that he should detest those, which did. Let us see then, how it continues fixt by the Conference, that they are Consequences of the Pretended Reformeds Doctrin, and such ma∣nifest Consequences, that they are own'd by the Mini∣sters. And indeed, not to depart from Mr. Claude's Relation, he himself asserts in it: That after all Ecclesiastical Assemblies e∣very
particular Person ought to  whether they have well understood GODs Word, or no When he had spoken of human Interests, which often, is he said,  the Truth in the most authentical and most universal Assemblies of the Church: For to destroy this Answer, and shew, that 'twas in the bottom nothing but a Civil, I  him, whether all pas∣sing in Order, and without the appearance of any human In∣terest in the Deliberation, every private Person must not yet examin. He acknowledg'd, he must; and  it still in his own Relation, maintaining, That there is not any Absurdity; nor any Pride in a private Persons  that he may un∣derstand GODs Word better than all Ecclesiastical Assemblies, what good Order soever is kept in them, and of whatsoever Persons they  be This Proposition and Doctrin will appear  to every docible Spirit. But to the end the thing may be let us make Application of this Doctrin in a particular Exam∣ple. The Calvinistical Church since these  or years from her first beginning to be establisht, has not held any Assembly more  more  than the Syno of Drt. Besides all the Churches of the , all the rest of the same Belief, that of England, that of , those of the  those of  those of Switzerland, that of and the est of the German Language, were there by their Deputies, and receiv'd it; and to the end nothing might be wanting to it, if the  Churches of this Realm were hindred from  at it, they adopted all its Doctrin in the National Synod of  1631. where all the Articles of and sworn to by the whole Synod, and afterwards by all-the Provinces and all the particular Churches Since that time none of the Pretended Reformed  this Synod. The alone, who were there  blame is Doctrin, and relate the Cabals and the Share, Policy and the Interests of the House of  had in it. All also have yielded; and if there be any thing, that can be said  have been receiv'd with an unanimous Confe by all the Churches of the Pretended Reformation, 'tis without doubt the  of this Synod. And nevertheless I will , Whe∣ther
any private Person whatever of his Church may rely up∣on an Authority, so great amongst them, as this is, without examining any farther, if he be press'd to Answer positively Yea or No to so precise a Question, and in a Fact so well circumstantiated, he must say No, and that in fine, notwith∣standing all this, they were but men, how able, how illumma∣ted, how holy soever they are imagin'd, still subject to fail, whose Sentiments, if one should follow blindfold and without examining, he would equal men to GOD. Thus, according to the Maxims of the new Reformation, every private Person, even to the most ignorant women, ought to believe, that they can understand the holy Scripture better than an Assembly, compos'd of whatever is greatest in that whole Church, which he acknowledges to be the only one, where GOD is purely serv'd; and not only better than this Assembly, but than all the rest of the Church, and than all, that he knows in the whole Universe. This is, what Mr. Claude has acknowledg'd to me; This is in Substance, what he still says in his own Relation; and this is, what every Minister, whether he will or no, shall own in a Conference in the presence of any one, that shall desire it, unless he obstinately resolves not to answer positively: In which case he will be seen to shuffle, and this Tergiversation will be stronger than an Acknowledgment, since 'twill not only shew, that the Acknowledgment is ine∣vitable, but 'twill also make appear, that he is sensible of its per∣nicious Consequences. And what I say of the Synod of Dort, Mr. Claude and every other Minister will be forc'd to say of the Council of Nice, of the Council of Constantinople, of that of Ephesus, of that of Chalcedon, and the rest, which they and we receive with com∣mon accord: And when they shall say it, they will say nothing new, or unusual in their Religion. Calvin said it in formal terms, when speaking in general of all the Councils of the precedent Ages,4. Instit. c. 9. he writ these words: I pretend not in this place, that all the Councils must be condemn'd, and all their Decrees vaca∣ted. Nevertheless, proceeded he, you will object to me, that I so order them, as to permit every one indifferently to receive or reject, what the Councils should have establisht; by no means, that's none of my Intent. You would say, he were very far from it. The Majesty of Councils, and the Authority of so great a Name,
moves him at first; but the Consequence of his Doctrin makes him soon forget, what he seem'd willing to say to their advan∣tage: For see, how he concludes. When, says he, the Authority of a Council is alledg'd, I desire first, it be consider'd, in what time, and for what cause it was assembled, and what Persons assisted at it; afterwards, that the principal Point be examin'd according to the Rule of the Scripture, so that the Councils Definition have its weight, and be as a Prejudice, but that it hinder not the Examination. This is, what all this careful Enquiry after Time, Matter, and Persons, in fine terminates in, to wit, That at what Time soever a Council is held, what Matter soever is there treated, and or what Persons soever 'tis compos'd, every one indifferently, for that was the Question, should examin the principal Point by GODs Word, and believe, he can understand that Divine Word better than all the Councils. See, how far these Gentlemen psh the Examen: They drive it yet much farther, since they will have one examin af∣ter the Apostles. This is not a Consequence, which I draw from their Doctrin: 'Tis their own very Proposition and Do∣ctrin in formal Terms, and particularly that of Mr. Claude. For upon what I saith in the Exposition,Exp. Ar. 19. that after the Council of Jerusalem,Act. XV. v. 18. and the Decision of the Apostles, where they said: It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us, nowe had any thing more to examin, and that in effect Pal and Barnabas with Si∣las, as 'tis written in the Acts,Act. XVI. v. 4. went through the Churches, teach∣ing them, not to examin, what the Apostles had done, but to keep the Decrees, they had ordain'd: Because I concluded thence, That they gave the Form to all following Ages, and taught us, how in all times the Faithful ought to submit to the Churches Decisions without examining; after several Answers, but all frivolous, they were fain at last to answer me clearly, That one ought yet to examin after the Council of the Apo∣stles. 'Tis the , 'tis the first, that answer'd the Expo∣sition, who writ in these terms: We do not see, that the Apostles publisht their Decision with an absolute Order, it should 'be obey'd: but they sent Paul, Barnabas, and Sila for to instruct the Faithful to keep this Ordinance, that is evidently, to perswade them the Mo∣tives and Grounds of it, which says not, that they were forbid to ex∣am.
This is, what the Anonymus says: The Place is remarkable: you will find it in the Nineteenth Article of the first Answer, in the fourth and last Observation he makes on the Council of the Apostles, Page the 328th. This is not a particular Senti∣ment of this Authors, since there is plac'd in the Front of his Book the Approbation of four Ministers of Charenton, of which Mr. Claude is one, to the end he may not say, I charge him with a strange Doctrin in imputing to him that of this Ano∣mus. Thus 'tis not the unbelieving Jews and Gentiles, 'tis the Faithful, the Christian Churches, that ought to examin after the Apostles; and after the Apostles assembled, and after they have pronounc'd, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us: And this prodigious Doctrin is taught in a Church, which vau of hearing nothing, but the pure Words of the Apostles, See, whither the Ministers and the Pretended Reformed, and particu∣larly Mr. Claude, are forc'd by their Belief to carry the necessi∣ty of the Examen. There was nothing left, but to say, we must yet examin after JESVS CHRIST, and that with all his Miracles, and all the Authority, given him by his Father, he had not e∣nough to oblige men to follow him on his Word, and with∣out examining: Mr. Claude said it in our Conference, and says it again in his Relation. I desire the prudent Reader to believe, that in a Matter of this importance, I will neither impose upon him, nor exagge∣rate: Let him follow me only with attention, and he shall see the Truth plainly appear. You have seen, how I objected in the Conference, That un∣less there were acknowledg'd a living and speaking Authority, to which every particular Person is oblig'd to submit without examining, private Persons would be brought to the Presump∣tion of believing, they could understand the Holy Scripture better than all the Councils together, and than all the rest of the Church. To prove, that in this there was not any thing so presump∣tuous, or absurd, Mr. Claude answer'd me, that in the time when JESUS CHRIST was upon the Earth, the Case had hapned, when a private Person ought to raise his own Judg∣ment above that of the Synagogue assembled, which con∣demn'd
JESUS CHRIST: That this was so far from be∣ing a Sentiment of Pride, that 'twas the Act of a perfect Faith. This Answer, I confess, struck an Horror in me: For, to make it good, one must say, That in the time, when the Sy∣nagogue judg'd JESUS CHRIST, and he himself was on the Earth, there was not upon Earth any living and speaking Au∣thority, to which Men were oblig'd to submit without exa∣mining: So that one ought to examin after JESUS CHRIST, it not being permitted to believe him on his Word. I made this Answer to Mr. Claude, and shew'd him, That they were then so far from a necessity of every ones determining him∣self by a particular Examen, and setting himself above every living and speaking. Authority, that there was at that time one, the greatest, which ever was or could be, to wit, That of JESUS CHRIST, and of the Truth it self; to whom the Father publickly bare Witness by a Voice from Heaven, by the greatest and most visible Miracles, that were ever wrought, and in fine, by the most resplendent, as well as the most cer∣tain Means, the Divine Omnipotence could make use of. If I observe in the Conference, there was no Answer to this Argument, 'tis very apparent, that in effect there ought to be none. Mr. Claude nevertheless in his Relation says, he answer'd me, That JESUS CHRISTs Miracles made one of the Matters in Question; That there were false Miracles, which Moses in Deuteronomy advis'd the Israelites to take heed of; That the Synagogue had judg'd JESUS CHRISTs Mi∣racles to be done in the Name of Beelzeub; That in fine an Authority decides nothing, till it be first receiv'd, and that JESƲS CHRIST's was not so as yet, since 'twas in dispute, whether they should receive it, or reject it. I am oblig'd to observe, That as∣suredly I heard nothing of all this in the Conference; and you will soon see, that it were indeed better to be silent, than to say such things. But since Mr. Claude will have said them, he must then also say, that, because JESUS CHRISTs Miracles were rejected as deceitful Signs by the Envious, by the Obstinate, in one word by the declar'd Enemies of the Truth, These Mi∣racles were not convincing enough to oblige Men to believe JESUS CHRIST on his Word without examining farther; and that, for Example, after he had rais'd Lazarus in express
Testimony,John xi. v. 42. That GOD had sent him, those, who beheld, with their Eyes so great a Miracle, were, I do not say permitted, but expresly oblig'd to examin, whether JESƲS CHRIST was sent by GOD. He must, I say, carry the necessity of the Examen to this excess: Otherwise 'twill be true, as I have said, That there was then a visible and palpable Authority, to which every one ought to submit without examining; so that there was never any time, when Men were less expos'd to the Temptation of Pride by elevating themselves above all living and speaking Authority, since JESƲS CHRIST, the most living and most speaking, as well as the greatest and most in∣fallible, that ever was, was then on the Earth, and that they preferr'd not themselves before the Synagogue but by submit∣ting to JESƲS CHRIST, whose Miracles, as himself said, took away all Excuse from those,John. xv. v. 22, 23, 24. that believ'd not in him: Which the Assembly, that condemn'd him, knew so well, that they found no other Answer to his Miracles, nor any other Means to resist him, but to make him away, and with him Lazarus also,John xi. v. 47. & xii. v. 10. to stifle, if they could, at once with the Mira∣cles, they had seen, the Memory of him, that wrought them. They must not then here think to dazle People with frivo∣lous Answers, and make the Readers lose the Consequence of an Argument by bringing in unprofitable Questions. I mean, That 'tis to no Purpose to start up here the Question con∣cerning deceitful Signs, nor to answer, That the Syna∣gogue doubted of the Truth of JESƲS CHRIST's Mi∣racles. The Question is only to know, whether this Doubt was not the Effect of an evident Malice, and in fine, whether it be not certain amongst Christians, That there was in JESƲS CHRIST's Miracles so full a Demonstration of the Divine Power, and so clear a Confirmation of JESƲS CHRIST's Mission, that every reasonable Spirit was oblig'd to yield with∣out any farther Examination, so that there was then a living and speaking Authority, to which there was nothing to be op∣pos'd, but a gross Ignorance, and a manifest Obstinacy. This is the matter in Debate, and if after this Explication of the Question, they think still to escape by saying with Mr. Claude, That JESUS CHRIST's Authority was not receiv'd, they must go farther,John viii. v. 13. and say to JESUS CHRIST himself with the Jews: Thou bearest Record of thy self, thy Record is not true. Then we
will answer with JESUS CHRIST:John viii. v. 13, 14, 16, 18. John v. v. 36. Thô I bear Record of my self, yet my Record is true. And again: I am not alone, but my Father, that sent me, bears also Witness of me. And again: The Works which the Father hath given me to finish, the same Works that I do, bear Witness of me, that the Father hath sent me. And in fine:C. xv. v. 22, 24. They have no Cloak for their Sin: If I had not done among them the Works which none other Man did, they had not had Sin: but now they have both seen, and hated both me and my Fa∣ther. The meaning of this is, That the Miracles are clear, the Authority is incontestable, and the Resistance can have no other Ground but a blind Hatred. I expect, they will yet answer me, That JESUS CHRIST added after all this:John v. v. 39. Search the Scriptures, they are they which te∣stify of me; and that they will dare to conclude from thence, how one might and ought to examine after JESUS CHRIST, so that the Word, he pronounc'd, shews us not a superabundance of Conviction in the Scripture, but an insufficiency of Autho∣rity in the Person of JESUS CHRIST. If they make yet this Objection, we have nothing to do, but to hold our Peace, and leave JESUS CHRIST to defend his own Cause. In the mean time we will conclude, That 'tis JESUS CHRISTs Authority, which we revere in his Church. If we say, the Church must be believ'd without examining, 'tis be∣cause JESUS CHRIST, who teaches and guides her, is above all Examen. We will not forbear to say also in imitation of JESUS CHRIST, Search the Scriptures: We shall confound them by this Scripture, which they say, they believe, and we shall see them also faint under this Examination, but it shall be, after we have forc'd them to acknowledge, that we must submit, without examining, to the Churches Authority, in which that Spirit, whom JESUS CHRIST has sent to keep his place, always speaks. There is then nothing less to the Purpose than the Example of the Synagogue, and our Pretended Reformed, depriv'd of this Example, which was their chiefest Strength, continue alone to believe themselves, every one in particular, capable to un∣derstand the holy Scripture better than whatsoever in the Uni∣verse has Authority to interpret it, and to judge of Doctrin, and than all the Faithful, that appear to them in the Worl'd: Which is the Error of the Independents, or something worse.
They will say, That this private Person, who examins af∣ter the Church, shall always be well assur'd not to be alone in his Sentiment, since there will always remain some secret elected one, who will think, as he does: As if, without refu∣ting this Vision, it were not a Pride detestable enough to set himself alone above all, that is seen and heard to speak in the whole Church besides. They will say again: 'Tis no Pride to believe ones self enlightned by the Holy Ghost. But on the contrary, 'tis the height of Pride, That particular Persons should dare to believe, the Holy Ghost will instruct them, and leave in Error all the Faithful, that appear in the rest of the Church. Nor is it to any purpose to answer, as Mr. Claude does in his Relation,John iii. v. 8. in his Relation, That the Spirit bloweth, where he will: For they must shew, that this Spirit which reposes on the Hum∣ble, ceases not to breath on those, who believe themselves alone more capable to understand the Scripture, than all the rest of the Church, since they examin after her; and not on∣ly to breath upon them, but himself also to inspire into them this proud Thought. But in fine, however it is, and without disputing any farther, since this is no place for it, we have shewn, that 'tis a Doctrin acknowledg'd in the new Reforma∣tion, That every particular Person ought to examin after the Church, and consequently ought to believe, That he may happen to understand the Scripture better than she and all her Assemblies. Those, that abhor this Presumption, or that upon Examination find not in themselves this false Capacity, have no more to do, but to seek their Salvation in another Church than that, in which so prodigious a Doctrin is pro∣fess'd.
The Third REFLECTION, On another Proposition, acknowledg'd by Mr. Claude in the Conference: An Explication of the manner of Instructing Christians; and, That the Churches infallible thority is neces∣sary for the knowing and understanding of Scripture. THE second Absurdity, I promis'd to make Mr. Claude and every good Protestant avow, is, That unless there be acknowledg'd in the Church an Authority, after which there must be no more examining nor doubting, there is a Necessity of setting a Point of time, in which the Believer at the Age of Reason cannot make an Act of Faith upon the Scripture, and in which consequently he must doubt, whether it be true or false. I assign'd for this Point of Doubt all the time, in which a Christian, for what cause soever, has not read the Holy Scripture. Mr. Claude here cries out against so de∣testable a Proposition; and I persist to say, That he not only own'd it in the Conference, but also that, in what manner soever he here endeavours to turn things, he has not been a∣ble to do it so well, but that he still confesses it in the Re∣lation. In truth, this is one of the Places, in which I least remem∣ber our exact Words. But there is still enough to convince him, since if this Relation becomes publick, every one will see, he here acknowledges in formal Terms, That he, who has not yet read the Holy Scripture, believes it to be GODs Word with human Faith, because his Father told him so, which is the State of a Ca∣techumen; and when he has himself read this Book, and felt the Efficacy of it, he believes it to be GODs Word, no longer with an human Faith, because his Father told him so, but with a divine Faith, because he has himself immediatly felt its Divinity, and this is the State of a Believer.
'Tis then true, that he has acknowledg'd the Time, I un∣dertook to shew, when a Baptiz'd Christian is not in a Con∣dition to make an Act of Supernatural and Divine Faith upon the Holy Scripture, since he believes it to be GODs Word only by an human Faith, and divine Faith cannot come till after the reading of it. In what manner soever he turns this human Faith, 'tis an horrible thing, that a Baptiz'd Christian, at the Age of Rea∣son, cannot make upon the Scripture an Act of that Faith, by which we are Christians. For thence it follows, That a Christian at his first going to read the holy Scripture, ought neither to be inclin'd of himself, or induc'd by any other, to say at opening it. I believe, as I believe that GOD is, that the Scripture, I am going to read, is his Word. On the contrary they must make him say: I am going to examin, whether hence∣forth, during the rest of my life, I ought to read this Scripture with such a Faith. 'Tis to overthrow the whole Order of In∣struction; 'tis to lose the Fruit of Baptism; 'tis to reduce Bap∣tiz'd Christians to instruct their Children, as if they were not so, and that they were yet to deliberate, of what Religion they should be. And what Mr. Claude says concerning the Scripture, the same he must say on the Faith of the Trinity, on that of the Incarnation, on that of JESƲS CHRISTs Mission, and the Re∣demption of Mankind. For that, which forces Mr. Claude and every Protestant to say, That the Believer, who has not read the holy Scripture, can believe it only with an human Faith to be inspir'd by GOD, is, That otherwise they must acknow∣ledg an Act of Divine Faith on the Churches sole Authority: Which would be to own this Authority as infallible, and ru∣in the very Foundations of all the new Reformation. But the same Argument returns upon all the Articles of our Faith; and if the Faithful can believe with a divine Faith, both the Trinity and the Incarnation and Mission of JESƲS CHRIST on the sole Authority of the Church, and before he has read the ho∣ly Scripture, I shall always conclude with equal Certainty, That the Churches Authority will be infallible. By the Con∣sequence then of Mr. Claude's and all the Protestants Principle, we must in reducing the Christians, who go to read the holy Scripture, to a bare human Faith concerning this Scripture, re∣duce
them at the same time to the like on the most Essential Articles of our belief. This was not the Method of our Forefathers; they did not thus teach Christians to instruct their Children. When they baptiz'd them in their Infancy, they said in that young Age Credo, I believe. No matter, thô our Reformers have chang'd this Form; 'twas us'd in the very first Ages, and will be al∣ways holy and venerable, maugre all they can do. But this Form, us'd towards Children, shews us, that when they shall have the use of Reason, they must be immediatly taught to make an Act of Faith, and time must not be lost in exciting them to it. They will then be capable of it: they may say the same Creed, they should have said, if they had been bap∣tiz'd at the Age of Understanding; and to reduce them to a Faith barely human, is to take from them the Grace of their Baptism, and justify the Practice, as well as the Doctrin of the Anabaptists. And I conjure the Gentlemen of the Pretended Reformed Re∣ligion not to believe, that I alledge here the Anabaptists by way of exaggeration, or to render them odious: these man∣ners are not beseeming Christians. I am ready to make good, that the Doctrin, taught here by Mr. Claude, and which all Protestants must teach with him, introduces Anabaptism. For if the Acts of divine Faith must be held in suspense, till such time as one has read the holy Scripture, and be instructed by himself; if all the Acts, that precede this Instruction, are not Acts of Christians: since they have for their foundation only an human Faith: for the same reason Bap must be deferr'd till that time, and we must not make Christians, that at the Age of Reason are uncapable to produce Acts of their Religion.
The Fourth REFLECTION, On Mr. Claude's objecting the same Diffi∣culty to us about the Church, as we do to him about the Scripture. 'TIS in vain for Mr. Claude to answer us, That he will make us the same Argument for the Church, as we make him for the Scripture: for, to do this, as we shew him a point of time, which even at the use of Reason necessarily precedes the Reading of the Scripture, he must also be able to shew us one, that precedes the Churches Instructions: but this he will never find. Whatever he does, we shall always mark him a a Point of time, before the reading of the Scripture, which is that, when the Church puts it into our hand: but before the Church there is nothing; she prevents all our Doubts by her Instructions. 'Tis an Error to imagin, that we must always examin, before we believe. The Happiness of those, who are born, as I may say, in the Bosom of the true Church, is, That GOD has given her such an Authority, that we believe at first what she proposes, and that Faith precedes, or rather excludes Exami∣nation. To ask now, by what Motives GOD makes us sensible of his Churches Authority, is to depart visibly from the Question. He wants not Motives to fasten his Children to his Church, to which he has given so particular and so resplendent Cha∣racters. This very thing, that of all the Societies in the world she is the sole, to whom none can shew her beginning, or any interruption of her visible and exterior State by any averr'd Fact, whilst she shews all other Societies, that envi∣ron her, theirs by Facts, which themselves cannot deny; this very thing is a sensible Character, that gives an inviolable Au∣thority to the true Church. GOD wants not Motives to make his Children perceive this so particular Character of his Church. But whatever these Motives are, not to forestall them here,
this being no place for it, 'tis certain, that there are some; since that in fine we must be able to believe on the Churches word, before we have read the holy Scripture, and that in the first Instruction, we receive, without speaking of the Scripture, we are taught to say, as a fundamental Act of our Faith, I believe the Catholick Church. Mr. Claude tells us, that to authorize the Method, by which we pretend to lay the Churches Faith as the Foundation of all the rest, the Creed should have begun with saying, I believe the Church; whereas it is begun with saying, I believe in GOD the Father, and in JESƲS CHRIST, and in the Holy Ghost. And he considers not, that 'tis the Church her self, which teaches us the whole Creed; that 'tis on her word we say, I believe in GOD the Father, and in JESƲS CHRIST his only Son, and the rest; which we cannot say with a firm Faith, unless GOD at the same time puts in our Hearts, that the Church, which teaches us, deceives us not. After then we have on her word said, I believe in the Father, and in the Son, and in the Holy Ghost, and begun our Profession of Faith by the Divine Persons, whom their Majesty places above all, we add an holy Reflection on the Church, which proposes to us this Belief, and say, I believe the Catholick Church. To which we imme∣diatly after joyn all the Graces, we receive by her Ministery, the Communion of Saints, the Remission of Sins, the Blessed Resur∣rection, and in fine Everlasting Life.
The Fifth REFLECTION, On Mr. Claude's alledging here the Practice of the Greek Church, and the like: which is only to embroil the matter, and not to resolve the Difficulty. 'TIS to shew a desire of embroling matters, to alledge here with Mr. Claude, the Greek Church, the Armenian, the Egyptian, or Aethiopick, and that of the Cophti, and so many others, which brag no less of being the true Church, than the Roman does. Those, say they, who are bred up in these Churches, revere their Authority, every one of these Churches has Followers, as zealous, as ours: True and pure zeal has no sensible Mark: every one attributes his, as we do, to the Grace of the Holy Ghost, and resting on the Authority of the Church, in which he is, says, That the Holy Ghost makes use of this Authority to guide him to the Belief of the Scri∣pture and all the Verities of Christianity. This is in a manner Mr. Claude's Objection; and thus some∣times, when Men cannot free themselves, they endeavour to cast others into the like Perplexity as theirs. But he will gain nothing by this Address: for in fine what cause does he pre∣tend to combat for? is it for indifferency of Religions? Will he say with the wicked, that there is not a true Church, in which men indeed act by divine Motions? And under pre∣tence, that the Devil, or, if he pleases, Nature can imitate, or, to say better, counterfeit these Motions, will he maintain, that they are every where imaginary? GOD forbid: we will both of us avoid this Rock. He will avow then with me, that there is a true Church, which soever it is, where the Ho∣ly Ghost acts, thô by looking only on the exterior, we can∣not always so easily discern, who those are, in whom he dwells. Hitherto we are agreed; let us see now, how far we can go together. We agree that there is one true Church, in which the Holy Ghost acts; we agree, that he
makes use of exterior Means, to put the Truth in our Hearts; we agree, that he makes use of the Church, and of the Scrip∣ture. Our question is to know by which he begins, whether by the Scripture or by the Church; whether, I say, he makes us believe the Church by the Scripture, or rather makes us believe the Scripture by the Church. I say, that the Holy Ghost begins by the Church; and it must be so, since 'tis ma∣nifestly the Church, that puts the Scripture in our hands. Nevertheless Mr. Claude leaves me here, and begins to walk alone; but he falls at the very first step into a Precipice. For his Fear of acknowledging an infallible Authority in the true Church, and of believing, that on her word we may make an Act of divine and super-natural Faith concerning the Scrip∣ture, obliges him to say, that 'tis not possible to begin the reading of the Holy Scripture by such an Act of Faith; and that every Act of Faith, which precedes this Reading, is an Act of human Faith. See the deporable Condition, in which he puts a Christian at his first going to read the Holy Scrip∣ture. Mr. Claude cannot get forth of this Abyss without re∣turning to the place, where he began to leave me, and saying afterwards with me, that there is a true Church, wheresoever she is, the veneration of which the Holy Ghost first inspires into true Believers; that by this Veneration, which he at first puts in their Hearts, he fixes them to the Scripture, which this Church presents them; that this Church requires also of all those, she can instruct, that they adore upon her word the infallible Truth of this Scripture, and acknowledges not for her Children those, which have only an human Faith for it. But, say they, the Roman Church is not the sole, which at∣tributes to her self this Authority: the Greek, and other Churches will have one believe them on their word, and teach, that this is the Means to read the Holy Scripture with the Sub∣mission of a divine Faith. And well, if it be so, it remains only to choose between these Churches. But then the Calvinistical Church is gone at the very first brush; she de∣grades her self, as I may say, from the Title of the Church, since she finds not in her self Authority enough to cause all those, whom she begins to instruct, to make an Act of a Christian, and an Act of divine Faith, not even on the Truth of the Scripture, whence 'tis suppos'd, she ought to learn all the rest.
But Mr. Claude asks, how one shall choose between these Churches. Shall it be by Enthusiasm? It would be by Enthu∣siasm, as I have observ'd in the Conference, if the true Church had not her particular Characters, that distinguish her from others. She has, without going any farther, or searching any deeper, her Succession, in which none can shew her by any positive Fact Interruption, Innovation, or Change. This is, what no false Church can so clearly glory of, as the true, be∣cause by glorying of it she would visibly condemn her self. There will be then always in the Instruction, which the true Church shall give her Children concerning her Condition, something, that no other Sect can, or dare say. 'Tis by this, we would convince, if it were in question, the Greeks, the E∣thiopians, the Armenians, and other Sects, which seem in this respect more deceiving because of the apparence of Succession, that they shew; which also makes them way to attribute to themselves with a little more ground the Authority of the Church. But as for the Calvinian Church, there is an end of her, because she has not so much as an apparent and tolerable Suc∣cession, and that she dares not, as we have now shewn by Mr. Claude's acknowledgment, attribute to her self this Authority, without which there can neither be any certain Instruction, nor any assur'd Foundation of Divine Faith, nor in fine any Church. 'Twould be then in vain for us to lose time here in dispu∣ting with the Egyptians and Greeks the Succession, they brag of. 'Twould be no great Labor to shew them the exact Moment of their Innovation. The Pretended Reformed know it as well as we, and can themselves shew it them, when they please: So when they pross us to do it, 'tis not that they think to en∣gage us in a thing impossible, or even obscure and difficult: but 'tis in a word, that in so bad a cause there is always some∣thing got by digressing, and making the consequence of an Ar∣gument be lost. Thus I had reason to tell Mademoiselle de Duras in one of the Instructions of this Book, that, if any one, disgusted with the Calvinistical Church, was tempted to embrace the Religion of the Cophti, or of the Greeks, 'twould be then time to shew them in these Churches that inevitable Moment of their Novelty, which they can no more dey, than can the other Sects: but since the
Calvinists, with whom we have to do, agree it, and that none thinks of leaving them, but to come to us, when we oblige any one to leave them, by shewing from their Ministers own Con∣fession the enormous Absurdities of their Doctrin, the work is perfected, and all the rest on that occasion would be to no purpose. And to the end the Method of the Conference, and the State of the Question, which is there treated, may be throughly un∣derstood; it did not aim directly to establish the Roman Church, but only to shew, that there is some-where or other a true Church, to which we must submit without examining; and be∣sides, that this cannot be the Calvinistical Church, since she will her self have one examin after her; which makes her ac∣knowledge the Absurdities, we have remark't, and by this ac∣knowledgment lose the Title of the Church. This done, there's no more question to preach the Roman Church, that is, that Body of the Church, of which Rome is the Head; since to him, that will choose between two Churches, the excluding of the one is the establishing of the other, with∣out any need of disputing farther for this purpose. Besides that the Roman Church so evidently beare these Characters of the true Church, that there is scarce any man of good Sense, even amongst our Reformed, but agrees, that, if there be in the world an Authority, to which we must submit, 'tis that of this Church. But however, when one sees the Absurdities, one is forc'd to own in Calvinism, for want of having acknowledg'd in the Churches Authority the true Principles of Christian Instruction, one soon retires from a Church, whose Method and Instruction is so manifestly defective; and one is sufficiently sollicited by the Remains of Christianity, which one feels within himself, to return to the Church, from whence he departed.
The Sixth REFLECTION, On Mr. Claude's reducing, as much as he can, this Dispute to the Instruction of Children. VVE see in Mr. Claude's Discourses, that press'd by this want of Authority, which ruins all Instruction in his Church, he affects to reduce our Dispute to the Instruction of Children, and thinks he has found an Advantage by making this Instruction depend on Parents and Nurses, who are better known at that Age than the Church and her Ministers. By this means he thinks to conceal from us the Churches Authori∣ty in the first Exercises and first Acts of Faith, we make; be∣fore we have read the Holy Scripture. But he ought first to consider, that the Argument, I made him, regarded not only Children: Children are not the only Christians, that have not read the Scripture. Mr. Claude is not ignorant, that there were in the beginning of Christianity, not only particular men, but also whole Nation, which, according to the Report of St. Ire∣naeus, had not the Holy Scripture, and without reading it ceas'd not to be true Christians. The Debate then between us is in ge∣neral concerning all those, that have not read the Holy Scrip∣ture, of what Age soever they may be, and what way soever they may have hapned not to have read it. For 'tis of those, and if they will, 'tis of those, whom St. Irenaeus mentions, or of their like, that I enquire concerning the Faith, with which they believe the Scripture, and prepare to read it, as being inspir'd by GOD. If they have but an human Faith, as Mr. Claude says, they are not Christians; and if they have a Divine Faith, as must be acknowledg'd, unless we will fall into an horrible Absurdity, 'tis then true, that Divine Faith, without ones ha∣ving read the Scripture, immediatly follows the Churches Do∣ctrin, and establishes her infallible Authority. 'Tis on this Au∣thority, that every Christian, who takes the Scripture in hand, begins by believing with a firm Faith, that all, he is going to read, is Divine: and he stays not his believing the truth
of this Scripture, till he has read it all; he believes the first Chapter, before he has read the second, and he believes all, be∣fore he has read the first Letter, or so much as open'd the Book. He forms not then his Faith by the reading of the Scripture: this Reading finds his Faith already form'd: this Reading does but confirm to a Christian all he already be∣liev'd, and all, he had already found in the Churches Belief. He believ'd then before all things, that the Church deceiv'd him not; and by this he began to make the Acts of a Christian. Children are not instructed in any other manner. When they hear their Parents, 'tis the Church, they hear, for our Parents are our Teachers, only as they are Children of the Church. 'Tis for this reason the Holy Ghost sends us to them: Ask thy Father and he will shew thee; thy Elders and they will tell thee. St. Basil,Ep. 29. so great a Divine, justifies himself, and at the same time confounds the Hereticks by alledging to them the Faith of his Mother and of his Grandmother St. Macrina; and he herein imitates St. Paul, who praises Timothy for having an un∣feigned Faith,2 Tim. 1. 5. which dwelt first in his Grandmother Lois, and his Mother Eunice. The meaning is that true Doctrin ought al∣ways to descend from hand to hand, and that there shall al∣ways be a true Church, to which none can ever shew her be∣ginning, nor find in her State those Marks of Interruption and Novelty, which all other Sects bear on their Front. Christian Parents, joyn'd to this Church, joyn their Children to her, and put them at the feet of her Ministers to be there in∣structed. 'Tis not to be imagin'd, that Children, in whom Reason be∣gins to appear, because they know not how to rank their Discourses, are incapable of resenting the Impressions of Truth. They are seen learn to speak in an Age, yet more infirm: in what manner they learn, by what they make the Distinction between the Noun and the Verb, the Substantive and the Ad∣jective, neither themselves know, nor can we, who have learnt by this Method, well explicate, so deep and hidden it is. We learn almost in the same manner the Churches Language. A se∣cret Light guides us in both these States: in the one 'tis Reason, in the other Faith. Reason discovers it self by little and little, and so does Faith infus'd by Baptism. We must have Motives to fix us to the Churches Authority, GOD knows them, and
we know them in general: in what manner he ranks them, how he makes these innocent Souls perceive them, is the Secret of his Holy Spirit. However 'tis certain, that this is done, and by this he begins. As this is the first Christian Act, we make, and as on this Foundation all is built, so it subsists for ever. The time will come, when we shall know more distinctly, why we believe; and the Churches Authority will from day to day become stronger in our minds. The Scripture it self will for∣tify the Chains, which bind us to her: but we must always have Recourse to the Original, that is, to believe on the Chur∣ches Authority. What Age soever we are at, 'tis by this we begin to believe the Scripture; we continue also on the same Foundation; and St. Augustin was already perfect in the Eccle∣siastical Science,Cont. Ep. Fudam. 5. when he said, He would not believe the Gospel, if the Authority of the Catholick Church did not oblige him to it. I could, were it in dispute, shew the same Opinion in the other Fathers. We must always re-ascend to the first Principle, and this is the first Principle, that fixes us to the Church. Let them not reproach to us this Vicious Circle: The Church makes us believe the Scripture, the Scripture makes us believe the Church. This on both sides is true in different Respects. The Church and the Scripture are so made for one another, and do so per∣fectly suit with one another, that they support each other, like Stones in an Arch, which mutually keep up the Building. All Nature is full of such Examples. I bear the Staff on which I lean: the Flesh binds and covers the Bones, which sustain it: and all things in the whole Universe mutually aid one another. So it is with the Church and the Scripture. There was but one Church, such as JESƲS CHRIST founded, to which such a Scripture, as we have, could be address'd; that is, such an one, as durst promise the Church, in which this Scripture was made, an eternal continuance. If any one receives the Scripture, by the Scripture I will prove to him the Church; if he acknowledges the Church, by the Church I will prove to him the Scripture: but since we must begin on one side, I have clearly enough shewn by Mr. Claude's Confession, that, if we begin not by the Church, the Divinity of the Scripture, and the Faith, we ought to have in it, is in Danger. Wherefore the Holy Ghost begins our Instruction by fixing us to the Church; I believe the Catholick Church. Amongst our Adversaries one must
examin, before he believes; and he must before all things exa∣min the Scripture, by which he examins all the rest. 'Tis not enough to have read some particular Verses, some Chapters, some Books: till such time as one has read all, conferr'd all, examin'd all, Faith continues in suspense, since 'tis by this Exa∣men, that 'tis form'd. Amongst the true Christians one believes at first: Thy Faith hath saved thee, saith JESƲS CHRIST. Thy Faith,Tertul. de Praescrip. 14. observes Tertullian in that divine work of Prescripti∣ons, and not thy being verst in the Scriptures: There's no need of passing through Opinions, through Doubts, through the Uncer∣tainties of human Faith. I never chang'd, says St. Basil: What I believ'd from my Infancy,Ep. 79. has only been strengthned in my following years. Without passing from one Opinion to another, I have only per∣fected, what was at first given me by my Parents. As a Grain, which is sown, of little, that it was, becomes big, but continues al∣ways the same in it self, and without changing its Nature takes only Increase: so is may Faith increas'd—and this is not a Change, in which one passes from worse to better, but an Accomplishment of a Work already begun, and the Confirmation of Faith by knowledge: In this manner we pass not, as amongst our Reformed, from a State of doubt to a State of Certainty; or, as Mr. Claude loves better to speak, from an human Faith to a divine. Divine Faith is de∣clar'd at first by the Churches first Instructions; and this could never be, did not her infallible Authority prevent all our Doubts, and all Examination. 'Tis thus,Cont. ep. Man. 4. as says St. Augustin, 'tis thus, I say, That those be∣lieve, who not being able to arrive at Vnderstanding, secure their Salvation by the simplicity of their Faith. If we must always ex∣amin before we believe, we must begin by examining, whether there is a GOD, and hearkning for some time, with a kind of Suspension of Mind, to the Arguments of the Wicked: That is, we must pass to the Belief of the Divinity through Atheism, since Examination and Doubt is a Spice of it. But 'tis not so: GOD has plac'd his Mark in the World, which is the Work of his Hands, and by this divine Mark he imprints in Souls, before all Doubts, the Sentiment of his Divinity. In like manner he has plac'd his Mark in his Church, the most perfect work of his Wisdom. By this Mark the Holy Ghost makes the true Church known to the Children of GOD, and this so particular Character, which distinguishes her from all
other Assemblies, gives her so great an Authority, that with∣out hesitating we admit before all Opinions, not only the Ho∣ly Scripture, but also all her sound Doctrin. Thus are the Children of the true Church instructed; those, that are edu∣cated in a strange Church, as soon as they perceive her waver in any part whatever of her Instruction, ought to stretch forth their Arms to the Church, which has reason never to waver, because she has never vary'd nor waver'd; and they find, they ought to return into it, because none should ever have gone out of it. The Seventh REFLECTION, On Mr. Claude's saying in his Relation, that I appear'd embarrass'd in this part of the Dispute. IT may now be judg'd, whether I ought to be perplext a∣bout the Promise, I made Mademoiselle de Duras, to make Mr. Claude acknowledg a Moment, in which, by the Prin∣ciples of his Religion, a Christian had but an human Faith con∣cerning the Truth of the Scripture. How could I be embarrass'd about a thing, which Mr. Claude acknowledg'd in the Confe∣rence, and which he acknowledges still in his Relation, thô he has weaken'd both my Proof, and his own Confession? 'Tis true, he cannot let go the Word Doubt; but I pretended not to make his Tongue form this Syllable; the Equivalent is suf∣ficient for me. 'Tis an Excess great enough to reduce the Christian, who is going to read the Holy Scripture, to be un∣capable of a Divine Faith: To content ones self in this Con∣dition with an human Faith, is always too evidently to re∣nounce Christianity. I have then manifestly, what I desir'd from Mr. Claude's Acknowledgment. And if he says, That the Faith, he here speaks of, excludes Doubt, as resembling that which makes us believe, there is a City call'd Constantinople, or that there was heretofore a King, nam'd Alexander the Great,
thô we know it but by Men: This indeed is not enough for a Christian, who ought to act by a Divine Faith; but 'tis still enough to conound Mr. Claude,  according to this An∣swer, the Church would always have an Authority, equal to that, which all Mankind, as I may say, has, when they u∣nanimously depose concerning a sensible Fact. Thus in what manner soever Mr. Claude explains to us  Faith, the Victory of the Truth, I asserted, will remain secur'd by his Confession. Since if he says, his human Faith excludes Doubt, he supposes in it an infallible Truth; and if he say, it leaves a Doubt, he will in fine have pronounc'd these fatal Syllables, he so much shun'd. In a Cause so assur'd, if I trembled for any thing, but the Danger of those, into whose Hearts, I fear'd, that either by reason of my own Weakness, or their Prepossession, I could not make the Truth sufficiently enter, I ill understood the Truth I defended. In the mean time, be∣cause I said in the Recital of the Conference, That, at Mr. Claude's objecting to me the Greek Church and others, I trem∣bled thrô the Apprehension, lest an Objection, propos'd with o much Address and Eloquence, might put a Soul in Peril: Mr. Claude took this moment to make me appear vanquish'd. Here, says he, it may with Truth be said, That Monsr. de Condom's Mind was seen not to be in its usual State, and that the Liberty, which is so natu∣ral to him, sensibly decreas'd. I may truly say in my turn, That my Trembling, whence this Advantage is drawn, was interi∣or; and that I can scarce believe, Mr. Claude could have per∣ceiv'd it, had I not my self sincerely related it in my Reci∣tal. But what matter is it, what was either the Effect, or Cause of my Fear? They shall say, if they please, That being put to a stand by Mr. Claude's Objection, I would cover the Disorder, into which I visibly fell, by the Trembling, I fain, I had for the Salvation of a Soul, that expected its Instruction from my Assistance. I will own it, if they please, or rather, not to ly, I will let it pass without Opposition. Let me have trembled before Mr. Claude, provided that even in Trembling I spake the Truth. I spake it: They need only see, what were my Answers, and whether I drew not from Mr. Claude's Mouth the Acknowledgment, I pretended. After this, the more I shall have trembled, and the weaker I shall have been, the more certain 'twill be, That 'twas the Truth, which kept me up.
The Eighth REFLECTION, On another Proposition acknowledg'd by Mr. Claude in the Conference, where is shewn the manner, how all false Churches establisht them∣selves. THere is a Part of the Conference, which Mr. Claude passes over in four Words. 'Tis that, where I shew him the horrible State of his Church, which set it self up, after the Example of all false Churches, by separating from all the Christian Churches, that were in the World, and without find∣ing any Church, which thought, as she did, at the time of her Establishment: So that she was not joyn'd by any Conti∣nuity, either to the time, that went before, or to any Church, which appear'd then in the World. This Fact pass'd for e∣vident; and how short soever Mr. Claude has been in the Reci∣tal of this Part, he says enough to shew, That in acknowledg∣ing this important Fact, he has only endeavour'd to cover the Shame of such a Condition by the Example of the Apostles, when they separated from the Synagogue. I will not repeat, what I said on this Subject: You have seen it in the Conference, and Mr. Claude, who relates but one Word of it, does not oblige me to any new Exaplanation. I shall only say, That he gives a very false Idea of this part of the Dispute. The Company, says he, was risen, and the Conversation, which continu'd yet some time, became much more confus'd, and we discours'd of divers things. I know not; why Mr. Claude will have our Conversation to have been confus'd; it was not so in any part; and 'twas less so, if it were possible, in this, than in the rest. 'Tis true, we were risen, and Part of the Company was withdrawn; but Mr. Claude and I stood firm before each other. Mademoisello de Duras seem'd to have redoubled her Attention, and after so many Principles declar'd, the Dispute became more quick, and more concluding than ever. If we spake of divers Matters, it was not ramblingly, and all tended to the same End.
It may be seen by reading it; and if Credit will not be given to me in this behalf, when Mr. Claude shall publish his Rela∣tion, 'twill appear, that the little, he says, naturally requires all, that I recite. So it is, that the Pretended Reformed were averr'd, in establishing their Church, to have done contrary, to what the Orthodox ever did, and precisely, what all have done; and Mr. Claude, press'd upon this matter, cannot in all the History of Christianity shew one only Church, truly Christian, founded, as the Churches of the new Reformation. It may now be judg'd, what likelihood there is, that what all Hereticks have done contrary to the Practice of all the Orthodox, can ever be authoriz'd by the Example of the A∣postles, when they separated from the Synagogue. But since Mr. Claude places the strength of his Defence in this Example, I desire him to add to the evident Facts, I alledg'd to him this Subject, these short Reflections: that thô JESƲS CHRIST, authoriz'd of himself, had no need of any Suc∣cession, to make himself believ'd, nevertheless to inculcate to us, how necessary 'tis for the true Religion to have a Succession always manifest, he would at his coming into the World find there a Church actually subsisting in its whole State: that he was born, and liv'd in this Church actually subsisting, that is, in the Synagogue, and would so form his Church in the midst of her, that even the holy Apostles after his Assion, and the Coming down of the Holy Ghost, persisted publickly in the Service of the Temple, which was than the most Mark of Communion: that they were not indeed seen, what∣ever might be ordain'd against them, to have ever withdrawn from it, as long as the Temple was in being, and the Syna∣gogue could keep either its exterior Form, or even any ap∣pearance of its ancient State: that GOD, who would in fine have his Children entirely separated from the Jews, had first ex∣tinguisht in this ungrateful People, by a manifest Reprobation, with the Sacrifice and Priesthood, all the Marks of the Church, so that 'tis apparent, the Synagogue with its Temple fell to ruin, before the Children of GOD departed from it: that he was then so far from leaving any hope to this People, as he had done in the ancient Transmigration and Ruin of the first Temple, that he had on the contrary given all the Marks of an implacable Anger: that to the end such a Fall of his heretofore
chosen People, and the Divorce, declar'd to the Synagogue, for∣merly his Spouse, might not give the least Pretext of suspect∣ing any like Event in time to come, he had caus'd this future Fall and Divorce to be foretold by all his Prophets, as a singu∣lar Example of his wrath: and had at the same time prote∣sted, that no such thing should ever befal that Church, with which he made an eternal Covenant; that besides all this, and thô the Reprobation of the Synagogue was clearly explicated in the Scripture, and thô the Apostles, without making any In∣novation in the Doctrin, did but follow him, who had til their time been always without any Interruption expected, never∣theless because there was in this Action some Rupture with the Synagogue, heretofore the true Church; to authorize them in it, there was no less requir'd, than JESƲS CHRIST himself, present on the earth with all the Authority of his eter∣nal Father: and in a word, to dissent from the Sentiments of the Synagogue, thô besides convinc'd by the Scriptures, 'twas necessary, that JESƲS CHRIST the Corner Stone, in whom all was to be united, should appear visibly on the earth with the incontestable Marks of his Mission. I leave you now to consider, whether an Example of this Nature can give any occasion of ever separating from the Church of JESƲS CHRIST, or of saying, that this Church, founded on the Rock, must fall, or that the Succession, of which JESƲS CHRIST is the Source, could suffer any Interruption, and whether all does not here rather cry out against such an At∣tempt.
The Ninth REFLECTION, On the Visibility of the Church: that Mr. Claude opposes not the Doctrin, I have explain'd, till he has first fram'd himself a false Idea of it. HItherto we have seen, what concerns the Conference, and Mr. Claude's manner of relating it. We must now consi∣der, what he opposes against the Instructions, that preceded it. He answers them largely in the writing,Vid. Sup. Advert. & Ref. p. 57. we have already men∣tion'd. This writing has no Title, and is made in the Form of a Letter. To make our selves better understood, let us give it a Name, and call it Mr. Claude's Manuscript Answer. As you have seen, that the Conference was on my part preceded by two Instructions:Vid. Sub. p. 2. the first of which establisht the perpetual Visibility of the Church,Vid. Sup. p. 16. and the second clear'd some Objecti∣ons, taken from the Book of the Kings, Mr. Claude has follow'd this Division. He divides also his Answer into two parts: the first is subdivided into four questions. In the first he treats of the Universal Church, which the Creed speaks of, and blames me for not having comprehended in it with all the Blessed Spi∣rits the Saints, which shall be born even to the end of the World. In the second he examins, whether the Church can be defin'd by her exterior Communion, as he supposes, I have done. He speaks in the third of the Churches perpetual Vi∣sibility; and seeks in the fourth, to what Church JESƲS CHRISTs Promises belong, whether to that, I have setled, or to that, he has establisht. He draws afterwards eleven Con∣sequences from the Doctrin, he has explicated; and passes to the second Part, the Objections, taken from the Book of the Kings. This is the Idea of his work. 'Tis in these four Questions, and these eleven Consequences, that he attack's with all his might the Doctrin, I have taught concerning the perpetual Visibility of the Church: but you are
going to see, that he could not do it, till he had first fram'd himself a false Idea of it. To shew, that the Church, spoken of in the Creed, ought to be always visible, I said, that all Christians by the Name Church understood a Society,Vid. Sup. p. 2. & seq. making Profession to believe the Doctrin of JE∣SƲS CHRIST, nd given it self by his Word; whence it follows, that 'tis visible, and linkt by an exterior and sensible Com∣munion. Thus I at first laid down my Position, being what I had to make good. 'Twas not my intention, as Mr. Claude supposes, neither was there any need to give a perfect Definition of the Church, nor to prove her interior Union by the Holy Ghost, by Faith, by Charity: for of this we are agreed: The question then being only about the exterior Marks of this Union, I had done all in shewing, that these exterior Marks are inseparable from the Church, and consequently that she is always visible. In the mean time on my having said, that by the word Church is understood a Society, making Profession to believe the Doctrin of JESƲS CHRIST, Mr. Claude in all his Ma∣nuscript Answer, but principally in the second and fourth Que∣stion, will perswade me, that I consider the Church, as a Society meerly exterior, constituted in its Essence by a single Profession of believing, without believing indeed, whose whole Nature and Essence consists in bare Exteriors and Appearances, without reality; whose Ʋnity is only an Ʋnity of Profession, an exterior Ʋnity, so that the interior is only in it by Accident; and that thô there should be neither Faithful, nor Just in it, but that it should be wholly com∣pos'd of Hypocrites, it would not cease to be the true Church. Behold indeed a frightful Idea of the Church, and I won∣der not, that Mr. Claude has an horror of it: it is also as far from my Mind, and the Mind of all Catholicks, as Heaven is from Hell; and I know not, how Mr. Claude could read my Instructions without seeing in them the clean contrary to what he imposes on me. Since the Reader has now these Instructions before his Eyes, I desire him to pass them over again in this Impression.Vid. Sup. p. 6. He will find there indeed, that 'tis of the Essence of the Church to be visible by Preaching and by the Sacraments: but he will find there also that the Elect and the Saints are the most noble Part of it; that they are there sanctify'd, that they are there rege∣nerated,
often also by the ministery of the Reprobate  that they must not be consider'd, as making a Body apart, but as making the fairest and most noble part of it. He will find there,Ibid. that 'tis of the Essence of the Church, because she is holy, to teach always, constantly, and without vary∣ing, an holy Doctrin; but he will find, that this holy Doctrin, which she incessantly teaches, continually brings forth Saints in her Vnity, and that by this Doctrin she instructs and contains in her Bo∣som the Elect of GOD. Do they call this a bare Profession of JESƲS CHRISTs Doctrin without reality, and a meet Heap of Hypocrites? He will find,Sup. p. 7. & seq. that Hell cannot prevail against the visible and exterior Society of the Church: but he will find also, that 'tis be∣cause it cannot prevail against the Elect, who are the purest and most spiritual part of this Church. 'Tis, I say, because it cannot pre∣vail against the Elect, that it cannot prevail against the Church, which teaches them, in which they confess the Gospel, and receive the Sacraments. Thus instead of believing, that this Church, which subsists eternally, can according to our Principles subsist with∣out the Elect: 'tis on the contrary seen, that we consider the Elect, as making the most essential Part and Strength of this Church. He will find, that 'tis of the Essence of the Church till the ge∣neral Resurrection,Sup. p. 9, 10. to have the Ecclesiastical Ministery, which renders her visible: but he will find; also that the effect of this Ministery is to bring the Children of GOD to the perfect Stature of JESƲS CHRIST, that is, to Perfection, which, after it has rendred them holy, will render them glorious both in Body and Soul. In fine he will find there the exterior and interior Communion of the Faithful with JESUS CHRIST,Sup. p. 11. and of the Faith∣ful amongst themselves: the interior Communion by Charity, and in the Holy Ghost, who animates us; but at the same time the exterior Communion in the Sacraments, in the Confession of Faith, and in all the exterior Ministery of the Church. Whence I concluded,Ibid. that 'tis not only the Society of the Pre∣destinate, which shall subsist for ever: but that 'tis the visible Body, in which the Predestinate are included, which preaches to them, which teaches them, which regenerates them by Baptism, which them by the Eucharist, which administers to them the Keys, which
governs them, and keeps them united under Discipline, which forms JESUS CHRIST in them: 'Tis this visible Body, that shall subsist for ever. 'Tis seen by this, that instead of making a Church, whose Communion is of its own nature meerly exterior, and interior only by Accident, the Foundation of the Church is on the contrary the interior Communion, of which the exterior Communion is the Mark, and that the Effect of this Mark is to shew, that the Chil∣dren of GOD are kept and inclos'd under this Seal. 'Tis seen also, that the Elect are the last End, for which all is done in the Church, and those, whom all her Ministery ought principally to serve; so that they make the most essential Part, and, as I may say, the very Ground of the Church. If then I have spoken more of the exterior Communion, than of the interior Communion of the Church, 'tis plainly seen, that this can be only for the Reason, I have mention'd; to wit, that the Pretended Reformed being agreed with us, that the Foundation, as I may say, of the Church is her interior U∣nion, I needed only establish the exterior, the necessity of which these Gentlemen contest. Thus, when I said at first in my Instruction, that the Church was the Society, which confess'd the true Faith, Mr. Claude ought to have understood, that this Confession of the Mouth excluded not the Belief of the Heart, but rather suppos'd it in the Living and essential part of the Church, of which I spake not then, because it was not the Question, I had to propose and resolve. To conclude from this Silence, that I admitted no other Union essential to the Body of the Church, but this ex∣terior Union, is the same, as if one, that should have under∣taken to explain only those exterior Ligaments, which keep human Bodies united on the outside, and include, as I may say, in one and the same Continent, with the living Members, the Nails, the Hair, the peccant Humors, and even the dead Members, not yet cut off from the Body, should be therefore made believe, that he acknowledges no other Principle of U∣nion; and under this Pretence it should be said of him, that, according to this mans Principles, there might be an human Body, which should be only Hair, Nails, rotten Members, and peccant Humors, without having any thing living in effect: This is, what Mr. Claude does, when he concludes from my
Discourse, that the Church of JESƲS CHRIST may be only an Amass of wicked persons and Hypocrites. But this will appear farther, in what follows, by Mr. own Principles; 'tis sufficient for me in this place to shew him, that this Church meerly exterior, which he call the Church of the Cardinals Bellarmin and du Perron, and of M. de Candom, is a Church, that subsists only in his imagination; and one may believe by his manner of judging my Sentiments that he no better understood those of these illustrious Cardinals. The Tenth REFLEXION, On the Pretended Reformeds Confession of Faith: that it acknowledges no Church, but what is visible, and that Mr. Claude satisfies not this Difficulty. TO shew,Vid. Sup. p. 2, 3. & seq. that the Word Church signifies in the Creed a visible Church, I laid for a Foundation, that in a Con∣fession of Faith, such as this Creed was, Words were us'd in their most natural and most simple Signification; and I added, that the word Church signify'd so naturally the visible Church, that the Pretended Reformed, Authors of the Chimera of an in∣visible Church, in all their Confession of Faith never us'd the Word Church in this Sense; but only to express the visible Church, cloath'd with the Sacraments, with the word, and with all the publick Ministery. See the Passages of the Confession of Faith, I have related, with the Consequences, I have drawn from them. I was not the first, who made this Remark; 'twas a Natio∣nal Synod of the Pretended Reformed. These Gentlemen, who had so much preacht the invisible Church, and who, being press'd upon the Succession, grounded on this foundation the invisible Succession, of which they made use, wondred, they
had not spoken one single word of it in their Confession of Faith, where on the contrary the word Church is always taken for the Vi∣sible Church. Surpriz'd with this Language, so natural to Christi∣ans, but so little conformable to the Principles of their Reformati∣on, they made this Decree in the Year 1603.Syn. de Gap, sur la Conf. de Foy art. 3. in the Synod of Gap, in the Chapter, which has for its Title, On the Confession of Faith. 'Tis by this, all the Synods begin, and the first thing, that is done in them, is to review this Confession of Faith; which gave oc∣casion to the Printers to re-imprint it with this Title,Syn. de Privas 1612. forbidden in the Synods: The Confession of Faith of the Reformed Churches, review'd and corrected in the National Synod. But let us come to the Decree of Gap, of which these are the words. The Pro∣vinces shall be exhorted to consider in the Provincial Synods, in what Terms the XXV. Article of the Confession of Faith ought to be coucht: forasmuch as being to express, what we believe touching the Catholick Church, of which mention is made in the Creed, there is nothing in the said Confession, that can be taken but for the militant and visible Church; as also in the XXIX Article they shall see, whether it be fit to adde the Word Pure to the Word the Church, which is in the said Article: and in general all shall come prepar'd on the matters of the Church. We have related the Substance of this XXV Article. You may in the same place see the XXVI,Vid. Sup. p. 3. XXVII and XXVIII Ar∣ticles. And for the XXIX Article, it says, that the true Church ought to be govern'd according to the Policy, which our Lord JESUS CHRIST has establisht; that is, that there be Pastors, Over∣seers, and Deacons, to the end the pure Doctrin may have its Course, and the Assemblies be kept in the Name of GOD. The Addition of the word pure Church, which they delibe∣rated to add to that of true, is founded on a Doctrin of the Pretended Reformed, which says, that a true Church may not be pure, because with the essential Truths it may have Errors mixt, I say even gross and considerable Errors against the Faith. And this is one of the Mysteries of the new Refor∣mation, which Mr. Claude will explain to us by and by: but 'tis not here in question. What there is important, is, that these People, who say, they are sent of GOD to raise again the pure Doctrin of the Gospel, being to explicate, as them∣selves declare in their Confession of Faith, the Church, of which mention is made in the Creed, spake nevertheless only of the mili∣tant
and visible Church. I could easily tell you the Reason: 'tis, that this Church, of which mention is made in the Creed, is indeed the visible Church; 'tis, that the word Church naturally im∣ports this Visibility, and the word Catholick is so far from de∣rogating from it, that it supposes it; 'tis, that in a Confession of Faith one often happens to speak rather according to the natu∣ral Ideas, the words bear with them, than according to the Re∣finements and Interpretations, one has invented to free himself out of some Difficulty. Thus the invisible Church presented not it self at all to our Reformed, when they fram'd their Con∣fession of Faith; the sense of the visible Church appear'd only in it; there was nothing seen in this but natural till the Year 1603. In 1603 they awoke; they began to find it strange, that a Church, which founded her Succession in the Idea of an invisible Church, and of a Church of the Predestinate, should not have said one word of it in her Confession of Faith, but have left it for evident, that the Natural Signification of the word Church always imported a visible Society; so that to speak truly, the Succession of the Church would no longer be shewn without shewing the Succession of her Visibility: a thing utterly impossible for the new Reformation. 'Twas this, inclin'd the whole Synod to desire the going again over this Article, and to ex∣hort the Provinces to come ready prepar'd upon the matters of the Church, which had never been well understood amongst the new Reformed, which are not yet understood, and which will make all those Catholicks, that can throughly understand them. But the going over this Article again was a very nice Affair. 'Twas to awaken all understandings; 'twas too visibly to mark the Defect, and give the Printers more occasion than ever to entitle it, The Confession review'd and corrected. Thus in the Sy∣nod of Rochel, held in 1607, 'twas resolved not to add or dimi∣nish any thing in the XXV and XXIX Articles, nor to meddle afresh with the matter of the Church. By the decision of this Synod the visible Church alone appears in the Pretended Reformeds Confessi∣on of Faith: the invisible Church has no part in it, and one draws from it Consequences, as one can. That,Vid. Sup. p. 4. which I draw, pinches them: for if the Church ap∣pears only as visible in the Pretended Reformeds Confession of Faith, and if besides they assert this Confession of Faith, as conformable in all points to the Scripture, they must
tell us, that this manner of explicating the Church comes from the Scripture, and that from the Scripture it has pass'd naturally into the ordinary Language of Christians, into the Confessions of Faith, and consequently into the Creed, which is not only the best authoriz'd of all Confessions of Faith, but also the most simple. Mr. Claude answers us,Man. Anf. q. 1. that the Custom changes; and that by Process of time Words often depart from their first and natural Signi∣fication; and that besides, thô it should be true, as I have said, that the word Church, taken simply, should signify the visible Church, the word Ʋniversal would change this Signification. But he shall not escape us by this Subterfuge: for we have still an Argument left to overturn the whole pretended Reforma∣tion. See it taken from the very Principles, laid by themselves. The word Church ought to be taken in the Pretended Reformeds Confession of Faith, as it is naturally taken in a Fundamental Article of the Christian Religion: else this Confession of Faith would not be conformable, as it pretends, to the Holy Scrip∣ture: Now in this Confession of Faith the word Church is ta∣ken for a visible Society: this Proposition is acknowledg'd in the Synod of Gap, as we just now saw. 'Tis thus then, that the word Church is naturally taken in Holy Scripture, and in the Creed for a visible Church, and the Term Catholick or Ʋniversal, put in the Creed,Man. Ans. q. 1. as Mr. Claude confesses, to distinguish the whole Bo∣dy of the Church truly Christian, spread over the whole Earth, from all false Churches, and all particular Churches, instead of rendring the Church invisible, makes her so much the more vi∣sible, as it more visibly separates her from all false Churches, and puts in her Bosom all the particular Churches, so visible, and so remarkable by their common Profession of Faith, and their common Government.
The Eleventh REFLEXION, On Mr. Claude's own acknowledging the Chur∣ches perpetual Visibility: the surprizing Do∣ctrin of this Minister. BUT without disputing any farther, we need only to Mr. Claude, and , what he grants us in his Ma∣nuscript Answer concerning the Churches perpetual Visibility. And would to GOD I could here transcribe all this Work! There would be seen in it many things, very favourable to our Doctrin, which I cannot well make understood, till it shall be publick. But 'tis not for me to publish it, and I am contend to transcribe at length, forasmuch as it is necessary, the Passa∣ges, you are going to see, such as I found them in the Duke of Chevreuses Manuscript, own'd as I have said by Mr. Claude himself. Now if he  found to speak of the Church after a man∣ner new in the , this mst not be wondred at for two Reasons. The first, because 'tis true, he has taught in a manner the same Doctrin in his other , th he has explicated it more fully, and  order th over. The second, because he pretends to say nothing new; a  we ought to rejoyce at, there being nothing more desirable, to see the Number of the Principles and Articles, on which we may agree, increase. Let us enter then with all our heart into this  De∣sign, let us  in what Mr. Claude agrees with us, and let us re his Doctrin in the  Order, th he  it in his third and fourth Question, and afterwards in his eleven Consequences. What I find at first, is, that 'tis manifest, that, th the Church be mixt with the  ends and  Confession, ceases not to be visible in the mixture, as the good  with the Three in one and the  Fields and as the good  with the in one and the same  This goes well, let no proceed, This
Mixture hinders indeed the just Discernment of Persons; but it hin∣ders not the Discernment or Distinction of the Orders of Persons, even with certainty. We know not certainly, who are in particular true Believers, nor who are Hypocrites: but we know certainly, that there are true Believers, as there are Hypocrites; which is sufficient to make the Visibility of the true Church. I hear this with joy: as∣suredly we shall advance. Mr. Claude gives it us already for manifest, that there shall be always a visible Body, of which one may say, There are the true Believers. I continue to read his Answer, and I find, that he blames me for imputing to the Pretended Reformed, that they believe not the Body, in which GOD has plac'd, according to St. Paul, some Apostles, some Teachers, some Pastors, and the rest, to be the Church of JESƲS CHRIST. How glad am I to be re∣prehended, provided we advance! It is then manifest, that the Body of JESƲS CHRIST, which is his Church, shall al∣ways be compos'd of Pastors, of Teachers, of Preachers, and also of People: it is then consequently always very visible, and the Succession of the Pastors, as well as that of the Peo∣ple, ought to be manifest in it. Mr. Claude confirms here his Discourse by a passage of Mr. Mestresat, who determins, that we must not seek the Church of GOD out of the Ministery and the Word. So much the better, and I am glad, that Mr. Claude finds in his Church many Fol∣lowers of this Doctrin. I was afraid,Vid. Sup. p. 5. that the Ministers would not find the visible Church in this Passage of St. Paul to the Ephesians, where the Church is propos'd to us without Spot, and without Blemish; and I had set my self to prove, that this Church, describ'd by St. Paul, was the visible Church; because it was washt by Baptism, and by the Word Mr. Claude enters at first into my Sentiment. He says, that in this passage we must understand indeed the Church, which is already in Heaven, but also the visible Church, whichis on the earth, as making together but one and the same Body, and he cites here also Mr. Mestresat. I receive this Doctrin; and if any of our Reformed, be it Mr. Claude him∣self, ever objects to me, that I must not so much rely on the Churches Visibility, since there is at least a Part of this Church, which is invisible, that is to say, that, which is in Heaven, I will answer, that this ought not to trouble us, since that in fine
by this Doctrin of Mr. Mestresat and Mr. Claude, being in com∣munion with the visible Part of the Church, I am sure to be so also with the invisible Part, which is already in Heaven with JESƲS CHRIST: so that 'tis very certain, that all is reduc'd in fine to the Visibility. Mr. Claude passes thence to the Objections, that may be made, and he decides at first, that the Visibility of the Church is a Visibi∣lity of Ministery. He must then at last, as he acknowledges in the Church a perpetual Visibility, come to shew us a Successi∣on in the Ministery, and in one word a Train of lawful Pastors. He objects to himself, that the Ministery is common to the Good and the Bad, whence it seems, one might conclude against his Doctrin, that Good and Bad compose the Church. And he Answers, that if the use the Ministery is common to Good and Bad, this is only by accident, and thrô the Fraud of the Enemy; that of right it belongs only to the true Believers; and that the supernatu∣ral Destination is only for them. All this is clear, except this Ex∣pression, the Ministery of right belongs only to the true Believers. For, as one might understand by this, that none but true Believers are lawfull Pastors, one might fall into the Inconvenience of be∣ing to examin every one in particular, whether the Pastors are indeed true Believers, and to believe, that they cease to be Pa∣stors, when they cease to be good People, thô without Scan∣dal: this is the pernicious Doctrin of Wicleff, which would put all the Church in Confusion! Excepting this ill Sense, which cannot be Mr. Claude's, I grant him all; he says; for without doubt 'tis not JESƲS CHRISTs first Intent, that there should be Ministers, that are Deceivers: this happens only thrô the Malice of the Enemy. The Destinction of the Ministery is for true Believers; JESƲS CHRIST did not establish it to call into the Church Deceivers and Hypocrites: who doubts it? But nevertheless these Deceivers and these Hypocrites may be sufficiently of the Church, to be lawful Pastors in it: and the true Believers being to live to the end of the World under the Authority of this mixt Ministery, he must then, without examining, whether the Ministers are good or evil, shew us a Succession of them always manifest, under which GOD has conserv'd his People.
The more I continue my Reading, the more I find this Truth evidently declar'd. For entring into the fourth Que∣stion, I take good notice, that Mr. Claude pretends there to shew, that the Passages, where JESƲS CHRIST pro∣mises the Church to keep her always on the earth, regard only the Society of true Believers: but he forbears not always e∣qually to own, that this Church never ceases to be visible, and that JESƲS CHRIST has so promis'd. I pretended to shew the visible Church in these words:Vid. Sup. 7, 8. & seq. Mat. xvi. v. 18. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church: and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. The Reasons, I made use of to prove it, may be seen. Mr. Claude receives this Doctrin with its Proofs. And he acknowledges, that the Church, which is spoken of in this Passage, is in effect a confessing Church, a Church, which publishes the Faith, a Church, to which JESUS CHRIST has given an exterior Ministery, a Church, which uses the Ministery of the Keys, and which binds and looses, and which consequently has an Outside and a Visibility. 'Tis such a Church, that JESUS CHRIST has promis'd to keep always on the earth; Mr. Claude cannot suffer one to tell him, that she ceases to be and thus she is always with all that Ministery, which is essential to her: which makes Mr. Claude conclude with me,Vid. Sup. p. 9, 10. &c. that the Ecclesiastical Ministery shall last without discontinuance till the General Resurrection; and to grant without difficulty, that this Promise of JESƲS CHRIST, I will be always with you, respects the Perpetuity of the Ecclesiastical Ministery.Mat. xxviii. v. 9. 20. JESƲS CHRIST pro∣mises, says he, to be with the Church, to baptize with her, and to TEACH WITH HER WITHOUT INTERRUPTION EVEN TO THE END OF THE WORLD. There shall then always be Teachers, with whom JESƲS CHRIST shall teach, and true Preaching shall never cease in his Church. But shall this Ministery last for ever so pure, that none but good People shall be admitted to it? We have seen, that Mr. Claude pretends it not. In effect there is no Promise of this perpetual Purity: the Promise is, that whatsoever the Man∣ners of these Ministers may be, JESƲS CHRIST will always act, always baptize, and ALWAYS TEACH with them; and the Effect of this Ministery, thô mixt, shall be such, that under its Authority the Church shall be always visible, not indeed, says Mr. Claude, with a distinct view, which goes so far as to say,
Such and such are , which it notwithstanding CERTAIN, and which goes so say, The true , to , IN THAT EXTERIOR, PROFESSION. Let us not call, if they will, by the Name of the Church all that exterior Profession: let us abstain from this Name, since Mr. Claude is against it; and like true reasonable and peaceable Christians, let us endeavour to agree on the thing. This ex∣terior Profession, which may be always  and, as I may say, pointed to with the Finger, is mixt of Good and Evil: the Ministery, which governs it, is also mixt. Mr. Claude a∣grees all this: it may nevertheless be said, Under this Mini∣stery and in this exterior Profession are the  Believers: This is, what we just now heard from the same Ministers Mouth. If then, according to his Doctrin, the Society of true Believers subsists for ever, and continues always visible on the earth; if it may always be shewn in an exterior Profession, and is visible only there, as Mr. Claude says: it not only follows, that true Be∣lievers shall always be upon the earth, but that this Profession, mixt of Good and Bad, where there true. Believers are found, where they are pointed to, where they are markt, shall be there also; this is, what we agree on with Mr. Claude. But since all these Passages are dispers'd up and down his Answer, see here one, in which he has taken care to collect all toge∣ther. 'Tis after his fourth Question, and in the seventh Conse∣quence, that this Minister, endeavouring to explicate the XXXI Article of the Confession of Faith, where it is said, that in our days, and before the Reformation, the State of the Church was interrupted; distinguishes the State of the Church interrupted for a time from the Church, which is never interrupted, according to his Principles, and ths he defines the Church. The Church, says he, is the true Faithful, who make Profession of the Christian Truth, of Piety, and of true Holiness under a Ministery, which f∣nishes her with the Alments, necessary for the spiritual Life, without depriving her of any of them. We shall discover in its time the secret of these spiritual Aliments. In the mean while  a∣gree with Mr. Claude, that the Church always subsist, and al∣ways subsists visible, since, by his Definition, she is nothing , but the true Believers, who MAKE PROFESSION OF THE
CHRISTIAN TRUTH under the Ecclesiastical Ministery. Be∣hold an immoveable Foundation. Let us see, what we can build on it: but before we build, we are going to see the Objections fall. The Twelfth REFLEXION, Two of Mr. Claude's principal Objections resolv'd by his own Doctrin. MR. Claude objects to me first,Man. Aus. that I desire in vain to esta∣blish my Society, compos'd of Good and Bad, and its eternal Duration, on these inviolable Promises of JESƲS CHRIST, Thou art Peter, and I am always with you. 'Tis not says he, of the Wicked, that it can be said; that Hall shall not pre∣vail against them. 'Tis not with Wicked men and Hypocrites, that JESUS CHRIST has promis'd always to be; and these Promises respect none but true Believers. Let us add according to Mr. Claude's Principles, that, if these Promises respect only true Believers, they respect them at least in this Ministery, and in this exterior Profession, and the Objection will be at the same time resolv'd. For in fine if the true Believers ought to be always shewn, and always visible, according to Mr. Claude, in this exterior Profession, in which the Good are mixt with the Bad; it follows, that this Composition, by what Name soever it is call'd, shall always appear on the earth. Now none can be assur'd of a Societies subsisting always, and always in a visible State, unless GOD has promis'd it. His Promises regard then even this Mixture; and not only the true Believers, but with them all the Society, in which they ought, according to his Decrees, always to appear. By Consequence we must under∣stand these Promises of JESƲS CHRIST otherwise, than Mr. Claude teaches. The Promises of JESƲS CHRIST respect not the Wicked alone, nor were made for their sake; if he said only this, he would have Reason: but these Promises,
which JESƲS CHRIST made to his Faithful, compre∣hend also the Wicked, who are mixt with them. When GOD by his Prophets promis'd the ancient People to give then plen∣tiful Harvesh, with the Corn he promis'd also the Chaff; and to preserve the Harvest is to preserve the Chaff with the Corn. So to promise the Church and her eternal Duration, into pro∣mise with the Elect, the Wicked, in the midst of whom GOD encloses them. The wicked also in the Church are for the Just, as the Chaff in the Harvest is for the Corn; and as GOD promises not the Chaff, either alone, or for it self, so he pro∣mises not the wicked, either alone, or for themselves. But ne∣vertheless all this Composition shall subsist in vertue of the di∣vine Promise till the last separation, when the Wicked, as the Chaff, shall be cast into the Fire, that shall never be quench. In the mean time JESƲS CHRIST shall be always with the whole Composition, keeping there in all the Exterior the sound Doctrin, which he knows how to carry into the In∣terior, even into the Hearts of those, that live: in the same manner as the Nourishment, presented to our whole Body by the same way, quickens only the Members, which are dispos'd to receive it. A second Objection of Mr. Claude's will fall by the same Principle. He objects to me,Man. Ans. 1. q. that in defining the Catholick Church, mention'd in the Creed, I speak only of the Church, which is actually on earth, instead of comprehending in it all the Elect, which have been, are, and shall be, and in fine with the holy Angels all the heavenly Jerusalem. I have already answer'd him, that I neither would, nor was oblig'd to define the Church but in relation to our Subject, and her Visibility. But I add, that in saying this, according to Mr. Claude's own Principles I said all: for, according to him, in the exterior Profession, that is, in what renders the Church visible, may be markt the true Be∣lievers, with whom all the Saints, in what time and place soe∣ver they may be, not excepting the holy Angels, are united. The Church, which is on the Earth, says Mr. Claude, is one with that, which is already gather'd in Heaven, and with that, which GOD will cause to spring up even to the end of the Generations, all which three together make but one, which is call'd the Vniversal Church. GOD be prais'd: when I shall have found the ex∣terior
Profession, which renders the Church visible, Mr. Claude has already told us, that I shall have found the true Believers, that is according to him, the true Church actually present on earth: and he now tells us, that with this Church I shall by the same means have found both that, which is already in Hea∣ven, and that, which GOD will cause to grow up in all fol∣lowing Ages. We need then only enquire after the Church, which is on the earth, and the exterior Profession, which shews her to us, being assur'd to have found there, without enquiring any farther, the Perfect Communion of Saints, and the Socie∣ty of all the Elect. Besides when under the Name of the Catholick Church I un∣derstood the Church, which is upon the Earth, I spake with all the Fathers. They ordinarily joyn to the Title of Catho∣lick Church that of spread over all the earth, toto orbe diffusa. To this Title of Catholick they joyn also the Title of Apostolick, and thus is it put in the Nicene Creed, where is seen the most authentical, as well as the most perfect Interpretation of the Apostles Creed. This Title of Apostolick makes part of the Churches Catholicity, and shews us among other things, that she is descended from the Apostles by the perpetual Succession of her Pastors, and by the Episcopal Chairs, establisht over all the earth. All the Saints, whose blessed Souls are with GOD, were conceiv'd in this Church; all those, that are to come, shall likewise be regenerated in it: so that there shall never be any one, who has not made an essential Part of this Body, of which JESƲS CHRIST is the Head. For the Angels, if we respect only the direct Signification of the Words, they never made Part of this Church, founded by the Apostles, and spread over all the earth, where she ought to make her Pilgrimage; and thô JESƲS CHRIST is their Head, he is in a more particular manner that of the Faithful, washt in his Blood, and renew'd by his Word. But the Angels, thô united to JESƲS CHRIST in another manner, are our Brethren, and are not Strangers to the Catholick Church, of which on the contrary they are establisht after their manner Co-opperators and Ministers. 'Tis an evident Truth, but with which I had nothing to do in this place: 'tis sufficient to remark in the Creed, what our Fathers found there expresly and immediately signify'd by the word Catholick Church, by adding to it the Title
Apostolick, so natural to her Catholicity, and the Elegium of be∣ing spread over all the earth. To know the Doctrin of th Church, is to know the Doctrin of all the Elect. There is seen in Heaven and in the Brightness of the Saints, only what is believ'd in this Church; and the Holy Angels, who, as the Apostle Saint Paul says,Eph. iii. v. 10. have learnt by the Church such high Secrets of the Divine Wisdom, respect her Beller. Thus all being reduc'd, as I have already said, to the Visibility, Mr. Claude will only make me lose Time, and digress, when he will have me treat here any thing else, to make known this Catholick Church, which is confess'd in the Creed. The Thirteenth and last REFLEXION. Mr. Claude's Doctrin shews the Gentlemen of the Pretended Reformed Religion, that there is no Salvation for them, but in the Roman Church. I Have now nothing left to do, but to exhort the Gentle∣men of the Pretended Reformed Religion, and Mr. Claude himself, if he will permit me, to draw manifest Conse∣quences from the Principles, he has laid: then they will no lon∣ger be able to resist the Truth, and will remain convinc'd, that there is no Salvation for them, but in returning to the bo∣som of the Roman Church. We have seen that,Vid. Sup. XI. Ref. p. 99. &. seq. to verify the Promises of the Gospel, Mr. Claude is oblig'd to acknowledge a Church always visible, since the Church, which is not visible, is no Church, and that ac∣cording to the Definition,Vid. Sup. p. 103. he has given us, the Church is the true Faithful, who make Profession of the Christian Truth under a Mini∣stery, which furnishes her with the Aliments, necessary for the Spiri∣tual Life. These Faithful then are not a Body in the Any since they make PROFESSION OF THE TRUTH under an Ec∣clesiastical
Ministery always subsisting; and that, as we have seen, there must be without any Interruption an exterior Profession, of which it may be said, There are the true Believers. Thus 'tis not sufficient to alledge at random to us conceal'd Believers, they are oblig'd to shew us without Interruption, first a visible Society, of which may be said, They are there; 'tis there, they serve GOD in Spirit and Truth; 'tis there, they confess the Gospel. Nor will it be enough to shew us these Believers dispers'd: they must secondly shew us them gather'd together under the Authority of an Ecclesiastical Ministery, with preaching of the Word, with the Administration of the Sacraments, with the use of the Keys, and all the Ecclesiastical Government. By consequence they must shew us a Society of Pastors and People: whence it follows in the third place, that they must be able to name us these Pastors, since the Succession of them is manifest. To seek all this in the Pretended Reformed Church, as it is now separated from the Roman Church, that is, from that Body of the Church, which acknowledges the Roman Church, and the Pope for its Head; is what Mr. Claude does not so much as dream of: 'tis enough for him, that to the time of the Pretended Re∣formed's Separation he finds all this in the Roman Church it self. The true Believers were there, as long as those, that compos'd the Pretended Reformation, were there, when they went forth, or were driven forth,Vid. Sup. p. 46. they carry'd the Church with them, as Mr. Claude said in the Conference. This Discourse, more like a Raillery than a serious Discourse, is nevertheless that, which is seriously held in the new Reforma∣tion. Till the Separation of these new Reformed, the Succession of the true Believers, that is according to Mr. Claude, of the true visible Church,Man. Ans. q. 4. seq. was perpetuated in the Roman Church, and 'tis since their Separation, that she ceases to contain them. Such is the Succession of the visible Church, which Mr. Claude esta∣blishes in his Manuscript Answer: till the Separation the true Faithful, which the Roman Church contain'd; after the Sepa∣ration the Pretended Reformed, which came forth of her Bo∣som. But whence came their Pastors? Were they also detacht with these pretended Believers from the Body of the Roman
Church, to perpetuate in the Church thus Reform'd the Ecclesi∣astical Ministery?Ibid. In no wise: Mr. Claude does not understand it so. The Faithful, detacht from the Roman Church, all on a sudden depos'd all the Pastors, which were before; that is to say, that before the Catholick Bishops and Priests with the Pope at their Head were the Pastors, establisht by JESƲS CHRIST; for there must be such for the true Believers, which they contain'd in their Unity: in the Moment, that the Re∣formation appear'd, they were all on a sudden depos'd, and the Ministery taken out of their Hands. But what right had private persons thus all on a sudden and in one moment to dispossess all their Pastors? 'Tis, because they are the true Believers,Man. Ans. q. 4. & seq. to whom the Ministery appertains of right, who might consequently dispose of it, take it from some, and give it to others.Man. Ans. 4. q. to∣wards the end. We must not, says Mr. Claude, imagine the Succession of Pastors in this ordinary transmission, which the Ministers make from one to another, and which is call'd the exterior and personal Succession: the Question is, whether it may not some∣times happen, that the Church, that is the true Believers, shall take her Ministery out of the hand of those, who have too visibly abus'd it, and give it to others. This is the Question in general,Cons. 8, 9, 10. as Mr. Claude proposes it; and the Application, he makes of it in particular, is, That the Latin Prelates, who enjoy'd the Ecclesiastical Ministery in the time of our Fathers, and who were assembled in the Council of Trent, having made Decisions of Faith incompatible with Salvation, and having pro∣nounc'd Anathemaes against these, who submitted not to them, the Pretended Reformed had Reason to regard these Prelates, as Mini∣sters, who had stript themselves of the Ministery, and to give it to other Persons. They should then at least, according to these Principles, have expected the Decisions of Trent; and since before these Decisions so many Churches, separated from Rome, had alrea¦dy given themselves Pastors, the Reformation will have be∣gun by a manifest Usurpation. But let us not so much press. Mr. Claude, and without insisting rigorously on the Council of Trent, let us desire him only to mark us some day a little near the Time, in which he will permit the true Believers to have continu'd under the Ministery of the Roman Church. And in the mean time let us content our selves to observe this new
Doctrin: that it may happen, that all the Pastors of the Church, dispossest all on a sudden, may become in one mo∣ment private men; and that, without their establishing any other Pastors to succeed them, the true Believers, in no wise Pastors, but private persons, separated from every Church actu∣ally existing, may of their sole Authority confer the Ministery on others, establish them, ordain them, instal them. This is, what Mr. Claude afterwards farther explicates by these words; that these Pastors, before alone in Function, are of right de∣priv'd, and the Ministery return'd of right to that part of the Society,Cons. 10. in which are found the true Believers, that is to say, the Pretended Reformed, separated from the Roman Church, and from every Church, then subsisting in the world. What an Authority and Privilege does the Separation give! Such is Mr. Claude's Doctrin: if I change, if I exaggerate, if I diminish, let him without delay publish his writing to con∣found me. But if this be his Doctrin, I conjure our Refor∣med to consider, what Prodigies of Doctrin must be taught to defend their Reformation, For first, where do they read, in what Gospel, in what E∣pistle, in what Writing of the Old or New Testament, that all the Pastors of the Church should in a moment fall from their Chair, and become private persons, whom one might and ought freely disobey. Has JESƲS CHRIST hidden this great Mystery from us? and would he not have precaution'd us against this hor∣rible Temptation of his Church? But this is not all: after he has shewn us in the Scripture this universal Fall of all the Pa∣stors, he must also find there this Ministery return'd of right to the private Persons, that were never vested with it. And what is Mr. Claude's Meaning? Is it, that these private Persons become of right Ministers, without any Bodies having ordain'd them; or that, without being Ministers, they have Right of their sole Authority to set up Ministers in the Church? Let them shew me it in the Scripture, or let them for ever renounce the Pretence of having the Scripture alone for Guide. I find in the Scripture, that JESƲS CHRIST said to his Apostles: As my Father sent me, I also send you. I find in the Scri∣pture, that the Apostles thus send others, and consecrate themselves Successors. But that, all their Successors being on a sudden faln,
and depriv'd of the right of their Ministery, this Ministery should of right return to the Faithful, to whom none had ever given it, to dispose of at their Pleasure: neither has the Scripture said, nor following Ages imagin'd: 'Tis then a Monster, the Birth of which was reserv'd for the time of the new Reformation. The Ministery, say they, belongs of right to the Church. It does without doubt belong to the Church, as the Eyes do to the Body. The Ministery is not for it self, no more are the Eyes: The Ministery is establisht to be the Light of the Church, as the Eyes are the Light, or, as JESƲS CHRIST calls them, the Torch of the Body. Does it follow, that, when the Body has lost its Eyes, it can remake them of it self? No without doubt; it will have need of the Hand, which made them at first, and there will never be any thing but a new Creation, which can repair the Work, that the first Creation had form'd. In this manner, if the Catholick Church could, as they would imagin in the new Reformation, lose all on a sud∣den all its Ministers, without their having given themselves Successors according to the Order of JESƲS CHRIST, JESƲS CHRIST must come again on Earth, to re∣establish this sacred Order by a new Creation. They will indeed find in the Bosom of the Roman Church these true Believers, of which the Reformed Church was at first compos'd; why will they not in the same manner detach the Pastors of this Reformed Church from the Pastors, which were in Office in the Roman Church? The Ministery is to be mixt as the People, and is to have always good Pastors amongst the Bad, as there are always true Believers amongst the false Chri∣stians. Why then were they fain to say in the new Reforma∣tion, and in the XXXI Article of their Confession of Faith, that the State of the Church was interrupted? Why were they fain to have recourse to these People, extraordinarily rais'd to build anew the Church, which was in ruin and desolation? 'Tis, that they were fain to speak, not according to what ought to be done in the Order, establisht by JESƲS CHRIST, but according to what was done against all Order. 'Tis, that the new Re∣formation was made of Pastors, who in effect held nothing from the Pastors, that were before, and therefore they were necessitated, even against their Wills, to attribute to them, thô without proof, an extraordinary Vocation. But in truth, Rea∣son
requir'd something else: and why then did they not speak according to Reason, except it were once again, that they were fain to accommodate, not what was done to the Rule, but the Rule to what was done? But, will they say, if any Church, for example the Greek Church, shews us the Succession of her Pastors, will you hold it for a true Church? By no means, if I can shew in it Marks of Innovation, which it cannot deny; as I should do without much trouble; if it were in question. But with our Reformed the Proof is made, since themselves confess the Interruption, we charge them with. Mr. Claude palliates, as well as he can, this interrupted State of the Church, so punctually acknowledg'd in her Confession of Faith. We distinguish,After the 4. q. 7. Conseq. says he, the Church from her State. The Church are the true Believers, who make Profession of the Christian Truth, of Piety, and of a real Sanctity, under a Ministery, which furnishes them with the Aliments, necessary for the Spiritual Life, without de∣priving them of any one. Her natural and legitimate State is to be discharg'd, as much as the Condition of militant can permit, from the impure mixture of prophano Persons and Worldings, not to be co∣ver'd, and as it were bury'd by this Chaff, and these Tares, whence a thousand Evils come upon her, as to have a Ministery, free from Errors, from false Worships, from superstitious Practices, a Ministery possess'd by good People, who keep at by good ways, and serve them∣selves for good example. 'Tis this State of the Church, which we say was interrupted. Why does he load himself with so many Words, and, because they are pompous, not observe, that they are vain, not to say deceitful, and manifestly contrary to the Gospel? For can one more clearly impose on People, than by exaggera∣ting, as is here done, this Ministery possest by good people, who keep it by good ways, and serve themselves for good Example? Is it, that the Authority of the Ecclesiastical Ministery dupends on the Discussion of the Life and good Example of those, who are vested with it? and that, thô they should be as scandalous and perverse, as the Scribes and Pharisees, we must not still say, not with JESƲS CHRIST, they sit in Moses Chair, but what is much more august,Matt. 23. v. 2. they are in the Chair of JESƲS CHRIST, and his Apostles? Let us leave nevertheless these things, and come to this interrupted State of the XXXI Article, which Mr. Claude undertakes here to explicate to us. This interrupted State
of the Church is alledg'd here, to found the necessity of an ex∣traordinary Vocation in the Pretended Reformers: for let us hear, how this Article speaks. It has been sometimes necessary, and namely in our days, in which the State of the Church was interrup∣ted, that GOD should raise up people after an extraordinary manner to set up the Church anew. You see Gentlemen, this interrupted State of the Church is alledg'd only to found the extraordinary Vocation of your Pretended Reformers. But to found the Necessity of an extraordinary Vocation, 'tis not sufficient, that the Ministery is impure; it must have ceased. When you came, Gentlemen, had this Ecclesiastical Ministery ceas'd? By no means, will Mr. Claude answer you, for then the Church would have ceas'd, since the Church, according to him, as you just now heard, is nothing else, but the true Believers, who make Profession of the Truth UNDER A MINISTERY, which furnishes her with necessary Aliments. And he has already told us, that the Church is never without the Ministery. Wherefore in this place, where he en∣deavours to give an Account of this interrupted State, after he has by so many fine Words set forth the Impurity, which he imagins in the Ministery before the Reformation; The Church, adds he, ceas'd not, She did not entirely lose her Visibility or her Ministery. GOD forbid. See, how he cries out against this Abomination, to say, that the Ministery can be lost in the Church. There is never then any Necessity of an extraordinary Vocation in the Ministers, since to transmit the Ministery after the ordina∣ry manner, 'tis not requisite for the Ministery to be pure; 'tis sufficient, that it is. And thô for the transmitting of it there should be requir'd, as Mr. Claude speaks, not only Ministers of good Doctrin, but also of good Life and good Example, 'tis as sure, that there will be always such in the Society of GOD's People, as 'tis, that there will be always true. Believers, since that all, the Ministery as well as the People, must be there mixt of Good and Bad, till the final Separation at the last Judgment. Thus the extraordinary Vocation is on all sides excluded from JESƲS CHRISTs Church, and can be only a weak Re∣fuge for a deplor'd Cause. And to see, what an Overthrow to JESƲS CHRISTs Order Mr. Claude here introduces, we need only consider the Promises of JESƲS CHRIST, and see, in what it has pleas'd him principally to establish the Strength of his Church.
She is strong, she is invincible, because JESUS CHRIST has said,Mat. xvi. v. 18. that Hell should not prevail against her. But he did not say, that Hell should not prevail against her, till after he had said, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church, adding presently after, I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. 'Tis then in the Ministery, confessing and declaring JESUS CHRIST, and using the Authority of the Keys, that JESUS CHRIST has principally establisht the Strength of his Church. And to whom did he say, I am with you even unto the end of the world;Matt. xxviii. v. 20. but to those, to whom he said, ach and baptize? All the Church is comprehended in this Pro∣mise; who knows it not? But JESUS CHRIST would shew the Truth of this Doctrin,Ep. 69. ad Flor. Pap. so well explicated by St. Cy∣prian: The Church forsakes not JESUS CHRIST; and this is the Church, the People united with their Bishop, and the Flock joyn'd to their Pastor: where 'tis clear, that we must understand, as he says elsewhere,Ep. 45. ad Corin. 4. & Tr. de vnit. Ecc. &c. this Pastor united with all his Collegues, and with the whole Unity of the Episcopacy, so often establisht in his Writings. 'Tis then with reason, that JESUS CHRIST would shew the Succession of his Church by that of the Mi∣nistery, and 'tis manifestly seen, that 'tis to those, who teach, he would say. I am always with you. And what is here more admirable, is, that these Promises are so evident, that Mr. Claude (against the Prepossessions of his Religion) was forc't to ac∣knowledg them such, as I have now explicated them. For we have heard him tell us, that 'tis in effect of a confessing Church, of a Church, which publishes the Faith, of a Church, which uses the Ministery, that JESUS CHRIST has pronounc'd, that Hell should not prevail against her.V. sup. xi. Ref. p. 99. seq. And because JESUS CHRIST, after he had said, Teach and baptize, adds, I am with you; Mr. Claude concludes, as we do, that JESUS CHRIST in effect designs a Church, that he affirms he will be with her, baptize with her, and teach with her even unto the end of the world. 'Tis then the Succession and Perpetuity of the Ministery, which is principally comprehended in this Pro∣mise; 'tis principally in this, that JESUS CHRIST esta∣blishes the Strength and eternal Duration of his Church. In the mean time, against all this Order we are shewn the Mi∣nistery so weak, and so forsaken by JESUS CHRIST, that it falls all together in one moment, and on the contrary
particular Believers so strong, that they alone establish all the Ministery extraordinarily rais'd, without having regard to the Succession or Authority of all the precedent Administration. Who does not then see, that all is overturn'd in the new Re∣formation? and that to say with them, that GOD would pre∣serve true Believers in his Church, to depose by their means all the Pastors, and afterward set up others extraordinarily in their place; whilst he would not preserve good Pastors to transmit the Ministery by the common ways, establisht in his word, and always observ'd in his Church: is to say, that he would set up a Church in a manner, contrary to that, he has reveal'd, and has always caus'd to be follow'd by his Church? Or rather 'tis to say, that he would have this Church, form'd after a manner so new amongst Chrians, bear in its Original, without ever be∣ing able to efface it, the manifest Character of its Falsity. But let us come to these true Believers, of whom Mr. Claude brags to us. I am not contented to dispute with them the Power, he has given them to depose all their Pastors, and make others: I say, that these true Believers never were. There must not∣withstanding, according to this Minister, have been true Belie∣vers, even in the Bosom of the Roman Church: for since, ac∣cording to his Doctrin, there must be acknowledg'd, without any Interruption, an Ecclesiastical Ministery, and an exterior Profession, of which might have been said, There are the true Be∣lievers, they were true Believers under that Ministery, and in that Profession, whence they went forth. I ask, did they com∣municate in the Sacrifice, where Saints are invocated, where their Relicks and Images are honour'd, where the Pope is nam'd as the Head of the Orthodox, where JESUS CHRIST is ador'd, as present in Body and Soul, where he is offer'd, where the Holy Sacrament is receiv'd under one Kind? Not to communicate in this Sacrifice, and to refuse the receiving of the Eucharist there, were manifestly to separate, and they are suppos'd not to have done that yet: but if they communicated there, continuing true Believers, in what an Error are now all our Reformed, who believe not themselves to have been true. Believers, till since they left communicating there? Thus these true Believers are People in the Air:1 Kin. xix. v. 18. these seven thousand, so much bragg'd of in the new Reformation, and by Mr. Claude,Man. Ans. 2 part. are so far from appearing, that they are not in na∣ture,
since before the Separation there was not any one, who communicated not in the Sacrifice and Host, which our Refor∣med look on as Baal, before whom one must not bow the Knee. They say, that these true Believers, who by their actual sepa∣rating compos'd the Reformation, were before separated in heart from the publick Idolatry. But first, this is not sufficient: se∣condly 'tis not so. This is not sufficient according to Mr. Claude, since he will have a Church always visible; since he has just now defin'd the Church to be the true Believers, who make Profession of the Truth, of Piety, of real Sanctity. Where then the Profession is wanting, there are neither true Believers, nor a true Church. But moreover, this is visibly not so; else, when Luther ap∣pear'd, and Zuinglius innovated, their Disciples must have made this Declaration: This is, what we always believ'd; we always had our Heart averse from the Roman Faith, and from the Pope, and from Bishops, and from the Real Presence, and from Con∣fession, and from Communion under one Kind, and from Relicks, and from Images, and from Prayer to Saints, and from the Merit of Works. Where are those, who spake in this manner? Can Mr. Claude name us any one of them? On the contrary, are not all these Reformed seen in all the Pages of their Books to speak, as newly retir'd out of the Darkness of the Papacy, and does not Luther glory at their head, that he was the first, who declar'd the Gospel? All the Reformed grant it, except Zuinglius, who disputes this Ho∣nor with him. He in the mean time acknowledges, that he was the sincerest Monk, the Priest most intent upon his Sacrifice, and in a word the zealousest of all the Papists. Do not the others use the same Language? Where are then these true Believers of Mr. Claudes, who not only durst not declare their Faith, whilst they were in the Bosom of the Roman Church, but af∣ter they were gone out of it, durst not say, they had always held in their heart the same Faith? But see here the entire Ruin of the new Reformation. In the Definition, that Mr. Claude just now gave us of the true Church, he says, 'Tis the true Believers, who make Profession of the Christian Truth under a Ministery, which furnishes her with necessa∣ry Aliments without depriving her of any one. If before the Refo∣mation there was no such Church, the true Church against Mr.
Claude's Supposition no longer was; and if there were such a Church, where Profession was made of the Truth, and which by her Ministery gave necessary Aliments to the Children of GOD with∣out depriving them of any one, what need was there of the Pre∣tended Reformeds Separation? Is it perhaps, that they bethought themselves all on a sud∣den to say Mass, and teach all the Doctrins, which our Refor∣med have alledg'd for the Cause of their Rupture? To think it only, would be the greatest of Absurdities. But it may be, in teaching all these Doctrins they had not yet thought of excom∣municating those, that oppos'd them. Whence then come so many Anathemaes against erengarius, against the Waldenses and Albigenses, against John Wickcliff and John Hus, whom our Re∣formed will count amongst their Ancestors? What then, had not those, who before the pretended Reformation made Profession of the Christian Truth, that is, according to Mr. Claude, of the Re∣formed Doctrin, yet found the Invention of making a Schism, and was all the World agreed to suffer them? But should all this be true, the Affairs of the Reformation would not be a jot the better: since still, before it had any Existence, there must be acknowledg'd a Ministery, where without teaching, either that the Sinner is justify'd by Faith alone and the sole Imputa∣tion of JESUS CHRIST's Justice, or that GOD in the new Testament abhors Sacrifices celebrated in a sensible mat∣ter, or that he alone would be invocated to the Exclusion of that inferior and subordiate Prayer, which is address'd to Saints, or in fine without any of those Articles, which distinguish our Reformed from us, althô they place their Salvation in them; they ceas'd not to furnish the Children of GOD with all the Aliments necessary fo the Spiritual Life, without depriving them of any one. What has the Reformation wrought, if all these things are not necessary Aliments; if even the Sacred Cup, and consequently the Supper, which, according to our Pretended Reformed, cannot subsist without the Cup, is none of these Aliments, necessary to the Christians Faith? How they have tormented themselves in vain, and how unadvisedly they have caus'd so many Trou∣bles, and shed so much Blood, if these things are not necessary! Perhaps these necessary Aliments must be reduc'd to the A∣postles Creed, or in general to the Scripture. But the Socinian Church remins this Creed, and this Scripture: so that the Mi∣nistery
of a Socinian Church would, according to this Rule, have furnisht the Children of GOD with all necessary Aliments, without depriving them of any one. What then at last will these necessary Aliments be; and if they are furnisht, without the Substraction of any one, only by proposing the Creed and the Scripture, in what Heresy have they been wanting? The more Mr. Claude endeavours here to disengage himself,Man. Ans. 4. q. the more he is intangled. For after he has establisht as a Fun∣damental Truth, that GOD always preservos in the Ministery all, that is necessary to nourish there the true Believers, and bring them to Salvation, he says, it does not thence follow, that the Ministery is exempt from all Error, even in its Decisions; but that, whether they concern not sensibly the Conscience, or even concern Salvation, the Con∣science is made use of to reject the Evil, and preserve Purity. Thus all would be reduc'd to Liberty of Conscience; and what Er∣ror soever is taught in the Ministery, provided they force none to follow their Decisions, and suffer all contrary Doctrin good or bad, 'tis enough to make Mr. Claude say, that the Ministery furnishes the Children of GOD with all necessary Aliments without depriving them of any one. But according to this Pretention, there would be no Society, whose Ministery should more furnish all ne∣cessary Aliments, than a Society of Socinians, who brag, that they will not damn any one. If it be said amongst our Reformed, that a Socinian Church overthrows the Foundation by denying the Divinity of JESUS CHRIST, 'tis also said there, that 'twas no less overthrown before their Reformation by the Ido∣latries, which, as they say, reign'd every where. And if they will in fine imagin, that 'tis more dangerous to destroy the Foundation by Substraction with the Socinians, than with the Roman Church by these pretended Additions, which they call Idolatry, besides all the Substractions, we have just now shewn there according to the Principles of the Reformed, and even be∣fore their Reformation; it were an unheard of Extravagance to believe, that it would be more easy for these true Believers, who ought to make the Distinction of Doctrins under a Ministery full of Errors, to cut off, what is superfluous, than to supply, what is defective; or that the Foundation of the Faith is more certainly overthrown by diminishing, than by adding, the Scrip∣ture having so often comprehended under one common Male∣diction as well those, that diminish, as those that add.
'Twould be better then for  to set also , and the perpeal Visibility of the Church, and  'tis in fine sufficient, all this Visibility being , that GOD has preserv'd the Holy Scripture, where the Faithful, whether conceal'd, or open, whether dispers'd, or re-united, whether al∣ways subsisting, or sometimes wholly extinct, shall clearly find, according to his Principles, without any need of the Ministery, all necessary Aliments. For also of, what use is a Ministery to them, in which Error prevail? And would not the Scripture alone be more commodious and more instructive to them? This is, what the  should say, to avoid the Inconveniences, into which we cast them. But Mr. Claude neither durst, nor ever will dare to do it; because he would find in it Inconveniences, yet more insupportable, and more visible. 'Tis in a word, be∣cause he sound, that by pushing the Authority and sufficiency, as I may say, of the Scripture independently of all Ecclesiastical Ministery, they must at last destroy the Scripture it self. In effect,Rom. 1. . 10. he found in the Scripture, that the Scripture ought not to be,Vid. Sup. p. 50. as the Philosophy of  the Rule of  Republick in Idea, but of a People always subsisting, which this Scripture calls the Church. He has found, that this People ought to be always visible on the earth, since they ought not only to believe with the Heart, but also to confes with the Mouth, and, to use his Terms, make Profession of the Christian Truth. He has found, that the Scripture was entrusted in the hands of such a People, to be their unchangeable Rule; that there should be always In∣terpreters establisht by GOD, the Author of this Scripture, as well as the Founder of this People; and that so the Ministery, destin'd by GOD to this Interpretation, was as eternal, as the Church it self. If he writ these great Words, GOD always preserves in the publick Ministery all that is necessary for the guiding true Believers to Salvation,Man. Ans. 4. q. he cannot found this Assurance on any human Indu∣stry. Let GOD leave the Ecclesiastical Ministery to it self, it must fall. If then it be certain, that GOD will always keep there all, that is necessary to Salvation, GOD himself must have promis'd it, and the Eternity of the Ministery cannot be foun∣ded but on this Promise. Mr. Claude also finds it in those Words, Thou art Peter,Matt. xvi. v. 18. and the rest. 'Tis thence he concludes with us, that JESUS CHRIST, in speaking to a Church, that con∣fesses▪
and confesses without difficulty by her principal Ministers, since 'tis by St. Peter in the Name of the Apostles; to a Church, joyn'd to an exterior Ministery, and using the Power of the Keys, has promis'd her, that Hell should not prevail against her; consequently supported by this Ministery: and therefore he affirms, that GOD preserves always in the publick Ministery all, that is necessary to the Salvation of GODs Children. Another Promise of JESUS CHRIST's,Matt. xxviii. v. 19, 20. directed to those, that baptize, and those, that teach, and concluded by these powerful Words, And, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the World, makes Mr. Claude as well as us say, that JESUS CHRIST promises the Church to be with her,Ibid. to baptize with her, and to teach with her, without interruption, even to the end of the World. Thus, according to this Minister, this Promise re∣gards the Church, as joyn'd to the Ecclesiastical Ministery, which makes him also conclude, that JESUS CHRIST promises, the Corruption shall never be such in the Ministery, but that there shall still be enough to entertain the true Faith of his Elect e∣ven to the end of the World. In fine,Eph. iv. Man. Ans. Ibid. a third Passage, to wit, that of St. Paul to the E∣phefians, makes him conclude with us, that the Ministery shall last even to the end of the World, and continue in a degree and in an Estate sufficient to edify the Body of CHRIST, and bring all the Elect to the Perfection, of which St. Paul speaks. GOD then must concern himself with it, without whose Assistances continually present neither such a Stability nor such an Integri∣ty can be expected in the Ministery. After he had thus begun to believe, he should have finish the Work, and given Glory to GOD even to the end. Mr. Claude was not far from the Kingdom of GOD, when he said, that GOD would render himself superior enough over human Infirmity, to preserve always, manger the Efforts of Hell, a Church, which should confess the Truth, and an exterior Mi∣nistery, which should furnish true Believers with the Aliments, necessary to Salvation. He ought then to proceed to the end, and believe, that the same Hand, which would hinder Hell from prevailing so far against the Ministery, as to deprive it of these necessary Aliments, would hinder it also from prevai∣ling so far, as to make any Error have dominion in it; and that so much the rather, as what he believ'd, manifestly compre∣hends,
what is left to believe. For if he believ'd on the Faith of the Divine Promise, that there should be always a Church, with which JESUS CHRIST would not cease to teach that is without difficulty, that he would not cease to teach with the Doctors of this Church? he ought by the same means to believe, that he would teach there all Truth, JESƲS CHRIST not being come,Joh. xvi. v. 13. nor having sent his Holy Spirit to his Apo∣stles to teach them some Truths, but to teach them all Truth, as himself declares in his Gospel. Nor would it be to any purpose to say, that Mr. Claude Promises in the Ministery only sufficient Aliments; which can comprehend no more than the Fundamentals of the Faith, as our Reformed find them amongst the Lutherans. For JESƲS CHRISTs Doctrin containing nothing but what is profita∣ble,Is. 48. v. 17. agreeably to this Word, I am the Lord, which teacheth thee profitable things; if we find not in the Ministery JESƲS CHRISTs Doctrin entire, we shall never find that Degree requir'd by Mr. Claude, nor that Estate sufficient to bring all the Elect to the Perfection, of which St. Paul speaks. 'Twould be then something, to believe, that by the Pro∣mise GOD would always keep without interruption in the Ministery all essential Truths: for 'twould be to acknow∣ledge in the Church, with which JESUS CHRIST teaches, a beginning of infallible Authority, by acknowledging this Authority at least in respect of the first Truths of Christia∣nity. But to finish the Work, and not to believe by halves, we must also believe, that JESUS CHRIST, in teaching, teaches all, and confess in his Church an absolute Infallibility. Thus we must not say with the Ministers and their incre∣dulous Flock: This Ecclesiastical Ministery is of men subject to fall: one may doubt after them: for this would be to yield to the Temptation, and no longer to believe the Promise. We must say, 'tis of men, with whom JESUS CHRIST promises to be, and teach always: then manger human weakness, and all the Endeavours of Hell,Rom. iv. v. 18. against hope we believe in hope, that we shall find eternally in their common Preaching, not some Truths, or only the principal Truths, but the entire Ful∣ness of Christian Truths. Whatever they say, 'tis not to be∣lieve blindly to believe thus, or 'tis to believe blindly, like Abra∣ham, on the word of GOD himself, and the Faith of his Promises.
How insupportable then is the Doctrin of Mr. Claude, who, after he has acknowledg'd so many magnificent Promises of JESUS CHRIST's in favour of this sacred Ministery: plunging again all of a sudden into the Darkness of his Sect, whence he was beginning to get out, shews us the Ministery so abandon'd by JESUS CHRIST, that there is no Re∣medy for its Errors, but by deposing all at once all those, which are in the Chair. What agreement have these Promises, so well acknowledg'd, with so universal a Corruption? Mr. Claude then needs only hearken a little to himself, for to come unto us: after having acknowledg'd, in vertue of the divine Promises, the Eternity of the Ecclesiastical Ministery in this Estate, he represents to us; to find there always all Truth, he needs only consider, that this imperfect Assistance, and, as one may say, this half Succor of JESƲS CHRIST to his Church, is neither beseeming his Wisdom, nor his Power; be∣ing moreover assur'd, that there is no true Sufficiency in the Mi∣nistery, but by the full manifestation of the Truth; reveal'd by GOD, agreeably to this Word of the Apostle By mani∣festation of the Truth we commend our selves to every mans Conscience in the sight of GOD.2 Cor. iv. v. 2, 3, 4. Whence he concludes presently af∣ter, that if our Gospel, that is most certainly our Preaching, be hid, it is hid to them, that are lost; to the end he may make us understand, that the Preaching always clear and always sincere in the Catholick Church, has no obscurity but in Rebels, in whom the Devil, the God of this World, and the Spirit of Pride, hath blinded the minds, as the same Apostle proceeds, lst the Light of the glorious Gospel should shine unto them. 'Tis now easy to see, that all Mr. Claude's Subtilties serve only to confound him. What avails it him, that, acknowledg∣ing the Churches Visibility, he endeavour'd to elude the Conse∣quences of this Doctrin, by reducing the Church to the true Be∣lievers? I am contented: where-ever he finds Church, let him understand the true Believers; let him even explicate if he will, these Words,Mat. xviii. v. 4. Tell it unto the Church, Tell it to the true Belie∣vers; single them out amongst the Troop, and judge before the Lord: or because, as himself acknowledges, here is too ap∣parently meant the Church represented by her Pastors,Mans. Ans. 4. q. let him say, that these Pastors represent the true Believers, which are not known, and act in their Name. What will these Explicati∣ons
after all advantage him, since that in fine, according to his own Doctrin, this true Church shall always be  visible, and these true Believers always under a publick Ministery from which JESUS CHRIST so little permits his Church to be se∣parated, that even after these Words, Tell it unto the Church, but if he neglect to hear the Church, let him he unto the as an man, to shew how redoubtable the Churches Judgment is, he immediatly expresses the efficacy of the Ministery by these Words:Matt. xviii v. 18. Whatsoever you shall bind on earth, shall be bound in hea∣ven, and the rest, which every one knows. Thus I conclude always equally, that the Church, which we must shew without interruption, whether it be only the true Believers, or if they will, only the Elect, or whether it be in a certain Sense the wicked mixt with them,Matt. xiii. v. 21. and those, that believe for a while, ac∣cording to the expression of the Gospel, is a Church always gather'd under a visible Ministery, and a Body always sub∣sisting of People with their Pastors, where the Truth is preacht, not in secret,Matt. x. v. 27. but upon the house tops. Let them turn, as much as they will, 'tis a Church of this Nature and this Constitution, we must at all times shew, by Mr. Claude's Confession. To make her disappear for one sole Moment, is utterly to annihilate her, and to overthrow the Promises of the Gospel, in what they have most sensible, and most apparent: to make her appear al∣ways, is invindibly to establish the Roman Church. Thus what Mr. Claude explicates to us with so much care, besides that it is false, leaves the Difficulty entire, and his Cause in as had a Condition, as it was before his Defence. But to the end they may not say, we are contented with refuting him, let us tell him the Truth in few words. The Foundation of the Church is the true Believers, and those principally, who persevering to the end, abide eternally in JESƲS CHRIST, and JESƲS CHRIST in them, that is to say, the Elect. The Wicked, which envinron them, are after their manner comprehended under the Name of the Church, as the Nails, as the Hair, as an Eye put out, and a wither'd Arm, which perhaps receives no more nou∣rishment, is comprehended under the Name of the Body. All is for these true Believers. The Ministery, under which they live, is theirs in the Sense,1 Cor. iii. v. 22. that St. Paul said: All is yours, whe∣ther Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas. Not that the Power of their
Pastors comes from them, or that they alone can set them up, and depose them. GOD forbid: This Pastoral and Aposto∣lick Power comes from him,Joh. xx. v. 21. who said: As my Father hath sent me, I also send you. This is, what makes St. Paul say in the same place,1 Cor. iii. v. 4, 5. Who is then Apollos? and who is Paul? The Ministers of him, whom you have believ'd, and to every one, as our Lord hath given; to you to be Believers, and to us to be Pastors. Wherefore he adds farther:v. 9. We are GODs Laborers, or to say better, Co∣operators. These Ministers and these Workers, establisht by GOD are also the Ministers of the Faithful, and in this Sense are theirs, because they are their Servants by JESƲS CHRIST, establisht in the Chair, not for themselves, for as to their own part it would suffice them to be simple Be∣lievers,2 Cor. iv. v. 5. but for to edify the Saints. He that desires to be in the Communion of these Saints, need not torment himself to di∣stinguish them from others: for, thô they are not known and perfectly discern'd but by GOD alone, we are sure to find them under the publick Ministery, and in the exterior Professi∣on of the Catholick Church. We need then only stay there, for to be assur'd to find the Saints; because this Profession, and the ever fruitful Word of the Preachers, which never fails to engender some, keeps them always inseparably united to the ho∣ly Society, where they receiv'd it. Wherefore when JESƲS CHRIST promises to teach always with his Church, he comprehends all in this Word, and rendring by virtue of this Promise the Church infallible exteriorly in the manifestation of the Truth, renders her interiorly always fruitful. If the Prea∣chers of the Truth are by their corrupt Life unworthy of their Ministery, GOD ceases not to make use of them for to sanctify his Faithful, for he is able to vivify, even by the Dead; and a putrify'd Arm may become active in his hands. Besides, these true Believers, known to GOD alone, animate all the Ecclesiastical Ministery: a small Number of these con∣ceal'd Saints often suffices to render the Prayers of a whole Church efficacious; the Conversion of Sinners will be often assoon the Effect of their secret Groans, as the Fruit of the most illumina∣ted Preachings. Wherefore St. Augustin attributes the wholsom Effects of the Ministery to these good Souls, for whom and by whom the Holy Ghost is flly in the Church. But that the Ec∣clesiastical Power depends on them, is what neither St. Augustin,
nor any of the Orthodox Doctors ever taught; and Mr. Claude, who cites them, understands them not. I will be fully seen, when he shall publish his writing; 'tis sufficient for us in the mean time, to have shewn, that he is of those and GOD grant he be not so to the end,Tit. iii. v. 2. that he is, I say, of those, of whom St. Paul speaks, that condemn themselves. 'Tis in effect according to this Apostle, the true Character of all Heresies; and never any Society more visibly bore this Cha∣racter set down by St. Paul, than the Pretended Reformed Church. She condemns her self,Vid. Sup. 1. Ref. p. 58. when not daring to affirm, that she is infallible, she sees her self nevertheless constrain'd to act, as if she were, and to bear witness to the Catholick Church by imi∣tating her. She condemns her self,2. Ref. p. 64. when she raises all the particular per∣sons, she teaches, above her own Judgment; and forcing them, how ignorant soever they find themselves, to examin after her, without rendring them capable, she renders them indocil and presumptuous. She condemns her self,3, 4, 5, 6. & 7. Ref. p. 73. & seq. since Vaunting of the Scripturus, she finds not in her self Authority enough to make them be receiv'd by her Followers on her Word, but leaves her own Children, to whom she presents them to be read, in the Uncertainties of an human Faith. She condemns her self,8. Ref. p. 88. when forc'd to own, that she was not establisht but by breaking with all the Christian Churches, which were in the World, she gives her self the proper Character of all false Churches. In fine she condemns her self,9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Ref. p. 91. & seq. when forc'd to acknowledge the perpetual Visibility of the Church in the Indefectibility of the Ministery, she cannot maintain her self without acknowledg∣ing, besides in the Ministery an universal Corruption, nor with∣out authorizing private persons against all the Succession of the Apostolick Order. Now if she condemns her self in so many manners, how hap∣py would it be for her to condemn her self in fine, by retur∣ning into the Bosom of the Catholick Church, which never ceases to recal her to her Unity. Let these Gentlemen no longer speak to us of the Abuses, which make us groan. The Evils of the Church are badly re∣medy'd by adding that of Schism. Are they so happy, or, to
say better, so haughty and blind, that they find nothing to be lamented amongst themselves? and will they authorize so ma∣ny Sects, gone forth of their Bosom, who, complaining of their Disorders in the same Spirit of Pride and Discontent, with which they heretofore so much exaggerated ours, daily separate from them, as they did from us? Why do they not rather hear Charity it self, Unity it self, and the Catholick Church, which tells them by the Mouth of St. Cyprian:Cyp. Ep. 43. ad. Confes. Persuade not your selves, our dear Brethern and dear Children, that you can ever defend the Gospel of JESƲS CHRIST by separating from his Flock, from his Ʋnity, and from his Peace. Good Souldiers, that complain of the Disorders, they see in the Army, ought to stay in the Field, to remedy them by common advice under the Authority of the Captain, and not go thence, to expose the Army thus disunited to the Invasions of the Enemy. Since then the Ecclesiastical Ʋ∣nity ought not to be broken, and that beside we cannot leave the Church to go to you, Return, return rather to the Church your Mother, and our Fraternity: to which we exhrt you with all the earnestness of a true brotherly Love. Amen. FINIS.
